THE LIFE OF FAITH.

Wherein Is showed the general use of Faith in all the passages of a Christians
life.

Together With a Discourse of right Judgment on Joh. 7.24.

By H. Lukin.

Now the Just shall live by Faith. Heb. 10. Do ye judge uprightly, O ye Sons of
men? Psalm. 58.1. LONDON, Printed by J. H. for John Allen, as the Rising-Sun in
St. Paul's Churchyard. 1660.

To all that have obtained precious Faith.
Grace and Peace,
IT was the wish of a good man, That he could be the same to God that his right
hand was to himself; my goodness extends not unto God, but to the Saints that
are upon earth, and to the excellent, in whom is my delight: For these would I
gladly spend and be spent, if I might in any thing be a helper of their Faith
and Joy. I thank God I am not yet in Zacharies case; that I should be fain to
write my mind, but when either the hand of violence, or the clods of the Valley
shall stop my mouth, I shall be as unable to write as speak; It is but little
that I can do by speaking, my words will reach but to few, and where they do
reach, I may complain with Melancthon, that Old Adam is too hard for me: And I
am willing to try this way also, if by any means I may help forward any in the
way to Heaven, and I hope I shall the more willingly dye, if I may leave any
thing behind me which may be of the least use to the Church of God when I shall
sleep in the dust. I confess I have not in the publishing of this small Treatise
done as the Romans were wont in preferring Laws, consulted first with the
Learned, to know whether what I have written be not already contained in
somewhat that has been written before, or whether it be not contrary to the
Doctrine formerly received, or whether it may be useful to the Church; but I
remember the Counsel of Petrarcha, Quia simul omnia vel legere, vel audire and
meminisse non potes, utilissimis quidem, and (quando brevitas est amica
memoriae) brevissimis quoque te fulcias. We cannot read or hear every thing,
therefore I have chosen to treat of those things that are most useful, and have
handled them very briefly. For the manner of handling these things I lie open
to the judgment of others; he that is afraid of leaves must not go to the wood,
we say, and he that is afraid of men's censures must not write Books, else we
had enjoyed more of many learned men's labors. If in any thing I may not be
well understood by ordinary Readers, I may answer as the Protestants do to the
Papists about the perspicuity of the Scriptures, it is not the manner of
delivery, but the thing delivered that makes it obscure, and there are other
things plain enough for them; to make things obscure which are in themselves
plain, by great swelling words of vanity (besides the sinfulness of it) is such
an unmanly piece of Padantry as I have always abhorred from; yet if at any
time I have happened to speak of such things as have been above the reach of
ordinary hearers, I have not accounted it altogether lost labor to such, if
they have thereby been delivered from the opinion of their own omnisciency, and
understood thus much by it, that they did not understand all things. I fear
God, who knows with what aim and intention I write and speak every word, and I
dare not accept of the service of Fancy, Pride, Vainglory, or any corrupt
Passion (which are ready enough to mingle themselves with whatever we do) in
that which I must go to God with in Prayer, to commend to his blessing; and now
at my parting with you I will give you a few words of advice, and I beseech you
let my counsel be acceptable to you.

First, Learn to understand the nature of the Covenant of Grace, that you may
know upon what terms God and you are agreed; there is no exception therein
either against infirmities on your part, or against afflictions on Gods part;
you may break the Commands of God, (not of right, but it may de facto so fall
out) and God may visit you with a Rod for it, and yet not break his Covenant,
Psalm. 89.30, etc.

There is not perfect obedience required on your part, (that is, as absolutely
necessary to salvation, though perfect obedience is our duty, else our moral
infirmities were no sins; where there is no Law there is no Transgression)
neither has God promised worldly happiness. Though my house be not so with
God, says David, yet he has made with me an everlasting Covenant in all
things ordered and sure, etc. 2 Samuel 23.5. Though my house be not so with God,
that is, either as ver. 3. he had not ruled in the fear of God, but had
miscarried in the business of Uriah, and it is most likely in other things, by
Absaloms insinuations, and the effect of them upon the people, 2 Samuel 15.3,
etc. or it had not been as a morning without clouds, etc. as ver. 4. but its
happiness had been eclipsed by the business of Amnon, and worse by that of
Absalom. Yet the Covenant of God was so ordered in all things, as it remained
sure as to spiritual things, which are therefore called, the sure mercies of
David, Isa. 55.3. If these things were well understood and considered, we
should not be discouraged by our infirmities, though we might be humbled for
them; as an eminent Saint said on his death bed, he had much peace and
quietness, not so much from a greater measure of Grace than other Christians
had, or from any immediate witness of the Spirit, but because he had a more
clear understanding of the Covenant of Grace than many others, having studied
it and preached it so many years. Again, we shall neither charge God foolishly
in afflictions, as if he did us any wrong in not standing to his Covenant, nor
take him for our enemy, as Job 13.24. interpreting them as evidences of his
wrath, or effects of revenging justice. And lastly, We shall not flatter our
selves with hopes of outward prosperity, nor be troubled with disappointment
when we fail of it, which is an addition to men's misery, when, as one says,
expectation takes more upon trust than enjoyment is able to discharge. If we
have food and raiment let us be therewith contented, 1 Timothy 6.8. We indented
with God for no more than Jacob did, Genesis 28.20. as to this life, Mat. 6.33.
compared with 31.

2. Mind your present duty, and the work of every day in the day; Every day
brings trouble enough with it, as we say in our Proverb. There is much talk of
the Turk and the Spaniard, and our next neighbor does us more hurt than both
of them; we look with dreadful apprehensions upon the evils that are at a
distance, and mind not our present dangers which we are continually in, or the
temptations which we are daily assaulted with. Many are like the Astronomers
that look up to the Heavens to foresee what will afterward come to pass, and
fall into a ditch before their feet. Corn. Agrippa de Astronomia. We fear
future calamities, and in a moment go down to the grave, Job 21.13. We fear
what the Sword or some other Judgment may do a great while hence, and a
fever, or any other disease, which we are daily liable to, may do us as much
hurt, Lipsius de constantia, l. 2. c. 19. I confess, a prudent foresight of
evil is good, Prove. 22.3. but there is no better preparation for it, than to
mind our present duty; let us keep a pure conscience, and the testimony thereof
will be our rejoicing in an evil day, 2 Cor. 1.12. Let us give all diligence
to make our calling and election sure, and that will deliver us from the
bondage of the fear of death. Let us do good while we have opportunity, and so
lay up for our selves a good foundation against the time to come. 1 Timothy 6.18,
19. If we know not what evil will be on the earth, let us liberally give to
others, Eccles. 11.2. that when the evil comes we may say with Antonius, Hoc
habeo quodcunque dedi, Seneca de Beneficiis, l. 6. c. 3. what we so lay up is
in safe hands, and will be duly paid again, Prove. 19.17. I could tell you of
one, who having given somewhat to a poor man, and considering with himself
whether he had not injured himself by giving beyond his ability, presently
corrected himself with those thoughts, that he had lent it to one that would
pay well again, and within an hour had it restored above sevenfold, in a way
which he never thought of.

3. Be very careful to walk blamelesly, and inoffensively. Christians are
trusted with the honor of Religion, as Magistrates, and all in any authority,
are with the Dignity and honor of their places, which they are not to betray
to scorn and contempt, by doing any thing that is base or unworthy thereof.
But further, by the Profession of Religion we derive upon our selves the enmity
of the world, John 15.19. Gal. 4.29. this is an old grudge, an ancient hatred,
Ezekiel. 25.15. therefore we had need to behave our selves wisely, in a perfect
way, Psalm. 101.2. that we may maintain an aw of us in them, Mark. 6.20. and
then we may say with Caligula, Oderint dum metuant: Let them hate us, so they
fear us. Zeuxis painted a Boy holding grapes in his hand, and he had painted
the grapes so lively, that he deceived the birds, and made them come to eat
them; but he was displeased with himself, that he had not painted the Boy so
lively as to scare them away. If we take upon us a form of godliness, to
contract the hatred of the world, let us be sure to express so much of the
power of it, as to make them fear us. And though this will not always restrain
the rage of men so far, but they may make bold sometimes to offend us, yet we
shall have a witness for us in their own breasts against themselves, which
will at one time or other be whispering to them as Pilate's Wife to him, Matthew.
27.19. Have nothing to do with such a just man; and will sooner or later lash
them worse than the Heathens inexorable Nemesis: but if, by an unworthy
carriage, you lose the repute of holiness, and integrity, they will make bold
to do any thing to you, without mercy, and without fear, Jer. 50.7. as birds
will sit upon the head of a Mormoluke, and pick at the very face of it, when
they perceive it is but the image of a man, and not a real living man. Let none
be able to find any occasion against you, unless it be concerning the Law of
your God, Dan. 6.5. resolve, if it be possible, to cut off occasion from them
that desire occasion, 2 Cor. 11.12.

4. Be sure to follow the work of Mortification: then you will be fit for any
condition; the temptations of prosperity will then lose their force against
you; you will be as Barzillai, 2 Samuel 15.35. all the pleasures of the Kings
Court were no temptation to him, because through age desire failed, Eccles.
12.5. So the things of the world lose their savor and relish with a mortified
Christian; as he replied (when it was told him, If he would please Caesar he
need not live upon herbs) That he that could live upon herbs need not please
Caesar: He that has so far mortified his affections, as to be content, as
Epictetus says, Enchirid. cap. 21. to be at Gods finding, as a Guest at a
table, that takes what is carved for him, and no more, need not fawn upon any
man, much less violate his conscience for the great things of the world.
Neither will losses or afflictions, on the other hand, be any great trouble to
them, as the Martyr said, If you take away my meat, God will take away my
stomach, and then she should not miss her meat: If your honors be taken away,
and your pride be taken away first; if your earthly mindnesse and sensuality be
mortified before you loose your estates and worldly accomodations, you will
easily bear the loss of them, as he that has a member mortified, feels not
what you do to it. Violent affections are always dangerous; as they that will
be rich, so they that will be great or honorable, fall into temptations and
snares, etc. 1 Timothy 6.9. and whatever our hearts cleave to, whenever it is rent
from us, it will be as the renting of our flesh. Jonah was exceeding glad of
his gourde, Jon. 4.6. and he was as exceeding angry when it withered* If the
Sea grow rough, strike sail; if times grow troublesome, shrink up and contract
your desires, and then say, as Luther, Miser sit, qui miser esse potest; Let
him be miserable that can be miserable. The sense of losses or any afflictions
is according to the value which we put upon any thing. Take a Ruffian, who as
Seneca says, Malit Rempublicam turbari, quam comam, sollicitior sit de capitis
sui decore, quam de salute; de brevitate vitae, cap. 12. That had rather see
the Commonwealth in disorder, than his hair: that takes more care to have his
head handsome, than he does (as I may truly translate it) of his salvation:
What an affliction would it be to such an one to have his hair cut off: quomodo
excandescit, si quid ex juba sua decifum est: when another, that minds
convenience more than ornament, would account himself rid of a trouble; as
Seneca, when he was old desired to be discharged of the burden of his riches,
and said, he should not thereby become poor, but should, when he was rid of
those things that did blindfold him with their brightness, bestow his time in
study, which he was wont to employ in his gardens, and possessions. Salvian
shows excellently, how happy a mortified Christian may be in any condition,
however others may through ignorance judge them miserable, de Gubernatione Dei,
lib. 1.

Finally, Brethren be of good comfort, if the world will contribute nothing to
your joy, but add to your affliction, you have a joy which they cannot
intermeddle with, Prove. 14.10. you need not to be beholding to them to make you
happy, or entreat them to spare your joy, which they cannot take from you, John
16.22. And if your afflictions increase, though the world, and carnal
professors may look upon you with scorn, because you are black by the sun
looking upon you, Cant. 1.6. with Obad. 12. and Micah 4.11. yet God has those
comforts in store for you against such a day, which you, it may be, never
tasted of yet, 2 Cor. 1.4, 5. as the experience of many of the Martyrs has
abundantly testified. Love as brethren, if the world hate you. Have peace among
your selves, if you cannot have peace with the world: And speak often one to
another, to comfort, encourage, and provoke each other; and there will come a
time, when you shall discorn betwixt the righteous and the wicked, betwixt him
that serves God, and him that serves him not. I will conclude with the words
of Polycarp. Leyserus, Ep. ded. part. secund. Loc. Theolog. Chemnitiis; That,
when we shall see cause to take up his complaint, we may also make use of his
counsel; Orbatur partim Ecclesia viris praestantissimis, and optime de ea
meritis: partim hostiliter multis in locis fideles Pastores per impios lupos ex
statione sua exturbantur, partim Epicureus sani Evangelii contemptus cum
proterva (...) in populo passim invalescit: ad quae mala accedunt mill
injuriae, quibus vigor and alacritas in fidelibus verbi Praeconibus retunditur;
odia item and infectationes eorum, qui pro defensione veritatis in acie non
fuerunt postremi, idque ab iis qui impigri and vigilantes (...) una nobiscum
esse debebant. Haec certe mala Ecclesiam eversura videntur. Humani vero
praesidiis hic vel nihil, vel parum omnino superest. Quaeramus itaque aliquid
solatii in mutua animorum conjunctione: and piis exhortationibus nos mutuo
erigamus, and confirmemus, donec omnibus periculis insani maris nobis emetiendi
superatis, portum aeternae patriae lae^i servati attingamus, Deum simul piis
and assiduis precibus fatigantes, ut magnus ille and fortissimus Michael pro
populo suo pugnet, and naviculam suam contra adversitatum procellas and
defectionum voragines tueatur, quo tandem ea subducta, ovantes in aeternam
patriam ingrediamur.

BOOKS sold by John Allen, at the Sunrising in Paul's Churchyard.
CAryl, on Job. Volum. 5. quarto. Volum. 7. quarto. Volum. 9. quarto.
Beza Novum Testamentum. folio. Allen's Scripture Chronology. quart. Baxter's
Call to the Unconverted. 12o. Lukine's Practice of Godlinesss. qu. Burges of
Orignal sin. folio. Davenport and Hook of New england, their Catechism.
Gataker against that wicked Cheat, Judicial Astrology: proving it to be the
Abomination of the Heathens, and that it ought not to be tolerated in a
Christian Commonwealth. Isa. 47.12. Jer. 10.2. The Faith and Order practiced in
the Congregational Churches in England, agreed and consented unto by their
Elders and Messengers, at their Meeting in the Savoy. October 12. 1658. Cotton
on the Covenant. Octavo. The heart of New England rent at the Blasphemies of
the present Generation: Or, A brief Tract^re concerning the Doctrine of the
Quakers, demonstrating the destructive nature thereof, to Religion, the
Churches, and the State; with consideration of the Remedy against it,
occasional satisfaction to Objections, and confirmation of the contrary Truth,
by John Norton, Teacher of the Church of Christ, at Boston in New England. The
Quakers folly made manifest to all men, in a public dispute at Sandwich in
Kent, between three Quakers and Mr. T. Danson Minister; to which is added a
Narrative of their wicked abominable practices, by the same Author. Ministers
Maintenance by Tithes, Infant Baptism, Humane Learning, and the Sword of the
Magistrate, clearly maintained by the Word of God, by Immanuel Bourne, Minister
of Gods Word at Waltham in Leichestershire; with a sober Answer to Anthony
Piersons great Case of ^ythes. Judicial Astrology totally routed and their
pretense to Scripture, Reason, and Experience answered, by J. A. Published for
public good.
THE Life of Faith.
CHAP. I. The worth or excellency of every thing is according to its
usefulness. Hab. 2.4. Romans 1.17. Gal. 3.11. Heb. 10.38. considered, and their
meaning enquired into, how places of the Old Testament are cited in the new.
The Life of every true Believer is an everlasting life, what living by Faith
does import.
THe nature of Faith I have already endeavored to explain in a small Treatise
formerly published. I have now taken in hand to show the use of it, for it is
this wherein every thing attains its perfection; and as habits are said to be
perfected in their acts, for which they are: so faith may (in a good sense) be
said to be perfected in works, because of the universal influence that it has
into the whole course of our lives; and for this cause it is called Precious
Faith, 2 Pet. 1.1. the value of every thing being answerable to the usefulness
of it. For diverse Ages before the time of Socrates, most men were led by Fancy
rather than Reason: As a Learned man has observed ( Casaubon of Enthusiasme,
p. 4.) and the only happiness of those Ages was to be exempted from
Controversies, for there must needs be a good agreement, where no reason is
used to examine or disprove: b^^ Socrates taught them the use of reason, by
organizing (as one expresse^ it) and, as it were, ensouling the body of
Philosophy, reducing the Principles thereof to such order, as they might be
useful and practicable; for which he was judged by the Oracle to be the wisest
of men; but here is a point of higher wisdom; the Spirit of God in the holy
Scriptures has taught us the use of Faith, whereby we live a life as far
excelling the life of Reason, as the life of Reason excels the life of Sense;
and how much faith does conduce to this life we shall understand, by a due
weighing those places of Scripture where the Just are said to live by Faith:
And the several cases wherein the Holy Ghost uses this expression: We first
meet with it, Hab. 4.2. where some refer Faith to the subject, reading the
words, The Just by Faith shall live: others to the predicate, according to the
ordinary reading, and this indeed seems more genuine, however if we should take
the first reading, the sense will not differ. There had been little question
made about the meaning of this place, but that the Apostle, Romans 1.17. and Gal.
3.11. seems to apply it to another end, than was intended by the Prophet:
making use thereof to prove justification by Faith without the Works of the
Law. Some suppose the Prophet intends this chiefly of Justification, and not of
any deliverance from the Chaldeans, inserting it as a Digression not properly
belonging to the Argument in hand: it being the manner of the Prophets, upon
occasion of particular deliverances more remarkable than ordinary, either
related, or foretold; to rise higher, and proceed further, to that more general
deliverance of mankind, and spiritual restoration and enlargement of the
Church by Jesus Christ. (see Gataker on Isa. 11.1.) others think he speaks
chiefly of the deliverance of the Jews from the Chaldeans, and that till it was
accomplished they should support themselves by Faith, and than the Apostle
might notwithstanding apply it to the business of Justification, because these
temporal deliverances were types of spiritual, and it is the same Faith whereby
we trust God both for spiritual and temporal mercies; and if faith in God for
temporal deliverances be so acceptable to him, then also will faith in him for
everlasting salvation be as pleasing in his sight. So Mestrezat on Heb. 10.38.
Others judge that the Prophet speaks in a more large and comprehensive sense,
understanding thereby whatsoever may be comprehended under life; and indeed
whatever was the meaning of the Prophet in that place, the word may be extended
to such a latitude of signification, as is evident from the use which the
Apostle makes of it in the New Testament, for it is plain that the Apostles did
not only multiply inferences from particular places of the Old Testament, and
apply one place to different purposes (as we may see 1 Cor. 10.26, 28.) but
they altered places which they cited; the former they might do as men endued
with reason, whose work it is to multiply conclusions from a few Principles;
the Law of Nature, and the whole body of moral Philosophy (as some think) being
hereby made up of a few common Notions: The latter they might do as Apostles
inspired by the Holy Ghost: so that they might not only cite Scripture, but
make and interpret Scripture, wherefore sometimes they give not the words, but
the sense of the Prophets. What the Prophet calls his glory, Psalm. 16.9. the
Apostle calls tongue, Acts 2.26. What the Prophet calls opening the ear, Psalm.
40.6. the Apostle interprets preparing a body, Heb. 10.5. So likewise, compare
Hab. 2.4. with Heb. 10.38. Sometimes they leave out something which is not to
the present purpose; compare Deu. 24.1. with Mat. 5.31. and Deuteronomy. 25.5. with
Mat. 22.24. Sometimes there is an addition of something for illustration;
compare Deuteronomy. 6.13. with Mat. 4.10. Sometimes some small mutations: See more of
this in Tarnovins on Amos 5.27. In these places, Romans 1.17. and Gal. 3.11. it
is evident the Apostle speaks of Justification. Gal. 2.20. (where he does not
in formal words indeed quote the place, but has clear reference to it) he
speaks of Sanctification; and Heb. 10.38. he speaks of Christians supporting,
and comforting themselves by faith in trials and afflictions, till the time
appointed for their deliverance; which seems also to be the chief intent of the
Prophet Habakkuk, and all these are comprehended in the word Life; for all men
are by nature dead in Law, that is, bound over to eternal death, condemned
already, Joh. 3.18. some understand the threatening thus, Genesis 2.17. Now in
Justification this sentence is repealed, and man is invested with a new right
to everlasting life, wherefore it is called, Justification to life, Romans 5.18.
and we need not distinguish this from everlasting life, for the life which a
Believer is restored to, is an everlasting life, Joh. 3.36. and 5.24. Though
the Acts of this life may be for a time obstructed, yet it can never be wholly
extinguished, as Mr. Hales has determined in his Remains, p. 108. whose
judgment (it may be) will be more regarded by some than the judgment of many
other learned men who have fully proved it. And Sanctification is ordinarily
understood by life. Ephesians. 2.1. speaks of initial Sanctification or
Regeneration, and Ephesians. 4.18. the Gentiles before faith are said to be alienated
from the life of God; by this life we are alive to God, fitted for communion
with him, as we are by Reason made capable of converse with men, Romans 6.11. but
yet further, by life we are not to understand life simply and nakedly in
abstracto, but an happy comfortable life; Vivere non est vita sed valere, a
sickly life is not worthy the name of life, so a disconsolate life is the
shadow of death, Psalm. 23.4. Yea, Paul, by reason of his afflictions, says, he
was in deaths often, 2 Cor. 11.23. So our Savior says, Luke 12.15. A man's life
consists not in the abundance of the things which he possesses, that is,
they do not make a man's life comfortable. So says the Apostle, 1 These. 3.8.
Now we live if you stand fast in the Lord, so he might have done if they had
not stood fast; but he means, this would be a reviving, or a great comfort to
him, to see their stedfastness and perseverance, as he expresses himself more
fully, 1 These. 2.19. A Believer may not only make a shift to get to heaven by
Faith, but may maintain himself comfortably in an evil World. So that to live
by Faith imports thus much, We are by faith not only acquitted from the guilt
of sin, and entitled to everlasting life: but are enabled to hold on
cheerfully, and comfortably in an holy course, notwithstanding all temptations
and troubles which we meet with in this evil world. Neither let any think that
hereby too much is ascribed to Faith, since Christ is our life, Joh. 11.25.
Chap. 14.6. Col. 3.4. for though we speak herein somewhat improperly, or
Metonymically: yet it is according to the ordinary manner of speech; for when
we say, A man lives by his labor, or by his wits, every body understands it of
what he gets by these: So to live by faith, is to live by what we have coming
in by faith, either morally, or by real communication.

CHAP. II. Of our Union with Christ, what it is not, viz. Essential, Personal,
Corporeal, a mere Union of affections: Joh. 17.21. and Gal. 2.20. vindicated:
the effects of this Union showed by diverse similitudes; how this Union is by
Faith; of the legal Union betwixt Christ and the Elect before Faith, by some
asserted; the relation betwixt Christ and his Elect as the necessary foundation
of his satisfaction.
IT being so that Christ is the original and fountain of a Believers life, I
must begin the proof of what I have taken in hand to clear, with the Union
which is betwixt Christ and believers, this being the foundation of our
Communion with him. Joh. 14.20. our Savior tells his Disciples, that after his
Resurrection, when they should receive a more full measure of the Spirit, they
should know two great mysteries, his Union with the Father, and his Union with
them, whereby they did, as it were, mutually possess each other; of this Union
we read further, Joh. 17.21, 23. 1 Cor. 12.12.

Now, if any ask me what this Union is, I must tell them, I know not;
Christianus ad multa respondere potest Ignoro, says Austin, If I should say,
it is a mystical union, I do in effect say, it is such an Union as I do not
understand, Ephesians. 5.32. yet as they say, we may know God per viam remotionis vel
negationis, and per viam causalitatis: So I may tell you what this Union is
not, and what the effects of it are.

1. It is not an essential Union, as some have boldly affirmed; for this would
infer an equality of power, holiness, wisdom, etc. that is, make the creature
not only perfect, in holiness, but omnipotent, omniscient; the infiniteness and
perfection of all excellencies being of the Essence of the Godhead.

And for that place, John 17.21. it is forced to serve two Hypotheses. Some
thence deny the Deity of Christ, because it is but such an Union that is
between the Father and the Son, as is betwixt Christ and believers. Others
would thence infer an essential Union betwixt Christ and Believers, because it
is such an Union as is betwixt the Father and the Son. But the place will serve
neither of their purposes, signifying, as Matt. 5.48. only some kind of
similitude, no equality, as Glassius has fully proved, Gram. sacr. 501. etc.

2. This Union is not a personal Union, as some strangely speak, (see W. Dell.
on Gal. 2.20.) The whole process of the last Judgment (as set down Matthew.
25.31, etc.) fully proves, that Christ and Believers remain distinct persons,
and that place, Gal. 2.20. is not to be understood literally, for then there
were a plain contradiction in it. But Christ is said to live in us, because he
makes us live, as will appear by comparing Romans 8.15. with Galat. 4.6. in one
place the spirit is said to cry, in another place to make us cry. Nos clamamus,
sed ille clamaredictus est, qui facit ut nos clamemus, says Austin de correp.
and Great. c. 15. And the Apostle speaks in that place, as in 1 Cor. 15.10. but
as one afraid of seeming to assume to himself, and derogate from the Grace of
Jesus Christ.

3. It is not a corporeal Union, as the Papists would prove from John 6.56.
that place is interpreted literally, only to serve their hypothesis of
transubstantiation.

4. It is not a mere Union of affections, such as was in the primitive
Christians, Acts 4.32. or in the ten Kings, Rev. 17.13. though there is such an
union of affections, 1 Cor. 6.17. Phil. 2.5. yet this is but the effect of a
nearer Union, which (though we fully understand not its nature) is set forth to
us by several similitudes, as of a vine and its branches, John 15.1. etc. Of an
head and members, 1 Cor. 12.11. Of an husband and wife, Ephesians. 5.32. all which
show the effects of this union, denoting the influence of divine power and
virtue, which believers have from Jesus Christ: the sympathy that he has with
them: their subjection to his guidance, and direction: the protection which
they have, and freedom from the Law by Jesus Christ: as a woman under the
covert of her husband: But of these things in their place.

I now come to show how this Union is made up by Faith; which I prove,

First, from 2 Cor. 13.5. where being in the Faith, and Christ being in them,
are made indifferently a proof of Christ speaking in the Apostles, Of the sense
and contexture of that place, See the Animadversions of Sr. Norton Knatchbull.

2. Christ dwells in the heart by faith, Ephesians. 3.17. he stands and knocks, and
Faith is the opening to him, Rev. 3.20. when Lydia believed her heart was
opened.

3. By Faith we are espoused to Jesus Christ, 2 Cor. 11.2. As the marriage
Union is made by the consent of both parties, so is this Union betwixt Christ
and the soul; Christ has given his consent by the offer and promise of the
Gospel, and the soul consents, when by faith it accepts this offer, and lays
hold on this Promise.

4. By faith we are made the sons of God, John 1.12. Gal. 3.26. and
consequently Partakers of the spirit, Gal. 4.6. Some indeed speak of an Union
betwixt Christ and the elect before Faith, by his Incarnation, which they call
a legal Union, or a stipulatory Union, such as is betwixt a Debtor and his
Surety, which they make necessary to his satisfaction, since, as they say,
unitas praestantis est fundamentum proprietatis ad officium praestitum: others
again load this with dreadful consequences, making it the foundation of
Antinomianisme, the ruin of Christian Religion, leaving no room for Remission
of sins. I dare not peremptorily define in such a case, yet it seems to me at
present, that there must be some relation betwixt Christ and his elect, whereby
his satisfaction becomes available for them, and whereby he may obtain for them
spiritual blessings wherewith they are blessed in him, Ephesians. 1.3. amongst which
faith is to be certainly reckoned. But the forementioned consequences of the
former Doctrine, (as understood by them that maintain it) I cannot so clearly
apprehend. If we have recourse to the civil Law for the proof of them, which
tells us, that every obligation is taken away by the payment of the debt; that
tells us also, that vicarius paena corporalis cannot properly pay the debt: for
in such a case, that holds, dum alius solvit, aliud etiam solvitur. And if it
be said, it is the same in sens^ civili, though not in sensu physico; I answer,
in strictness noxa sequitur caput, and aliud pro alio invito creditori, solvi
non potest, Mine singer, in lib. 3. Institut. Tit. 30. so that God did, in
dispensing with the person, uti suo jure, and by an act of supreme Dominion
substitute Christ in our stead; wherefore it was free for him to appoint
himself upon what terms the Obligation should be taken away: and here was room
enough left for Remission. I will but refer to Grotius, de satisfac. c. 6.
where he sets down what the true notion of remission is, and shows that there
is properly Remission, where an act of the rector or Creditor does intervene,
to make a solution valid: antecedently to which act, such a solution may be
admitted or refused: and that such an act does here intervene is evident, which
seems to be a dispensation, unless we will understand interpretation in as
large a sense as Suarez, l. 6. de legibus, cap. 1. S. 3. And further, Grotius
does in the same place yield, that solution ejusdem does not ipso facto
liberare: unless it be with this intention, ut reus liberetur. So that whatever
Christ paid, it might be that the sinner might be freed, at such a time, or on
such terms as should be agreed on between the Father and the Son. Whereas some
say, what Christ did or suffered, was as a Mediator, this will not prove, that
he was not sponsor: the same person may be Mediator and Surety, as the learned
Parker has proved by the examples of Judah, Genesis 43.8, 9. and Paul, Philem.
9.18. de descensu, lib. 3. Sec. 95. We should as carefully avoid Socinianism in
this case, as Antinomianism. Aquinas, p. 3. quaest. 49. Art. 1. c. goes as far
as any man, for he says plainly, that the Redemption of Christ becomes
available to the Remission of our sins, as he is our head, and we his
members, as the hand may do something to satisfy for the fault which has been
committed by the foot: because actiones sunt suppositorum. I have sometime
wondered, how this place of Aquinas escaped Mr. Wottons censure, ( de
Reconciliatione, P. 1. l. 2. cap. 10. N. 3. and cap. 16. N. 9. where he cites
it) considering how he disputes P. 2. L. 1. C. 16. etc. But to leave this
digression; Whatever the Relation was betwixt Christ and his Elect, as the
foundation of his Satisfaction, yet that which according to Scripture may most
properly be called our Union with him, is not before we believe, when we become
actual partakers of the benefits of his death, as will more fully appear in the
following Chapter.

CHAP. III. We are justified by Faith, not before faith. Why such as are
justified are afflicted, and their happiness deferred? How faith justifies? How
imputed for righteousness? Sanctification our formal happiness. The fruit of
the spirit, received by faith; yet in the Ordinances. John 7, 38, 39. Hos.
14.6. Psalm. 92.13. expounded.
HAving thus laid the foundation, I will now proceed to show you, what
Communion a Believer has with Jesus Christ, by virtue of this Union: and

First, They partake of the Righteousness of Christ, and so are freed from the
sentence of death, which before they lay under. The Scripture abounds with the
proof of this, Acts 10.43. cap. 13.39. and, whatever attempts have been made
upon these places to disable them for the proof of Justification by Faith, yet
that place of the Apostle, Galat. 2.16. is beyond all exception, Knowing, says
he, that a man is not justified by the works of the Law, but by the faith of
Jesus Christ, even we have believed in Jesus Christ, that we might be justified
by the faith of Christ: they believed to the end they might be justified: now
the end is not before the means, unless in intention. As for those who have so
earnestly contended for Justification before Faith, they seem to do it out of a
good intent, lest we should derogate from the Merit of Christ, the justice of
God, or the comfort of the Saints. But they are afraid, where no fear is: for
yielding the certainty of Gods Election, and the efficacy of Christ's death,
whereby the Salvation of the Elect becomes sure in it self, certitudine
objectiva, yea supposing the greatest redundancy of merit in the sufferings of
Christ, all this does not amount to justification. And I would desire those who
labor so earnestly in this business, to consider these few things;

1. The Elect are kept long out of heaven after the satisfaction made by Jesus
Christ.

2. They lie under many evils while they are in this world: these things sense
will not suffer us to deny.

3. It is equally injust, to inflict upon any what is not due to them, and to
detain from them what is their due: and whether is it harder to say, that we
are not justified till we believe, notwithstanding the satisfaction which
Christ has made for us? or that we are justified, and yet left under the power
of Satan, the curse of the Law, dead in trespasses and sins? wherefore they
take not a right course to vindicate the justice of God: but the matter seems
to be thus, whatever the purpose of God toward sinners has been, and whatever
intrinsic value may be in the obedience of Jesus Christ, yet his merit was not
absolute, but founded upon an act of Grace, God condescending to accept of the
satisfaction of our Surety, where he might have required the Debt of us:
wherefore it was free for him to appoint, upon what terms, and at what time,
these for whom Christ died should be made partakers of the benefit of his
death, and under what discipline they should be exercised till they partake
thereof, especially seeing the condition he requires of them, derogates nothing
from his Grace, being his own gift, having such an aptitude in it self, for
that to which it is appointed, and not contributing the least mite to the
satisfaction for our sin, and when the deferring of our happiness, and the
afflictions we suffer in the mean time, are both for our advantage, and work
together for our good, Romans 8.28. 2 Cor. 4.17. For the Question about the
interest of Faith in our justification, whether it justify as an instrument,
or as a condition, I think it deserves not half the words that have been used
about it, they are both of them School-termes, and not found in the Scripture,
and should not therefore disturb the peace of the Church, especially seeing
both parties at variance are agreed in the thing, but not in the formal notion,
under which they do conceive of it; and I think both sides are so far agreed,
that Faith may be called an instrument, allowing much impropriety of speech,
and that it may be called a condition, while we thereby do not suppose any such
thing as merit. As guilt does immediately result from the act of sin, by virtue
of the threatening, so does righteousness from faith by virtue of the promise,
as the Law is the strength of sin, whereby it binds over the sinner to
punishment, 1 Cor. 15.56. So the Gospel is the strength of faith, by virtue of
which the sinner is acquitted. Yet I would not be understood, as if I ascribed
the same causality to faith in justification, as to sin in condemnation. And
where Faith is said to be counted or imputed for righteousness, we need not
thereby understand that we are justified for our faith, or that it is the
matter of our justification, but our faith is reckoned or imputed to us, that
is, God does reckon us believers, and deal with us as such, that is, justify
us according to his own gracious appointment in the Gospel.

For so that is said to be imputed to us, which is really inherent in us, as
sin is said to be imputed to a person when he is reckoned or accounted a
sinner, and dealt with as a sinner, 2 Samuel 19.19. But now our justification is
but in order to our sanctification, for hereby we live to God, and converse
with him. This is our formal happiness, I mean Sanctification taken passively,
and in actu secundo, and according to the degree thereof is the degree of our
happiness. When we shall know God perfectly, we shall love him perfectly, and
then our joy and happiness shall be perfected, And if we could suppose a man to
be justified and not sanctified, it would be, but as if a man should have his
debt paid, and be left in prison. Its true, such an one might be exempted from
the punishment of sense, and so, in as good a condition as a beast; but it
would not exempt him from the punishment of loss. Justification qualifies us
for heaven morally, but Sanctification naturally. A fool may have a right to an
estate, if he be lawfully begotten, but he cannot enjoy it without the use of
reason: So if we should be supposed to have a right to happiness by
justification, we could not enjoy it without sanctification. Therefore they
speak ignorantly, who so much cry up Justification, and speak so slightly of
Sanctification. Christ blesses us in turning us away from our iniquities, Acts
3.26. Now the Author hereof is the Holy Ghost, who is the quickening Spirit,
Joh. 6.63. the spirit of life, Romans 8.2. in him, we live and move spiritually.
As he divides his gifts to every one as he pleases, so likewise his graces:
they are his fruits, Galat. 5.22. the constant being of our Graces depending
upon his perpetual in dwelling, John 14.16. the liveliness thereof, and our
comfort, on his arbitrary influence, which he gives out, or withholds at his
pleasure, Psalm. 51.11. This is as the dew, Hos. 14.5. which descends
insensibly, John 14.17. the dew sweetly refreshes, Prove. 19.12. so does the
Spirit, John 14.16. the dew makes fruitful, Genesis 27.39. so the Spirit makes us
grow as the Li^ies for fruitfulness, fragrancy, beauty: like the Cedars for
duration, and firm rooting; which -- quantum vertico ad auras aetherias, tantum
radice ad tartara tendunt: vide Rivet in locum.

Now it is by Faith that we receive the Spirit, John 7.38, 39. it is by the
Spirit indeed that we are enabled to believe, Faith being reckoned among the
fruits of it, Gal. 5.22. but then we receive greater measures of the spirit by
faith. Put water into a pump, and you may bring up more, while there is any in
the well: So let the Spirit be put within us, whereby we may believe, Ezekiel.
36.27. and Faith will continually draw further degrees from the fountain: It is
as the attractive power, or magnetical virtue in plants, whereby they suck
juice and moisture from the root, which makes them thrive and prosper. And for
the more full clearing hereof, I will show you how Faith does improve all those
Ordinances, which are the breasts of consolation, from whence the chi^dren of
God do suck, and are satisfied with the blessings of the Gospel, Isa. 66.11.
Those that are planted in the house of the Lord, shall flourish in the courts
of our God, Psalm. 92.13. It is in the Church that the Ordinances of God are
dispensed. Neither yet do all flourish that are there, but such as are planted
there. You may see many dead sticks and boughs in a Garden, which are only for
the support and defense of some choice plants or flowers: so there are many
amongst believers that make the same common profession with them, which are but
for their defense and security. If there were none that professed Religion, but
such as are found and sincere believers, how soon would they become a prey to
Adversaries. But they are those that are planted or ingrafted, that bear fruit,
John 15.4. Now there are three Ordinances whereby a Christians spiritual life
is maintained, and which do all become effectual thereto by faith, and these
are Prayer, hearing the Word, and the Lords Supper. Indeed though Baptism is
ordinarily administered, when persons are not capable of exercising Faith, yet
there is some use to be made of it: But I shall not treat distinctly of it
here, but leave the Reader to infer by proportion from what is said of the
Lords Supper, how it is to be improved, there being much said about it, in a
few words, in the larger Catechism of the late Assembly, and there being a
Treatise written of it by Master Simon Ford.

CHAP. IV. The use of Prayer, though we pray by the Spirit, yet we are to pray
for the Spirit, Mat. 7.11. and Luke 11.13. compared; an unbeleever cannot pray
acceptably, nor in the name of Christ, yet is not therefore discharged of his
duty; by faith we pray with reverence, boldness, importunity, Mat. 15.22, etc.
explained; by Faith we wait for a return of Prayer; helps to Faith in Prayer,
Psa. 9.10. 2 Pet. 1.4. Isa. 30.18. illustrated* what Faith is required in
Prayer, or what it is to pray in Faith, Jam. 1.6, etc. opened; the ends of
Prayer.
PRayer is as the Merchants Ship, it fetches in all a Christians store, even
temporal blessings, if they be really blessings, are brought in by Prayer;
indeed, sometimes men have them without asking, but they had better ask them
without having: for it is by Prayer that they are sanctified to us, 1 Timothy 4.5.
And we are to pray, not that we may incline God to give, but because he is
inclined and has promised to give, 2 Samuel 7.27. And though we pray by the
Spirit, Romans 8.15, 27. yet we must pray also for the Spirit, Luke 11.13. He is
given to us as a Spirit of Supplication, and thereby we obtain him to work
effectually in us to all those ends and purposes for which Christ sent him into
the World, to be Vicarius Domini, as Tertullian calls him, De velandis virgin,
Cap. 1. To supply his absence while he is gone to appear in heaven for us. The
words of Christ are variously related, by Luke and Matthew. Luke relates them,
How much more shall your heavenly Father give the holy Spirit to them that ask
him. Matthew, How much more shall your Father which is in heaven give good
things to them that ask him, Mat. 7.11. Of the Evangelists citing the words of
our Savior, we may make the same judgment which was made, Chap. 1. of the
Apostles citing the words of the Prophets. If the words of Christ were as they
are related by Matthew, then Luke makes a particular inference from a general,
or at least from an indefinite promise. If God will give good things to those
that ask him, surely he will give his Spirit, else we may say as Abraham, Genesis
15.2. Lord God what will thou give me? Nothing can be good to us without the
Spirit; if those which Luke sets down were Christ's words, then Matthew does
make the Spirit to be all good things in effect; the promise of the Spirit
being the great Promise under the Gospel, as the Promise of the Messiah was
under the Law: and the Spirit being all in all, in respect of Application, as
Christ is all in all, in respect of impetration, Col. 3.11. Or else he does
from the promise of the Spirit infer, That God would give all good things, as
Christ argues, Mat. 6.33. and the Apostle, Romans 8.32. He that gives the greater
will not deny the less.

Now, we can do nothing in Prayer without Faith, which must qualify us for it
both habitually and actually.

First, Habitually, for without Faith it is impossible to please God. Heb.
11.6. It must be the effectual fervent prayer of a righteous man that availes,
Jam. 5.16. for such a man only can pray in the name of Christ; If a man should
come to desire a favor of you in the name or for the sake of such a friend
whom you much respect, and whose name will prevail much with you, would you not
ask him presently, What relation he has to such a man that he uses his name?
So many come to God in the name of Jesus Christ, And God may say to them, and
Why in the name of Christ? What are you to Christ? Or, What relation have you
to him? Or, suppose, in the former case, your friend, whose name another makes
use of, should be near you at such a time, and you go to him, and ask him if
he know that man that makes use of his name, and he should tell you, he is one
that he has nothing to do with, one that has done him much injury, and from
whom he never received the least respect or civility; What answer might such a
Petitioner expect? So let us suppose our selves to hear God asking Jesus
Christ, when an Unbeleever comes to pray in his name, if he belong to him, or
have any thing to do with him: and Christ answering, That he has nothing to do
with him, and is one that despises his authority, and contemns his grace, and
reproacheth his name, and makes light of him; What can we think it would avail
such an one to pray in the name of Christ? Yet an Unbeleevers incapacity of
praying acceptably does not give him a discharge from his duty, for if wicked
men were bound to do nothing but what they can do as they ought, they should
have no sins of omission; but however I should in Thesi say it is the duty of
an Unbeliever to pray, yet in hypothesi if such an one should come to ask mine
advice, I would deal with him as with one who has an erring conscience, I
would not advise him to do any thing against his conscience, or to do his duty
persisting in his error, but rather to lay aside his error, by rightly
informing his conscience, that so he might do that which is lawful in a lawful
manner.

So I would not advise such an one to pray, persisting in his unbelief; but to
believe, that so he might pray acceptably. It is true, God does sometimes out of
the exuperance of his bounty hear wicked men, 1 Kings 21.29. 2 Kings 13.4. But
though he bestows common favors on good and bad, yet it is upon the righteous
(who are so by Faith) that he bestows them with a special love, Psalm. 146.8.

But Secondly, Faith qualifieth us actually for prayer.

1. As it disposes us to an holy awe and reverence of God. He that will serve
God acceptably, must serve him with reverence and godly fear. Heb. 12.28. God
disdains such services as men would be ashamed to offer to their Prince, Mal.
1.8. And it is more tolerable to err by superstition in the Worship of God,
than on the other hand, by rudeness and profaneness. Now Faith sets the soul
as under the eye of God, sees him (who to sense) is invisible, Heb. 11.27. It
being the evidence of things not seen. So that by Faith the soul does as really
apprehend God present, as if he were incarnat^, or had assumed an humane shape;
and there is nothing more effectual to beget in the soul a due reverence of
God, since the presence of Angels in our Assemblies requires such a decorum in
the exercises which we there perform, 1 Cor. 11.10.

2. By Faith we come boldly to God in prayer, though Faith prevent rudeness,
yet it comes with an holy boldness, Ephesians. 3.12. it is by Faith, as the Apostle
there shows, that we have access with confidence; the word (...), there used,
signifies freedom of speech, when a man speaks his whole mind freely, when a
man can come boldly to God and challenge his Promise, urge upon him, as Austin
says of his Mother Monica, his own handwriting, as David does, Psalm. 119.49.
Remember thy word unto thy servant, upon which thou have caused me to hope; and
Psalm. 143.1. he challenges God in his faithfulness and righteousness to answer
him, though he dare not deal with God upon terms of strict justice, as he
shows, verse. 2. yet he pleads that justice which is founded upon his mercy, and
his promise made thereby.

3. Faith encourages the soul to perseverance and importunity in Prayer; there
is an holy impudence to be used in Prayer, so the word (...), used Luke 11.8.
does properly import; a clear instance of this we have in that woman, Mat.
15.22. She comes to Christ, and propounds her case to him, and at first he
gives her no answer. Sometimes a Believer may pray and have no audience, Psalm.
22.2. yet Christ's silence would not make her silent, but she cries after him,
ver. 23. It seems the Disciples were weary of her importunity, and Austin, by
comparing this place with Mar. 7.24. observes, that she followed Christ from
one place to another, though he endeavored to avoid her; then Christ does in
effect give her a flat denial, signifying to her, that she was none of those to
whom he was sent, for the time of the full calling of the Gentiles was nor yet
come. So God does sometimes deny the prayers of his People, as he tells them
plainly, Judge. 10.13. He would deliver them no more; yet neither delays nor
denial would beat her off, but she still continues her suit; then Christ gives
her a very rough answer: does in effect call her a dog, ver. 26. Sometimes God
seems to be angry even against the prayer of his People, Psalm. 80.4. The more
they pray, the more their affliction increases, and things seem to grow worse
and worse with them; but yet she is not discouraged hereby, but retorts Christ's
words upon himself, arguing from thence against him, If she were a dog, yet
there was something due to her as a dog: the dogs eating of the crumbs which
fal^ from their Masters table^ as David seems to retort such an argument upon
God, Psalm. 25.11. making that which might seem to make his sin less capable of
Pardon, an argument to prevail with God for the pardon of them; the greater
they were the more need he had of pardon, and the more glory God would have in
the pardon of them; this is an excellent point of skill in prayer, yea, not
only in wrestling with God, but in wrestling with Satan.

Now observe Christ's answer to this woman, O woman great is thy faith, be it
unto thee even as thou will.

Here is first, Christ's testimony concerning her, her faith was great, he
imputes her importunity and perseverance to her faith.

2. Here is Christ's grant to her, even what she would; by which Christ shows
how pleasing such importunity is to him, and what a grateful violence, as
Tertullian calls it, Apol. c. 39. is thereby offered to him. The same
importunity we may observe in Jacob, Genesis 32.24. and in Moses, Exodus 32.10. and
the like success thereof in them both.

Fourthly, Faith waits for the answer of Prayer, as David when he had directed
his Prayer to God, looked up, Psalm. 5.3. as one that having put in a Petition,
waits to see what answer he shall have, or what becomes of it. A surly beggar
loses many Alms because be will not wait; like that wicked King, 2 Kings 6.33.
This was the frequent sin of the Jews, who, impatient of delays, were wont to
betake themselves to foreign aid, Isa. 30.1, etc. 31.1, etc. Hos. 12.1. though
God had told them, that in quietness and confidence should be their strength,
Isa. 30.15. quiet and confident dependence upon God should be their best
security: And when young men (that are strongest, and most confident in their
strength) shall utterly fall, they that wait on the Lord shall renew their
strength, they shall mount up with wings as Eagles, they shall run and not be
weary, they shall walk and not faint, Isa. 40.30, 31. they shall hold out to
the last, and overcome all difficulties, as if they had wings to fly over them.
God is so well pleased with those that wait on him, Psalm 147.11. that he will
not fail them, Psalm. 25.3. We may say of God, as Seneca of a friend, Epist. 3.
Fidelem si putaveris, facies; the Proverb is true here, He that trusts much,
obliges much, see Psalm. 37.40. Isa. 26.3. Now that this is the fruit of Faith,
is evident from the whole current of that place, Hab. 2.2, 3, 4. He that
believes makes not haste, he does not through the distrust of Gods Promise,
(though the performance of it be deferred) betake himself to the use of any
unlawful means for his own help, (which was before observed to be the common
sin of the Jews) Esai. 28.16. but waits for the God of his Salvation, because
he knows his God will hear him, Micah 7.7.

Now because the work of Faith lies much in trading to heaven in Prayer, I
shall here add some helps to faith therein.

First, Let us look to the command of God. It is not in vain that he has said,
Seek ye my face, Isa. 45.19. When Christ called the blind man, Mark 10.49.
they bad him be of good comfort, supposing he intended some good toward him,
else he would not have called him. Commands may sometimes be of greater use
than Promises, and more effectual for silencing doubts and discouragements;
some I believe have found them so. We may dispute our interest in a Promise, or
plead (in a mistaken humility) our own unworthiness against what we look upon
only as a privilege; but Commands are not to be disputed, but obeyed. And if we
should fear Gods being angry with our Prayers, and that he should say as Josh.
7.10. Wherefore lie thou thus upon thy face? we might take the boldness to
answer, as David, Psalm. 27.8. Thou have said, Seek ye my face, therefore thy
face Lord will I seek: And besides the general commands of Prayer, Christ has
let words fall from him to invite our importunity, intimating his readiness to
yield thereto, and how well pleased he is therewith, Luke 11.8. Chap. 18.1. etc.

2. Let us acquaint our selves more with the nature of God, and this will be a
great encouragement to Faith as one observes well, ( Arrowsmith Chain of
Principles, p. 39.) Faith may lay hold on an Attribute when it cannot close
with a Promise, Psalm. 9.10. They that know thy name will put their trust in
thee. Name here may have reference to Exodus 34.5, etc. those Attributes there
mentioned being an encouragement to confidence; or it may have reference to
Exodus 6.3. the name Jehovah importing the constancy and faithfulness of God in
fulfilling his Promises, see Rivet on the place. But most probably it is
redundant here; and the words intend no more, but, they that know thee will put
their trust in thee.

Instances of the like redundance we have in those expressions, The Name of the
God of Jacob defend thee, Psalm. 20.1. To seek Gods Name, Psalm. 83.16. To love
his Name, Isa. 56.6. To fear his Name, Isa. 59.19. to praise his name, call
upon his name, swear by his name, etc. however the sense of the place will be
the same: Those that know God, that is, how faithful, how good, how wise, etc.
he is, will put their trust in him, Isa. 30.18. The Prophet shows the
blessedness of those that wait for God, because

First, God is a good God; while the sinner waits for mercy, God waits that he
may be gracious, Tardius videtur Deo veniam peccatori dedisse quam illi
accepisse, Bern. de interior. dom. c. 37. the time seems longer to him than it
does to them.

Secondly, He is a God of judgment, one that does all things with wisdom, and
moderation, and so will take the fittest season when he may show mercy to our
greatest advantage.

Martha thought it fell out very unhappily that Christ was not with her at her
bro^hers death, Jo. 11.21 but Christ was glad that he was not there, for he
intended a farther mercy than the life of Lazarus, viz. the confirming the
faith of others by the miracle which he had occasion to work, ver. 15. We are
always ready for mercy, but God in his wisdom sees meet many times to defer
it, Joh. 7.6.

Thirdly, Let us study the Promises, that so we may have them in readiness to
urge upon God as the matter shall require in particular cases, 2 Pet. 1.4. the
Promises are exceeding great and precious; they are great in respect of the
things promised, and exceeding precious in themselves, it being a great favor
to have a promise from another; Many that intend us good, will not come under
the bonds of a promise, they love not to be obliged, but would have us stand to
their courtesy: But God has not been so reserved, but has made himself a
debtor by his promise, if not to us, yet to his own truth and faithfulness;
that requiring that what he had promised should be fulfilled: So that we know
what we have to trust to; times and seasons indeed for their accomplishment he
has kept in his own power, but the things themselves he has, as it were, put
out of his power, Act. 1.7. They are precious in respect of their sutableness
to every condition or degree of Believers; There is no duty a Christian can be
called to, no temptation or affliction which he can be exercised with, but he
may find a Promise suited to it; Yea, no Christian, of the lowest stature, but
may find Promises within his reach, though some may be above him; a man on the
ground cannot reach the top of a tree, but he may get hold of the lower boughs,
and so rise by degrees till he come to the top. It may be thou can not reach
such Promises as Rev. 2.26. or Chap. 3.21. but thou may reach such as those
Mat. 5.3, 4, 6. Yea, let me add farther, as Austin says of Books de Trinit.
l. 1. cap. 3. It is expedient that diverse men write of the same thing in
different styles, that so what they cannot understand in one they may apprehend
in another, that so the truth may come to all: to one after this manner, to
another after that (the common Apology for multiplying Books on the same
subject) so I may say of the Promises; God has promised the same things under
several notions, and expressed them by several similitudes, whereby he conveys
them to the soul (as cordial powders are conveyed in some waters to the
stomach) and when a soul cannot receive comfort by one Promise, it does by
another, though they are Promises of the same thing, but under different
notions and expressions, or to the same persons whose condition is expressed by
several Metaphors. Some may perhaps receive comfort from Mat. 5.6. which dare
not apply Psalm. 51.19. though it would be easy to show, that whoever hungers
and thirsts after righteousness has a broken and contrite heart. Mat. 11.28.
is as full a Promise as Joh. 6.37. and Isa. 55.1, etc. as full as either of
them: Yet it may be some souls may take more comfort from Joh. 6.37. because
that Promise, that Christ will in no wise cast out such as come to him, answers
directly to their scruple, and just meets with that doubt which runs most in
their minds, (that Christ would surely reject them if they should come) as if
God had intended that Promise purposely for them.

But further, these Promises are precious in respect of their firmness and
certainty, which God has given us assurance of by all those ways which are in
use among men for the confirmation of any Grant, Covenant, Promise; being as a
Testament confirmed by the death of the Testator, Heb. 9.17. 2 Cor. 1.20. A
Covenant sealed, Romans 4.11. A Promise confirmed by an Oath, which is the utmost
assurance that any man can give or require, Heb. 6.16, etc. This God does not
that his counsel may be immutable, but that he may declare it to be so to us,
by that which is the most solemn way of confirmation amongst men. O beatos nos
quorum causa Deus jurat. O miserrimos si nec juranti Domino credimus, Tert. de
Poenit. cap. 4. How happy are we that God should swear for our sakes! And what
wretches are we if we believe him not upon his oath.

Fourthly, Let us labor to clear our own interest in the Promise, that we may
with the more boldness put in our claim, crying, Abba Father, Romans 8.15. coming
with as much confidence to God as a child to a Father, though we may pray
indeed without assurance hereof: if we come not to God as knowing that he is
our Father, we may come to him that he may be our Father. The Promise indeed is
not universal, but the call or invitation is universal, and the Promise becomes
absolute upon our accepting of Gods invitation, Isa. 55.1. Mat. 11.28. If any
shall say, the invitation is not to all, but only to such as are thirsty and
weary. I answer, these are no limitations of Gods grace, but it would be in
vain to invite any others; and those are not moral qualifications to make
Christ willing to accept of us, but natural qualifications to make us willing
to accept of him. But that you may see what Faith it is which is required in
Prayer, I will make a short Digression to consider more distinctly what it is
to pray in Faith: and this may be taken either improperly, or properly; we may
be said to pray in faith more improperly,

First, When we pray with this confidence, that our Prayer is according to the
will of God, ( viz. that it is according to the will of God that we should so
pray, though not that our Prayer should be granted;) it may be our duty to pray
for that which it is not the pleasure of God to bestow, Romans 14.23. it is
evident by the Context, that the Apostle speaks of what a man does without a
persuasion of the lawfulness of it; for the Will of God must be both the Rule
of our duty, and the Reason of our obedience; so that whatsoever we do without
this persuasion, though it may be materially good, it is formally evil,
because it is not in obedience to Gods Will.

Secondly, When we pray in truth and sincerity, so Faith is taken, Romans 3.3.
and Jam. 1.6. the Apostle seems to speak of such a Faith as does effectually
determine the Will to the free choice and constant prosecution of that which is
good; and that you may not think this a singular notion, see the sense of
several very judicious and godly men, Dr. Jackson of Faith, page 108. Dr.
Preston on the Attributes of God, page 11, 12. Dr. Reynolds on Psalm. 110. p.
317. Mr. Capel of Tentations, part. 4. p. 46. The double-minded man says, he
is not he who is in the right way, and labors under some doubting, but he
that hangs betwixt two ways and knovvs not which to choose, whether God or
Baal.] There are many which pray from their memories, uttering such expressions
as they have heard or read, or from their fancies and inventions (for therein
Mr Saltmarsh is right, that all extemporary prayers are not from the Spirit, as
some mistake.) Others go further, and pray from conscience, for such things as
they are convinced they ought to pray for, yet these pray not sincerely from
the heart and affections, and so they do not as David says, Psalm. 27.4. Seek
after that which they desire of the Lord; they pray, but are afraid to be
heard, loath that God should take them at their word, or say Amen to their
prayers. This was Austine case Confess. L. 8. cap. 7. he prayed, Da mihi
castitatem and continentiam, sed noli modo. Timebam enim ne me cito exaudines.
Lord, give me chastity and continency, but not yet. I was afraid (says he)
lest thou should hear me presently, and cure that disease of lust which I had
rather should be fulfilled than mortified. So doubtless there are many which
pray for that humility which would spoil their pride and gallantry; for that
fear of God, self-denial, heavenly-mindedness, which would interrupt their
sensual pleasures, or hinder their thriving in the world by unlawful means: and
it is to be feared, would be loath to part with those sins which an answer of
such prayers would force them to part with. How many pray, that Gods name may
be hallowed, and are most ready to blaspheme his name? That his Kingdom may
come, and oppose his Kingdom? That his will may be done, that will neither do
it themselves, nor suffer those to live quietly that desire to do it? That God
would not lead them into temptation, and yet daily run upon temptations, and
would account it a punishment to be kept from them? Thus do men compass God
about with lies and deceit, Hos. 11.12. pretending to pray for those things
which they hate or fear.

But more properly we may be said to pray in faith, when we pray,

First, With a more general persuasion either of the power of God, Mat. 9.28,
29. 2 Timothy 1.12. I am persuaded he is able to keep that which I have committed
to him, or of his faithfulness, Heb. 11.11. 1 Timothy 2.13. If we believe not, he
is faithful, he cannot deny himself; which words we are not to understand, as
if God notwithstanding the unbelief of men would perform to them his mercy
promised, or as if unbelief could not deprive us of it; but whether we believe
or no that shall not make the faith of God of none effect, Romans 3.3. Gods
Promise shall be made good (according to the true tenor and import of it) to
those that by faith lay hold thereon, though we should by our unbelief exclude
our selves from the benefit of it.

Secondly, When we pray with a particular persuasion that we shall receive the
mercies which we pray for.

Now, the chief question is about this, How far we may pray with such a faith?

And for answer hereof we must consider, that our prayers are either for
spiritual mercies or for temporal. Again, spiritual mercies are either such as
are necessary to the being of grace, or for the well-being of it; that which is
necessary to the being of Christianity is assisting and persevering Grace, and
of the receiving of this our assurance is answerable to the assurance which we
have of our own sincerity. For that of God to the Apostle, My grace is
sufficient for thee, is equivalent to a Promise, and is as applicable to every
Believer as those words of God to Joshua, which the Apostle applies to all,
Heb. 13.5. and that the Apostle, 2 Cor. 12.9. does not speak of the sufficiency
of grace, as distinguished from the efficacy of it, see Rhetorforti exercitat.
428. and that Heb. 13.5. is true as well of spirituals as of temporals, that
being the chief end why we should desire of God not to fail us nor forsake us,
that he may incline our hearts to walk in all his ways, and keep his
Commandments, 1 Kings 8.57, 58. but for such grace as is necessary only to keep
us from particular infirmities, or for our comfort, or for the liveliness of
our graces; this is not promised so absolutely, but after the manner of
temporal mercies, for which we cannot ordinarily pray, with a particular
assurance of being heard; all the Faith we can exercise in such cases, is only
on the power, faithfulness, and goodness of God in general, and that he will
not despise our Prayers, Psalm. 102.17. but accept them graciously, and answer
them in such kind, manner, time, and measure, as seems good to his grace and
wisdom; and accordingly are all such Promises to be understood. Indeed
sometimes God does make an extraordinary impression of confidence upon the
hearts of his people in their prayers for temporal mercies, as in Luther, when
he prayed for his friend Myconius: and Edward the sixth for Sr. John Cheek,
Fullers H^story, Lib. 7.

Object. We are commanded to believe, that we shall receive whatsoever things
we desire when we pray, Mark 11.24. and whatever we ask in prayer, believing,
we shall receive, Matthew. 21.22.

Ans. 1. It is evident in both these places, by the context, that our Savior
speaks of that Faith of miracles, which was in the primitive Church, and
peculiar to those times.

2. If this were universally true, many would never die, nor ever want any
thing: for though they should not, possibly, pray thus for themselves, yet
others might pray thus for them.

3. They had not an absolute power of receiving whatsoever they asked in
prayer, but this Faith was from an extraordinary impress upon the soul, which
had not any particular Promise for its foundation, but only the power of God,
and an immediate persuasion of his willingness, God preparing the heart to
seek, where he had an intent to lend his ear to hear, Psalm. 10.17. Indeed, as
one boasted that he could make an engine which would remove the whole earth, if
he had some place else to fix his engine upon: so Faith would remove the world,
if it had a promise to stand firm upon. If it be said, we should pray for
nothing but what we have a promise for, I deny it. There are (as Mr. Hooker,
Eccles. pol. l. 5. Sect. 48. has rightly observed) two uses of Prayer, It
serves as a means to procure those things which God has promised to grant when
we ask: and as a mean also to express our lawful desires toward that which
whether we shall have or no we know not, till we see the event. Yea, I may add
further, we may therein represent our desires (with a submission to the will of
God) of those things which we know we shall not have: It was plainly our
Saviors case, Matthew. 26.39. though he knew it was not possible that the cup
should pass from him, and that he was come to that hour, for this end; that he
might drink it, John 12.27.

CHAP. V. The Gospel the Word of Life. Of Hearing and Reading the Word. The
Word is effectual by Faith. How variously Faith acts upon the several parts of
the Word. Upon the History and Doctrine thereof. Hebr. 11.3. illustrated. Upon
the Commands. The Socinians notion of Faith censured. 1 These. 2.13. explained.
The Acts of Faith on the Promises. Romans 4.17, etc. 2 Pet. 1.4. opened. How the
Promises to Grace, and the Promises of Grace conduce to Sanctification. How
Faith acts on the Threatenings. Heb. 11.7. cleared. The Use of Threatenings to
Believers. Romans 8.13. interpreted. How the Word is a means of Faith though it
be made effectual by Faith.
THe next means of Spiritual Life is, Hearing the Word of God. This is called
the Word of Life, Acts 5.20. Phil. 2.15. and Life is promised to the Hearing of
the Word, Isa. 55.3. John 5.25. it is clear he speaks thereof spiritual Life,
because he says the time is already come; and in the verse before he had been
speaking of Everlasting Life, which is begun in Regeneration. This Word is both
the seed whereby we are begotten again, 1 Pet. 1.23. and the food whereby we
are nourished when we are borne, 1 Pet. 2.2. 1 Cor. 3.2. the end of the
Ministry being to perfect the number of the Saints by conversion, and their
graces by Edification, Ephesians. 4.11, 12. I will not examine, whether this word
be the instrument of the Spirit, or whether they have their different ways of
working, the one morally, by persuasion, the other, physically, by real
influence: but this is sure, there is a Spirit of life accompanies the
dispensation of the Word, which quickens dead souls, as a spirit of life
entered into the Prophet, and set him upon his feet, when God spoke to him,
Ezekiel. 2.2. and as there went a divine power along with the word of Christ, when
he bade Lazarus come out of his grave, which raised him out of it: So while
Paul preached, the heart of Lydia was opened, Acts 16.14. And for this cause
the ministration of the Gospel is called the ministration of the spirit, 2 Cor.
3.8. Not that the spirit does accompany the Word always, so as to make it
effectual: it did not so when Christ himself preached, John 12.37. nor when
Paul preached (whom Austine desired so much to hear) then some believed, and
some believed not, Act. 28.24, but it works in subordination to Gods Election,
bringing home all such as are ordained to eternal life, Act. 13.48.

Now by Hearing the Word, I mean with Dr. Ames, Quaelibet praeceptio sermonum
Dei, sive praedicatione, sive electione, sive alia quaecunque ratione
communicentur: receiving the Word by preaching, or reading, or any other way.
Such words of sense signifying any way of perceiving a thing, wherefore seeing
is applied to sounds, Exodus 20.18. Revel. 1.12. The Word of God was wont to be
read formerly both publicly and privately. Of the public reading of it we
may see Nehem. 8.3. Acts 13.27. chap. 15.21. they read part of it in the
Synagogue every Sabbath day: and that they read it privately, is plain from our
Savior's appealing so often to their own reading, Have you never read, etc. Mat.
12.3, 5. chap. 19.4. 21.16.22.31. and from their searching the Scriptures, John
5.39. whether we understand that indicatively, affirming what they did, or
imparatively, commanding what they should do; they were thereby enabled to
judge the better of what they heard, Act. 17.11. but this was not enough, but
they must have an Interpreter, that they might understand what they read, Act.
8.30. They not only read distinctly in the Law, but gave the sense, and caused
the people to understand it, Nehem. 8.7, 8. yea, they applied it by
exhortation, etc. Acts 13.15. Luke 4.18. And if it be said, However this is
necessary, that the Scripture should be explained and applied, yet Preaching is
not now necessary, because we have expositions, and Sermons, now to read in
greater plenty than formerly, when there were no books but such as men wrote
out: I answer, Would to God men would read them more, and that they would but
spend their spare hours therein, which they spend idly, or sinfully: but let
not this make us less esteem the hearing of the word preached: for though
reading may conduce more to the information of the judgment, yet Preaching with
a lively voice does more excite the affections; and further, the success of
the Gospel, is according as the Lord gives to every man, 1 Cor. 3.5. and
experience has told us, with what success God has blessed the preaching of
the Gospel. See the Letter of Archb. Grindall to Queen Elizabeth, in Fullers
History, B. 9: p. 124, 125. Though I had rather men should be instructed by the
Homilies, which were formerly read in the Church, than by many men's Sermons:
And I believe God has blessed them to the good of souls, where there has
been want of able and godly Preachers, yet God forbid, that these should ever
thrust out Preaching, where such Preachers are not wanting. He that desires to
be more fully satisfied concerning these things, may peruse Master Hooker's
Eccl. Polit. l. 5. S. 21, 22. and Mr. Hieron's Preachers Plea, where these
things are solidly and soberly debated.

I come now to show how it is by Faith that the Word becomes effectual to our
spiritual life. The Apostle, Heb. 4.2. tells us, that the Word preached did not
profit the Israelites, because it was not mixed with Faith in them that heard
it. As to make the seed fruitful in the earth, there is required some moisture
whereby it may be as it were incorporated with the earth, and receive of the
virtue and fatness of it: for it will not grow, if it lie under a dry and hard
clod: so Faith is necessary for ingrafting the Word into the soul; wherefore it
is the power of God to the Salvation of every one which believes, Romans 1.16.
And for the clear proof hereof I shall show you how variously Faith acts upon
the several parts of the Word of God.

There are in the Word, 1. some things affirmed; and that either Doctrinally,
or Historically, these Faith assents to.

2. Some things are commanded: these Faith submits to.

3. These Commands are enforced by Promises: these Faith embraces and relies
upon.

4. These Commands are also enforced by threatenings: these Faith stands in awe
of.

First, Faith assents to the truth of whatsoever the Word of God affirms, John
3.33. He that believes sets to his seal that God is true. And 1. in the
Historical part of the Word, particularly concerning the Creation it is said,
Heb. 11. by Faith we believe that the worlds were created by the Word of God,
etc. If it be objected, That this is a thing may be known and demonstrated by
reason, and therefore is not an object of Faith. I answer, First, it is not to
be taken for granted, that the same thing cannot be the object both of Faith,
and Knowledge, vide Baronium de fide, Art. 4.2. Though the Creation should be
demonstrated by reason, yet that it was made by the Word of God, and that it
was not made of things that do appear is the object of Faith, as appears by the
strange conceits which many of the wisest Philosophers had of it.

So for the Doctrines of the Scripture, as, of the Trinity, and personal Union
of the two Natures of Christ, imputed righteousness, the Resurrection, etc.
Faith believe; with reason against reason; as it is said, to believe the
Promise in hope against hope: that is, though reason be not able to comprehend
how these things should be, at least some of them, yet, that they are, we have
reason enough to believe, because God that cannot lie has said it; and though
we know not how they should be, God does; and this would be greater arrogance
in us to deny, than if some rude ignorant fellow should face down a
Mathematician, that a starr is no bigger than the palm of his hand, or the Sun
than his cart-wheel; or, if there be any Antipodes, they must needs go with
their heads downward. Now the Word is of great use to us in respect of these
things which Faith believes. The Apostle being to show the great use and virtue
of faith, begins with this act of it, whereby we believe the Creation of the
world, supposing that nothing will be too hard for a believers faith, seeing
(as Amyrald in his Paraphrase on the place observes) although the things that
we believe do not yet appear, this hinders not, but we may have full assurance
of their future existence, seeing the same power of God which created the world
of nothing, may give being to whatsoever we believe, when it seems good to
him: and we shall observe that frequently in Scripture, God does support the
Faith of his people with this consideration, of his creating heaven and earth,
Isa. 40.28. and 51.13. and herewith David strengthens his confidence, Psa.
121.2. My help stands in the name of the Lord that has made heaven and earth:
as if he had said, I will never distrust his power, for deliverance or
protection, who could erect such a stately Fabric from nothing. And there are
other historical passages of Scripture also, which may be of like use unto us,
both for encouragement, Deuteronomy. 8.17. and caution, 1 Cor. 10.11. yea, and for
confirming our Faith in the Messiah, John 20.31. that History of the acts and
Sermons of Christ, being written by John, in his old age, for the confirming of
the Deity of Christ, against those which then begun to deny it, at the request
of the Bishops of Asia, which is the reason why he disputes more clearly of the
Deity of Christ, than any of the other Evangelists, and records diverse of his
miracles, which serve for the confirmation thereof, that the rest do omit, And
for those points of Doctrine which Faith assents to, and are not otherwise
demonstrable by reason, they are generally reckoned amongst those
Fundamentalls, the belief of which is necessary to Salvation. But herein the
use of Faith in this particular does further appear: when men do not believe
such things as these, it brings them to flat Atheism at last; for they first
question, and by degrees deny the Authority of the Scriptures, when they see
the improbability or rather impossibility (as seems to their reason) of many
things, both in the Doctrine and History of it, as in Philosophy, because some
cannot conceive how such a vast body as it is demonstrable that the Sun is,
should move so many thousand miles in an hour, as it is necessary it must, if
we suppose that it move at all, venture rather to deny the received opinion of
its motion, and entertain that paradox of the motion of the earth.

Secondly, Faith submits to the commands of the Word, Heb. 11. we shall find
many eminent acts of Obedience ascribed to Faith, as ver. 8. By faith Abraham,
when he was called to go out into a place which he should afterward receive
for an inheritance, obeyed, and he went out, not knowing whither he went. It
was an hard trial, for, as the Proverb is, patriae fumus igne alien^
luculentior, the smoke of our own Country is as good as the fire of another:
and he was to go he knew not whither; for God only bade him go into a country
that he would show him, Genesis 11.33. So that command which was yet more hard, of
offering up his son, he submitted to by faith, ver. 17. he was to offer up his
son, which was against nature, yea his only begotten son, (that is of his wife)
and the son of the promise, in whom his seed was to be called. So ver. 29. By
faith they passed through the red sea, when it was very unlikely the unruly
surges of it should keep their place while they went so many miles. ver. 30. By
faith they compassed the walls of Jericho seven days together, with ramms
horns, a very ridiculous thing in the eyes of men. Now Faith does thus submit
to the commands of God, because we are thereby brought into covenant with God,
and consequently subject our selves to his authority, as a wife by taking
another to be her husband, does oblige her self to those duties which do
immediately result from such a relation, and to that subjection which is due
from a wife to an husband: So by taking God to be our God, and Christ to be our
husband, we are ipso jure obliged to submit to all his commands. Deuteronomy. 26.17.
Jer. 31.32. We are indeed obliged to this subjection before we believe, but by
faith we own our obligation, and do actually and professedly make a recognition
thereof: So that we may say as Salvian. de guberunt. Dei, lib. 3. Fides est
fidelis Deo esse, hoc est, fideliter Dei mandata servare. Faith is to be
faithful to God, that is, faithfully to keep his commands; yet I am far from
thinking with Socinus, Defens. 108. that fides in Christum and ista opera sunt
re ipsa idem; and that a faith of such a latitude, is the matter of our
Justification, and holds the same place in the Covenant of Grace which perfect
obedience should have done in the Covenant of Works; these are not Faith
formally, but only effective true Faith necessarily producing these, ( Vide
Stresonis meditat. de fide, sect. 34, etc.

Secondly, Faith receives the Word as the Word of God. 1 These. 2.13. in which
place we may observe three things.

1. The power of the Word, it wrought effectually.

2. The persons in whom it had this efficacy, they were such as did believe.

3. The reason of it, they received it not as the word of Man, but as the Word
of God; which implies two things:

First, Their receiving it Qua Verbum Dei, or under that notion, considered as
the Word of God, or believing it to be so; whether it be strictly and properly
the object of Faith that the Scriptures are the Word of God, I will not stand
here to dispute, or determine; and how the preaching of men may be received as
the Word of God; you may see in the forementioned Treatise of Mr. Hieron, We
are to prove all things, that we may hold fast that which is good, 1 These.
5.21. and that we may do so we are to search the Scriptures, to see how that
which we hear does accord therewith, Act. 17.11. and what is rightly deduced or
inferred from the Word is of the same authority with the Scriptures, as Daille
and Vedelius have sufficiently proved against the new Methodists in France (as
they are called) who by denying this did undertake quite to overthrow the
Doctrine of the Protestants; whatever the success of such an undertaking would
have been, their boasts may serve for a caution to those who decry
consequences; but I hope men are not so zealous now against them as they
sometime were, else I should before this time have taught that small Treatise
of Daille to speak English: wherein he uses his wonted candor and clearness.

Secondly, To receive the Word as the Word of God, is to receive it as becomes
the Word of God, that is, as the Word of such a God who is so wise, so just and
faithful, so good, so holy, that all his commands must needs be holy, and just,
and good, Romans 7.12. and so not to be disputed, but obeyed, for by Faith we
believe the nature of God as well as his being. Now Faith is in this respect
of singular use in the whole course of our lives; how often do men stand and
dispute the commands of God till they reason themselves out of their duty in
things that are against carnal reason, and carnal interest, things which are of
mere positive institution, not of any natural moral right: but Faith considers
not any thing against a Command, as it is said, Abraham did not against the
Promise, Romans 4.19. If Christ bid Peter cast in his net, though he have toiled
long in vain, he will do it at his command, Luke 5.5. If a Believer should be
enjoined such things as the Prophets were often enjoined, as Ezekiel. 4.8, 12.
(unless, as some think, these things were only represented to them in visions,
and they were not really to do them, see Smith his select discourses of
Prophecy,) he would not stick at them, but do all things without murmuring or
disputing, even such things as are most against interest, Heb. 11.8. yea,
against natural affection, Heb. 11.17. Ezekiel. 24.18.

Thirdly, Faith does embrace the Promises, (that is, lay hold on them,
thankfully accept them, Isa. 56.6.) and rely upon them for the performance of
the mercy promised. Abraham being strong in the Faith, gave glory to God, and
against humane hope believed in divine hope, not regarding any thing which
might be objected against the Promise of God, Romans 4.17, etc. Let God be true
and every man a liar, yea, every thing a liar, sense and reason; he considered
not any thing that they could plead against a Promise. How happy might a
Christian be if he could live by faith in this particular? Trusting God upon
his bare word, when there is nothing else to vouch him, when we have neither
sense nor reason to second our Faith. But the Promises have a more peculiar
influence into our spiritual life, by them we are made partakers of the divine
nature, 2 Pet. 1.4. that is, are made godly, like to God in holy dispositions,
and inclinations; and the Promises conduce hereto both morally, and (as I may
speak) instrumentally. There are Promises to Grace, these promote it, as we are
thereby encouraged to the exercise of Grace, 1 Cor. 15.58. and to press on to
the perfection of Grace, 2 Cor. 7.1. For supernatural habits are strengthened
and confirmed by exercise and renewed acts, though we should say they are not
acquired thereby. But there are Promises of Grace. Whether the Promises of the
first Grace be mad to, or may be pleaded by any particular persons, or whether
they may be made only to the Church in general, as the Promises in the Old
Testament concerning the calling of the Gentiles, I shall not take upon me to
define. But certainly there are Promises of following Grace to be pleaded by
particular, persons in Prayer, as was showed in the foregoing Chapter; and this
pleading of Promises in Prayer is, as M. Dod would say, like putting of bonds
in suite: Thus the Promises are means or instruments for conveying of Grace to
us.

Fourthly, There are Threatenings in the Word of God, and these Faith makes the
soul stand in awe of, Psalm. 119.161. Certainly, David's heart stood in awe of
the Word of God, because he believed it; as the Ninevites took warning at the
preaching of Jonah, and proclaimed a fast, because they believed God, Jonah
3.5. But the clearest proof hereof is, Heb. 11.7. by Faith Noah being warned of
God of things not seen as yet, moved with fear, prepared an Arc, to the saving
of his house: In these words we have the faith of Noah commended from the
warning he took at the threatening of God concerning the universal deluge which
was to come upon the World; he believing this threatening, his fear put him upon
the use of such means as might prevent the evil which he feared, (the best use
of that passion) and most that it is good for) and we see the issue of it, he
saved himself and his house; like a prudent man, he foresaw the evil and hid
himself, Prove. 22.3.

Now, let us see the power of Noah's faith in this, and how much reason he had
to object against what he did.

First, He was warned of things which did not appear, that which was threatened
was yet many years to come, so that he might very probably die before that
time, and be past need of an Arc; and what he was commanded was such an
unlikely thing to be performed that it was enough to discourage his attempt; he
was to take two of all Creatures but such as lived in the water, and seven of
such as were clean beasts, and food for all these; it was seven months after
the flood began, ere the tops of the Mountains were seen, and it is likely long
after that before the earth brought forth food fit for them; and it must be an
huge Vessel to hold so many Creatures, and food for them for so long a time.
And when he had made the Ark, how should he get these Creatures together? Or,
how should he rule them when he had them together? And he might think that the
undertaking of such a work would expose him to the scorn of others, and if he
let it alone he might escape as well as others, yea, better perhaps, for having
warning he might remove his habitation near some high mountain before the flood
came; but all these objections notwithstanding he went on with his work, and we
see what was the issue of it. Oh how would men tremble at the Word of God, if
they did certainly believe the threatenings of it! And what is it that hardens
men in their wickedness but such carnal reasonings as Noah had in store to have
brought out against the warning of God. Tell men of the judgment to come,
enough to make an heathen tremble, Act. 24.25. when he was a Judge on the
Bench, and his Preacher a Prisoner at the Bar; Tell them of that horror which
will so amaze men at the last day, as to make them call for the rocks to cover
them, or the mountains to fall on them, Rev. 6.16. they either say with the
Prophets hearers, Ezekiel. 12.27. The Vision is for many days to come, and he
prophesies of times afar off; He tells us of things to come a long while hence,
and it will be time enough to prepare for them afterward; or else they say
with those, Deuteronomy. 29.19. they shall have peace though they walk in the
imagination of their own heart; or they shall escape as well as others, or they
shall be heard at the last day for their importunity (for so shall many seek to
enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, Luke 13.24, etc.) or if they should set upon
the work of repentance they must leave their old ways, and their old company,
and so expose themselves to their scorns; these are such reasonings as Faith in
Noah overcame; and it might be well for godly men to improve the threatening of
the Word more to the restraining of their corrupt lusts and affections. How
should such places, as Romans 8.13. be as the Sword which the Angel held before
Balaam when he followed the wages of unrighteousness, Numb. 22.23. If any shall
to that place object, that believers cannot die. I am sure that place will
prove then, that believers cannot live after the flesh, and that if we live
after the flesh we are no believers; it proves the connection betwixt the means
and the end, betwixt dying and living after the flesh; and let not any think
these are too low motives for Christians to be acted by: God thought them not
unmeet for Adam to make use of in innocence, he had an intimidating threatening,
Genesis 2.17. Christ pressed such upon his Disciples, Mat. 10.29. God has set our
affections one over against another, as it is said of prosperity and adversity,
Eccl. 7.14. and happy is he that finds no need of fear to restrain the violence
of his other affections. I shall conclude this Chapter with the answer of an
objection; some may say, How can Faith be necessary for making the Word thus
effectual, when Faith it self comes by hearing, and is ordinarily wrought by
the Word, Romans 10.17. To this I answer: First, That as God at the Creation did
not hold to the ordinary Method which he has kept since, but created the Light
before the Sun, though since the Sun has been created it has been the
Fountain of Light: So though ordinarily the Word is made effectual by Faith,
it is not necessary God should observe the same Method in the first working of
Grace which he does in carrying it on, But secondly, Though Faith come by
hearing, yet there is a Faith concomitant with that hearing, else the Word
would not at all profit: The Word brings that evidence along with it which
begets the faith whereby it becomes effectual: it is obvious to every ones
conception, that if a man come to deal with me about any thing, all he can say
does nothing at all move me, unless I give credit to what he says, and yet he
may use those Arguments or Evidences which may make me believe him; and in
eating, certainly our food does ordinarily increase Spirits, and so natural
heat, before the several concoctions be performed, and it is by that natural
heat that the several concoctions are performed, whereby our food does further
nourish.

CHAP. VI. The several uses of the Lords Supper exciting Grace in us; conveying
Grace to us; sealing the Covenant; by Faith only we have a right thereto, and
make right use thereof; in the Controversies about the Sacraments, the Question
is not so much about men's title thereto, but our judgment of their title; the
Judgment of the Church of England herein; whether those who doubt of their
sincerity may come to the Lords Supper; how we are to deal with such; the
ground of many men's desire to come thereto.
I Come now to speak of the Lords Supper, and that you may see how this is a
means for the strengthening and increase of Grace, that so we may have life,
and have it in abundance, Joh. 10.10. I will show you the use of this
Ordinance. And

First, It is a sign to represent spiritual things to us, we do herein see
Jesus Christ, as it were, evidently set forth and crucified among us, Gal. 3.1.
we therein show forth the Lords death till he come, 1 Cor. 11.26. and therefore
are to do it in remembrance of him, verse. 25. that is, to perpetuate or
continue the memory of his Death and Sufferings in the Church to the end of the
World; and hereby it becomes a means for the exciting of Grace, and an occasion
for the exercise of it, the eye affecting the heart, Lam. 3.51. Here we have
occasion for the exercise of Repentance, while we see the body of Christ
broken, and his blood powered forth; He was wounded for our transgressions, and
bruised for our iniquities, Isa. 53.5. we are many times it is likely filled
with indignation against the Jews, when we read how they dealt with him; but we
are therein, at Dr. Stoughton says, like the foolish Athenians, who when they
had killed an Ox, an innocent Creature in Sacrifice, acquitted the Priest, but
condemned the Sword that gave the deadly stroke of murder; for we did more to
the crucifying of him than Pilate, or the Jews, or the chief Priests, so that
we should father be moved with indignation against our selves, 2 Cor. 7.11. When
we look on him whom we have pierced, Zach. 12.10. And be in bitterness. There
we may see more of the evil of sin by what God inflicted on his own Son, than
if we could look into hell and see the preparations which are made for the
punishment of it. Again, we have here an encouragement to Faith while we see
the love of God in giving his Son, Joh. 3.16. The love of Christ in giving
himself, Gal. 2.20. The expiation which was made by his Blood that cleanses us
from all sin, 1 John 1.7. Heb. 9.14. We have here also occasion for the
exercise of our love both to God and man, while we behold the love which God
has toward us, 1 John 4.11.19. Ephesians. 4.32. Mat. 18.32. Our patience, while
we see how Christ endured the Cross, and despised the shame, Heb. 12.2. Our joy
and desire, while we see the preparations that God has made for us,
represented to us under the notion of a Supper, friendship and communion being
most shown in eating and drinking, and meat and drink is more necessary to us
than the Objects of any other sense; See Vines on the Lords Supper, p. 97, etc.
But there is a further use of this Ordinance, and that is to offer spiritual
things and communicate them to us; wherefore it is called, The Communion of the
Body and Blood of Christ, 1 Cor. 10.16. God does therein really offer to us
Jesus Christ, and so all his benefits, as in Marriage, by taking the person we
are entitled to the Estate; and his flesh is meat indeed, and his blood drink
indeed, Joh. 6.55. whereby our spiritual life comes to be preserved and
maintained; and as our food is turned into our substance: So there is the
nearest communion betwixt Christ and us in this Ordinance, and under this is
comprehended the sealing use of it; God does hereby absolutely confirm the
Covenant of Grace in general, and likewise in particular, to every one so far
as their faith does act upon the things signified, as their sense does upon the
outward signs. See this plainly handled in Mr. Marshal's defense of
Infant Baptism, 117, 201. but accurately in Mr. Baxter against Blake, Sect. 64.

Now, Faith is absolutely necessary to the right receiving of the Lords Supper;
and observe this, That though there are many disputes about the qualifications
of such as are to be admitted thereto, the question is not concerning the
ground of their title, but our judgment: Not what it is that gives them a
right to it, or fits them for it, but what is a sufficient ground for us to
judge them to be such as have a right to it, and are fit for it. Some supposing
a mere verbal profession to be enough; others requiring a credible profession,
or such a profession as we may in prudence and charity judge to be real and
sincere; which seems very reasonable, profession not being required for it
self, but as a sign of the thing professed. See Mr. Baxters Disputations of
right to the Sacraments, p. 6. etc. and of Confirmation, p. 41, etc. but that
Faith is necessary to the right use of it has been the constant Judgment of
the Church of England, both in its former and latter constitution; and that not
only a dogmatical faith, but a lively Faith in the mercy of God through Jesus
Christ. See not only the Confession and Catechism of the late Assembly, but the
Articles of the Church of England, agreed upon 1562. Art. 29. The Articles of
Ireland, Art. 96. The Catechism in the Book of Common Prayer.

And if any should object, that the Catechism only says, that Believers are
to examine themselves about their faith.

I answer, the duty of examination is not required for it self, but as a means
to know whether we have this faith; because, as the forementioned Articles
express it, without this we cannot partake of Christ, but eat and drink to our
own condemnation.

I forbear to cite the Testimony of other Churches or Authors, which would be
both tedious and needless, the thing being evident in it self; For consider the
Lords Supper, as it represents to us spiritual things, and we cannot without
faith discern the Lords Body; and though it may be discerned speculatively by a
bare historical faith, the fruit of tradition and common knowledge, yet we
cannot discern it practically, so as to have the heart affected therewith, but
by a lively faith, which is the substance of what is past, as well as of what
is hoped for; that is, we do by Faith as really apprehend or discern the Body
and Blood of Christ, as if we had seen him upon the Cross; and it is by faith
alone that we appropriate to our selves what Christ has done and suffered,
which is necessary to a due affecting of the heart therewith, Gal. 2.20. Phil.
3.8. But consider the Sacrament as it offers and seal spiritual things to us,
and it is certainly of no use to us without Faith. For as it is the eye of the
soul whereby we see Christ, so the hand whereby we receive him, and the mouth
whereby we feed on him; and a dead man may as soon feed upon a banquet set
before him, as an unbeliever on the Body and Blood of Christ. Yea, though this
should be granted to be a converting Ordinance, yet a concomitant faith is
absolutely necessary to our receiving it with any benefit to our selves, which
is sufficient for my purpose to prove how necessary Faith is for the
improvement of all means for the preserving and increase of our spiritual life;
and considering this as a seal, it is wholly useless to unbelievers, the Seal
confirming no more than is in the Covenants, and they are wholly void and of
none effect to those who fail of performing what is required of them therein.

I shall conclude this with answering a question which may arise from what I
have before laid down. If Faith be so necessary to a right receiving of the
Sacrament, how can those adventure to come thereto who doubt whether they have
true faith or no?

This question has already been discussed by others, as Mr. Baxter on the
Sacraments, p. 191, etc. Mr. Ford in his Treatise of the spirit of bondage and
adoption, 308. Wherefore I shall be more brief in the answer of it: And first
in Thest I may answer with Mr. Baxter, that we must in such cases as these
follow the smallest prevalent persuasion of our Judgment, though far short of
full assurance; and as he truly says, if we must act only upon certainty, we
must sleep out most of our lives: for besides the cases wherein he instanceth
that we must forbear giving thanks for spiritual mercies, as Justification,
Sanctification, Adoption, etc. till we have attained full assurance; it would
be destructive to humane Society, and discharge children of their duty to their
Parents, and in some cases, and in some suppositions which are by many made,
all Inferiors from subjection to their Superiors; in this case I may say with
the Apostle, 1 John 3.21, If our heart condemn us not, then have we confidence
toward God. Though we have not such a full persuasion as does exempt us from
all doubting, if upon a due examination of our selves our heart do not accuse
us of hypocrisy, we may come with boldness to this heavenly banquet. But now
in Hypothesi if one should come to me, and make it a case, whether he should
come to the Lords Supper or no: I would know of him the ground of his question,
if it be any desire that he has to come to this Ordinance, If it be not, I
shall not trouble my self to satisfy his curiosity; but if he do truly desire
to come thereto, this may help to answer his question. I do not think indeed
that every desire of coming thereto is an evidence of what may entitle a man to
it, or fit him for it, for then we should have many more Believers amongst us
than I can yet hope that we have; and it is this which has caused so many
violent intruders, and put Ministers to so much trouble to keep those who are
unfit from these holy things. Doubtless, this desire in many proceeds partly
from men's impatience of having their faith or sincerity questioned, though they
are more unwilling to be Believers indeed; And partly, from those Popish
Principles which are so deeply rooted in many, of the necessity and efficacy of
the Sacraments, as if there could be no Salvation without them, and no fear of
missing salvation if we receive them. But I here speak of a true, sincere,
well-grounded desire; wherefore I would know of such, what is the ground of
their desire to come to the Lords Supper; and if it be that they might partake
of Jesus Christ and his benefits, and a greater measure of his grace, whereby
they may be enabled to walk more worthy of their holy vocation, this is
sufficient ground for a judgment of charity in those who admit then, and of
confidence in themselves that they may come with boldness thereto: and if they
should still tell me they dare not come, and fear they have no right thereto; I
should no more regard what they say, than if a man should seriously tell me
that he would fain utter his mind to me but he cannot speak. And if they
should further object, that they fear, though their heart do not at present
condemn them, yet they may be as the stony ground, and in time of temptation
fall away, and so discover, that their Faith was not true: I should advise such
to come to Christ in this Ordinance, as the Campani of old applied themselves
to the Romans, when they were oppressed by the Samnites Live. li. 7. their
Envoie which they sent to them after a long speech, uses these words,
Quandoquidem nostra tueri adversus vim atque injuriam justa vi non vultis,
vestra certa defendetis, etc. Although you will not by lawful power defend
what belongs to us, against injury and violence, you will certainly defend what
is your own; therefore we yield up the people of Campania, the City of Capua,
our fields, Temples, and all belonging to us to your jurisdiction or dominion;
so that whatsoever we suffer for the future, we shall suffer as your subjects.
So if we fear being overcome by the assaults of our spiritual adversaries, let
us apply our selves to Jesus Christ, and go and renew our Covenant with him,
resigning up our selves, souls, bodies, and all the faculties and members
thereof, to be kept by his power to salvation, that we may be able to claim his
aid, and challenge his assistance, as he has a special inte^est in us, John
10.12. cap. 17. 9. and pray, as David, Psalm. 119.94. I am thine Lord, save me.

CHAP. VII. What our spiritual Adversaries are. How our Lusts do tempt us.
James 1.14. explained. The Disadvantage of Believers in their spiritual
combat, by reason of their own lusts, showed by many similitudes out of
Parisiensis. The use of Faith in purifying the heart. 1 John 3.2, 3, cleared.
IF we consider the forementioned services as part of that homage which we owe
to our Creator, (acknowledging the dependence which we have on him, in
directing all our prayers and supplications to him, the authority which he has
over us as our Lawgiver, Jam. 4.12. by sitting down at his feet, to receive of
his words, Deuteronomy. 33.3. the obligations that are upon us to him for the great
things Christ has done and suffered for us, by celebrating the Memorial of his
Passion, in the Lords Supper) Faith quits it self sufficiently in a right
performance of these Duties. But considering them as means of grace, for the
getting and increase thereof, so what Faith does therein is but in order to the
overcoming of temptations, and bearing afflictions, wherein the grace which we
get thereby is very much exercised. So that in speaking of these things, I must
necessarily refer to many things spoken of in the foregoing Chapters, though I
shall not repeat them: and in treating of those temptations which faith is of
such use to overcome, I shall show you whence they proceed, and how we do by
faith overcome them.

Now these Temptations do proceed from the flesh, from the world, and from the
Devil. These are ordinarily reckoned our three spiritual adversaries, and
though they do all of them many times conspire in the same temptation, yet I
must treat of them distinctly.

For the First, The Apostle tells us, that fleshly lusts war against the soul,
1 Pet. 2.11. And every man is tempted, when he is drawn aside of his own lust
and enticed, James 1.14. where we have the two ways whereby lust prevails,
either the impetus and violence of it, whereby it hurrieth a man into sin, as
the horse his rider into the battle, Jer. 8.6. casting reason down from its
seat where it should hold the reins of our affections, so that neither fear,
shame, admonitio^s of others, checks of conscience, our own Principles,
Professions, former resolutions, will restrain them, but they break all bands,
and cast away all cords, Ps. 2.3.

Secondly, They entice and allure the will to consent, by pretending the great
pleasure and satisfaction in fulfilling them, the consistency thereof with
Salvation, purpose of repentance, probability of pardon, etc. by reason hereof
we fight with our other adversaries at a great disadvantage, as Parisiensis de
Tent. and resist. cap. 2. has by many apt similitudes excellently showed, as
Of a Kingdom divided against it self, having a party within it ready to join,
as occasion serves, with a foreign adversary. Of a Soldier that rides on a
restive or unruly horse, that runs backwards, or runs away with him, when he
should charge his enemy. To a strong man standing to fight on a slippery place,
where he is not able to hold his feet to put forth his strength. To a Soldier
in a house or castle, that has many breaches or open places where an enemy may
shoot in at him. To a Soldier that bares an heavy burden which loads him, and
presses him down, when he should fight. To an house, whose lower part is of
some combustible dry matter, and ready to take fire: so our hearts are ready,
as occasion serves, to comply with Satan, and betray us into his snares; our
affections unruly, our senses as so many windows or Avenues, through which
Satan may cast in his darts: our corruptions as a burden that keeps us down, as
the remainders of an evil disease, that enfeebles us, so as we fail when we
should put forth our strength against our spiritual adversaries: our hearts as
tinder, or gunpowder, apt to be set on fire by every spark of temptation.

Now Faith is of great use to us in this respect, Purifying the heart from
these corrupt lusts, Acts 15.9. And this it does,

1. As it unites us to Jesus Christ, whereby we are made partakers of the
Divine Nature, which is continually lusting and striving against our corrupt
nature, weakening it by degrees: The spirit lusts against the flesh, as the
flesh lusts against the spirit, Gal. 5.17. This is in the soul as the expulsive
faculty, which is subservient to the nutritive faculty, expelling such things
as are noxious to nature.

2. By Faith we receive the spirit of Jesus Christ: This may seem to be the
same with the former, but they differ, as the habits of grace from assisting
grace, or auxilium habituale and actuale, of which see Alvarez de auxiliis
divin. great. Disp. 82. N. 10. as the Fable is of Hercules, that he cleansed the
stable of Augea, wherein thousands of oxen had lain for many years, by turning
a river through it: so this sink of our hearts is cleansed by the spirit,
which as a fountain opened for sin, and for uncleanness, does continually flow
in a believers soul, compare Zach. 13.1. with John 7.38, 39.

3. Faith purifieth the heart, as it improves those Ordinances which are means
for the purifying of it, as the Word, Psalm 119.9. John 15.3. Prayer, Exek.
36.26, 27, 37. Psalm 51.10. etc. How Faith improves these I have showed in the
former Chapters.

4. Faith does this morally, by improving such Arguments as may persuade us
hereto, 2 Corinthians. 7.1. 1 John 3.2, 3. Faith and Hope run parallel, faith
believing the promise, hope expecting the thing promised, and we can hope for
nothing but what we believe the Promise of. Now, whoever hopes to be like
Christ hereafter, will certainly purify himself, that he may, in some measure,
be like him here, that being our state of perfection, and there being in every
thing a natural tendency and reaching forth to its perfection, and the spirit
does not work in us as physic, but there must be a subordinate concurrence of
our wills therewith: the Apostle, on the same ground, presses to
mortification, Col. 3.4, 5.

CHAP. VIII. What a dangerous temptation the world is, What it is to overcome
the world. The Story of Constantius his Courtiers. The Parable of the thorny
ground. Luke 8.14. opened. How Faith overcomes the world. Heb. 11.24, etc.
illustrated. Matthew. 6.30, etc. cleared. How Faith overcomes by looking to the
recompense of reward. How it discovers the vanity of the world, 1 Cor. 7.29,
etc.
THe world in our spiritual conflict is as the Midianitish women which caused
the Children of Israel to sin, Numb. 31.16. according to the wicked counsel of
Balaam, spoken of Rev. 2.14. the story of which we may read, Number. 25. and more
fully in Jos. de Ant. Jud. l. 4. c. 6. And though the necessaries of this life
sometimes prove a temptation to many, yet the chief baits of the world are the
superfluities of it, as riches, pleasures, honors, and preferments. Now as the
Moralist says of vices, we conflict with them, not that we may wholly overcome
them, but that we may not be overcome by them: So if we can maintain our ground
so far against the world, that it does not entangle and overcome us, it is a
good degree of victory, though we be sometimes solicited by the allurements of
it. And we thus overcome the world.

1. When we do not use any unlawful means for the attainment of the things of
it. This was it which that good man feared, Prove. 30.9. that being pressed with
poverty and want, he should be tempted for the supply of his necessities to
take some sinful course, and so make his Profession of the name of God to
become vain.

2. When we do not for the things of the world cast off the Profession of
Religion; like the Courtiers of Constantius, whose Story is worth setting down:
The Christians were sometimes in great esteem with the heathen Emperors,
because by means of their Prayers they sometimes obtained great victories, and
had wonderful success, whereof there is a memorable instance in the Letter of
Aurelius, which he sent to the Senate of Rome, the copy of which is to be read
in the Magdeburgenses Cent. 2. cap. 3. so that Constantius had a mind to know
whether there were any true Christians in his Court; and to that end made a
Decree, that whosoever would sacrifice to their Idols should be preferred in
his Court: but those that would not must depart, and be thankful that they
might depart without punishment: Hereupon many did renounce their profession,
others resolutely maintained it, and would not by any means be prevailed with
to worship their false Gods. Constantius, when he had hereby made trial who
were sincere in their Profession, and would rather lose their honors and
Preferments than quit it, these he highly honored and advanced, but the other
he severely reproved, and banished them from his Court, as being unfit to be
trusted by men, who would not be faithful to God, Eusebius, de vita
Constantini, and Histor. Trip. L. 1. c. 7. So the young man, Matt. 19.22. left
Christ, being overcome with the love of riches: and those John 12.42. had some
convictions that Christ was the Messiah, but durst not make confession to
Salvation, because they loved the praise of men more than the praise of God; as
many doubtless are ready to say with Balaam, Numb. 23.10. Let me die the death
of the righteous, being convinced they are in the right way, yet think if they
should live their life, and betake themselves to a strict course of holiness,
they should be accounted some silly sneaksbies, or dull hypocondriaques, men of
no port or breeding, among the esprits forts, or brave gallants of the time;
and they will lose heaven rather than run the hazard of such an imputation.

But yet there is a 3. way, far more dangerous, whereby the world prevails
against multitudes, and this is intimated in the Parable of the thorny ground,
Luke 8.14. those do not fall away, as they v. 13. but hold on in a Profession
of Religion; but it comes to nothing at last, they bring forth no fruit to
perfection, being choked with cares, and riches, and pleasures of the world,
they deceive themselves by thinking to serve both God and mammon, to keep up a
Profession of Religion, which will consist with their lusts and carnal
interests. Now these things hinder the growth of the Word, as thorns hinder
the growth of the corn, 1. by drawing away the heart of the earth, whereby the
corn should thrive and grow, 2. by overtopping the corn, and keeping it down.
While these should be meditating in the Word of God day and night, having their
thoughts much exercised therein. that so they may be as a tree planted by the
rivers of water, bringing forth fruit in due season, Psalm. 1.2, 3. they have
their thoughts wholly taken up with distracting cares about the necessaries of
this life, what they shall eat, and what they shall drink, and wherewith they
shall be clothed, Matthew. 6.31. Or if their abundance set them above this
temptation, then riches or pleasures ingross their thoughts; they are either
projecting, how for the future to make provision for the flesh, to fulfill the
lusts of it, Romans 13.14. how to compass such a place, or purchase, where to
meet with such company to enjoy their pleasure, how to morrow may be as this
day, and much more abundant, Isa. 56.12. or else they are acting over their
former sinne^ in their imagination, that they may again enjoy the pleasure
thereof by rumination, pleasing themselves with the remembrance of what they
did in the days of old, Ezekiel. 23.19. at such a time, in such a place, in such
company, which is worse than the first commission of it, being in effect a
justifying of their former sin, and wishing they had an opportunity to commit
it again upon second thoughts, (which should be wiser than former) every one
knows best himself how much of his solitary time is thus taken up; and such
thoughts as these prey upon the vitalls of Christianity, as the disease called
the wolf preys upon the body. Or else, as the thorns overtop the corn; these
make a profession of Religion, and bear Christ fair in hand, while they can
make his interest and theirs agree; but if they have an opportunity for
satisfying their lusts: Christ must be served as the man, Luke 14.8. he must
take the lowest room, to give place to another, and make way for their lusts.
This was Herod's case, who heard John gladly, and did many things which he
taught, but he must enjoy his pleasure whatever John said, Mark 6.17, 20. This
is the ruin of thousands of souls, who have a form of godliness, but are
lovers of pleasures, or else lovers of riches, and honors, more than lovers of
God, 2 Timothy 3.4, 5. Now it is by Faith that we overcome these, This is the
victory that overcomes the world, even our faith, 1 John 5.4. a clear proof
hereof we have in Moses, Hebr. 11.24. in whom God would let us see the victory
of Faith as clearly as we did in Solomon the vanity of the world. Observe in
this place the strength of Moses temptation, his absolute conquest, and the
means whereby he overcame: to enforce the Temptation he had on one hand, the
offer of being accounted the son of Pharaoh's daughter, there was honor, ver.
24.2. the pleasures of sin, verse 25.3. the Treasures of Egypt, verse 26. and
if upon refusal of these he might have lived quietly, and enjoyed a competent
estate, the temptation had been small in comparison: but on the other hand he
was presented with reproaches, afflictions, and the wrath of the King, which is
as the roaring of a lion, Prove. 19.12. yet Moses chose these rather than the
former: Many make a virtue of necessity, and despise those things which they
have no hopes or means to attain: but in such a case there is no temptation.
Moses had his choice of these, and we see what it was, that he preferred to all
these offers of the world, not the glory which shall hereafter be revealed in
us, Romans 8.18. but the reproach of Christ, ver. 26. And the time when he did
this is considerable, it was not when he was young and unable to judge of the
worth of these things, but when he was come to years, even when he was forty
years old, Acts 7.23. neither was he then likely to be persuaded to it by his
mother: and all this he did by faith, ver. 24.

Now Faith overcomes these temptations:

1. As it relies firmly on the Promise and Providence of God. This will keep us
from anxious cares, or the use of unlawful means for the necessaries of this
life. There is a known Story of a Good Man, who being in a strait for money,
told his wife, he had a Bond lying by him, and now all failed he would go put
that in suit, and this was the Promise of God, that he would never fail him,
nor forsake him, Heb. 13.5. And such a promise is better security to Faith than
if we had the best estate in the Land morgaged to us. Though a man should say
to his soul, with him, Luke 12.19. Thou have goods laid up for many years.
Riches may take to themselves wings, and fly as an eagle toward the heavens,
Prove. 23.5. quite out of sight, and never to be recalled; but whoever wants, he
that seeks the Lord shall want no good thing, that is, nothing that is formally
good for him, Psalm. 34.10. It is better to be at Gods finding, than to live
upon a stock in our own hands. One would have thought Elijah had been well
provided of water, if he had been as sure of meat, 1 Kings 17. he sat by a
brook, but his meat was to be brought him by ravens, no very trusty servants;
but the brook failed, when we do non read the ravens failed him: he had a
supply of water according to the ordinary course of nature, his meat in a
special way of Providence. And Faith will likewise rely upon Providence as
well as upon a Promise. Mat. 6.30, etc. we have

1. The sin which Christ reproves, that was over solicitous care about the
things of the world

2. The cause of these distracting cares, that was, The weakness of their
Faith, ver. 30.

3. The Arguments which he uses for the strengthening of their faith; and
amongst many others, one is taken from Gods general Providence, for all
creatures, verse. 28. another, from his special providence for his own
children, ver. 32.

Secondly, Faith overcomes the world, as it has respect to the Recompense of
Reward, Heb. 11.26, 27. For first, we thereby see the excellency of spiritual
things, which does much abate our esteem of the world, and consequently the
force of the temptation. These things having no glory in comparison of that
glory which excells, as the Apostle says in another case, 2 Cor. 3.10. so
faith disdains the offers of the world in comparison with Christ; as a Merchant
would the offer of some contemptible thing for an exceeding rich jewel. So
whatever the Devil can offer the soul in lieu of heaven, though he should make
the offer which he did to Christ, Matthew. 4.8, 9. The Believer would by faith
disdain to hear him, or to look to him, and be filled with indignation against
him, as offering him incomparably less, yea nothing in comparison with that
which he would bereave him of. Super omnem estimationem and cogitationem, and
cogitatum minus quam decens sit, and nihil prorsus comparatione illius: Gu^l.
Parisiens. de Tentat. and resist. prope finem. Away fawning pleasures, that
would bereave me of those pleasures which are at Gods right hand for evermore:
begone deceitful and vanishing honors, which would beguile me of that glory of
which I can never be divested, from which I shall never be degraded. Valeat
vita, pereat pecunia, etc. Farewell riches, farewell life, if I cannot enjoy
you without the loss of Eternal life, of a Kingdom that has no end, an
Inheritance that fades not away. But further, Faith having respect to the
recompense of reward, can by patience wait for it: Omne peccatum impatientiae
ascribendum: Every sin is to be ascribed to impatience, says Tertullian de
patientia, c. 5. When men like the Prodigal, must have their portions
presently, Luke 15.12. must have their good things in this life, Luke 16.25.
cannot be content to be guided by Gods counsel here, and brought to glory
hereafter, as Asaph, Psalm 37.24. Faith can stay, being the substance of things
hoped for, Heb. 11.1. resting as quietly in expectation thereof, in confidence
of Gods faithfullness, as if they had already a real subsistence.

Thirdly, Faith overcomes the world, as we thereby discover the vanity of it.
Faith easily sees through the world, and so easily contemns it, sees the
bottom of these things, as the Spanish Ambassador did the bottom of the
Venetians coffers, when they showed him their Treasure. Sense is blind, and
cannot see afar off, 2 Pet. 1.7. But Faith is a perspective which makes
things at a distance seem as at hand. Parisiensis de Tent. L. 4. tells us a
Story of a young man of Burgundy, that always carried about with him the skull
of a very beautiful woman, whom he had known in her life time, ('it is likely)
that when at any time he found himself enticed by the beauty of any, he might
look upon that skull, and despise it, considering what that will be brought to,
in a short time, which he is now so apt to dote upon: and as Gregory, Qualis
erat mortua caro quae viva concupiscitur. Faith needs not such helps, but can
look upon all the glory of the world, and weep over it, as Xerxes over his Army
of so many hundred thousands: Or, as Christ on the buildings of the Temple,
wherewith the Disciples were so much taken, Mat. 24.1. thinking how soon we
shall despise or lament the ruins of what men now so much admire. The Apostle,
upon this ground. 1 Cor. 7.29. bids, that those who have wives should be as if
they had none; and they that weep as though they wept not; and they that
rejoice as if they rejoiced not; and they that buy, as if they possessed not;
and they that use this world as not abusing it, for the fashion of this world
passes away. No more effectual Consideration, to moderate our affections to
the things of the world, and so prevent the abuse thereof, than that of the
vain appearance of happiness which is in them, and their transient nature:
Neither the comforts which we rejoice in, nor the crosses which we weep for,
will be of any long continuance: Ce n'est qu'une ombre passagere qui s'en va
and une vain appearance du bien, Amyrald in loc. A flitting shadow quickly gone,
A vain show or appearance of happiness. Seneca has a passage, Epist. 110,
which may serve for good gloss upon this place, Quid miratis? Pompa est:
ostenduntur istae res, non possidentur: dum placent, transeunt. When I behold
(says he) a brave house, a gallant train, etc. I say with my self, Why do
thou wonder? etc. all these things are mere pageantry, a show which is gone
while we please our selves with it. He could see thus far by reason; but a
Believer may much more clearly discern these things by the eye of Faith.

CHAP. IX. The power of Satan to tempt, by working both upon the mind and
affections, Ephesians. 6.16. enlightened; how Faith overcomes his temptations; 1
Pet. 1.5 opened; Luke 11.21, 22. illustrated; the general use of Faith in
respect of all the pieces of our spiritual Armor; Ephesians. 6. from verse. 14. to
verse. 19. explained.
SAtan is the chief enemy we have to conflict with, and when he desired to have
Peter, that is, to have him in his power, as Job 2.6. Christ prayed for him
that his faith might not fail, Luke 22.31, 32. supposing he might be able to
abide the encounter while his Faith held out. The influence of Angels both good
and bad is certainly as the influence of the heavenly Bodies, very strong,
though we are little sensible thereof. The devil is (...), he works powerfully
or effectually in the children of disobedience, Ephesians. 2.2. he can doubtless by
the stirring of Phantasms, and moving the spirits, work much both upon the
judgment and affections, and these have also a mutual influence upon each
other. He could put it into the heart of Judas to betray his Master, Joh. 13.2.
He could fill the heart of Ananias and Saphira to lie to the Holy Ghost, Act.
5.3. He can take advantage of a sinners grief and trouble to swallow him up of
sorrow, 2 Cor. 2.7, 11. He can take away the Word out of men's hearts (by
diverting their minds to some other thing) lest it should settle in their
hearts, and they be thereby persuaded to believe, Luke 8.12. He can represent
things to the mind by stirring of Phantasmes when they are not represented to
the outward sense; and he is so cunning, he knows how to apply actives to
passives, how to fit and suite temptations to men's tempers and inclinations, as
Judas being a thief, Joh. 12.6. that is, a covetous wretch, he could suggest to
him the advantage of betraying his Master; and then Satan, when Objects are
presented either to the senses or imagination, can stir the spirits, and work
upon those humors which may exceedingly increase those passions, which such
Objects are proper to, and this is as spreading the sails when the ship is
carried by wind and tide; and hence is that violence of lust which is spoken of
formerly, Chapter 7. the Proverb being true here, that he must needs go whom
the devil drives. And hence are those dreadful temptations to Despair, the
devil holding men's minds intent chiefly upon such things as may increase their
fears, and thereby diverting them from such things as might give them some
hopes; and then working upon the melancholic humors of the body, which have
strange operations on the mind to beget most sad and dismal apprehensions,
therefore it is no marvel if he can swallow us up of sorrow. He that pleases to
satisfy himself more fully about these things may consult Voetius de natura
and operationibus daemonum, 960, etc.

Now Faith quenches all the fiery darts of Satan, Ephesians. 6.16. In which place
the Apostle alludes to the custom of those who used impoysoned Arrows or
shafts in their fights, which Job speaks of, Job 6.4. the venom of which does
exceedingly burn and torment the flesh where they stick. Whatever the
temptations of Satan be they are very troublesome to the soul, but Faith does
either as a Shield keep them off, or as a sovereign Balsome allay the heat of
their poison, it either prevents or cures them.

Now Faith overcomes these temptations.

First, As we thereby have Union and Communion with Jesus Christ, of which I
have before spoken, we are kept by the power of God through Faith to salvation,
1 Pet. 1.5. It is the power of God which keeps us, but this it does by Faith,
both as by Faith we derive a divine power to our souls, and as the power of God
strengthens our Faith. Christ by Faith dwells in the heart, Ephesians. 3.17. and
then we have one stronger in us than he that is in the World, 1 John 4.4. who
takes his armor from him and divides the spoil, Luke 11.21, 22. takes from him
those things wherewith he fortified himself, and serves himself of them, as a
Conqueror enriches himself with the spoil, and arms himself with the weapons
of his enemy. Satan sometimes served himself of our Wisdom, Reason, Thoughts,
Affections, which Christ brings into captivity to his own obedience, Romans 8.7.
2 Cor. 10.4, 5. Our members, which were weapons of sin to uncleanness, are made
Instruments of righteousness unto holiness, Romans 6.19. Our goods, or riches,
which were fuel to our Lusts, are now consecrated to Gods use; and by Faith we
have recourse to Jesus Christ for daily supplies of Grace, whereby we are
enabled to stand out against all the powers of hell, and through which we are
more than Conquerours, Ephesians. 6.10. Romans 8.37. Isa. 40.30.

Secondly, By Faith we overcome the temptations of Satan, as we set to our
Seals that God is true, Joh. 3.33. Man fell at first by believing the devil
rather than God, Genesis 3.3, etc. and we must now stand by believing God rather
than the devil. How effectual would this be against temptations to Atheism,
Blasphemy, Unbelief, Despair, if we could keep close to the Word of God? And
when we find in our selves any temptations to unworthy thoughts of God, to
distrust his Promises, or argue against the comforts of his Word, let us
presently suspect the hand of Satan, as David suspected the hand of Joab, 2 Samuel 14.19. God is true, and cannot lie, but the devil is a liar, and the
father of it, Joh. 8.44.

Thirdly, it is by Faith that we make use of all our spiritual armor; so that
some from those words, above all, Ephesians. 6.16. do infer the usefulness of Faith
for the securing all other parts of our spiritual armor, and therefore is to
be taken upon them all, and not the pre-eminence thereof above them.

But to come to the particular parts of this armor. As

First, Truth, if we take it with reference to the mind or judgment, and
thereby understand soundness of Doctrine, which indeed is necessary for keeping
together the rest of our spiritual armor, this is evidently a fruit of Faith,
as appears by what has before been spoken of Faiths assent to the Doctrine of
the Gospel; and the Apostle, Acts 24.14. shows why he kept close to the Truth,
though it was branded with the name of Heresy, and particularly, to the
Doctrine of the Resurrection, which was accounted such a Paradox by the
Philosophers of Athens, Act. 17.18. He believed God with an implicit faith, in
whatsoever was written in the Scriptures. Or if we take Truth as it respects
the heart, or for sincerity, which indeed adds worth to all other Graces, they
being as Diamonds, exceeding precious if true, good for little if false, and
this is the fruit of Faith, as Faith purifies the heart, and as by faith we set
God before us, Heb. 11.27. there being no greater motive to sincerity than a
sense of the presence of God, Genesis 17.1. So for Righteousness, if we understand
it of the imputed righteousness of Christ for Justification, this is a
Breast Plate ^ensing the heart and conscience against the darts of Satan, Romans
8.33. though we have many wounds in other parts of the body, if the heart be
found we may recover, but a stab there kills. So if the conscience be
untouched, we may be able to sustain other infirmities, Prove. 18.14. And this I
have before proved to be the fruit of Faith, and showed how Faith improves it
in urging the Promises; if we hereby understand inherent righteousness, this is
also a Breast Plate, Ps. 25.20. Pro. 13.6. 2 Cor. 1.12. Nil conscire sibi, etc.
is as a brazen wall to a man, Hor. Epist. So Job, cap. 31. having made a large
profession of his own integrity, ver. 35. faith, if his Adversary should write
a book against him, he would bind it to him as a Crown, and he would go boldly
to him and not be afraid to declare to him the number of his steps, that is, to
give him a particular account of his whole life. And this I have also proved to
be a fruit of Faith. And whatever is meant by the shoes of the preparation of
the Gospel, if it be such furniture as the Gospel prepares, this is of no use
to us without Faith, as I have before showed, Chap. 5. where I have also said
enough to prove that it is by Faith that we weild the Sword of the Spirit,
which our Savior made so much use of in his encounter with Satan, Mat. 4. That
by the Helmet of Salvation is meant hope, is plain from 1 These. 5.8. and
whether it be called an Helmet because it chiefly preserves the head, securing
us against error, as one thinks, Templer on Jude 3. p. 11. Or take it in a
larger sense, I have before showed, that Hope necessarily supposes Faith, the
work of Hope being to expect the accomplishment of the Promise which Faith
believes. And Prayer, which the Apostle commends as a general means for the use
of our spiritual armor, cannot be rightly performed without Faith, so that our
spiritual combat may well be called, The fight of Faith, 1 Timothy 6.12. seeing
it is by Faith that it is wholly managed.

CHAP. X. The evil effects of sore afflictions, where Faith does not help to
bear them; Faith looks to the Author, cause, ends of affliction; Good thoughts
of God a great help to bear affliction; Three ends thereof, Deuteronomy. 8.16. Why
outward troubles are often accompanied with inward; Faith sees all in God in
affliction; Assurance not necessary to comfort; Believers more then Conquerours
in affliction; Col. 1.11. opened; Recumbency the most noble Act of Faith; The
advantage of Believers above others in affliction; The Conclusion.
ALthough afflictions are in a proper sense called temptations, yet it will be
requisite to consider them by themselves, and to show the use of Faith therein
both for bearing them, and improving them. Afflictions if they be sore and
heavy, are as I have beforesaid, a shadow of death, by reason whereof a
Christian is many times ready to faint, Heb. 12.5. yea, to charge God
foolishly, as if he would at last cast us off, 1 Samuel 27.1. yea, as if he had
already cast us off, Psalm. 31.32. Isa. 49.14. yea, as if he took pleasure, or
it did him good to grieve and afflict his own children, Job 10.3. and (which is
more sad) when they press hard, our feet are ready sometimes to slip, and we
almost repent of our repentance, and think we have cleansed our hearts in vain,
Psalm. 73.2, 13. So that God is fain to take off his rod lest we should be
tempted to put forth our hand to iniquity, Psalm. 125.3. But though we be as
dying, yet by Faith behold we live, 2 Cor. 6.9.

First, Faith looks to the Author of our affliction, sees the invisible hand
which inflicts and moderates them, Heb. 11.27. while Sense looks only at the
Instrument thereof. Now this does much quiet the soul under affliction, as Eli
said, 1 Samuel 3.18. It is the Lord, let him do what seems him good. And Job,
though the Chaldeans and Sabeans had spoiled him, and taken away his goods,
ascribes it to God, as the righteous permitter and wise orderer of it, Job
1.21. When Attila, King of the Hunns, came into France, Lupus Bishop of Troyes,
met him, and asked him, who he was that so spoiled and made such devastations
in the earth? He answered, Dei se esse flagellum, He was the Scourge of God;
Whereupon Lupus commanded the City Gates to be opened to him, and welcomed him
with these words, Fauste ingrediatur flagellum Dei, Magdeburg. Cent. 5. cap.
10. While the rod is in Gods hand there is no danger, he is a wise God and
cannot be overseen; a strong mighty God, who can rule the rod in his own hand,
Isa. 10.15. A righteous God, and can do us no wrong, Jer. 12.1. and will not
give man advantage against him so as to enter in o judgment with him, Job
34.22. He is a good God, who does not afflict willingly, nor grieve the
children of men, Lam. 3.33. and so will be sure to lay on no more than need
requires, 1 Pet. 1.6.

Secondly, Faith looks to the cause of our affliction; Sense is ready to
quarrel with God, as if he took pleasure to afflict, Job 10.3. as if he took us
for his enemies, and set us up for his mark to spend all the Arrows of his
displeasure upon us, Job 13.24. and Chap. 16.12. but by Faith we may see
through these clouds, Isa. 8.17. and stay our selves on God, though we walk in
darkness and see no light, Isa. 50.10. Job, when he had recovered himself, and
had found his faith, would not let his hold go of God though he should kill
him, Job 13.15. Yea, Faith can see love and faithfulness in the greatest
afflictions, because it judges not by Sense, measures not happiness by present
enjoyments, and so makes not things before us an evidence of love or hatred,
Eccles. 9.2. but reckons of things according to the tendency of them to the
promoting our everlasting happiness; wherefore David acknowledges that it was
in faithfulness that God had afflicted him, Psalm. 119.75. God was therein
faithful to the interest of his soul.

Now this does much case the burden of affliction, we can easily bear that
which we know is done out of love; the wounds of a friend are better than the
kisses of an enemy, Prove. 27.6. We are impatient of an enemy besieging us in a
City, or imprisoning us in a Castle, when we can well enough be content our
Physician should confine us to a Chamber, because we know he does it out of his
love and care. If ever we would comfortably bear afflictions let us maintain
good thoughts of God, and not make the severest interprerations of his
Providence, or entertain any evil surmises or jealousies of him; we should
indeed be so sensible of his Fatherly displeasure as not to despise his
chastening, but not question his Fatherly care so as to faint when we are
rebuked of him, Heb. 12.5.

Thirdly, By Faith we look to the end of our afflictions, there are three ends
of them which are set down together, Deuteronomy. 8.16. The first is to humble us, 1
Pet. 5.6. this they do as they bring our sin to remembrance, Genesis 42.21. as
they let us see our dependence on God, and how obnoxious we are to him, how
much we are at his mercy. The second is to prove us, Job 23.10. 1 Pet. 1.6. and
I have elsewhere showed what an excellent fruit of affliction this is. The
third is to do us good in the latter end, Heb. 12.11. By experience we may know
this afterward, as David could say, It was good for him that he was afflicted,
Psalm. 110.71. But Faith rejoices in this before hand, being the substance of
things hoped for; and as the Levites praised the Lord before the victory, in
confidence of his faithfulness in making good his Promise; 2 Chronicles. 20.21. so a
Believer can rejoice in tribulations, in hope of the happy issue thereof, as it
is said Mr. Dod did once in a very great affliction, because he knew God would
do him good by it.

Fourthly, Faith takes Gods bare word, when a man has nothing else to trust
to; and indeed this (...) most properly Faith, otherwise we deal with God as we
do with one whom we count a knave, whom we dare not trust any further than we
can see him; let Faith have but a Promise and it will be too hard for sense or
reason, because it knows it is impossible for God to lie, but nothing else is
impossible to him but what is against his Nature or Word. Abraham believed
this, Heb. 11.19. Therefore he obeyed, knowing that if there was no other way
to fulfill the Promise, God could do it by raising the dead; and this is to be
observed, that when God will do any notable thing for any of his people, he
first does, as it were, sentence to death all means conducing thereto, that so
they may believe in him that raises the dead, 2 Cor. 1.9. Thus he dealt with
Abraham, with Joseph, with the Israelites in bringing them out of Egypt. And
if Christians did but duly consider this, it would free them from many sad
doubts and fears concerning their own condition: Many when they read the many
Promises in Scripture to the children of God, and compare their own condition
therewith, are ready to say, as Linacer, when he read the fifth Chapter of
Matthew, Either this is not the word of Christ, or these are not the people of
Christ; so either these Promises are not true, or we have no right in these
Promises; and out of modesty they rather choose to affirm the latter, and so
cast away their confidence, reasoning concerning themselves, as Job's friends
did concerning him, Job 4.7. God never cast off a righteous person, but he had
cast off Job, wherefore Job was not a righteous person, but an hypocrite: and
this is one cause why inward troubles do so often accompany outward troubles: as
in David, Psalm 6.2, 3. his body and soul were sore vexed together. When men
are in great straits and afflictions, they think these things cannot stand with
the Promises of God concerning his presence with his people, Isa. 43.1, etc.
his protection and provision, Psalm. 84.11. wherefore sure they are none of his
people. Do but observe how Christ rebukes his Disciples, Luke 8.25. for being
afraid, though they were in such great danger, and he imputes this to the
defect of their faith.

Fifthly, Faith sees all in God in time of affliction, as it sees God in all in
time of prosperity: Thus Habakkuk lived by the same faith, chap. 3.17, 18.
which he preached, cha. 2.4. Thus David had reckoned the protection of God as a
garrison, Psalm. 31.21. though some think he means Keilab, by that strong city,
yet others think, he means nothing but Gods Salvation, Isa. 26.1. Ezekiel. 11.16.
especially comparing it with Psalm. 3.5. which he wrote when he fled for his
life; and yet, how does he there profess his own security, in confidence of
Gods Salvation, v. 8. Psalm. 112.7. and it holds as well for any other mercy,
as for protection; for God, in promising to be a God to his people, Genesis 17.7.
does in effect promise, that his power, wisdom, goodness, or any other of his
Attributes shall not be wanting to them when they may be improved for their
Good. And where we see not the power of God put forth at any time for our help,
and supply, in what we desire or need, let us account that there the wisdom
and goodness of God are ours, in denying us what he knows would not be good
for us, and what is better for us to want than have. Amemus unum bonum, in quo
sunt omnia bona, and sufficit, etc. August. Med. Many observe a difference in
the words of Esau and Jacob, Genesis 33.9, 11. though they are translated alike,
Esau says (...) but Jacob (...) a wicked man, like Esau, may have much; but a
godly man, like Jacob has all: For, as Austine says, he has all, that has
God, who has all.

If any shall say, Indeed we might glory in tribulation, if we were assured
that God is ours: But how can we see all in God, when we doubt of our interest
in him? and, as the Apostle says, that all men have not faith; so we may say,
all Believers have not assurance. To this I answer, That full assurance is not
always necessary to our joy and comfort, as Mr. Baxter says, Adam in
Paradise did certainly live comfortably, and rejoice in his condition, yet he
was not sure he should abide therein, and not fall from it; there was not
certitudo rei, or assurance of the thing it self, therefore he could not be
sure of it. And a child may comfort himself in hopes of his Fathers estate,
though he know not but his Father may disinherit him. And if any reply, that
Adam might be taken up with the happiness of his present condition, and so not
need to look forward for comfort, as Believers are fain to do, and that Adam
had not so much cause to suspect his condition, as a believer has. I add, a
Merchant rejoices much in expectation of his Ship coming home, richly laden,
yet he knows it is subject to great hazards at sea, and I desire this may be
diligently heeded; Faith of recumbency (as it is commonly called) is the most
proper and most noble act of faith, (though I am far from thinking that the
conclusion is not de fide, where both the premises are not so, and so that
assurance is not faith) v. Daille la foi fondee, etc. party 1. c. 12. For as
Christ said to Thomas, Joh. 20.29. Blessed are they that have not seen and yet
have believed: blessed are they who though they are not assured either by any
mediate or immediate testimony of the Spirit, yet dare rely ( strongly strongly
strongly, as an eminent dying Saint once said) upon the Promise of Jesus
Christ, that he will in no wise cast out those that come to him; for as those
are commanded to rejoice that seek the Lord, Psa. 105.3. though they have not
yet found him, because he has not said to any in vain seek ye my face, so may
those rejoice that thus cast themselves upon Jesus Christ, though he have not
yet said to them, I am thy Salvation, Psalm. 35.3. and he takes pleasure in
those who so hope in his mercy, Psalm. 147.11.

Sixthly, By Faith we receive strength from Jesus Christ for bearing of
affliction. I have showed before how we have Union and Communion with Jesus
Christ, and through him we are able to do all things, Phil. 4.13. he speaks not
there of active obedience only, as a learned man has observed Hales Romans,
125. (...) there is as much as vales, or possum, which is as well to suffer, as
to do; and it is clear from the context, that he speaks there chiefly of
suffering. Colos. 1.11. There is a gradation, strengthened with all might
according to his glorious power, unto all patience, with long-suffering, and
joyfulness. The power of God does not only strengthen us to patience, but to
all patience; we may have patience in some afflictions, not in others; those
may bear losses perhaps, that cannot bear affronts or disgrace; and not only to
patience, but long-suffering: this respects the length of our sufferings, as
the other did the weight of the^, Some can endure a sharp brunt, but tire under
a long affliction. But he goes further to joyfulness, those may endure an
heavy affliction, and endure it long too, which yet go drooping and heavily
under it: but by Faith in the power of Christ we may bear long and heavy
afflictions with joy: Thus we are more than conquerors, through him that loved
us, Romans 8.37. we conquer afflictions, when they do not conquer us, but we are
more than conquerors when we can rejoice in them.

Lastly, Faith looks to the recompense of reward, as I before showed the
efficacy of it in this respect, to overcome temptations, so we shall now see
how effectual it is to enable us to bear afflictions: Though our outward man
perish, our inward man is renewed day by day, says the Apostle, 2 Cor. 4.16.
Afflictions did abound, yet they gained spiritual strength to go on more
cheerfully, instead of fainting or drawing back, and the reason hereof was,
they looked not on the things which were seen, but on the things which were not
seen, verse. 18. which is the work of faith, Heb. 11.1. As Columbus, when he
first went to discover America, ventured a tedious and long voyage over the
main Ocean, upon this confidence, that he should there discover another part of
the world, which had formerly been unknown to us, when the Spaniards that went
with him were ready to mutiny, because they had not so much judgment as to be
persuaded of any such fruit of their travel. Or as Moses had much ado to get
an unbelieving multitude along with him through the wilderness, but they were
often murmuring, rebelling, turning back in their hearts unto Egypt. So have I
seen those who have been unequally yoaked, and have had some heavy burden of
affliction lying on them, the one has born it cheerfully and comfortably, the
other has been an hindrance, and no help, continually murmuring and
complaining. In such cases the virtue of faith does most evidently appear; and
though there are not many amongst us, where the Gospel is preached, such
infidels as to deny the Recompense of reward, yet it is only the exercise of a
true and lively Faith, which can lift up the soul under affliction, that being
the very substance of the thing hoped for, and the evidence of things not seen.

For a Conclusion of the whole matter let me borrow the words of a learned man,
Dr. Arrowsmith, Tact. Sacr. l. 2. c. 7. s. 13. O quan^^^^ memorem fides
virtutum nobilissima, etc. How shall I make mention of thee O Faith, the most
noble of all Virtues? What shall I say of thee? Thou art the Hinge on which the
Gate of heaven turns, the Bucket by which we draw the water of life, the
Wedding Ring whereby the Soul is married to Jesus Christ, the Receptacle of the
Blood of Christ, the only Condition of the New Covenant, and the chief part of
the New Creature; they that by thee attain to a recumbency are safe, they that
attain to assurance are joyful. Thou art the Eye, the Hand, the Mouth, yea, the
All of our Souls. Yea, I may add, Faith is in Grace as the Philosophers Stone
in Nature, as a Catholicon or universal sovereign remedy for all diseases. It
is in the Soul as the Lungs in the Body, the Instrument of breathing, whereby
Vitalis spiritus (as Fernelius says tanquam patulo alitur and fovetur; we are
continually thereby taking in, and giving out: Either receiving from Jesus
Christ, or laying out for him. Wherefore with all our getting, as the Wiseman
says of Wisdom, Prove. 4.7. let us get Faith, and pray, that God will fulfill
the work of Faith with power in us, 2 These. 1.11. When Christ teaches his
Disciples the exercise of Love, they pray for the increase of Faith, Luke 17.5.
Whatever we are called to in this World, let us pray Lord increase our Faith;
hereby we shall be able to perform our Duties, to exercise our Graces, to
overcome our Temptations, to bear our Afflictions, to hold up in Desertions;
yea, all things are possible to him that believes, Mark 9.23. Search and
examine your selves whether you be in the Faith or no, 2 Cor. 13.5. No Faith no
Life; and be diligent in the use of all means for the strengthening of Faith,
attend Ordinances, treasure up Experiences, consult the experiences of others,
be diligent in secret duties, take heed of an evil heart of unbelief, Heb.
3.12. This work is to be followed well, for we are slow of heart to believe,
Satan is a great enemy to Faith, and there are not in us the seeds of Faith as
of obedience, Sibbs Souls Conflict. Especially let us be diligent in the use
and exercise of Faith; I have showed the use of it in actu signato, but let us
learn the use of it in our daily practice; David in his greatest grief, 2 Samuel
1.18. took care to have the Children of Israel taught the use of the Bow; it is
not having good weapons in the War, that will do us any good without the use
thereof: and Faith in the habit, not exercised, is but as the Sword in the
Scabbard. Bellarmine, De ascension. in Deum prope finem. The Apostles had
Faith, Luke 8.25. but they had it to seek when they should use it, and so were
at present as if they had none; as he that has much and does not enjoy it, is
as if he possessed it not. Whatsoever condition you are in, or whatever you are
about, stir up Faith, for it has some work to do therein; Every thing is
beautiful in its season, Eccles. 3.11. and this is the season of Faith, as
Christ said of the poor, Joh. 12.8. I may say of some other Graces, we shall
always have use for them in heaven, not of Faith; here we live by Faith, there
by sight.

FINIS.
A DISCOURSE OF Right Judgment, on
JOHN 7.24. Judge not according to the appearance, but judge righteous
judgment.
OUr blessed Savior, having healed a man on the Sabbathday, the Jews were so
enraged thereby, that they thought to kill him, John 5.16. And here he makes
his defense, showing how unjustly and partially they dealt with him. They do
not stick to do those things on the Sabbath day which Moses commanded, he
having given them the command of Circumcision, Levit. 12.3. though he was not
the first Institutor of it; and if it happened that the Sabbath day was the
eighth day after the birth of the child, they circumcised it on that day,
which would have been a profanation of the sabbath Mat. 12.3. had not Moses
given such a command concerning it. Hereupon our Savior concludes his Apology
with a wise and holy admonition, which might be of use to them in the whole
course of their lives, and that was to judge righteous judgment: and to that end
he warns them of one thing that does most ordinarily pervert the judgment, and
that is, judging according to appearance, or the face and outward show of
things. And herein Christ may have respect either to his person, or to his
action; if to his person, then it is as if he had said, You think the authority
of Moses sufficient to dispense with the duties of the Sabbath, and never
scruple any thing that he enjoynes, because you think God spoke to him, John
9.28, 29. but if you would make an impartial judgment, and not suffer your
selves to be deceived with the external apearance of things; you might know,
that though I come in the form of a servant, and not of a King, as Moses did,
Deuter. 33.5. yet I have as sufficient authority from God, for what I do, as
Moses had, John 5.36. yea I have the testimony of Moses himself, John 5.46.
compared with Deuteronomy. 18.15. If it have respect to Christ's action, then his
Argument is thus, You pass sentence upon actions according to the appearance
and first view of them, without examining the grounds of them, or considerings
in what cases the command of God are dispensible, when you see, according to
the command of Moses, some things were done on the Sabbath Day, which had not
been lawful but for such a particular command concerning them; and you do not
observe how commands that are but Ritual, and of positive right, may yield to
works of justice and mercy, else you would not have condemned the innocent,
Mat. 12.7.

For the right understanding of the words of the Text, we must know, that both
the Verb and the Nown verbal (which are ordinarily joined together in
Scripture) besides many tropical and improper acceptions which they have, are
for the most part taken either more largely, for an act of the mind, whereby
we discern or determine of any thing, as in those places, Luke 12.57. Why of
your selves judge ye not what is right? Acts 4.19. Whether it be right in the
sight of God to hearken unto you more than unto God, judge ye. 1 Cor. 10.15. I
speak as to wise men judge ye what I say. The sense of the words in these
places is obvious to every one that reads them: Or else it is taken more
strictly, for judging evil, or condemning, as Mat. 7.1, 2. both these
significations of the word we have in that elegant Antanaclasis of the Apostle,
Romans 14.13. Let us not judge one another, but judge this rather, that no man
put a stumbling block, or an occasion to fall, in his brothers way: that is,
let us not condemn one another, but rather determine this in our own minds,
etc. here it is evident, that our Savior understands it in the more large and
proper sense. Now, this judgment is either a private judgment of discretion,
which belongs to every man; in this respect thoughts are free, so men think
aright; or else a more public judgment of Authority, which belongs only to
those who are appointed thereto; of this distinction see Aquin. 12 ^ q. 93.
art. 2. 3 m. This command of judging righteously was first given in respect to
this latter judgment of Authority, Deuteronomy. 1.16. but it is here by our Savior
applied to the former judgment of discretion, it being necessary indeed in all
cases, that men should judge righteous judgment, that is, according to truth,
Romans 2.2. as the thing is, as the matter requires. The judgment is the guide of
our lives, and all our actions and affections are regulated thereby, Matthew.
6.22, 23. The eye enlightens the whole man, as a candle does a room: And as the
rest of the members would not do their work aright, were it not for the eye
that guides them* so neither can man do any thing aright, unless he be guided
by a right judgment, which will make all that proceeds from him to be full of
light, as with the light of a candle, Luke 11.36. See Mr. Perkins on the former
place, and on this latter, Erasmus, Maldonate, and Dr. Hammond.

The will indeed sits as Queen regent in the soul, and the chief executive
power belongs thereto; but as the King does what he does with the advice of his
Council, so the will follows the directions of the understanding; and when the
will seems to be refractory, refusing to follow the guidance of the judgment,
it is because the judgment does not represent to the will the object which it
should choose, as omni modo bonum, as Camero speaks, not as good or best in
every respect; but though it do in thesi judge this or that to be best in
general; yet pro hic and nunc as we say, at this time, and as the case stands,
it may judge the contrary more elegible: as a Drunkard may judge temperance to
be better than excess, but having an opportunity to satisfy his appetite, and
a strong desire thereto, and thinking for this once he may take liberty so to
do, and easily obtain the pardon of it, he thinks it best at present to be
drunk. Or else the mind is as a Master that is much from home, or is careless
and negligent, and does not look to his servants, to keep every one to his
task, and so they grow idle and dissolute. In like manner do the inferior
faculties usurp authority, when the understanding does not clearly and actually
represent things to the will; whence it comes to pass, that there are as well
(...), as (...), lusts or wills of the flesh, as of the mind, Ephesians. 2.3. see
Amyrald. de lib. arbitr. 110. As it is not every feeble wish, or faint velleity
of the will that can command the appetites, but an earnest and resolute purpose
thereof, tantum quisque potest, quantum serio and vehementer vult, Camero 243.
see Aug* Confess. l. 8. c. 9. and Mestrezat, in Heb. vol. 2. 134. So it is not
any habitual knowledge of the mind, (which indeed the Platonists would not
account knowledge) nor the weak and faint rays thereof that can determine the
will, but the express clear actual dictates of it.

But for the more distinct and full handling of this matter, I shall show
particularly wherein we are to judge righteous judgment: for though Christ here
speak, either concerning his person or actions, yet we may extend it further,
and it is necessary in respect of 1. Opinions; 2. Actions; 3. Persons; 4.
Things:
In all which respects I shall show you, how necessary a right judgment is,
and how we may make such a judgment.

First, We must judge aright of Opinions, or Doctrines. Every Christian has a
judgment of discretion allowed him, and as we are not to act ecstatically,
like the Energumeni, which were acted of the devil, but upon rational grounds,
knowing why we do what we do: So neither must we believe irrationally, but must
judge for our selves. It is not enough for us to follow the judgment of others;
for if the leader be blind, not only himself, but he that follows him, shall
fall into the ditch, Mat. 15.14. wherefore we had need have our spiritual
senses exercised to discern good and evil, Hebr. 5.14. A Christian indeed is
not bound to determine every question that is disputed in the Schools; there
are many hundred questions I believe in Aquinas, and Scotus, which many good
Christians never heard of. But yet it is necessary that all fundamental truths
should be believed with an explicit faith, and next to necessary, that a
Christian be able to make a right judgment of other Doctrines that are not
fundamental.

1. Because Error in judgment is so destructive to godliness, corrupt
Opinions being like vapors, which being conde^^ed in the head by the coldness
of the brain, as in a still, drop down upon the vitalls, and corrupt them: so
they corrupt men's practices: Yea, as some humors, when they abound in the
brain, do so obstruct the passage of the animal spirits, that they cause an
Apoplexy, which deprives a man of all sense and motion: So some Errors do so
obstruct the workings of the Spirit of God, that they deprive a man of all
spiritual motion. I will press that Caution of Austin, Epist. 107. but
tenderly, where he bids us take heed, lest while we plead for freewill amongst
men, we do not lose the benefit of our prayers; for I do not think all that
hold freewill to be of Seneca's mind, Ep. 31. that we need not weary God with
our prayers, but may make our selves happy. Yet there are many corrupt
principles which have a more malignant influence upon men's practices than they
are aware of. Some men's words eat as a gangrene, destroying the very life of
godliness, 2 Timothy 2.17, 18. They it seems, as some of later times, turned the
Doctrine of the Resurrection into an Allegory, interpreting it mystically; and
the Apostle, 1 Cor. 15.33. speaking of this very thing, bids them take heed of
being deceived, they could not think how soon such Doctrine would corrupt their
manners: he that thinks he shall die like a beast, will soon be persuaded to
live like a beast: wherefore Tertullian complains, that corruption in Doctrine
was worse than Persecution, for Persecution made Martyrs, but Heresy
Apostates, Praescript. adv. Haer. c. 4.

Secondly, Corrupt Opinions do ordinarily disturb the peace of the Church. It
is commonly said indeed, that opinionum varietas, and opinantium unitas non
sunt (...): Difference of judgment should not breed discord: but we too often
find it otherwise: The Apostle could easily believe, that there were divisions
amongst the Corinthians, because he knew there must be Heresies amongst them, 1
Cor. 11.18, 19. men, in maintaining their own Opinions against others,
proceeding for the most part to strife of words, and so to envy, railings, evil
surmisings, perverse disputings, etc. 1 Timothy 6.4, 5.

Now, that we may be able to make a right judgment in this case, I shall first
lay down some Cautions, then give some Directions; and I shall begin with the
Caution which our Savior gives us here in the Text, Judge not according to the
appearance. There was a sort of Philosophers indeed of old, which made
appearance of the essence of truth, but that was because they made man the
measure of all things, and every thing was true which appeared to any man so to
be, and so there were as many truths as men of different Opinions.

But most men are ready to judge that to be only true, which seems so to them:
and let a man set off any Opinion with a few plausible words, and many think
presently, it is as a King, against whom there is no rising up, Prover. 30.31.
It is with Opinions as with men, that which is first in its own cause is just,
till another come and find it out, Prove. 18.17. Hence it is that most men are
of the opinion of those that they converse most with, and wonder that any
should believe the contrary, or not rise up to what they say; they ordinarily
hear their own Opinions urged home, and the Opinions of their adversaries have
but a partial hearing; when, on the other hand, their adversaries having their
own Opinions represented to the best advantage, wonder as much that every body
should not be of their mind. The Papists are so careful to conceal from the
people the Arguments of the Protestants, that Sr. Edwin Sands tells us, in his
Europae speculum, that he could not set his eye on Bellarmine's Controversies,
or Gregory de Valentia, in any shop in Italy, because these men do fairly lay
down the Arguments of their Adversaries.

When Vergerius, he that we read so much of in the Story of Sp^^^, came to read
the Writings of the Lutherans, with an intent to confute them, that he might
vindicate himself from the suspicion of favoring their cause, which had
hindered his preferment, he was so borne down with the force of truth in them,
that he became a Lutheran indeed, which he was only suspected to be before. The
like is reported concerning Pighius.

Some have observed, that the same word in the Hebrew signifies the ears, and
a pair of balances, Implying, that we should weigh things with both ears,
before we judge. Yet I would not here persuade any to the Sceptick (...), or
(...), to suspend their judgment till they hear every thing which can be said
on both sides, or rather because they think when matters seem to be cast one
way, something may possibly be said on the other side to praeponderate; Neither
do I think it necessary or possible for every one to examine whatever is said
or written pro and con in every point. We may believe many truths which we
cannot answer all objections against, and there are many opinions which, are
not fit to be candidates or probationers to stand for a place in men's minds;
only that which I would persuade men to, is a due pondering of such things as
have a probability of truth, according to their capacities, or opportunities
and advantages, that what they believe they may believe upon good grounds, and
with due moderation toward others, that so they may not change their opinion
as they change their company, and be of the same mind with every one which they
hear or read maintain any thing with a few fair plausible words: And that they
may not ^ail, or at least wonder at every one that is not of their judgment,
thinking they must needs be either stupidly ignorant, or self-condemned. It is
obvious to every considering man, that those that are most ignorant and
unstudied are most confident and censorious; qui pauca considerat facile
pronunciat.

When those that hear what both sides have to say, though their judgments are
not born down with the force of their adversaries arguments, yet they may see
so much in them as may induce them to think that they differ conscientiously,
and are not (...), or wilfully blind.

Secondly, Let us take heed upon what grounds we judge any thing to be either
true or false; because many things stand upon the same foundation; and upon the
same ground that we admit or refuse one thing, we may admit or refuse many
others, 2 These. 2.2. The Apostle beseeches the Thessalonians that they be not
soon shaken in their mind, or troubled either by Word, or Spirit, or Letter, as
from them; the particular thing whereof he warns them, had no great evil in
it, but he was afraid of the means whereby they went about to seduce them, ver.
3. Let no man deceive you by any means. If they did by these means persuade
them to this, they might by the same means persuade them to things of more
dangerous consequence; if any should endeavor to impose upon us some harmeless
opinion, and to persuade hereto, tell us it was revealed to him, or given in to
him of God, if we believe him upon this ground, he may as easily press upon us
the foulest errors; if we admit any thing upon Apostolical tradition, how do
we know what may be obtruded upon us under that pretense. Many urge their
opinions upon us because they are in so many words in Scripture, if this be
sufficient to draw us to their beliefs, we may as well believe that God has
hands, and eyes, and ears, and so turn Anthropomorphites, or almost any thing:
So others cry out when we would commend some truths to them as the Macedonians
of old (...), or (...); where do you find any such thing in the Scripture? Show
me it in so many words; tell not me of inferences and consequences; when if
they will reject any thing upon this ground, they may reject the Scripture it
self.

Doubtless, There are many among the Papists wiser men than to believe many of
the dotages of the Church of Rome; but that admitting things upon the Authority
of the Church, whatever is recommended to them thereby, that is, by the Pope or
a Council, must be believed, how repugnant soever it be either to sense or
reason.

Thirdly, Let us take heed of depending upon the authority of men, however
eminent for Learning and Godliness; these indeed have a great advantage for
finding out Truth, and they may be of much use to us for informing us thereof;
but it is one thing to teach, and another thing to dictate; Debetur consulenti
reverentia, cum non debetur fides affirmanti. If a man tell me what he
believes, and upon what ground he believes it, if his ground be an in
artificial Argument, or if it be a clear divine testimony, he makes his own
knowledge mine, and I know it as well as he; but if a man dictate a thing only
to me, and tell me it is truth, I must not believe it presently because he
says it. And though we are to have a reverent esteem of the judgment of those
that are learned and godly, yet it is no sin for us to suspend our assent
thereto, till we see more reason for it, than merely because it is their
judgment; for God does many times leave such men for our trial, Deuteronomy. 13.1,
etc. and the devil makes choice of such Instruments for his own credit, quarit
diabolus ab iis ornari, as one says; and he could get even into Peter, Mat.
16.23. The Man of God, 1 King. 13.7. withstood the offer of Jeroboam, but was
seduced by the old Prophet, ver. 18. Those that have not been prevailed with by
all the Arguments of learned men, have been easily misled by such as have been
of great esteem for godliness. How much hurt was done by Tertullian and Origin,
men famous for Learning and Piety, we may see in Vincentius Lerinensis, c. 23,
24. So Priscillian, being a man of quick parts, great reading, much fluency of
speech, of a noble family, free from covetousness, yet as free from lavish
profuseness, drew multitudes of all sorts after him, Sulpitius Severus, Lib. 2.
And as for learned men, it is true which one observes of them, that they
ordinarily judge of the truth and ways of God, according to that kind of
Learning which they most excel in, reducing every thing to the trial of that
which they addict themselves to the study of; like the Musician, that being
asked what the soul was, defined it Harmony: So amongst those that addict
themselves to the search of Antiquity, many times that complaint of Tertullian
is true, De vetandis virgin. cap. 1. Consuetudo adversus veritatem defenditur;
a Tradition, or ancient Custom is of more account with them than a long
neglected truth or duty; and if they bend their studies to Philosophy, or
School Divinity, we may complain with the same Father, Haereses a philosophia
suboruantur. praescrip. adv. haer. c. 7. and Divinity must be cramped to fit
their School nicities, and philosophical notions. Such as delight in the study
of the Jewish or Oriental Learning, how do they accommodate their Divinity to
their dull Rabinical notions, if not to the Fables of their Talmud; like the
men that came from Judea, Act. 15.1. Doubtless, the converted Gentiles were
glad they had such to consult with, to whom the Oracles of God had been
committed, and with whom Christ and his Apostles had conversed, and they
presently call them to the observation of their Circumcision, whereon they so
much doated. Far be it from me to speak this to the contempt of Learning, which
I value much (though I possess but little) knowing how good an use may be made
of it; yet it is necessary to observe how ordinarily men do abound in their own
sense, and how prone they are, that they may beget an high esteem in others of
such Learning as they are most in love with themselves, to make it seem more
serviceable and necessary upon all occasions than indeed it is.

I will conclude this Caution with that of Tertullian de praescript. c. 3. Ex
personis probamus fidem an ex fide personas? Shall we judge of opinions by men,
or of men by opinions?

Fourthly, Let us take heed our Judgment be not perverted by Passion or
Interest; It is true, the Understanding moves the Will morally, as has already
been showed, but the Will moves the Understanding physically, Aquin. 1 a. q.
82. Art. 4. c. As a King follows the advice of his Council, but yet chooses
his Council himself, and it may be so regulates their Debates, that they shall
not take into consideration, or at least not thoroughly discuss, those things
which he has no mind to hear: So the Will does determine the Mind to the
consideration almost of what it pleases. Hence the Scripture complains of such
as will not understand, but walk on in darkness, Psalm. 82.5. and are willingly
ignorant, 2 Pet. 3.5. For though the Understanding cannot refuse its assent to
such truths as are evidently demonstrated thereto, as Scotus has observed, l.
2. did. 7. q. 1. Yet the Will and corrupt affections so interpose to hinder
the access of those things to the Understanding which might rightly inform it,
that it cannot make a true impartial Judgment; as Theodosius the Emperor
complained of it as the unhappiness of great men, that they could not know the
Truth, by reason of such about them, as would let nothing come to their ears
but what might make for themselves and their Interest: So corrupt affections
prevent those reasonings of the mind which might restrain them from that which
they have a strong propension to. Hence it is that Seducers and Impostors have
prevailed so much by their cunningly devised Fables, suited to men's corrupt
lusts and carnal Interests: as Mahomet and the Papists, of whom we may say as
Tully of Astrologers, It is a wonder they can look upon one another without
laughter to think of their absurd ridiculous opinions, but that they know as
one of them blasphemously said how much such Fables profit them; and so
certainly many beguile their understandings into a belief of them. The Apostle
2 Pet. 2.18. speaks of some, who through the lusts of the flesh allured those
who had escaped them that live in error: That is, through the lusts of their
hearers or followers, framing their Doctrine so as it might give the largest
indulgence to their lusts, an account of which we have in Irenaeus, l. 1. c. 1.
Men heaping up Teachers to themselves after their own lusts, 2 Timothy 4.2. Mic.
2.11. and even good men's judgments may be swayed sometimes by Interest or
Passion, I might give an instance hereof in some of the Ancients, in the matter
of compulsion by the Magistrate in spiritual things, we find that those who
lived under heathen or Arian Emperors were utterly against it, because then it
was against their interest, as Tertullian ad Scapulam, c. 2. Lactantius Instit.
l. 5. c. 20. Indeed he wrote his Institutions in his old Age under Constantine,
to whom he dedicates them, but he had known something of the effects of force
in matters of Religion in Dioclesians time, whose fury he had with much
difficulty escaped. The like might be observed of Athanasius and Gregory
Nazianzen: But Austin was of another mind after he had seen the insolence of
the Donatists, and the effect of the Magistrates power in restraining thereof,
Retract. l. 2. c. 5. I am apt to believe we shall find many amongst our selves
which will not continue long of the same mind in this very thing, but some will
be for it which have formerly been against it, and others against it which have
formerly been for it; and I am not so void of charity, as to think all those
whom I see so quick at changing their judgments in many things as times
change, to be self-condemned, or to go against clear convictions, but their
interest baffles their judgment, and change of times has as great an
influence upon their minds, as change of weather has upon weak bodies. But
Truth is the same in all Ages, and in all places, and is not like our
Almanacks, to be changed every year, or calculated peculiarly for one Meridian.
And how Passion perverts men's judgments is evident from the difference that is
betwixt men's Polemical or Controversial writings, and their devotions, or such
as they write in cool blood. Rivet shows how much Bellarmine differs from
himself about the Scriptures, Isagoge ^ad Script. cap. 25. Men when they deal
with their Adversaries, whet their Pens so sharp that they prick their own
fingers; or they are like Physicians, that to cure their Patients of one
disease cast them into a worse; to recover them from an Ague cast them into a
Fever, which they know not how to cure; or to cure a Fever, take away so much
blood that they dispose their Patients to a Consumption, or Convulsions. Thus
Austin in vindicating the liberty of Man's Will against the Manichees, gave
advantage to Pelagius, with whom he was more troubled than with the former.
Thus Dionysius Alexandrinus, whilst he zealously opposed the Sabbellians, gave
advantage to the Arians. Whether did Illyricus run in the business of original
sin, while he opposed the Papists? And what advantage did Luther give to
Islebius Agrioola in the business of Justification: and it is an ordinary
observation of many, that the opposition of our first reformers to the general
assend maintained by the Papists, transported them to another extreme in the
business of Faith; though I do much approve of the opinion of a Learned man
concerning this thing, that those good men spoke much their own experience, God
ordinarily giving them assurance whom he employed in more eminent services, and
who were to encounter greater trialls, which he does not ordinarily give to
those who are not put upon such service, it being his way to proportion his
comforts to his Peoples trials and temptations, 1 Cor. 10.13. 2 Cor. 1.5. See
Arrowsmiths Tactica sacra, l. 2. c. 7. s. 5. I could easily give many instances
in the most Learned men of former and latter times, of several opinions and
persuasions, of the influence that men's Passions and Interests have upon their
Judgments, hindering the sight thereof, as a Cataract or suffusion hinders the
sight of the eye.

I come now to the directions which we must observe if we will make a right
judgment of Opinions or Doctrines. And,

First, Let us labor to have the Word of God dwelling richly in us in all
wisdom, Col. 3.16. It is not enough to be acquainted with the Letter of the
Scripture, but we must study the Sense of it, and be able to find out such
truths as are not in so many words therein expressed. Ignorance of the
Scriptures was the cause of the Sadduces error concerning the Resurrection,
though the Doctrine of the Resurrection was not so obvious to every one in the
place which our Savior cited for the proof of it, Mat. 22.29.

Secondly, Let us daily apply our selves unto God by Prayer; by humble
addresses of our selves to him, therein we may get more than by reading, or
study; our Understandings as well as our Wills daily stand in need of assisting
Grace. Homer does say, That men depend daily upon God for the guiding of their
minds. See Ludov* Vives, in lib. 5. de civitat. Dei. c. 8. It is part of the
Spirits work to guide us into all truth, Joh. 16.13. though it do not
immediately dictate to us what is truth, nor by any extraordinary Revelation
discover any new objects to us, yet he is a Spirit of wisdom to make us quick
of understanding in the fear of the Lord, Isa. 11.2, 3. and to enable us to
judge of spiritual things, 1 Cor. 2, 15. Chap. 7.40.

Thirdly, Let us labor to be well acquainted with the fundamental Truths of
Religion, which will be as so many phari, or towers, to guide us safe betwixt
the rocks of error; and with some of which most Errors are some way or other
inconsistent.

Four^hly, Let us labor for a since^e honest heart; this conduces more to the
keeping men right in their judgments, than the learning of the Schools, Isa.
35.8. Though men have not so much cunning as others, yet, if their hearts be
right toward God, they shall not so soon be misled; if men's hearts be not
sincere, nothing else will help them: as Christ came into the world, that those
that see might be made blind, and that those that see not might see, John
9.39. He was set, not only for the rise, but for the fall also of many in
Israel, Luke 2.34. So the Scriptures are a light to the feet, and a lanthorn to
the paths, of those who in sincerity make use of them for guiding their feet
in the paths of uprightness, Psalm. 119.105. But if we make use of them only for
satisfying our curiosity, or to pass our censure upon them, they will be
rather a stumbling block, than a light to us. Tertullian says, He is not
afraid to affirm, that the Scriptures are so ordered or disposed by the will
of God, that Heretics may be misled by them, adv. Haer. 39. And if we pray to
God for further illumination, only that we may know, and take no care to
practice what we know, God will not so far satisfy our curiosity. They are
those that do the will of God, that shall know what Doctrine is of God, and
what of men, John 7.17. There were three things that did so much advance David's
knowledge, Psalm. 1^9. 1. The Word of God was with him, that is, he had it by
him to read on, and consult with, according to the charge given. Deuteronomy. 17.19.
verse. 98. 2. He meditated thereon, ver. 99. 3. He kept it, or practiced what he
read, ver. 100.

I might now, as some do, lay down some Characters for the trial of Doctrines,
whereby men may know what comes nearest the truth; as that which does most
promote Godliness, and that which does most detract from the creature, and give
to God, is most like to come nearest the truth. But I will not much urge these,
and otherlike, because however these may be true Characters, yet they are not
so evident, and there is as much controversy what does most advance Holiness,
and the Grace and power of Jesus Christ, as about any other mediums for the
clearing of truth, and all proof should be made, per notiora, by those things
that are more evident than that which we would prove.

Secondly, We should judge aright of Actions: and that, 1. Our own Actions. 2.
Other men's.


We should judge aright of our Actions, 1. Beforehand in our intention; that we
may know what our duty is, It is the wisdom of the prudent, to understand his
way, Prove. 14.8. It is not sufficient, that we do things in the simplicity of
our hearts, as those followed Absalom, 2 Samuel 15.11. the will of God being the
rule of our actions, Ephesians. 5.17. not our own erroneous consciences. And our
ignorance will not altogether excuse us in what we do against the command of
God, no not at all, if we be wholly supine, and careless to inform our selves
of the will of God. Paul thought verily he ought to do many things against the
name of Jesus, Acts 26.9. yet this mistake of his made his sin only pardonable,
and he confesses himself the chief of sinners for it, 1 Timoth. 1.1^.2. post
factum; or in the reflection on our actions, we must judge righteous judgment:
It was the sin of the Jews, that none did reflect upon their actions, and
consider what they had done, Jer. 8.7. which we are to understand, not only
physically, what actions they had done, but morally, of what nature the actions
were, as Genesis 3.13. the guilt of sin is taken away by justification, the blot
or stain of it by Sanctification, but the fault is not taken away till
Repentance, and in a moral sense a man persists in the act of sin till he
repent of it. Primus felicitatis gradus est non delinquere, secundus delicta
cognoscere, Cyprian, Epist. 55. next to innocence Repentance is the greatest
happiness.

2. We should judge a right of other men's actions, not that we should be
busybodies, in other men's matters, or severe Cato's, censuring every thing
which belongs not to us. But sometimes we are concerned to make a right
judgment of other men's actions, 1. That we may not partake of their sin, 1 Timothy 5.22. by approving that which is evil, 2 John 10, 11.2. That we may not
condemn them, and cast them out of our charity without cause, Romans 14.3. I know
there is nothing does more trouble one that is partaker of the divine nature
that dwells in love, 1 John 4.16. than to know or hear any thing of another,
that may hinder the exerise of their love. There remains indeed always a love
of benevolence toward them, but it abates of our love of complacency, when we
apprehend them guilty of any thing that is evil; and it is in it self a sin to
be angry with our brother without cause, Mat. 5.22.

Now, that we may judge aright of actions, I must proceed in the same method as
in the former case: 1. Give you some Cau^ions: 2. Some Directions.


First, Let us here again take heed of judging of actions according to the
appearance, but examine the Principles and ends of them, with other
circumstances. Many times, at first view, men's actions seem very unwarrantable,
till the business be fully understood, and till we see for what ends, upon what
grounds, by what necessity forced thereto, and upon what occasions men
undertake such things. It was the case of the Reubonites, Josh. 22.12. but when
their brethren understood their grounds and intentions, they were very well
satisfied, verse. 30. So many men do often make very fair pretenses of such things
as are most remote from their intentions. Judas seemed to be of a very public
spirit, and one that aimed at doing good, John 12.6. but there was somewhat
else at the bottom, which lay out of man's sight. But though counsel in the
heart of man, be as deep water, a man of understanding will draw it out, Prove.
20.5.

Secondly, Let us not judge of Actions by men's Examples.

1. Not of most men, Exodus 23.21 we must not follow a multitude to do evil. The
broad way, wherein most walk, leads to destruction, Mat. 7.13. Nor of great
men, Joh. 7.48. It is the Doctrine that Mr. Rob. Bolton insists on in his
assize Sermon, on 1 Cor. 1.26. that great men are seldom good. No, nor always
of the best men; their examples, if evil, are most dangerous, because we are
most apt to follow them, Gal. 2.13. but they must be followed only so far as
they follow Christ, 1 Cor. 11.1. yea further, good actions of good men are not
always to be imitated, as it is a great error in Policy, for men to undertake
things because they have seen others do them before them; as Pompey would say,
Scylla potuit, ^go non potero? Scylla did such i^ thing, and why may not I?
never considering the advantage of parts and abilities, opportunity,
popularity, which one man may have more than another. So it is a great mistake
in Morality, that what was lawful and justifiable in another, we may venture
to do, when that which is lawful in one may be sinful in another, when there
is not the same principles, ends, occasions. And hence it is that Precedents
get so much credit and authority, that they pass for a Law, and men argue a
facto ad jus. The Disciples, Luke 9.54. pleaded the example of Elias, for what
they desired, when our Savior intimates by his answer, that they were of a
quite different spirit from Elias, and desired fire from Heaven upon far
lower principles than Elias; his was pure zeal, theirs mixed with the base
alley of ambition, and revenge, so Amos 6.5. those Epicures plead the example
of David for their justification, not considering that the end of David in the
use of Music, and singing, was to lift up his heart in the service of God,
theirs only to please their own lusts. So many plead the example of good men
for what they do, and for the liberty which in many things they take to
themselves, not considering that while they do the same things, not on the same
grounds, nor for the same ends, they may sin, in that which others do lawfully.
Again, that is lawful at one time which is not lawful at another; as First,
In case of offense, compare Act. 16.3. with Galat. 2.3. and 1 Cor. 10.27. with
ver. 28. quod non expedit, etc. that which is not expedient, so long as it is
not expedient, is not lawful. Secondly, Some things which are our duty, or
else unlawful for the most part, may at some time be dispensed with. What
commands are dispensible, and in what cases, would be too great a task here to
examine; but that some commands are so, and in some cases, is evident from
Matthew. 12.2, etc.

If any shall object, That We must not do evil that good may come of it:

The best Answer which I have in readiness hereto is, that sometimes the
goodness of the end may legitimate the means, so as it may cease to be evil,
supposing it to be in such things as are not intrinsically and in their own
nature evil, and prohibita quia mala, as some distinguish. These things,
though they are not to be denied, are to be tenderly pressed. He that desires
to see more of this may consult Rivet on Genesis, Exercitat. 108. and on the
Fourth Commandment, S^are^ de Legibus, lib. 2.14, 15. Mr. Baxter, of
Infidelity, Advertisement, propos. 13, 14, 15. Thirdly, Take need of judging of
actions according to success. God may shine upon the counsel of the wicked,
Job 10.3. The proud may be accounted the happy men, and those that tempt God
delivered, Mal. 3.15. God has taught all amongst us this Doctrine effectually.
Men indeed are very apt to judge of love and hatred by what is before them,
Luke. 13.1, etc. John 9.2. Acts 28.4. Faelix ac prosperum scetus virtus
vocatur, Sen. But the Israelites had right on their sides, against the
Benjamites, and a great advantage of multitude, yet they fell twice before
them, Judges 20. So God delivered Judah into the hands of Israel, who slew them
with a rage reaching up to heaven, yet there were among the Israelites sins
against the Lord, and the fierce wrath of God was upon them, 2 Chronicles. 28.9, 10,
11. I must give the same Directions here that I gave in the former case,
therefore,

1. Let us labor to acquaint our selves with the Word of God: there are not
only credenda, but agenda; as well what we should do, as what we should
believe: This was David's counselor, Psalm. 119.24. besides the express rules
which are there given us, for the directing of our ways, we may (if we be well
acquainted therewith) be able to infer one thing from another, and argue a
pari ratione, and so know what to do in like cases, as we find in the Word of
God, as our Savior argues, Mat. 12.3.7.

2. Let us pray for the guidance and direction of the Spirit of God, Psalm
25.12. What man is he that fears the Lord, him shall he guide in the way that
he shall choose: that is, in the way that he should choose; that which is spoken
de facto, or of what men do, being often understood de debito, or what men should
do, as Psalm. 32.8. Mal. 1.6. Hebr. 5.4. God leads us by his good spirit, Psalm.
143.10. not by dictating to us, as to Philip, Acts 8.29. though I will not
deny, but the Spirit may sometimes powerfully determine a man to some
particular act. We read in the life of Mr. Dod, that he was strongly inclined
one night to go to his neighbors house, and knew not why, but God thereby
saved a man's life. So we read of one Aventroot, who, in very old age, against
the persuasion of his friends, went from Utrect in the Low Countries, to Madrid
in Spain, to tell the King of Spain, that the Pope was Antichrist, and to
persuade him to destroy him, for which he was burnt. These are extraordinary
cases, and do not favor the ordinary pretenses of Enthusiasme, especially in
things contrary to the Word of God, see Voetites, de probationibus spirituum,
p. 2 ap. 1124. where you have the forementioned Story, and what we are to judge
in such cases. Ordinarily the Spirit directs Christians, by filling them with
the knowledge of Gods will, in all wisdom and spiritual understanding: though
it may sometimes awaken conscience to be as a voice behind us, saying, this is
the way, walk in it, when we turn to the right hand, or to the left, Isa.
30.21. or direct us to such places of Scripture as may be for our turn, or best
serve our purpose, as Austin to Romans 13.13. Junius to John 1. see Austine's
Confessions, l. 8. c. 11. and Junius his life written by himself. He that
desires to read more concerning divine impulses, or the voice of Providence,
may consult Geo. Wither's cordial Confection, p. 12. and Edw. Gee. of the Right
and Original of Magistrates, cap. 3. to whom I had rather refer, than
determine any thing in so nice a point.

3. Let us here also labor for an honest, sincere heart, otherwise it is as
hard to judge of Actions, as of Opinions. Corrupt affections will blind the
judgment, and turn desire into opinion, so as a man shall believe that to be
true which he desires to be true. Hence it is, that every man's way is right in
his own eyes, Prove. 16.2. Passions and Lusts endeavor to draw the judgment on
their own side, that so they may not be controled or interrupted thereby,
Reynolds, on the Passions, cap. 8. And for this cause, some Philosophers have
not thought young men, especially such as were addicted to youthful lusts, to
be fit for the study of Ethics, Wendelini Philosoph. Moral. l. 1.0.1.

But further, when men come to enquire of God with their idols in their hearts,
he will answer them according to their Idols, Ezekiel. 14.4, 7. that is, When men
(like young people, who ask their friends consent in marriage, but are resolved
beforehand what to do, whether their friends will consent or no) pretend to
inquire the mind of God, and have beforehand fixed their desires, if not their
resolutions: God will answer such to their cost. The Jews pretended a desire
and willingness to know the mind of God, and to be ruled thereby, but they had
before resolved to go down into Egypt, and he tells them what should befall
them, if they went thither, the sword and famine which they fled from should
follow close after them, Jerem. 42. read that Chapter throughout. So Ahab had a
mind to go to Ramoth Gilead, yet he would enquire of God, whether he should
go; God suffers the Devil by his Prophets to seduce him to go thither, to his
ruin, 1 Kings 22. If we enquire of God, it must be with an honest heart, and
sincere Resolution to follow his Counsel; God will not be mocked, we must seek
to God, an licet, not ut liceat, whether a thing be lawful or no, not that it
may be lawful.

4. Let us take heed of rashness, and precipitancy. With the well advised is
wisdom, Proverb. 13.10. We must ponder the paths of our feet, Prove. 4.26. We
are not of such present and comprehensive understandings, as to make sudden
Resolutions. We see how often we are put to change our Resolutions, and make them
give place to second and wiser thoughts. Gods immutability is an Argument of
his perfection, and is founded in his omnisciency, his perfect understanding of
all things by one single view, directing him to such purposes as are not
capable of any perfective alteration; only consideration must not take up the
time that should be spent in execution.

5. Let us consult with those who are wholly unconcerned in what we would judge
of, such are like to make the best judgment. How does David pass sentence on
himself, when a case was represented to him, only in thesi, not as his own, 2 Samuel 12.5, 6. So the Jews, Matthew. 21.41. but change the persons, and they are
of Ploydon's mind, That the case is alterred, fo does Interest corrupt men's
minds: We see daily proof of this; hence the common saying, That a good
Arbitrator must displease both parties, because interest makes them both think
their own case right, when a third person sees, that both must yield. Hence so
many complaints of Oppression, Interest makes both Plaintiff and Defendant
think himself wronged. Hence is it so hard to find a good Historian, if he
stand in the crowd, affection to causes, or parties swayes him, if he stand too
far off, he cannot see well what is done.

Finally, Hence it comes to pass, that the present age seldom judges right,
but the succeeding age must judge of the actions of the age going before, most
men being some way concerned in public affairs. Matthew. 23.30.

Thirdly, We must judge aright concerning persons. I shall not here speak of
judging our selves, having elsewhere said something of it. Now I shall speak
only, of our judgment concerning others; we are not indeed rashly to condemn
others, this is the judgment which Christ forbids, Mat. 7.1. Neither are we to
usurp a peremptory judgment concerning men's final estate, yet there is a
private judgment of Prudence that we may, yea, must pass upon men.

1. That we may know how to carry our selves toward them; to some we owe only
a common charity; to others brotherly kindness, or a more entire affection, 2
Pet. 1.7. 1 Pet. 2.17. Some are to be carefully avoided, Romans 16.17. Some there
are of whom we may hope well, yet are to carry our selves toward them as if we
had a suspicion of them, 2 These. 3.14, 15.

2. That we may beware of men, Mat. 10.17. Paul, amongst other dangers that he
was in, reckons up false brethren, 2 Cor. 11.26. Gal. 2.4. These indeed are the
most wretched sort of men, and an abhorring to all flesh. Perditissimi hominis
est illum fallere, qui nou deceptus esset nisi credidisset. Abundance of
instances I could easily give, of those who have very much suffered by their
credulity, and putting themselves too much into their power, who have proved
perfidious to them. Christ would not trust all that trusted him, Joh. 2.24. And
some think it was Alexander that was like to lose his life at Ephesus, Act.
19.33. that did Paul so much harm, that he warns Timothy to beware of him, 2 Timothy 4.14, 15.

3. That we may know how to esteem them. The Saints should be the most
excellent persons in our account, Psalm. 16.3. Prove. 12.26. There is indeed a
civil respect due to men according to the place wherein God has set them, to
keep up the authority of their place, Isa. 3.5. Act. 23.5. that authority which
is necessary for preserving of Order in the Societies of men, may not be
betrayed to contempt, Fulgent. ad Trasimundum. l. 1. c. 2. But yet we should
have a more real respect to those who are the children of God, 2 King. 3.14.
Psalm. 15.4. Ingo, King of the Venedi in Prussia, made a great Feast, to which
he invited many of his Nobles, who were then Pagans, and many also of his
meaner Subjects who were Christians; the Nobles he fed without with the meanest
and coursest Diet, the Christians, who were but mean men, he sumptuously
entertained at his own Table. Magd. Cent. 8. c. 2. though these are not thought
worthy of the World, the World is not worthy of them, Heb. 11.38.

Now, that we may judge aright of Persons,

First, Let us not judge by report; It was foretold of Christ, Isa. 11.3. that
he should not judge according to the hearing of the ear. Fama mendax, Fame is a
liar; See how much David suffered hereby, 1 Samuel 24.9. and Mephibosheth, 2 Samuel
19.27. and Paul, Act. 21.24. Tertullian complains in his Apology how much the
Christians of old suffered hereby; and their Adversaries were willing to
believe false reports of them, that so they might with the greater show of
reason malign and persecute them. Credunt de nobis quae non probantur, and
nolunt inquiri ne probentur non esse quae malunt credidisse, cap. 2. because it
was against the Law to have Virgins strangled, Tiberius would first have them
defloured, that so they might according to Law be strangled; it is too much to
abuse Christians as Christians, but first Fame must commit a rape upon their
names, and then they may be dealt with as the vilest persons; let them but be
made Schismatics or sedirious persons, and no punishment will be too much for
them: The poor Protestants at Paris must first be accused of a Conspiracy
against the King, and then butchered by thousands without mercy. I have
sometimes wondered what the bloody Papists could say in excuse of that cruel
Massacre, till I read their pretense for it in Estourneaus continuation of
Surius, 4. 48. What strange things were reported concerning the meetings of the
Christians of old! How they put out their Candles when they had peformed their
religious services, and fell to the committing of all manner of abominations,
Tert. Apol. c. 7. And have not the same reports passed for current amongst many
concerning others of latter days? But we may say as the same Father, Cap. 39.
Cum probi cum boni coeunt: cum pii cum casti congregantur: non est factio
dicenda, sed curia. I should wish those that entertain such reports of others
no worse punishment of their credulity than the Italian Friars, who having
heard that Geneva was a place where any thing was tolerated, robbed their own
Covents, and brought away their booty to Geneva, pretending a conversion to the
reformed Religion, and thinking thereupon to find Sanctuary there: Who when
they came there were presently advanced to the Gibbet, which made them complain
pitifully of their wrong information, See Europae speculum, 170. where you have
also the Story of a Spanish Gallant that lost his head there upon a like
occasion. What horrid reports have the Papists raised concerning this Nation
formerly? Yea, what strange Stories do Calixtus, Hoornbeeck, Maresius, etc. yet
tell? What strange prejudices have many conceived against others? Of whom we
may say as Tertullian, c. 1. Si sciant odisse non poterant; If they knew them,
they could not hate them. How many have by Fame been represented as men of
corrupt Principles, and proud and turbulent spirits, to be avoided as those
that have the Plague or Leprosy? Whom we have found when we have come to
converse with them to be sober, humble, conscientious Christians. Nemo nisi per
amicitiam cognoscitur; And if any object, that we have not any other way to
know many but by report. I answer, If we have no opportunity to converse with
them, we have the less occasion to judge any thing of them.

Secondly, Do not for the faults of some condemn all; A learned man (Dr. Brown
in his Religio medici,) complains of this piece of injustice, whereby whole
Nations are accused of those crimes which, some therein have been found guilty
of, many concluding from a disposition in some, an habit in all. Thus it falls
out when men of quite different principles and practices fall under one common
name or compellation, whatever is held or done by one is many times charged
upon all that are distinguished by the same name. Thus of old whatsoever
Carpocrates and his followers did, was charged upon the Christians in general,
because they went under the name of Christians among the Heathens, Eusebius,
lib. 4. c. 8. What the Protestants have suffered from the Papists upon this
account, because so many Sects are included in the common notion of
Protestants, I need not stand here to show. I will only give one instance more:
What abominable errors are charged upon the Independents of New England by a
late Author? Alexander Rosse is his view of the Religions of Europe, Sect. 12.
as far remote from the judgment of the generality of those who come within the
compass of that Name, as New England is from Europe; their proceedings against
the abettors of those opinions, and the Writings of Hooker, Cotton, Norton,
Shepherd, etc. sufficiently testifying their abhorrency of them. I forbear to
give like instances nearer home, and desire only those whom it may concern, to
consider how they should resent it, if a Papist should charge upon them all the
opinions of Anabaptists, Socinians, Weigelians, Arminians, because they are
Protestants, and have made a Secession from the Church of Rome; And whatever ye
would that men should do unto you, do you even so unto them, for this is the
Law and the Prophets, Mat. 7.12.

Thirdly, Let us not judge of men according to a bare outward profession,
though there is a judgment of charity, 1 Cor. 13.7. to which men have as much
right, as to any thing they call their own, Phil. 1.7. yet this does not
deprive us of the use of reason or prudence; let a verbal profession, valere
quantum valere potest, go as far as it can, as one says, If Gracchus be
invective against sedition, I censure him by his actions, not by his words. And
if Cato be accused of mutiny, I censure him by himself, not by his accusers.
Omnino enim nihil prodest nomen sanctum habere sine moribus, quia vita a
professione discordans abrogat illustris tituli honorem, per indignorum actuum
vilitatem. Salvian de Gubernatione Dei, lib. 3. in fine. A profession of
Religion is cheap, especially when it is the rising side; and that is the
reason why Salvian and others of the Fathers complained so much of the
corruption of the Church, after the Church was in prosperity Emperors being
turned Christians. See Lactant, lib. 2. 1. Usser. de successione, Eccles. C. 1.
s. 22, etc. It was not only because Saevior armis luxuria incubuit, victumque
ulciscitur orbem, Juvenal. because the warm sunshine of prosperity made them
cast off those Garments, or at least wear them more loose, which the blustering
winds of persecution had made them keep close to them: But also there were many
hypocrites turned Christians for advantage; and a verbal profession in the time
of the Churches prosperity will not signify so much as it did when a bare
profession of Christ was enough to expose a man's life and estate to hazard; as
we may see many, who when they are abroad appear in a handsome garb and
attire, whom we should not know if we met them as they go every day at home: So
there are many who make a fair show when they are amongst those with whom they
seldom converse, but go into their Families, or follow them to their Callings
and they are quite other men.

Fourthly, Let us not judge of men by particular actions, but by their walking,
or the course which they hold on in, Psa. 1.1. and 119.1. Romans 8.1. otherwise,
we may take the vilest hypocrite for the most eminent Saint, and the best
Saints for the prophanest sinners. What should we have judged of Ahab, when we
had seen how he humbled himself? 1 Kings 21.27. Or of Jehu, to have seen his
zeal for the Lord of Hosts? 2 Kings 10.16. Or of David, to have seen how he
heaped his sins one upon another, that (as they say of ill turns) it might not
rain through? 2 Samuel 11. Or what should we have thought of Asa? 2 Chronicles. 16.
who when he had sinned shut the Prophet in prison that told him of it, and
afterward in his sickness sought to the Physicians, and not to God.

Fifthly, Judge of men as God judges of them; his Judgment is according to
truth, Romans 2.2. He judges not as man judges, for man looks on the outward
appearance, but the Lord looks on the heart, 1 Samuel 16.7. Antiochus was
called Epiphanes, or the Illustrious, yet God calls him a vile person, Dan.
11.21. And those are accounted happy times when men are esteemed according to
their real merit, and not honored with gaudy Titles, which do no more become
them than a Pearl in a Swines snout, Isa. 32.5. Reddunt miseri dignitatum
pretia quas non emunt, commercium nesciunt and solitudinem faciunt, Salvian de
Gubernat. Dei, lib. 4. Quantus in Christiano populo honor Christi est, ubi
religio ignobilem facit? Statim enim ut quis melior esse tentaverit, deterior
is abjectione calcatur: ac per hoc omnes quodammodo mali esse coguntur, n^
viles habeantur, Idem. Ibid. What a shame is it that Votaries, and those who
make the greatest proficiency in other Religions should be had in highest
esteem amongst those who profess the same Religion with them, and amongst
Christians only, those should be most contemned that are most strict in
observing the Rules of Christ; And that men should be under such a temptation
amongst them, as to be forced to be wicked lest they should be vile and exposed
to contempt? Si quis aliquid de spiritu dixerit, velut insulsum atque insipidum
cum risu and subsannatione excipiunt, cum sibilis exuflant, cum clamore and
contentione rejiciunt. Clemangis apud Voetium, p. 3. 65. Such men are as
ridiculous and brutish to any whose wisdom remains with them, as Gryllus in
Plutarch, who when Ulysses pitied them, in that condition wherein they were,
being transformed into beasts by Circe, and prevailed with Circe to restore
them to their former condition again, Gryllus disdains his offer, and tells
him, they now despised him, and would not change their happy condition for the
worse, to be made men again, that is, the most wretched creatures in the World.
Man that is in honor and understands not, (that is, has not a right
understanding, 1 John 5.20.) is like the beasts that perish, Psalm. 49.20. Yet
they think those that would persuade them to return to their former state, and
recover the Image of God which they have lost, envy them the happiness of their
present condition. Nobilitas sola est unica virtus, Juvenal. The World blesses
the covetous man, he that will be rich, that is, a thriving man, that will not
boggle at any thing which may stand in the way of his gain, but God abhors such
an one, Psa. 10.3. That is, the truly noble and brave spirit that abhors to be
the devils slave, and aims at nothing lower than an incorruptible Crown, Col.
1.13, 14. 1 Cor. 9.25. Habet and sapientia sui generis superbiam, Religion has
its ambition too. Bern. de amore Dei, cap. 8. God calls all wicked men fools in
Scripture, and so they are indeed. We speak wisdom among them that are perfect,
yet not the wisdom of this world, nor of the Princes of this World that come to
naught, 1 Cor. 2.6. No marvel the Apostle disclaims the wisdom of the Princes
of this World, when they come to naught with all their wisdom. Sinite sapientes
hujus seculi de spiritu hujus mundi tumentes alta sapientes, and terram
lingentes sapienter in infernum descendere. Bern. de vita solitar. With all
their wisdom they do but go wisely to hell; If they reject the Word of the
Lord what wisdom is in them? Jer. 8.9. He is the only wise man that is wise to
Salvation, 2 Timothy 3.15. Lactan. Institut. lib. 3. 11. Who fixes on a right end,
chooses fit means for attaining that end, and vigorously prosecutes that end in
the use of those means: and in some of these points of wisdom every wicked man
fails. Indeed, godly men may be defective in many points of particular wisdom,
wherein a wicked man may excel, and God does not call many wise men after the
flesh, 1 Cor. 1.26. But as Nature intending higher perfection is more negligent
of lower things, so that Bruits do in many inferior things excel men, who
have a reasonable soul bestowed on them far surpassing all the excellencies of
bruit Creatures: So God does not always bestow the greatest natural endowments
where he intends Grace, which is far better, as in his Church he often bestows
the greatest gifts where there is the least grace, to adorn those parts which
have most need, 1 Cor. 12.23, 24.

Fourthly, We must judge aright concerning things. Aquinas affigns this as one
cause of sin, Falsa aestimatio de particulari elegibili. So Cebes Thebanus
makes a false opinion or wrong judgment of what is to be desired and avoided,
the cause of all vices and evils, when men have not judgment to approve the
things that are more excellent, Phil. 1.10. that so they may value every thing
according to its real worth. Mr. Perkins makes those words, Mat. 6.22. to be
an answer to an objection which might arise from what went before; the reason
why so few lay up a treasure in heaven is, they want understanding to discern
things that differ: As our esteem is of any thing, so will our affections be
toward it, Our heart will be where our treasure is, Mat. 6.21. that is, where
the things which we account our treasure or set greatest store by are. A very
ingenuous Author, Monlin of a peace and contentment of mind, makes the right
Government of Passions to depend on right opinion. The great error (says he,
page 207) of the understanding, which makes the passion to apply it self to an
evil object, or to a good object, otherwise than it should, is a mistake in
the true price and true inconvenience of things; which being once well known we
shall abate much of our desire and fear of most things which we seek or avoid
with great earnestness, and shall become earnest to get other things which we
neglect, and to avoid other things which we desire. And as our affections, so
our endeavors are guided by the opinion which we have of things; The
Merchant when he has found a treasure or Pearl which he sets a great price
upon, sells all he has to purchase it, and runs per mare per terras, by sea
and land to get it, Mat. 13.44, 46. So that it is a true observation of one,
that there is no error more dangerous though it be common, than to think that
true happiness consists in honor, pleasure, and riches. Ceriziers la
consolation de la Theology, l. 5.

Now, that we may judge aright of things:

First, Let us not judge according to the appearance; the show of things for
the most part deceives us, those things that are of least value being most
taking, and those things most affrighting which have little or no evil in
them. How does the pomp and splendor of the World, Riches, and Honors, and
Pleasures dazzle the eyes, and attract the desires of most men in the World?
When they prove but vanity and vexation of spirit, for the most part failing
men's expectations of worldly comfort and contentment, and often proving the
ruin of their souls. And how do men abhor from that which is displeasing to
Nature? Flying from it as from a Serpent, as Moses did from his Rod while it
lay on the ground, which when he had taken it up, proved that Rod whereby he
wrought his miracles in Egypt, at the Red Sea, in the Wilderness, Exodus 4.3. So
we flee from the Cross when it lies before us, but if we take it up, Mat.
16.24. it is of much use in overcoming our spiritual enemies; and it is
spiritually true of every Believer which is spoken, Mark 16.18. They shall take
up Serpents; and if they drink any deadly thing it shall not hurt them, but do
them Good, Heb. 12.11. Non hominibus tantum sed and rebus persona demenda est,
and reddenda sua facies, Seneca Ep. 24. Let us take off the vizards, not only
from persons, but from things, and they will not be so dreadful as they appear,
vid. Lipsi. de constantia, lib. 2. c. 19.

Secondly, Let us be guided in our judgment of things by the judgment of God.
Those things that are highly esteemed amongst men are many times an abomination
to God, Luke 16.15. We, in our folly many times rejoice in a thing of naught,
desire that which would undo us, are afraid of our mercies. Methinks God stands
by his children when he is giving them the cup of affliction to drink of, as a
father by his child, when he is giving him a bitter potion; oh (says the
child) I cannot endure to drink it, it is so bitter, oh it will make me sick!
oh I shall saint! fear not, says he, I will not leave thee, I will stand by
thee, be not afraid, I will hold thee. How do we shrink at the thoughts of any
affliction? and think we shall never be able to bear it, or to hold out under
it. Fear not says God, I will hold thy right hand, I will help thee, thou art
mine, I am with thee, I am thy God, Isa. 41.13, 14.43.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. And
observe how on the other hand the Scripture vilifies the greatest and most
desirable things of this world, making them next unto nothing, yea nothing, and
appropriates reality, substance, truth, worth, and excellency, of being unto
the things of the world to come, See J. Goodwins Catabaptisme, Admonit. S. 20.

Thirdly, Let us follow the judgment of the wisest men, and those that are most
fit to judge, as he to whom God gave wisdom, so as there was none like him
before, him, or after him, 1 Kings 3.12. Ecclesiast. 12.8. having made his
Demonstration at large, he resumes his Conclusion, quod erat demonstrandum,
vanity of vanities all is vanity: consult Paul, a man who had the spirit of
God, and so was fit to judge, 1 Cor. 7.40. he accounts all things but dung in
comparison with the excellency of the knowledge of Christ, Phil. 3.8. consult
the wisest heathens, and the wiser they were, the nearer they came to
Christianity, and the more they contemned the things of the world. Consult men
on their sick beds, or when they are bound in fetters, and held in the cords of
affliction, Job 36.8. and so are brought to themselves, Luke 15.17. and become
sanae mentis, as mad men, that by hard usage, and slender diet, and being kept
bound are brought to their wits: these will judge otherwise of the world than
they did before; yea, take dying men whose souls begin to peep out of this
dark prison, and see some light, how are their judgments alterr'd? how do they
mourn at last, and bewail their own former foolish choice? Prove. 5.11, 12.

Lastly, Let us judge according to reason, quitting our selves like men, 1 Corinthians. 16.13. and not like beasts, that mind only what sense gives them
notice of. That is the use which we ordinarily make of reason, to correct the
errors of sense, else we should never sow, to bury our seed under a clod: We
should never take Physic, nor do many other things which are common amongst
men. Let us examine what conduces most to our chief end; this made the
Philosophers run into so many Opinions about the Summum bonum, or, Man's chief
happiness; this fell first under their consideration, because Finis dat
bonitatem, and amabilitatem mediis, they could judge nothing concerning other
things till they had determined something concerning the chief end of man;
every thing else being to be judged according to the tendency that it has
thereto: Reason tells us, quod diuturnius praestantius, that is best which is
most durable, 2 Cor. 4.18. things that are not seen are eternal, these things
that are seen but temporal. Reason tells us, that the more comprehensive any
good is, the better it is: and God is an all sufficient good, Genesis 17.1. Cur
ergo per multa vagamur, quarendo bona corporis and animae? etc. Aug. Med. cap.
18. We weary our selves in seeking several pieces of happiness, as they are
scattered among the creatures, when we might in God find them altogether. And
it is a matter of greatest astonishment, that men should be so far forsaken
of reason, as to prefer broken cisterns which will hold no water before the
fountain of living waters, Jer. 2.12, 13. and, that (when in other things we
are impatient of being deceived by others) we willingly permit Satan, for the
pleasures of sin, which are but for a moment, to cheat us of those pleasures
which are at Gods right hand for evermore.

FINIS.
Errata.
Page 71. line 7. read perceptio. l. 8. r lectione. l. 9. r. quacunque. p. 107.
r. on some p. 160 l. 6. r. (...) p. 167. l. 24. r. pabulo. p. 43. l. 24. r.
allay. p. 67. l. 7. blot out in l. 10. r. solutionem. There are several other
literal faults and mispointings, bu^ such as will not much hinder the Reader*


