The chief Interest of Man; Or, A Discourse of RELIGION, Clearly demonstrating
The Equity of the Precepts of the Gospel, and how much the due Observance
thereof does conduce to the happiness and well-being as well of Humane
Societies, As of Particular Persons.

By H. Lukin.

Suffer me a little, and I will show thee what I have yet to speak on Gods
behalf, Job 36.2. Dicam ego quid sentiam dicent forte meliora doctiores. Aug.
contra Faustum. London, Printed by R.D. for T. Bassett under S. Dunstans Church
in Fleetstreet. 1665.

THE PREFACE To the Reader.
AMongst so many books wherewith the World is filled, it may justly be
expected, that none should obtrude more upon it, without giving a fair account
thereof, unless they have attained to that repute for Wisdom which Job had,
chap. 29.21. etc. that men give ear, and wait, and keep silence at their
counsel, waiting for it as for the rain, and opening their mouth wide as for
the latter rain: such need no Apology to bespeak a reception of their Labors,
but it is far from me to reckon my self of that number, haud equidem tali me
dignor honor, yet I must confess it is not much that I have to say in my own
defense. The persuasion of Friends, from an opinion of the usefulness of such
Books as Men publish, is such a common Apology, that the world grows weary of
it; if I should say that scribunt indocti doctique was an old observation, so
that it is no new thing for Men of small Learning to write Books, it might well
be retorted that the World has suffered so much by such Men's Writings, that it
is pity they should suffer any more by them. It will be but a poor Plea to say
that I have written but little, and so shall put Men to the expense of very
little time or money for the reading of it, if the little which I have written
may not probably be of some advantage to the World; but, this, through the
blessing of God, I am not without hopes of, if one sinner might hereby be
converted from the error of his way, I should account it an happy fruit, and
abundant recompense of my well intended endeavors; but if the disobedient may
not be hereby turned to the Wisdom of the just, yet I hope the children of
Wisdom will hereby be established and encouraged to hold fast their integrity,
and be furnished with that, wherewith they may put to silence the ignorance of
foolish Men. If the Ethiopians paint Angels black, and Devils white, because
they are black themselves, and Pride themselves in it, as their beauty, this
makes not us to dislike our own complexion, neither can they persuade us to
wash our selves with Ink, that we may be like them. If therefore some Men glory
in their shame, and account it their honor to be like the Devil, or hate
holiness, wherein Men do most resemble God, and bear his Image, as it is said
of the Basilisk, that its enmity against Man is such, that it will fly with
rage upon the Picture of a Man, let not this be a temptation to us, to learn
their ways, let them return to us, let us not return to them, Jer. 15.19. If
our adversary should write a Book against us, (that I may allude to the words
of Job, c. 31.35. etc.) if it be of scorns and reproaches, let us bind it to us
as a Crown, and say as David, 2 Samuel 6.21. I will yet be more vile, if to obey
God, and be like to him, be to be vile: but if he will encounter us in good
earnest, with serious arguments, let us go near to him as a Prince, and not
fear, having all the reasons that can be drawn from the authority of our
Sovereign Lord and Lawgiver, from our own interest, from equity, ingenuity and
gratitude, on our side.

I shall not be very sollicitous or industrious to decline or anticipate the
censures of others, I know it is ordinarily supposed, that Men of no name that
have not that real worth which may make others take notice of them, have that
petty design in publishing such things as are more admired by themselves, than
by any body else to get themselves a name, and to make themselves and their own
supposed worth known to the World. Let Men think of me as they please; I hope
there is none shall think more meanly of me, than I do of my self, and I am
such an impartial judge of my own labors, that I am so far from projecting
thereby for any esteem or credit in the World, that I should rather if that
were my aim and design, have held my peace, which is the way for a fool to be
counted wise, Prove. 17.28.

One thing I would advertise the Reader of, that this Treatise was finished in
another Nation, after some years observations, of the lives and manners of such
as in other parts of the World profess Christianity, both Papists and
Protestants, the manner of whose conversation I was then better acquainted
with, than of those of our own Nation, which I hope may suffice to free me from
all suspicion of having any oblique aspect upon particular Persons, or any
particular sort of men, or of calculating this Treatise only for our own
Meridian, and for our own times. I know, were it in other Languages, it might
indifferently serve for any place where the Gospel has been Preached, and
might have had its use in the purest times, which have been since the Christian
name was known: that little I have seen of the World, will easily keep me from
judging our own Nation the worst of any that profess Religon, unless the
privileges which we enjoy above others, do raise our guilt to a greater
height; and I am not so unacquainted with the History of former Ages, as being
surprised to cry out, O tempora! O mores! or to make that unwise enquiry,
Eccles. 7.10. what is the cause that the former days were better than these? I
confess I have sometimes been in Paul's case, Act. 17.16. when I have observed
amongst the generality of Christians in all places, so much difference betwixt
men's principles and practices, and so many professing to know God, which in
works deny him, and this has made me sometimes express my self with the
greater passion and vehemence, as knowing the terror of the Lord, and grieved
to see the misery that so many without repentance are hastening to: for thougb I
owe a special love to those of the household of faith, yet I profess my self a
Citizen of the universe, and so have a charity and compassion toward all.

SECTION. I. The Practical Atheist a greater wonder than the Speculative
Atheist; the unreasonableness of such as professing Religion, do yet neglect
the commands thereof, and despise such as desire to be found in a strict
observance of them.
A Spartan being invited to hear an Oration in commendation of Hercules,
replied, Ecquis eum vituperat? Does any body speak against him? and some will
think I might periturae parcere chartae, or rather better in ploy precious
irrevocable hours than in Apologizing for that which needs no defense, and
which there is such a reverence of so deeply implanted in every Man's nature;
but upon a nearer approach and exact survey of things, we shall find there is
nothing in the World does either need or deserve a more serions consideration
and just defense. The Speculative Atheist is such a Monster that many will
hardly admit of such a thing in nature. And it seems incredible to them that
any should doubt of a Deity; yet daily experience and observation refutes our
more rational and retired Speculations, and has put many Learned Men to the
labor of proving that there is a God; this being the utmost we are able in the
Theory to make good; That there are none think that there is no God, but such
as for whom it were well if there were none: and these being judicially given
up to be seduced by their own lusts, first, think it would be well for them if
there were no God, finding his commands crossing their Carnal interests and
corrupt desires; thence they proceed to wish there were no God, and by degrees
arrive at flat Atheism, inordinate passions converting Desire into Opinion (as
we easily believe that which we earnestly desire) that so having baffled their
Judgments, and drawn them into the same confederacy with their Lusts, they may
sin without their control or contradiction, and avoid the reproofs of their
Consciences while they give up themselves freely to satisfy their vile
affections. His gradibus itur. I affirm the Practical Atheist is yet a greater
wonder, and a more horrid Monster than the Speculative Atheist. (As Mirandula
has well observed) it is a wonder that any should doubt of the truth of the
Gospel after so many evident proofs of it; but a greater wonder that any should
believe it, and yet live as if it were not true. But Africa has not so many
monsters in nature as Europe has in Religion, How many thousands of Zealots
have we that profess the name of Christ, and presume violently that they shall
be saved by him, yet look into their conversations and you would not believe
their own mouths, or imagine that they are seriously persuaded that there is a
God, an Heaven, an Hell, a Judgment to come wherein they shall be sentenced to
their everlasting home.

Nay, hear O Heavens and be astonished, O Earth, has any people dealt so with
their Gods, which are yet no Gods, as Christians deal with Christ? Do Turks
deal so with their Mahomet? Do they scorn those that are most careful to
observe the Rules of his Alcoran? Are they ashamed to be seen to have any
respect to his Laws? Yet I call Heaven and Earth to record against Christians,
that he that turns from his wickedness, makes himself a prey, yea, as Salvian
complained of old, Mali esse coguntur ne viles habeantur. Men are fain to turn
Rebels against Christ and cast off the fear of his commands to free themselves
from the scorn and hatred of Christians, amongst whom he must go for a
Melancholic dull sot, or sneaking fool, and one that has nothing of
generosity that dare not set his mouth against Heaven, or defy the authority
of his Maker; insomuch that he that cannot harden himself against scorn, shall
be jeared out of Heaven; he shall forfeit the reputation of his breeding, that
shall speak a word of the Scriptures; he shall pass for a silly fellow that
will abandon the pleasures of Sin in hopes of an unseen-Glory, and he shall be
accounted importunate or uncivil that shall interrupt Men's carnal mirth by
casting in the ungrateful mention of God or his commands, and be thought unsit
for the company of Persons of quality and breeding. Of old they accounted it
the sum and substance of Religion to imitate him whom they worshipped. Those
that adored mortal Deities (such as Alexander and Caesar) were ambitious to
imitate their Virtues, yea, some Emperors have been imitated by their
flattering Courtiers in their Defects and Deformities. The holiness of God is
his Glory, and (of all his attributes) propounded to us for our imitation, see
1 Pet. 1.15. Exodus 15.17. and compare Isa. 16.3. with John 12.40. and yet how
do men glory in their shame, while they are ashamed of their glory? Phil. 3.29.
Jer. 2.36. but that some are wiser than to be so befooled out of Heaven,
holiness would be hissed out of the World.

How many think it a greater reproach to call one a Saint than a Drunkard, a
Whoremongen or whatever is evil, When the Scripture makes this a title of
honor, and that from whence they are so denominated absolutely necessary to
Salvation? O let not these things be told in Gath, or published in Ashkelon.
Let not Turks and Heathens hear such things of Christians. What God dowe
worship? What Savior do we own? Are they like the Idols of the Heathens who
(as Tertullian said of old) are worshipped in vain, and may be abused at our
pleasure? Quit your selves like Men, awake your reason and consider what I
shall say for God and for his holy Laws, which are (as the Apostle says, not
only boly but just and good, Romans 7.12. So that (as has been well observed by
Learned Men) if God had never commanded what he has done, nor made any
transcript of the Eternal Law out of the Idea of his holy nature; yet, what he
has commanded would have been best for Mankind to observe. There is not only
an equity in them, but they are good naturally, as well as morally, conducing
to the welfare of Mankind, the good of the Universe, insomuch that if we had
stood on even ground with our Maker, and capitulated with him on what terms we
would submit our selves to him, and what Laws we would be obliged to observe,
we could not have made conditions more for our own advantage: or if Christ
should wave his authority which he has over us, to command us (though the
authority of the superior is more to be regarded than the advantage of the
inferior) he might justly counsel us, as Rev. 3.18. to observe his precepts as
that which would be best for our selves; and if we had no respect to his
sovereignty, yet regard to our own welfare and happiness might oblige us
thereto. And having evinced the equity of the ways of God, and the benefit Men
have thereby, I shall endeavor to discover and remove the causes of this
Practical Atheism that reigns so much in the World, and though I know after all
I can say the Disease will despise any remedy, yet let me tell all the profane
scorners of Godliness till they can deprive themselves of reason, that is,
become beasts, God and his Saints shall have a witness in their breasts
against their own souls.

SECT. II. The equity of Gods commands: Love (which is the fulfilling of the
Law) founded on Gods goodness, Patience, Bounty. Fear (which with that
observance that is the effect of it, is the whole Duty of Man) founded on his
Power and Wisdom: ratio rei, or reason it self the ground of such things as are
of natural right: Gods sovereignty the ground of such things as are of positive
right.
I Shall begin with the Equity of Gods commands, and show how reasonably he
requires the observance of them, his nature most justly challenging, and the
excellency of his attributes really meriting whatsoever his Law exacts as our
duty. Man has (as the Moralists observe) but a Political Dominion over his
affections, not such a despotical and absolute power as over his locomotive
faculty, and so over his outward actions, so that he cannot love and hate, and
fear, and desire as he list. The Soul being a rational Agent, moves it self in
respect of all Objects according to what it sees there of good or evil which
begets liking or aversion. Wherefore arrogance is one of the most contemptible
vanities amongst the Sons of men, it being the most ridiculous thing in the
World for men to require of others that Honor, esteem, reverence, which they
have no real worth in themselves to be a foundation of. And it is worse tyranny
than that of the Egyptian Taskmasters who required brick without giving straw.
They say indeed honor est in honorante depending on the will of the giver, yet
it must be radically in him that is honored, there must be a Foundation laid
by him, whereon others must raise their esteem of him. Wherefore the charge is
given to Timothy and Titus, that none should despise them, that is, they were
to carry themselves with that gravity, prudence, integrity, that none might
have occasion to think meanly and contemptibly of them. Now there is in God a
real foundation for all those affections, which he requires of us as the
principles of all our outward actions, whereby they are formed and fashioned.
First, God requires that we should love him with all our might, with all our
strength, with our whole Soul, and this is in effect the keeping of his
commands, the fulfilling of his Law, Love being the Queenregent, the commanding
affection of the Soul, the first mover that sets all on work (as Austin says)
Love is the bias which turns us where ever we go? We may judge of the power of
this affection by observing the effects of it in our selves where we do truly
love, how careful are we to please? how fearful to offend? how desirous to
enjoy? how ambitious to serve? how unwearyed in serving? how ready to run
hazards, to undergo difficulties? what sympathy is there of all affections?
what jealousy? So that God needs require no more of us, for if he have our
Love, the rest will follow. Now it were not beseeming the Majesty of God to
require this of us, were there not that in his nature, and in his works that
did justly deserve it, but there is nothing in the creature attractive of our
Love which is not eminently in him, how great is his goodness! how great is his
beauty? Zach. 9.17. that is, those perfections of his nature, which being found
in the Creature infinitely below what they are in him, make it amiable to us.

Goodness and greatness where they meet in Man are very desirable and lovely,
but God is Optimus Maximus (as he is wont to be called) the greatest and the
best, not exceeding us more in his greatness than in his goodness, in his
Glory than in his Grace. Mich. 7.18. What narrow bounds did Peter set to his
forbearance when he asked if he should forgive his brother seven times? what
would soon become of us if the forbearance of God were confined within such
narrow limits? we indeed pass by many offenses in others because we know not
how to revenge them, but God could every moment by a word of his mouth, an act
of his will let us know what it is to contemn his authority. And let us but
consider the disproportion between God and Man, how infinitely he is above him,
and the nature of God, how holy and contrary to whatsoever is evil, and we
shall much more admire his patience and goodness. We can do good to our
Friends, we who are evil, but to do good to Enemies whom we have daily in our
power, and who still continue their enmity against us is too hard for us. God
is good to Angels that never sinned, patient only to sinners. Let us but
recount the various acts of his Providence toward us, consider the daily care
which he has of us, the mercies which we daily receive from him, the evil he
preserves us from, what offers he makes to us of an eternal Glory with
himself, what means he affords for obtaining it, how long space of repentance
he gives us, and we shall find our obligations to him to be infinitely beyond
what they are to Parents, Princes, Friends, disloyalty and ingratitude to whom
is condemned, abhorred of all. Further the Fear of God is the whole Duty of
Man. Eccl. 12.13. that is, efficienter though not formaliter, for where ever it
is it does bind the Soul to its duty. Job. 28.28. Prove. 1.7. and I may say as
much for this as for the Love of God. Methinks it is a condescension in him to
argue the matter as he does with sinners. Jer. 5.22. Mat. 10.28. when he might
let them run upon their own ruin, and know by experience the danger that they
despise. We should deride the threatenings of some vain boaster that should go
about to affright us with such things as it were far above his power to effect,
but the frown of a Caesar, an Alexander might make us tremble; it is the most
astonishing madness and folly in the World for men to account it generosity
and braveness of spirit, not to be awed by the great words of Scripture, to
dare to sin, to take courage against God like the Philistines, 1 Samuel 4.9. and
to account it meanness of spirit to be affrighted with the threatenings of an
invisible God, whose greatness we neither see nor feel, though it is our own
fault, we seeing it in its effects every day. It is he that hangs the Earth on
nothing, and when he pleases, makes it tremble, sends the Sun on his errand
every day, orders the host of Heaven, making every Star keep its place,
thundering with his voice so as he can make the Emperors of the World run to
hide themselves, setting bounds to the raging waves of the Sea which they dare
not pass; and though he does not every day reveal his wrath from Heaven
against sinners, yet he has told us it is not because he approves of their
ways, or knows not how to right himself, he only stays till the time of the
Revelation of his righteous judgment, and then he will pour out his wrath like
fire and make the stoutest sinners run, (if it were possible for them) under
the Rocks and Mountains to hide themselves from his presence. David and Solomon
were both feared for their Wisdom; and indeed Wisdom does make a Man's face to
shine, commanding reverence and a kind of veneration from others. Now there is
none to be compared to God for Wisdom, he is so wise he cannot be deceived,
cannot be mocked, he sees through the most secret designs of Men, and laughs
them to scorn, takes the wise in their own craftiness, makes those that dare
transgress his precepts, whether they will or no, to fulfill his purpose,
overreaching them in their most cunning contrivances, making them serve his
holy ends when they least intend it. Further, he requires that we should
acknowledge him in all our ways, owning him as our Sovereign in the observance
of his precepts, as our Preserver in depending on his providence. And what more
just and equal, when we had our being from him, when we live and move in him,
when we are daily maintained at his cost and charges, and are therefore sent to
the Ox and the Ass to learn our duty; it being he that gives us all things
richly to enjoy, and has not only right and authority to command us, but might
and power to force us? so that if we will do any thing without his leave or
moral permission, we cannot do it without his natural permission. If we run
away from his service, he can command the Sea to way-lay us (as in the case of
Jonah) and send a Whale to fetch us back. If we would go out of the reach of
his Rod, he can make it reach us where ever we go, as the Israelites in their
going to Egypt, Jer. 42.16. In short, he commands the boisterous Winds, the
unruly Waves, the Angels that excel in might and glory, the Devils that are
filled with rage and envy, the Sun, that as a Giant runs his race, and makes it
stand still at his pleasure, the Stars whom he makes as his Host to fight his
battles; the frogs, the Flies, the Lice, the Bears, the Lions, the Ravens, as
the several instances in holy Scripture show. All these are at his beck, and he
sends them at his pleasure. Degenerate Man only, (for whom he has done more
than for any of the works of his hands, and whom he has made capable of more
happiness than the whole visible Creation) casts off the authority of his
Creator in those things wherein especially it would be his Wisdom to make a
virtue of necessity; for when Men will venture upon any thing without asking
Gods leave, or taking his counsel, he stands by and derides their counsels, and
tells them that he is wise also, and will bring evil upon them, and not call
back his word, what he says shall be done, none shall disanul it; when their
designs which they would undertake without him shall come to nothing, and they
perish in them. Esa. 31.2. thus God will sooner or later teach all what it is
to despise his authority or to dispute his commands. As for our outward actions
(what I have already said concerning our internal affections, and those acts
and attributes of God whereon they are grounded, being supposed) though they
should not be of any natural right, or have any intrinsic goodness in them,
antecedently to any command of God concerning them, (which yet doubtless some
have, and are therefore commanded, because good, as those which are grounded on
the precepts of the Law of Nature) yet as we say of the credenda, or the things
which we are to believe, though our finite understandings be not able to
comprehend the nature and causes of some of them, yet we have reason enough to
believe them, because they are spoken by him that cannot lie; so I may say of
the agenda of Religion, though they should not be of natural moral right (which
yet many of them are) yet being commanded by him who is so wise and so good, to
whom we have such obligations lying upon us, and on whom we have such an
absolute dependence we have, all the reason in the World to do them without
murmuring or disputing, and though the sovereignty of God is such that he might
justly try our obedience, and make us know our subjection to him, by requiring
of us such things as are merely of positive right, yet it is evident that in
what he has required, he has not stood much upon his Sovereignty and
Authority, but has commanded such things as he might justify at an impartial
Bar, though man were an Independent Creature, and coordinate with him, and
this will sufficiently appear by the ensuing discourse.

SECT. III. The advantage which Men have by Religion in respect of their good
name, honor being both a moral and a natural effect of virtue and holiness.
The Hypocrisy of some that profess Christianity, an argument of the
excellency of it. Shame the present reward of sin. None dare speak against
holiness or holy men as such.
WHat I have hitherto said has been ab aequo, I shall now argue ab utili, and
show what advantages come to Mankind by a due observance of the Rules of the
Gospel, whereby the truth of the Apostles assertion will evidently appear, that
Godliness is profitable to all things, and is the chief interest of the (...).

And first, let me consider man in his personal capacity, and his several
interests in such a respect, and I will begin with that which is most
extrinsick to him, viz. his good name which Solomon justly says is rather to
be chosen than great riches, and he adds a reason of it, loving favor is
better than Silver or Gold. That is the effect of it, it commands a friendly
respect from all, and so entertains him where ever he goes, is his harbinger to
bespeak him in all places an honorable reception, it is his surety, to vouch
him in all his dealings with others, so that there is nothing can more sweeten
a Man's life to him, and indeed nothing which generous spirits do more esteem.
No greater incentive to virtue among the Heathens than honor, and it is
ordinarily seen that Men can more easily bear the loss of Goods than disgrace
or contempt, a breach in their Estate, than a wound in their name. Now I will
not here speak of that honor, which after a few days shall be put upon all
Godly men when they shall appear with Christ in Glory, and shine like the Sun
in the Kingdom of their Father, while others shall be clothed with perpetual
shame: Nor will I speak of honor as it is a moral effect of Godliness, God
having promised to honor those that honor him, and he that gave the
Israelites favor in the eyes of the Egyptians, and made them to be pityed of
them that carried them away captive, can give a Man esteem and repute among
others.

But I shall speak chiefly of honor as it is a natural effect of Godliness,
and it is worthy to be considered that that which at first view seems to
reflect dis-honourably upon Religion, and which many improve to the reproach of
the professors of it, does upon a serious weighing of the whole matter
exceedingly commend it, and argue something of more than ordinary worth in it,
and that is the Hypocrisy which is found among Christians: this implies that
there is something in it which is attractive that men should use such industry
to counterfeit it, and seek by a feigned show of it to insinuate themselves
into the esteem of others whose good opinion they think most considerable.
However, as I have already said (and shall say again in due place) there are
many scorn men for it, yet this is an evident proof that it is a thing of good
report and praiseworthy; though we do not esteem every thing that looks like
Gold, because it is sometimes counterfeited, yet this is an argument of the
worth of that which is Gold indeed: so, though it is true every one that makes
profession of Godliness does not presently deserve the honor and respect of a
Godly Man, because there are many Hypocrites; yet it is an argument of the
greater worth of such as are Godly indeed. Pearls and Diamonds are oftener
counterfeited than those things that are of mean value. What is there that
begets an higher esteem amongst Men than that Humility, Meekness, Goodness,
Charity, Justice, which the Gospel requires, and which every true Christian in
some measure has? It makes a Man (as was said of Vespasian) the Darling of
Mankind, and makes his memory blessed. What is the ordinary Character which you
shall hear of such a Man? He was a good Man, a quiet Man, you might have put
your Life in his hand, his word was as good as his bond; and however the Devil
cheats men with the hopes of esteem in the World by a careless neglect of
Religion, though they gratify the greatest part of the World (in some respect)
as they justify their wicked ways by their own practice; yet we shall observe
(through the just judgment of God) shame is the present wages of sin. Prove.
13.5. Romans 6.21. and indeed the Heathens themselves made honor the reward of
virtue, so that a wicked Man according to them is not capable of it. Pride is
that which all abhor, swearing and blaspheming are such sins as none gain by,
and therefore will commend no man; for, Drunkenness discovers so much of a
Man's weaknessse, that it makes him obnoxious to every Man's pity or scorn;
lying, injustice, oppression, and other sins against the second table, being
immediately against our Neighbor, and so prejudicial to the interest of
Mankind, cannot purchase any man any honor or esteem; and though it is true,
as I have before complained, that a Godly man is exposed to scorn and reproach;
yet, first, it is of such whose reproaches we may glory in, and bind to us as a
Crown. What was said of Nero, is true of them, that it is likely to be
something that is good which they speak against; yea, commonly such before they
dye, justify those whom they reproached, and when they grow wiser come to be
of their mind, when they come to lie on their sick beds, and to be convinced by
sense and experience of what they would not believe, or at least consider
before, that there is a vanity in every Creature, that they must dye, and that
their former pleasures will yield them no comfort at such an hour: then they
reproach themselves more than formerly they reproached others, then they find
that they were the fools for despising instruction, and wish now they were in
the case of those whom they despised; and which is yet more observable,
Godliness does command such an esteem from all, that none dare speak against
it, and you shall hardly hear any Godlyman reproached as such as the Jews would
not own that they stoned Christ for a good work, but for Blasphemy; when Wicked
Men reproach others, they will not by any means acknowledge that it is for
Godliness, but for Ungodliness, for Hypocrisy, for being too nice and
superstitious, doing more than God requires, for Covetousness, or such like
sins; so that by their own confession, sincerity, observing what God has
commanded, charity, etc. are good and commendable, and so they are condemned
out of their own mouths. Let sin seek excuses and subterfuges. Virtue (as
truth) seeks no corners, knows no shame.

SECT. IV. How much Godliness conduces to the preserving and increase of Men's
Estates, which Sin does like a Canker, wast and consume. An illustration of
Jer. 17.11. and Hos. 9.11. Objections answered, which Men make from that
Justice and Charity which Religion obliges Men to, and from those expenses and
losses which it exposes them to, as also from experience and daily observation.
THe next interest of Man in his personal capacity which I shall consider, is
the furniture of this life for bearing his charges in his Pilgrimage while he
is on his way toward his long home, and though Riches (by reason of the abuse
of them) sometimes seem to be undervalued both by God and Man, in the Scripture
and other writings, yet in themselves they are useful and desirable, and if we
should understand these things absolutely and simply, which are spoken of them,
not in a certain respect and secundum quid (as they speak) it might rather be
said, the curse of the Lord makes rich than his blessing; thereby a Man is
capable of doing good to others, and our Savior has pronounced it more
blessed to give than to receive, he is able to command his own affairs, he is
freed from the temptations of poverty to a sinful flattery and pleasing of Men,
incroaching upon Gods time or Men's Estates, from distracting cares about the
necessaries of this life, they are a defense to him, not only in his own
conceit, but really lifting him up, that the foot of contempt may not trample
upon him, and that whatever is praiseworthy in him may be more conspicuous to
others which is little taken notice of in the poor, whose wisdom, yea, all
other graces and virtues are despised. Now as the race is not to the swift, nor
the battle to the strong, so neither are Riches always to the diligent, or
industrious, or wise, but to those whom God favors with his blessing.
Godliness has the promise both of this life, and that to come, though God
has not absolutely promised abundance or superfluities, necessaries he has;
so that though the Lions (whereby we may according to the language of
Scripture, understand those who have both cruelty and power to oppress others)
may lack and suffer hunger, those that fear the Lord shall want no good thing.
Again, Godliness may be ranked amongst the natural causes as well as amongst
the moral causes of riches. Do but consider what diligence the Gospel requires
in our particular callings, and though (according to what I lately said) this
is not the only or solitary cause of Riches, yet it is a means which God does
ordinarily bless. Do but further consider what sobriety and moderation is
required in Meat, Drink, Apparel, and we shall easily conceive how much it does
tend to the increase of Men's substance, and stopping up those chinks and
crannies, at which other Men's Estates do run out. On the other hand we shall
find many sins both moral and natural causes of decays in men's Estates, it is
true all sin does make men obnoxious to the curse: but there are many sins
which derive a curse upon Men, which in a special manner (like the rust)
devours their Riches; particularly oppression and injustice, the Prophet Jer.
17.11. elegantly shows how the designs of Men, for setting up themselves
thereby prove abortive, as the Partridge sits upon eggs and hatcheth them
not, so he that gets Riches and not by right, shall leave them in the midst
of his days, and in the end shall be a fool.

Some Birds Men take care of to secure them against injuries and violence as
those that are tame, others there are whose uselesseness makes them neglected
of all and so is their security, others there are able to resist the violence
of the Birds of prey; the Partridge is none of these, and so is most likely of
all others to miscarry and prove a prey to violence: so the unjust Oppressor
may indeed gather Riches, but he shall soon leave them, himself is like the
Grass, but his Glory is like the Flower of the Grass (which often falls off
while the stalk stands) and he shall outlive his Glory, some Men's Glory flies
away from the conception, others from the womb, others from the birth, Hos.
9.11. some men's designs fail while they are projecting and contriving them,
others while they are traveling with them, or laboring to effect them, they
fade in their ways, others when they have just attained them, and arrived at
their end, as the Rich Man, but when he should solace himself in the enjoyment
of them, they shall be taken away like the Corn, and the wine in the Harvest or
vintage, and in his end he shall be a fool, that is according to the language
of the Scripture (wherein words of existence are put sometimes only for
appearance and manifestation) he shall appear to be a fool, though formerly he
seemed to be of the wise of the World, that knew how to get most for himself in
the scuffle of the World, wherein almost every one scrambles to get as much as
he can to himself to make his own heap biggest, but increasing that which is
not his own, Hab. 2.6. but of right belongs to others, he proves like the Dog
in the fable, that not content with what he had, but catching at more lost all.
So Adultery (through the curse of God) is a devouring Fire that consumes and
wastes a Man's substance. So the Covetous unmerciful Man unfolds that riddle.
Prove. 11.24. he scatters by gathering whiles he retains his Riches when God
requires them for the relief of the poor, or by his extortion and oppression
squeezes out the sweat, yea, it may be the blood of the poor: what is so
either gotten or kept proves a canker to his Estate to devour it. Yea, there
are many sins, which are the natural causes of poverty, and if God should leave
men only to the genuine natural effects of their sin, they would soon fade in
their ways, as the Apostle says, Jam. 1.11. By means of a whorish Woman a Man
is brought to a morsel of Bread, her words are so ensnaring, he is lost that is
once entangled with them, and it is a sad sign such a one is abandoned of God.
So the unmerciful Man and the Oppressor exposes himself to the curses of the
poor, yea, to their rage and violence if ever they have the opportunity of a
popular tumult. So how does Pride (like rust) eat up Men's Silver and God.
Drowsiness clothes a Man with rags, so Gluttony and Drunkenness feed upon Men's
Estates till they have devoured them. Envy and malice beget contentions and
quarrels which cast Men into chargeable Lawsuits. If Men would in their Books
of Accounts allow some pages for their Lusts, and set down what they spend on
them more than what Nature, Reason, Religion require, and write so much laid
out at such a time for Pride, so much at another time for Pleasure and
Voluptuousness, so much for envy in a Lawsuit to vex such a one, so much for
entertainments, Buildings, Gardens, Festivals, Pomp of Funerals, (I speak not
against a decorum and moderation in such things answerable to a Man's rank and
Estate, but only against the superfluity and excess in these things, which
Men's own Consciences will tell them, ambition and vain glory put them upon) let
them set down so much lucrum cessans from idleness and negligence in their
particular callings, and they shall find such a retinue of Lusts (which
Religion would make them shake off and abandon) as chargeable as a train of
Servants, though the old complaint should be true. Quot servi, tot Fures.
Notwithstanding all that I have said, many have such a prejudice against
Religion, that they think if a Man begin seriously to addict himself thereto,
it soon spoils his thriving in the World. As first, it is observed by many that
it takes up much of Men's time, and many as soon as they begin to be so strict
in matters of Religion, neglect their particular callings. To this I answer,
God is but little beholding to men that complain that his service takes up too
much of their time, there are none in the World amongst the devout orders that
consecrate their time more entirely to God than thousands do to the Devil and
to their own lusts; yea, how few are there that do not allow more time to Pride
in adorning themselves? to pleasure in vain sports and recreations? to idle
discourse? to fruitless visits? to superfluous sleep and ease than God
requires to be spent solely in his service? he allows us time enough for our
private affairs and particular callings. God is not served only in prayer and
reading, and hearing his word, but in the works of our ordinary callings. Col.
3.13. What is there said of servants is true of others also in their several
stations, while they duly attend their lawful vocations. It is true, some
Christians may not have prudence to share their time equally betwixt their
general and particular callings, but such are ordinarily observed to be young
Converts, (as they are called) that is, such as have had but late acquaintance
with the power and practice of Godliness, and something is to be indulged to
these who at first conversion many times find so much delight and sweetness in
exercises of Religion, that they know not how to leave them off. We know under
the Law he that had married a Wife was dispensed with the first year to stay at
home and solace himself with her and not forced to go out to War. Some again
are ready to complain of the charge of Charity which Religion does oblige a Man
to. To such I answer, nature it self does bind a Man to the same charity, that
Christianity binds him to, only Christianity directing us to right principles
and ends in such actions, makes them turn to our good account. So that
Christian Charity is the best Usury, God gives us bond for repayment. Prove.
19.17. and he is a good play master. If a Man would lay up somewhat against an
evil day, he cannot put it into better hands. Eccles. 11.2. If the worst come,
and the hand of violence should seize on his Estate, yet he may say with him in
Seneca, I have that still which I have given away, yea, a Man of mere humanity
and generosity, cannot but have such a sympathy with others in their
sufferings, that in relieving them, he relieves himself, as Alexander when
Darius sent a complement to him by his Ambassadors for his civility to his
Wife, Mother, Daughters, whom he had taken Captives, returned him answer, that
it was in vain to complement with an Enemy, and the favor he had showed to
them was not so much out of affection to him, as to satisfy his own nature,
which could not insult over the misery of others. For the charge of the service
of God, let shame for ever cloth them, and confusion cover them as a Garment
that complain of it. Let an Heathen, an Alexander condemn them, who when
Leonidas reproved him for spending so much incense in sacrifice to his Gods,
and told him he might do that when he had taken the Countries from whence it
came, having taken them, sent him incense in abundance, and sent him word, that
for the future he should not be sparing in his offerings to his Gods, for he
had found by experience that what was offered to them they paid with Usury. And
further, our expense now under the Gospel about the service of God, is nothing
to what it was formerly under the Law. What I said before in respect of time, I
may say here in respect of Estate, what Men spend upon Religious uses and works
of charity, is not comparable to what Men spend upon their Lusts. And whoever
call themselves Christians should disdain that any should be more free in the
service of the Devil, than they are in the service of Christ. Neither is it
Christian charity but blind zeal and superstition that makes men give away
their Estates (as is ordinary amongst the Papists) to maintain others in ease
and idleness under a pretense of devoting themselves to religious exercises,
and the imitation of I know not what pretended Saints. Others are not ashamed
to complain of that justice and equity, that Religion does oblige a man to
observe in his commerce with others, as hindering their thriving in the World:
but I have said enough already of the curse that follows injustice and
oppression, to show how vain this objection is, besides the punishment
inflicted by Man for these sins, which are the more odious to Men because they
are against our neighbor immediately (as many other sins are not) so as men are
more sensible of them, and as much as they can avoid having any thing to do
with such as are false and unjust in their dealings with others. Some object
further the sufferings which Religion exposes a Man oftentimes to. But to this
I may answer, as to the former, Men ordinarily suffer more for sin. The Devil
has had more Martyrs than Christ in most Ages of the World; that is, more have
suffered for doing the Devils works, and fulfilling his Lusts, than for the
service of Christ. How many are there that suffer imprisonment, banishment,
loss of goods, yea, of life for injustice, oppression, murder, adultery,
sedition, and other sins. And I have often thought it might be a great comfort to
one imprisoned for the cause of Religion, for Christ's sake, to think he might
have suffered the same for his sin, if he had been left to his Lusts as others;
or for his misery, for Debt and Poverty, whereas now he suffers the ordinary
lot of Mankind, in such a cause, on such an occasion, as it shall prove his
greatest advantage, God rewarding so bountifully, whatever a Man undergoes for
his sake, both with present spiritual comforts, and future everlasting Glory.
Lastly, experience may be objected against all that I have said, it being
observed that the followers of Christ have the least share ordinarily in the
things of the World.

But I answer to this, it is not because Religion is any way prejudicial to
Men's worldly Estates, but because God in his free and wise Providence does for
the most part choose the poor of the World to be the Heirs of his Kingdom, both
that he may confound the wisdom of Men, and stain the Pride of their glory,
choosing contrary to Man's ordinary judgment and choice, and also because out of
his bounty he is pleased to give many a portion in this Life, to whom he
intends none hereafter. Further, however God does not many times give his
Children superfluities, he ordinarily provides for their necessities, and many
may make David's observation, that they have not seen the righteous forsaken,
nor his seed begging their bread. Yea, I may add, as Psalm. 37.16. A little that
a righteous Man has, is better than great Treasures of many wicked, because he
is satisfied with what he has.

The vanity of the Creature proceeds from the vanity of Men's minds, when Men
will make the Creature their chief happiness, they must needs find it vanity
and vexation of spirit, because it does not answer their expactations from it,
they looking for more from it than ever God put in it. But a Godly Man having
something else for his chief good, which is sufficient to fill his most
enlarged desires, and to answer the highest expectations that he can have from
it, he makes use of the Creature only for the end, to which God has appointed
it, to supply his bodily necessities, to be a Viatioum in this his Pilgrimage
toward Heaven, which end it is sufficient to answer, so that there is none can
rejoice and take pleasure in the Creature more than a Godly Man.

SECT. V. The influence which Religion has even upon our bodies, how far it
conduces to our health. Diseases of the body ordinarily proceed from the
distempers of the Soul. That Temperance, Diligence in our callings and
moderation of our passions, which the Gospel requires and teaches, is the best
remedy against them.
THE next interest of Man, which I shall speak of, does yet more nearly concern
him, and that is Health, which is not only as one calls it the Paradise of all
sensual pleasures; wherein they grow and flourish, but the Salt that seasons
all our worldly comforts, without which we can find very little sayour in them,
yea, are not only incapable of enjoying all other things, but of enjoying our
selves, yea, the want of it makes us as unable to do good as to enjoy good, but
only as we may be examples of Faith and Patience to others. Now though Religion
chiefly concerns the Soul, and seems to have little influence on Men's bodies,
yet I will confidently affirm (what may seem a Paradox to many) that the
precepts of Christ well observed would free as many from Diseases as his
Miracles, they would prevent as many diseases as his miracles cured. How many
are there whose bodies are filled with the sins of their souls, which they have
tired and worn out in the service of their insatiable Lusts, which are like
furious Riders, that tire out their Beasts they ride on before they be tired
themselves. Though Men are not presently sensible of decays in their health by
riot, drunkenness, and such like sins, they lay in daily the seeds of those
diseases which many groan under in their old age, though others feel them
sooner. We ordinarily say that excess kills more than the Sword. By excess we
are not to understand only eating and drinking to surfeiting and drunkenness,
or till nature be so oppressed that it discharges it self of its burden, but
when Men make their appetite not their reason, the measure of their allowance.
It would require the skill of a Physician to enumerate the Diseases which are
the effects of Men's sins, but every one may easily observe that the ordinary
Rules which the best Physicians prescribe for the preservation of Health,
require nothing more than Temperance and exercise, the former Religion strictly
injoyns, and though it do not require the later as such, or under such a
notion, yet in effect it requires it of most, commanding diligence in Men's
callings, and condemning idleness, which is the source of so many diseases, as
daily experience will evince, it being obvious to the observation of all, that
Health is the poor Man's privilege, and sickness most common among the Rich,
who live in idleness, though they have many other advantages above the poor
for the preservation of their health, besides those two causes of sickness
there is a third, which religion does remove, or at least much correct, and
that is, inordinate passions, such as Anger, Fear, Sorrow, Envy, which have a
very malignant influence upon the Body, and there is scarce any thing which
tends so much to the poizing and ballancing of the humors of the body, (which
is so necessary for the preservation of the health) as a well composed temper
of mind, and calmnesse, and quietness in the Soul, which Religion does not only
teach, but (which is more) does in a great measure effect, and therein exceeds
the morals of Philosophers as we shall in due place more fully see.

SECT. VI. Religion forbids us not any pleasures which are agreeable to nature,
reason, or Man's own interest. None can more freely enjoy pleasures than a Godly
Man.
THere is yet another thing which many account their great interest (and their
great prejudice against Religion is, that they conceive it inconsistent
therewith) and that is Pleasure. Now if we take Pleasure in a large sense as it
is taken in Scripture, that inward Joy, Comfort and satisfaction which
accompanies an holy Life, and those everlasting pleasures at Gods right hand,
which a holy Life leads to, will fall afterward under consideration. And as
for those bodily pleasures, which in this place are chiefly intended, Religion
does not at all forbid them, nor deprive a Man of them; and it is an unjust
calumny of some that God has put inclinations into man's nature to such things
as he has forbidden him, and that this is the chief cause of so much sin in
the World: But these men know not what spirit they are of. It was the
suggestion of the Devil to Man in Paradise, that God (as if he envyed man's
happiness) had laid a restraint on them to keep them from that which (as the
Devil would persuade them) he knew might better their condition, and advance
them to an equality with himself, as if it had been a small matter that he had
allowed them such liberty to enjoy all the pleasures of Paradise, and to eat of
all the fruit of it, save only that in the midst of the Garden. But they
received a just recompense for believing the Devil rather than God. It is the
same spirit which now persuades Men that God has dealt hardly with us, to
interdict us the enjoyment of that wherein we might find such pleasure and
satisfaction, whereas he has rather manifested his goodness to Man, in that
he has put into him such inclinations, as he may take pleasure in those things
which are necessary for the propagation of the species, or for the conservation
of the individuals of Mankind; and he does not forbid our pleasure in these,
but only forbids Gluttony and Drunkenness, which is excess in the use of meats
and drinks, and Adultery, which is the misplacing of these desires which he
has provided for the satisfaction of mankind without sin: and we have no cause
to complain of Gods bounding of us in these things, but rather wonder that
there should be any need of any Laws to forbid such irregularities therein, as
we should wonder that any should make Laws strictly to forbid Men to burn their
own houses, to cut their own flesh, to drink poison, if we consider the
mischiefs that ensue upon our exceeding the limits which God has yet set us in
these things, in impairing our Health, wasting our Estates, staining our
honor, breeding discords in Families, depriving us of reason, and turning us
into Bruits, exposing us sometimes to Man's rage, sometimes to the penalty of
human Laws. In short, God has not only provided for the supply of our
necessities, but for our delight and comfort. Psalm. 104.15. 2ly. Religion
allows a Man to enjoy and take comfort in these things which God has given us.
Eccl. 2.24, 25, 26.5.18.9.7, 8, 9. Yea, requires we should rejoice in them.
Deuteronomy. 12.7.12.18. cap. 14.26. cap. 16.11, 14. cap. 26.11. 3ly. There is none
can take more pleasure in these things than a Christian. Eccl. 2.25. Solomon
might hasten as much as any to such pleasure, not so much as he was a King, and
had all things in abundance: but as he was a good Man, and in the favor of
God. Eccl. 9.7. But this I have elsewhere touched. Sect. 4. and sect. 8. If any
account it hard to be restrained from unnatural pleasures, I may say as Joash
of Baal, Judges 6.31. Will you plead for these? He that will plead for these,
let him presently be put to Death. He that cannot content himself with moderate
pleasures, without excess, let him go and learn of Bruit-beasts, that will not
eat and drink to Gluttony and Drunkenness. He that cannot satisfy himself
unless he may wholly prostitute himself to pleasure, and spend his whole time
therein, as if he were put into the World, as the Leviathan into the Sea, to
play therein: Psalm. 104.26. Let them learn of a Heathen, who would say, He is
not worthy the name of a Man, that would spend a whole day in pleasure. So that
Religion restrains us no more in the use of Pleasures than nature, reason, or
our own interest restrains us, but rather teaches us how we may enjoy them
more pure and refined, without any sting of guilt, or check of Conscience,
which may allay the sweetness of them.

SECT. VII. The advantage which we have by Religion in respect of our Souls.
First, in being thereby restored to the image of God, and that spiritual beauty
which has been defaced by sin.
I Now come yet nearer to our selves, to that Divine part whereby we hold
intelligence with the upper World, have our Conversation in Heaven, with God
and Angels, to these our bodies are but as a box, a case to a precious Jewel,
and the advantages which I have hitherto spoken of are not worthy to be
compared with these that Godliness brings to the Soul. And I will first speak
of what a Godly Man has thereby in enjoyment and possession, then of what he
has in hopes and reversion, and I will begin with the restoration of man to
the condition from which he fell, or the renewing of the image of God in him.
To have seen that great Monarch. Dan. 4. in the greatest Glory, priding himself
in his Majesty, and after to have seen him not only divested of his Glory,
degraded from his dignity, but deprived of his reason, and putting on the
manners of Beasts of the Field, and conversing amongst them, would have moved a
Man's compassion; though he, it is likely was no more sensible of his own
unhappiness, (being bereaved of humanity) than those in the fable, that being
by the enchantments of Circe turned into Beasts, disdained the offer of Ulysses
to have them restored to their former shape, being debased in their souls, as
well as metamorphosed in their bodies, and so not understanding the felicity of
the rational life; but such were the more to be pityed, by how much the less
they could pity themselves. This is the condition of Mankind. We are all of a
good house, well descended, of a noble stock and Divine Original: but are
fallen into decay, have lost the luster of that Family from which we came,
(being the offspring of God) and we are become like the Beasts which perish,
Psalm. 49.21. So some understand that place, Man being in honor continued not,
soon fell from his Estate of dignity and happiness, and became brutish in his
knowledge and affections. Satan, that old Magician, by his enchantments has
bewitched us from that form wherein we were at first created, into the form of
Beasts; so that Men are become Lions for rage, cruelty, oppression; Foxes for
subtilty in evil; Swine for silthinesse and uncleanness; Dogs for envy and
malice; Wolves for rapine; yea, as the wild Asses Colt for folly and stupidity:
the Scripture accounts it neither incivility nor calumny to describe Men by
such compellations. Now it is only true Godliness, and that regeneration,
(which miserable Man does as little understand, and much despise, as those even
now mentioned, did the offer of Ulysses) which must restore us to our former
state. The Gospel (as a spiritual charm) brings us to that shape and form which
our first Parents lost. And though poor ignorant Men neither understand their
own deformity, nor that beauty of holiness which adorns the souls of those who
are renewed, according to the Image of God, (as the Jews despised Christ, and
esteemed him not, as seeing no form nor comeliness in him, though he was to
those who had a spiritual discerning, and an eye of Faith to see that Divine
excellency and perfection that was in him, the chiefest of ten thousands, and
altogether lovely) yet there is an inward beauty of the Soul, obvious only to
the eyes of God that regards the hidden Man of the heart, and those who have a
spiritual discerning to discern spiritual things, which (as the beauty of the
outward man consists in color, proportion, and perfection of parts) stands in
a due regard of every faculty and affection of the soul to its proper object,
and a just subordination to each other, the superior irradiated by a Divine
light to judge of every thing as the matter requires, and accordingly to
command the inferior, which by an obsequious subjection yields to the
authority, and executes the commands of the superior, (and is not like a bone
out of a joint, which is not subject to the commands of the locomotive faculty)
and the whole tinctured with a Divine holiness, justice and goodness. It would
be a sad spectacle to behold a Man bowed together, that he could not look up,
his eyes closed up with filthy putrid matter, his lips black, and swelled as if
they were poisoned, his breath stinking, to the offense of all that come near
him, Lame of his feet, that he could not go, his bowels hanging out. In a word,
from head to foot full of bruises and putrefying sores, thus is man by nature
to the eyes of God, bowed down to the earth, minding earthly things, his
understanding darkened, and the eyes thereof closed by vile and corrupt
affections, his lips breaking out with filthy communication, as if the poison
of Asps were under them, his throat like an open Sepulcher, sending forth such
unsavory discourse as is offensive to pure ears, that knows not how to tread a
right step in the way of Gods commandments, void of the bowels of pity and
compassion, and the plague of his heart, (his natural inbred corruption)
breaking forth daily into sinful actions which are as so many botches and sores
to render a Man loathsome in the sight of God, to whom our inward Man is as
naked and open as our outward Man to eyes of flesh. A form of Godliness and the
paint or varnish of an outward profession, may help to conceal some of this
deformity from the eyes of Man, but it is only that Fountain set open to the
house of David, and the Inhabitants of Jerusalem to wash in for sin, and for
uncleaness, that will restore to Man his primitive soundness and beauty, as
Naamans flesh by washing in Jordan was restored as the flesh of a young Child.
This is the immediate effect of Regeneration, and though the work is not
persected at once as to degrees, yet it will be as the light that shines
clearer and clearer till the perfect day, we being transformed daily more and
more into the Image of God, from Glory to Glory by his Spirit.

SECT. IX. Tranquillity of mind the privilege of the Godly Man. A due ordering
of the affections, not a stoical Apathy necessary thereto. Peace of Conscience
unknown to the Heathen Philosophers, and attainable only by true Religion.
Objectionsgrounded on the moroseness, and inward troubles of Christians
answered.
THE next advantage of the Soul, in this World by Godliness, is Tranquillity of
Mind, whereby a Man is exempted from the importunity of inordinate passions,
and from the secret (though severe) lashes of an accusing terrifying
Conscience, which wound deeper than Scorpions. This the Philosophers cry up as
the sum of a happy life; but what is said of happiness in general, I may apply
to this part of it: Philosophy seeks it, Theology sinds it, but Religion
possesses it. As Paul told the Athenians; he declared unto them, him whom they
ignorantly worshipped. So the Christian discovers that which the Heathen
Moralist blindly pursues, but it is only the Godly Man who has his Soul
thoroughly tinctured with true Grace that enjoyes this tranquillity, and hereby I
mean a sedate calmnesse of affections, whereby a man is freed from the terrors
of an accusing Conscience, and from the impetus and violence of unruly
passions, which make him as the troubled Sea casting up continually mire and
dirt, discovering in the effects of such vile affections the filthiness that
lies deep in the bottom of their hearts, so foaming out their own shame, these
lusts (like the Devil in the poor man that cast him sometimes into the fire,
and sometimes into the water, or made him cut himself with stones) hurry men
with violence, sometime into one extreme, sometimes into another, and make them
pierce themselves through with many sorrows, and make dreadful wounds and
gashes in their own Consciences, rushing them into a thousand dangers, as the
unruly horse does the Rider into the battle. But I have already said enough of
the diseases, quarrels, and other inconveniences, that men's sins subject them
to, which are but the fulfilling of these importunate Lusts which will never
let a man rest, but are continually soliciting for satisfaction, and can never
be satisfied, but enlarge themselves continually, as Hell; and those fleshly
Lusts do not only war against the Soul, but in the Soul against one another:
this is our unhappiness that we must serve diverse Lusts, so that a man is not
only (as one compares him) like a Servant in an Inn, where there are many
Guests, some calling with importunity one way, some another, some up stairs,
some down, but like those that live on the Frontiers of a Kingdom, bordering
upon the Territories of another Prince, or betwixt two Garrisons in a civil
War, his service is required of both, he knows not whom to obey, both require
more taxes than he knows how to pay; thus is miserable man tortured, while he
is a slave to his Lusts, one calls one way, another calls another way, Pride
puts him upon one thing, Covetousness countermands, Sensuality calls him
another way, Pride reclaims and tells him it will stain his reputation, spot
his honor. Now for freeing a man from this basest slavery, the Gospel is much
more effectual than all the precepts of morality, as it more clearly lays
before us the express commands, and peremptory will and pleasure of the
Sovereign Lawgiver, as it inforceth these with promises and threatenings, of
such things as there is either a deep silence of amongst the Philosophers, or
which at least they descry but at a great distance, and seem to make some
imperfect discovery of which the Gospel does evidently demonstrate. And which
is more than all this, there does a spirit of Life and Power accompany the
Gospel where it is received, which changes the Soul into another form; there
is a Divine nature thereby communicated, whereby men become as it were new
Creatures, have new thoughts, and new affections, whereby they now savor the
things of the spirit, as they did before the things of the flesh. The Old Man
is mortified by the spirit; that, as in old age desire fails, (as we have a
proof in Barzillai that tasted not the sweetness of the Creatures, as
formerly) so when a Man's Lusts are mortified, he has not a desire after
forbidden vanities, and the pleasures of sin as formerly. Philosophy indeed
has one Polemo to boast of, but the Gospel thousands whose natures have been
so changed by its power, that they have become quite other persons, and
whatever Morality can furnish us with to persuade, the Gospel has the same in
greater evidence, and much more: besides, a Christian may more truly say of the
Gospel, than one said of Philosophy, he thereby learns to want what others
enjoy, not that any man has more pleasure, or finds more contentin what he
possesses, than the Christian, that has all sweetened to him by the favor of
God, and knows that it is not his only portion, as to others when they dye, woe
to you, ye have received your consolation; but he does not disquiet himself
with the desire of more than God has given him, and it is better to be content
with a little, than to have much, and not to be satisfied, better to enjoy
perfect health, and eat and drink no more than nature requires, than to be
troubled with the (...), or appetitus caninus, and be continually eating, or a
Dropsy, and be always drinking. So for those natural evils which are the
objects of our fear and sorrow, as they are future and foreseen, or present and
selt, the Christian has the advantage of all others for bearing them, not only
as Hope, Patience, Meekness are the fruits of the spirit which he works by
that special power and energy which he puts forth in Gods chosen ones; but as
the Gospel does furnish him with moral arguments, much more effectual to
persuade to patience, than any that are learned in the Schools of the
Philosophers, as it is in vain to be troubled at what we cannot help: all good
has a mixture of evil, and all evil has a mixture of good. There is a
vicissitudo of fortunes, so that in adversity a Man may hope that prosperity
will succeed. We should consider the condition of others who suffer the like
things with our selves. Bearing afflictions, will harden us to undergo them
better, (as Iron grows harder by being often heated in the fire,) sometimes
injuries prove advantageous to those who suffer them. These and such like
rational considerations may help to correct the excess of Men's passions, but
it is only the Gospel which discovers the care and singular love of God to his
people in all the eviss that befall them, he being with them, sympathizing with
them, (so far as is consistent with his happiness and perfection) ordering all
things by his wise and powerful Providence, sitting as a refiner, while he
casts his Gold and Silver into the Furnace to purify it, ordering all things
for the good of his chosen: this may make us not only patient in tribulation,
but to glory in it, not only to conquer in our sufferings, but to be more then
Conquerors. Indeed all that assume to themselves the title of Christians, enjoy
not this tranquillity, for many arrogate this to themselves which belongs not to
them, those that are Christians indeed, attain to this but by degrees, none are
absolutely perfect in this life, and perfect peace of mind is not an absolute
freedom from all passion, not an apathy, but tranquillitas ordinis, when every
affection keeps its own place, and does its proper work. When Fear is the Souls
Gentinel to warn it of approaching danger, that being forewarned, it may
before-armed, when Sorrow is the temper of the Soul, or the ballast of it to
keep it steady, Angercos Fortit udinis and ingenii, the mettle of it to fit it
for action, and the Oil of Gladness, making the face to shine, and being as
marrow to the bones, making our conversation more acceptable and agreeable unto
others, our life more pleasing and comfortable to our selves. But that wherein
a Christian has the greatest advantage is Peace of Conscience, the importunate
solicitations of Satan and our own Lusts, to the commission of sin are not so
disquieting to the Soul, as the rebukes and clamors of Conscience after the
commission of it. The Devil is a mere Trapan, that draws Men into a Plot
against Heaven, and when he has ensnared them, is the first that accuses
them, sollicites men importunately to sin by the strongest enticements,
afterward affrights their Consciences by aggravating their guilt to them, and
this is a preoccupation of Hell, as peace of conscience, and joy in the Holy
Ghost (...) the first fruits and (...) of ^eaven. As Virtue is its own reward,
^o sin is its own punishment; guilt follows sin, as the shadow does the body,
haunting the sinner like a hideous Ghost, and continually terrifying him. It is
true, many do not feel these terrors, but it is not through any true settled
peace that they have, but only a senseless stupid ignorance of their own
danger, they are like a man asleep on the top of a Mast, do but awake them to
see their danger, and it is enough to affright them into the infernal abyss.
While they go on quietly in sin, they are but as a man which has bribed the
Sergeant, which does not pay his debt, nor secure him against Arrests, his debt
increases still, and he will have more to pay when he is arrested. It is not a
Merchants putting off the melancholic thoughts of his debts by pleasures and
divertisements that will always quiet his mind, he does but beguile himself,
and increase his debt, it is the acquitiance of his Creditor that can only
secure him. This is the case of many, that when they are haunted, as Saul by
the evil spirit of an accusing Conscience, as he had his music to quiet his
mind, they must have something to divert their thoughts from such disquieting
and tormenting objects; but these are but like Opiates, which may stupifie for
a time, and free from pains, but do nothing to the cure of the disease. It is
only the blood of Christ that can sprinkle our hearts from an evil Conscience,
cleanse our Consciences from dead works, only an effectual Faith that applies
this blood to the Conscience. So that the Heathen Philosophers by all their
prescriptions could never quiet the Consciences of sinners, and all that peace
that they had was only from ignorance of that severe inexorable justice of God,
(which will never pardon sin without satisfaction, and never be satified but by
the sufferings of Jesus Christ) and the nature of the Covenant of Grace, or the
condition of the Gospel, that none should have any benefit by Jesus Christ but
those who are united with him by an effectual Faith which produces the fruits
of holiness in a blameless upright conversation; so that as the blood of
Christ is the cause of our reconciliation with God, by Faith and holiness, we
actually patake and are assured of the fruits thereof: all these therefore are
in several respects necessary to true peace of Conscience. Morality therefore
can never teach a right way and means of it, to which the righteousness of
faith is an hidden mystery. The loose profane Christan can never attain it,
while his conversation is evidently inconsistent with that true faith and
Gospel sincerity, which is absolutely required of all that will be saved; and
however they may flatter or cheat themselves into a vain presumption, or shut
their eyes that they may not see their danger, they are continually obnoxious
to the affrights and alarms of such places of Scripture, as affirm that without
holiness none shall see God, that if we live after the flesh we shall dye;
that the Gate is strait, and the way narrow that leads to life, and there are
few that find it, that many shall seek to enter, and shall not be able: That if
any will be Christ's Disciple, he must deny himself and take up his Cross and
follow him: That whoever says he knows God, and keeps not his Commandments, or
that he has communion with God, and walks in darkness, is a liar, and the
truth is not in him: That whoever seems to be Religious, and bridleth not his
tongue, his Religion is vain: That he that loves Father, or Mother, or Wife, or
Children, or House, or Lands, more than Christ, is not worthy of him. Besides,
others clearly importing, that a Man may have much knowledge, and his judgment
so far convinced, as to approve of the best things; may be much in holy duties,
take delight in them, hear the word with joy, do many things which he hears, be
blameless as to his outward carriage, and yet be an hypocrite. So that without
daily exercising our selves to Godliness, and a strict watch over all our
ways, it is impossible to maintain a settled well grounded peace of Conscience.
If any object that there are none more disquieted in their Consciences, than
those that make the greatest show of Religion, none more melanchollick and
morose in their conversation; I may answer, solid joy is a serious thing, (as
Seneca could say) it is not most seen in a forced laughter and jollity, which
is as thorns under a pot, Eccl. 7.6. that for the present makes a great noise
and blaze, but neither heats nor lasts. In the midst of it the heart many times
is sorrowful, and the end of it is heaviness, and, as the heart knows its own
sorrow, the stranger intermeddleth not with its joy. There is that comfort
within, which every one cannot observe. A Godly man needs not have his heart
revived with wine, and strong drink, and merry company, like a sick Man that is
forced continually to have his spirits kept up with Cordials: He has that
within, which is better to him than Wine and Music. It is true, Godly Men have
more inward conflicts in their Consciences than others, but this proceeds from
the sense that they have of their own danger, as they say, Wisdone arms misery
against it self, that is, discovering the evils that we are obnoxious to, makes
a Man more timorous and suspicious, whiles fools go on and are punished without
any fear of danger, go on as an Ox to the Slaughter, a fool to the Stocks, a
Bird to the suare, and knows not that it is for her life. It is time for a Man
that knows, if he be not set upon the Rock that is higher than himself, if he
be not upon that sure Foundation, Jesus Christ, he hangs by the small thread of
a brittle life, over the bottomless pit, to look about him, and make his
calling and election sure. Again the greater esteem any one has of Heavenly
things, the more careful he is to make sure of them, the more fearful to be
deceived about them, ( Tarda solet magnis rebus in esse fides.) And further,
when Satan, who before kept all things in peace, sees himself in danger of
being dispossessed, he rages the more, as he rent the poor man out of whom he
was cast almost to death. And God gives him leave sometimes to winnow his
dearest Children for their trial; but for the most part God leaves them to
such disquietment of spirit, and terrors of conscience for some sin, which they
have fallen into, (as in David's case) and then their trouble is not because of
their piety, but of their defect in it; or else it is before he intends to
raise them to some great eminency, or fill them with some extraordinary joy: as
we may observe, where Men have been raised exceeding high, their foundation
has been laid very low in some deep abasement, and so God brings them as a
King our of Prison to reign; and ordinarily when God lays his people low,
either by extraordinary outward afflictions, or inward temptations, he does
recompense them for it by those inward consolations, which are the fore-tasts
of Heaven; hence proceeds that joy the Apostle speaks of, which is unspeakable
and full of Glory; which he that has tasted the sweetness of it, would not
want to be exempted from all those Temptations and trials which he has been
exercised with. The peace of wicked Men is but an agreement with Hell, which
shall be disanulled; a Covenant with death, which shall be broken, as the mirth
of a Drunken Man, who whilst his spirits are raised, feels not his wounds, but
afterward feels the smart of them, when his reason returns to him. That will
be the woeful end of the carnal man's security, if he be laid in the Bonds or
Fetters of afflictions, and so come to himself and feel the wounds which he
has by sin made in his own conscience, he is a Magor missa bib, terror round
about; that is the reason of such horror many times on sick beds, which yet is
better than to be hushed asleep by the charming pleasures of sin, and not awake
till he be amidst the everlasting flames. So that we may say with the Prophet.
The work of righteousness is peace, and the effecti of righteousness,
quietness and assurance for ever. It is only by the righteousness of Jesus
Christ, imputed to us by faith, that we have peace with God, and so peace of
Conscience, which is as a continual feast daily to entertain us, as a brazen
wall, always to secure us, that we may always sind that within, wherewith we
may solace our selves, and need not fear that any thing shall disturb or
disquiet the tranquillity which we have in our own souls.

SECT. IX. The reward which Godly Men have after this life, the chief advantage
of Religion. The excellency thereof demonstrated from Scripture, from the
satisfaction which the Angels have in it, from the glory which wicked Men enjoy
in this World, from the sweet fore-tasts which Godly men have of it in this
life. Wherein it consists, the glory of the body, the happiness of the Soul, in
the enjoyment of God, in communion with the whole number of perfected Saints,
and that for ever.
ALL that I have hitherto said of the advantage of Godlyness, is little in
respect of what remains to be spoken. The estate of Man after this life is of
more important consideration, as it is usually said, there is no proportion
betwixt finite and infinite, as there is betwixt two things that are finite,
though at the greatest distance in respect of their natures, quality, quantity:
so there is a proportion between a minute and a thousand years, and minutes may
easily be multiplied to such a quantity; but there is no proportion betwixt a
thousand years and Eternity. So that if the misery of Christians in this life
were answerable to wicked men's prejudice, and the happiness of wicked men
answerable to their own desires, and if both might live in these two different
estates a thousands years twice told; yea, and suppose that after this life
wicked men were to be happy to seven, and Godly men but to eight, (as the
Philosophers speak of the degrees of heat and cold) or that Godly men should be
as miserable as wicked men, abating only one degree, yet the consideration of
an Eternity would easily praeponderate in comparing the several states of these
persons. The Apostle says, that if in this life only we have hope, we are of
all men the most miserable, not that a wicked man has more real joy or comfort
in this life than a Godly man, but we must consider that the Apostle is
disputing against such as denied the Resurrection in a popular Rhetorical
style, wherein words are not to be subjected to a rigid interpretation, but to
be expounded in a greater latitude, and it is usual in several languages to
express a thing with the greater Emphasis by the Superlative degres, as if he
had said, we are very miserable men, if our hope be only in this life. Again
there may be an Emphasis in the Pronoun; q. d. we who are the offscouring of
all things in the eyes of the World, and have in these times of Persecution run
such hazards and quitted our worldly enjoyments for the hopes of a glorious
Resurrection, are miserably deceived, if there be no Resurrection. And further,
though Christians have that inward peace and comfort in outward tribulations,
which does more than counterballance them, yet this joy is in hope of the Glory
of God, and but an anticipation of that joyful Resurrection which hereafter
they expect. And now I shall come to speak something of the certainty of it, of
the the nature of it, and of the strictness of holiness necessary to those who
would enjoy it, and that we may raise our thoughts to hold some proportion with
the greatness of that glory, though it be not possible for poor Mortals to
have an adequate conception thereof. First, let us consider the great things
that God himself has spoken of it, and how he has throughout the Scripture
propounded it as a sufficient and an abundant recompense, for whatsoever we can
do and suffer for him, in comparison where with all the afflictions of this
life, are but light and inconsiderable. The Apostle tells us, God is not
ashamed to be called the God of his people, having prepared a City for them.
The preparations that he has made for them, are answerable to the bounty and
munificence of such a Majesty; though they here mourn whilst others rejoice,
and though he here make them bear the Cross, whilst his professed Enemies wear
the Crown. Now it would be much below the greatness and glory of such a
Majesty, to boast of his own gifts above the real worth of them, and flatter
men into his service by possessing them with high expectations of great
matters, which the enjoyment of will not answer the hopes which God himself
has drawn us into. And we may be most secure that he will not give such
advantage to any Creature to enter into judgment with him. Now let us consider
what some of us have seen in the interviews, perhaps of Princes, the Coronation
or marriage of Kings, or on other occasions, yet we have heard of more than we
have seen. We have heard of the Glory of Solomon, and many other great Princes,
exceeding what our times have to boast of, and yet we can enlarge our thoughts
to something above these, and let our minds wander into the four corners of the
earth, to fetch in the Glory and splendour of the World; to make up to our
selves an Idea of happiness, and yet when we have framed such an Vtopia, such
an imaginary Glory, God (who is too great, and too good, to deceive poor
mortals) has given us to understand that his preparations for his Saints are
somewhat above all this, and that eye has not seen, nor ear heard, non the
heart of Man conceived what he has laid up for those that love him.

In the next place, let us consider that it is the blessed state of Angels,
which are first of more enlarged capacities than Men, and yet they find a
perfect felicity therein. We should not make a judgment of the state, and
magnificence of a Princes Court, by the reports of some poor Peasant, who (we
might easily imagine) would be ready to admire any thing which he should see
above the pomp of his Landlords house, where he used perhaps to labor, or go
sometimes to pay some poor rent, but we should more easily believe some noble
Courtier of a more raised mind, or some Ambassador that has seen the pomp of
several Princes Courts, and knows what belongs to State and greatness. It had
been no great matter to have heard Paul boast of what he saw in Paradise, who
was carried from these poor Cottages of clay, to the Court of Heaven; like
David from the Sheepfold to Saul's Court. But the Angels continually adoring the
Glory of their King, and singing perpetual Hallelujahs to him, does easily
persuade that the Glory of the Celestial Court, is far above what mortal eyes
ever saw. And besides, the enlarged capacities of Angels, we may consider that
they are incorporeal, so that these corporeal delights and pleasures, which we
have the most clear and lively apprehension of, make up none of their
happiness; but, besides such delights, which its likely we shall not want in
Heaven, (there are more pure and spiritual delights, enough to make an Angel
happy; which we can scarce conceive any thing of. A further consideration,
which may argue the happiness of that future state, is the greatness and Glory
of many wicked men here in this World. Let us but consider, how the great ones
of the Earth, many of which have been wicked men, do bash themselves
continually in Rivers of pleasure, and enjoy for many years together whatever
their hearts can wish, and what we ordinarily see great ones now enjoy is
little to the Glory of a Belshazzer, a Darius, an Alexander, a Ner^, the Grand
Signior, the Kings of China; and yet all this is but as the crumbs that fall
from the Childrens table. What then can we imagine them to be fed with? these
are but the spillings, or the overflowings of his bounty to his very Enemies:
how great then is that which he has reserved for those, to whom he has
purposed to show the exceeding Riches of his Grace, to give the World a proof
of his bounty and Glory? as a Prince that would make an entertainment for
ostentation, and show his great respect to some of his special and most beloved
friends. We read often in Scripture of the preparations that God has made for
his Saints, which is but a metaphorical expression of the greatness of that
glory, which he has ordained them to; as those entertainments which Men do
long prepare for, do far exceed what they on a sudden make, being unawares
surprised by the coming of their friends. I will yet add another proof of the
greatness of that Glory, which we hope for; taken from the fore-tasts, which
many have of it here, which has made them Glory in tribulations, triumph in
the flames, and not only abated, but wholly taken away the sense of the most
exquisite torments, that some Martyrs have felt no more in the fire, than if
they had been in a bed of Roses. Some after long conflicts and terrors, have
had such ravishing joys, that they have cried to God to hold, they could bear
no more. If such glimpses have so ravished them, what is the full view and
clear vision? Let us imagine a confection, the least drop of which distilled
into a draught of Gall, or Wormwood, or whatever can be supposed to be more
bitter and distastful, should wholly alter the taste of it, making it most
pleasing and delicious, how sweet would a full draught of it be without the
least mixture of any thing distastful and unpleasing: so if such drops of
spiritual joys are able to sweeten the bitterest cup of afflictions, what shall
we think of bathing our selves, and drinking our fill in those Rivers of
pleasure at Gods right hand for evermore, without the least mixture of any
sorrow or trouble to allay the sweetness thereof?

I have hitherto in general showed that the Glory of Heaven is like to be very
great and inconceivable, much more inexpressible, but I have not yet attempted
to show what it is, or wherein it consists, and while I say it is not to be
expressed, if I should go about to set it forth fully, there would be
contradictio in terminis, so that all I dare pretend to, is some rude
delineation of that state of happiness. Man is made up of two essential parts,
Soul and Body, now though the Soul be the more noble part, yet doubtless the
body shall have its share in this felicity. If God has so far honored them,
as to make them the Temples of the Holy Ghost, and given Christ a charge that
he should lose nothing of what he has given him, but raise up our scattered
dust at the last day, Job. 6.39. he has certainly reserved a reward for that
which has had so great a share in our sufferings here; and he has told us in
general, that he will by his Divine power change our vile bodies, and make them
like his glorious body, but sure as we approach nearer to the nature of God in
our souls, so they shall have the greatest share of future Glory, and in
general it shall be with the Glory wherewith Christ was glorified from
Eternity, and after his suffering, and this shall be by the enjoyment of God,
which is the acting of the perfected faculties and affections of our Souls upon
him. Every sense has its proper object in the enjoyment of which it takes
complacency according to the suitableness of the object thereto, and according
to the nature of the object, and the capacity of the sense for receiving it, or
acting upon it, such is the pleasure that it finds therein, and the more noble
the faculty and the object are, the more noble is the delight which arises
from the Union betwixt them, so that all Philosophers are agreed, that
intellectual delights exceed sensual pleasures. Now in Heaven our Souls shall
be perfected according to the capacity of a finite being; otherwise they would
be no more capable of enjoying God, than a deaf man of being delighted with
music, or a blind man in the most perfect beauty, therefore we are said to be
made meet, to be partakers of an inheritance with the Saints in light;
sanctification, qualifying us naturally for Heaven, as justification does
morally; and God himself shall be the object of our happiness, whom we shall
see as he is, and love him, and delight in him according to his goodness and
glory; I know it is hard for us to conceive what it is to enjoy God, but to
help us in the conception of it, let us consider a little what it is to enjoy a
friend, to have an absent friend is a comfort, but to be with him is a great
addition to our contentment, to receive the expressions of their love, and to
testify ours to them. Those who are of a more noble and generous complexion,
find more true satisfaction herein, than in whatever else this World can afford
them, and what is it that endears another to us, but Love and Loveliness?
where there are amiable endowments in persons of worth, they command an esteem
from us, though they know us not, and though we are never the better for them;
but where they have a particular affection to us, take us into their bosom,
make us of their entire friends, this does much more endear them to us. Now (as
I have already said) we find in God, in a far more eminent degree, that which
renders the Creatures amiable and lovely. Besides his goodness toward the
whole Creation, which the Earth is full of, his special favor to Mankind, and
it may be to us above many thousands of others; the exceeding Riches of Grace
toward the Elect, which Men and Angels shall admire to the days of Eternity,
there is that Beauty (that is intellectual beauty, or such Beauty as is
objected to the understanding) which will ravish the whole intellectual
Creation. His Wisdom is unsearchable, his Power irresistible, and his Grace and
Clemency as far exceeding what is to be found in the Creature, as his Majesty
and Glory. Job had heard of God, but when he came to see him, abhorred himself
to see the infinite distance betwixt the Sovereign Creator, and a poor Mortal;
that durst dispute the case with him. Oh! what thoughts shall we have of God
when we come to see him as he is? What astonishment will seize upon us? what
confusion will cover us when we see what a God it is, whose grace we have so
often despised, whose patience we have so long abused, whose authority we have so
boldly contemned, and yet see that he who had us always at his mercy, and
could at his pleasure avenge himself on us, should pardon us for his own sake,
and make such glorious preparations for us? We shall then perfectly understand
all the dimensions of his love, and continually as it were read the stories of
it. We may the better conceive of it by fancying to our selves, what a singular
favor it would be to have some great Prince take a singular affection to us,
though we did the least of any in the World deserve it, and had dis-obliged him
by a thousand provocations, if he should take us home to his house, and
maintain us always at his table, keep us always in his presence, this would
fall infinitely short of that love which God will manifest to us, and what an
addition will it be to our happiness to see him in his Glory, who has loved
us, and washed us from our sins in his blood? the story of whose love we have
so often read over, a sight of whose Face though but through the Glass of Faith
we have so often, so long desired and lamented a feer, to have the society of the
innumerable company of Angels, and the general assembly of just men made
perfect, a meeting of the Saints of all Ages and places, and these perfected
both in Grace and Glory, so that they shall have no infirmities, no Pride,
Ignorance, self-seeking to exercise our charity or patience; no sufferings to
move our pity, or compassion; and we shall never need to disquiet our selves
with the thoughts of such a sad parting as Paul had, Acts 20.39. We shall keep
an everlasting Holy Day, the marriage of the Lamb shall be for ever celebrated
by all his Friends, and as Eternity will perpetuate our happiness, and make it
the greater extensive, so the assurance and consideration hereof will heighten
it, and make it greater intensive, and every moment of our felicity will be
more sweet to us, in that we shall never be disquieted with the thoughts that
our condition (as happy as it is) will one day have an end.

SECT. X. The necessity of holiness to salvation, proved by many plain
Scriptures. Objections answered. The imprudence of being but formal half
Christians, and the advantages that stict serious Christians have above such.
THere is yet another consideration which will much enhance the glory of
Heaven; but before I come to speak of that, I must show how necessary an holy
conversation is to the enjoyment of it. Many have entertained a suspicion, that
some morose Men peevishly envious against the happiness and contentment of
Mankind, and too superstitiously precise, would lay upon them a yoke which
neither they, nor their Fathers were able to bear, confining their liberty to
too narrow bounds, and frighting them from Religion by exacting so much
strictness and severity. Now that I may not seem to any to make the way to
Heaven more narrow than God has made it, I will but set down the plain words
of God himself, not to speak of what those have attained to, who yet are
plainly declared to be under the sentence of condemnation, and in a state of
wrath. I shall only instance in some places where the Scripture sets down what
is indispensibly necessary to salvation, or what does plainly argue, a Man to
be in the state of damnation. Math. 5.20. I say unto you, that except your
righteousness exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, (who yet
went a great way in the Profession of Religion, and in both Moral and
Ceremonial righteousness) you shall in no wise enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven. Cap. 6.20. Where your Treasure is, there will your heart be also. Cap.
7.13. Enter ye in at the strait Gate, for wide is the Gate, and broad is the
way that leads to destruction, and there be many which go in thereat; but
strait is the Gate, and narrow is the Way that leads to life, and few there be
that find it. Verse 21. Not every one that says unto me, Lord, Lord, shall
enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, but he that does the will of my Father which
is in Heaven. cap. 12.36. Every idle word that a man shall speak he shall give
an account thereof in the Day of Judgment. Cap. 16.24. If any Man will come
after me, let him deny himself, and take up his Cross and follow me. Mark.
8.38. Whosoever shall be ashamed of me, and of my words in this adulterous and
sinful Generation, of him also shall the Son of Man be ashamed when he comes in
the Glory of the Father with his holy Angels. Luke 13.24. Strive to enter in at
the strait Gate, for many I say, unto you shall seek to enter, and shall not be
able. John. 3.5. Except a Man be born of water, and of the spirit, be cannot
enter into the Kingdom of God. Romans 8.9. If any Man have not the spirit of
Christ, he is none of his. Verse. 13. If ye live after the flesh ye shall dye,
2 Cor. 5.17. If any M^n (...) Christ, he is a new Creature. Gal. 5.6. For in
Christ Jesus neither circumcision avails any thing, nor uncircumcision, but
Faith that works by love. Cap. 6.7, 8. Be not deceived, God is not mocked,
for whatsoever a Man sows, that shall he also reap; for he that sows to the
flesh, shall of his flesh also reap corruption, but he that sows to the
spirit, shall of the spirit reap life everlasting. Heb. 12.14. Follow peace
with all men and holiness, without which no man shall see the Lord. Jam. 2.19,
20. Thou believe there is one God, thou do well: the Devils also believe
and tremble. But will thou know, O vain man, that faith without works is dead?
1 Pet. 4.18. If the righteous scarcely be saved, where shall the sinner and the
ungodly appear? 1 John 1.6. If we say we have fellowship with him, and walk in
darkness, we lie and do not the truth. Cap. 2.4. He that says I know him and
keeps not his commandments, is a liar, and the truth is not in him. I might
add many like words out of the Scripture of truth, but it may be these are
enough to make many say, Who then can be saved? But let God be true whatever
becomes of Man, and it is that which has been told us, that few find the
narrow way that leads to life. If any object the failings of such as David and
Peter, the same Scriptures that tell of them, tell us of their repentance and
bitter tears. If any wonder how this should be consistent with the mercy of
God, I answer there are other objects whereon he shows the Riches of his
mercy, even the small remnant that shall be saved. And when we come to see (at
the last day) the evil of sin, the holiness of God, the preparations which God
has made for sinners, we shall rather admire that he should save any, than
that he should save no more. And if the pardon of sin were such a light matter
that God should be charged with severity, if he hearken not to the cries of
sinners, which necessity does at last force them to, he might have spared the
trouble (as I may take liberty to speak) of ^ending his son; yea, (as I may
further say) spared his glorying of his unconceivable love in giving Christ to
dye for sinners, and it is an ignorant conceit to think that such a strict
exaction of holiness straitens the grace of the Gospel when it is much of the
Grace we receive by Christ to be turned from our iniquities, Acts 3.26. Romans
7.1. etc. The end of our redemption is to be a peculiar people zealous of good
works. Tit. 2.14. The chief article of the Covenant of Grace is to have the Law
of God written in our hearts, Heb. 8.9. our chief glory to be like our heavenly
Father in holiness. 1 Pet. 1.15. The great advantage we have by the promises
to be made Partakers of the Divine Nature, 2 Per. 1.4. So that let men flatter
themselves with vain presumptions, and delude their own souls by drawing their
desires into opinion, and from wishing, they might have peace, though they go
on in the ways of their own hearts, proceed to believe that it will be so.
These words will certainly take hold of them, Zach. 1.6. and judge them at the
last day. I may further add, that it is the greatest imprudence for men to be
but half Christians, or to make some profession of Religion, and not to strive
to attain to some perfection in it, both as the reflection on such an
indifferency, or lukewarmness, will be an aggravation of Men's misery, while
they shall think with themselves they were near to the Kingdom of Heaven, and
were shut out because they went not a little further, they were fair for
striking a bargain for the Rich Pearl, and yet parted for a small matter. As if
a Merchant should go near to Peru, or some other place where there is Gold in
abundance, and through a sluggish lazy stupidity, come back empty; or as if
Columbus, when he was near to the Coasts of America, should have been forced,
through the mutiny of his Soldiers, to return and lose the honor and advantage
of his enterprise. It is pity to run a race, and lose the prize through
negligence, when we come within a few steps of the Goal. If we will do any
thing in Religion, let us go through with it, and not lose the future reward of
it, which is most considerable through sloathfulness. And it is further to be
considered, that those who are but half Christians and smatterers in Religion,
know nothing of those spiritual comforts, that delight in communion with God in
his ordinances, joy in the Holy Ghost, which those who are truly Godly have
experience of: those who are but smatterers or bunglers in any Art, Science,
Trade, find them difficult, when they are easy and delightful to those who are
Masters of them, and thoroughly understand them; as the wise Man says,
knowledge is easy to him that understands. As there is great difference in the
reading of a Classick, Author by the Master and the Scholar, the Scholar
looks upon it as a great task to construe it, and is glad when it is over, not
minding the things themselves expressed by the words, while the Master who
minds the matter, and understands it well, is transported with pleasure to
observe the elegancy of style, height of fancy, depth of judgment, strength of
reason, subtilty of Wit, candor of mind which is in the Author. So, while a Man
is but a Christian in name, and has but a form of Godliness, the exercises of
Religion are a burden to him, and he does them only as a task to escape Hell
fire, as a Schoolboy gets his Lesson to escape the Rod, but he that is a
Christian indeed, finds that sweetness in the word of God, that it is to him
as honey and the honey comb, the joy and rejoicing of his Soul. He is glad when
he can steal an opportunity to pray; he finds so much comfort in communion with
God therein, and can say with Christ; it is his meat to do the will of his
Heavenly Father, and the testimony of his Conscience is to him as a continual
feast, and makes the practice of holiness more pleasant to him, than all the
delights of sin are to a wicked man. And as it is in trading, he that does not
thoroughly understand his Trade, cannot make his best advantage of it to thrive
by it, and so grows weary of it, or turns bankrupt; when he that is well seen
in the mystery of it, and knows how to improve every opportunity of gain, and
so finds the benefit of it, makes a pleasure of his business, and will not be
persuaded to leave it off. So he that is but a Christian in show, and finds not
that real advantage which others do of a strict walking with God, nor any
return of their formal heartlesse prayers, grow weary of Religion, and at
length it may be cast it off, while the real serious Christian by the Rich
returns of his sincere and fervent prayers, and the benefit which he finds by a
close walking with God, is so confirmed in his holy profession, that nothing
shall make him cast it off, or think it a burden.

SECT. XI. The misery of wicked Men after this life demonstrated from
Scriptures, from the sufferings of Godly Men here in this World, from terrors
of conscience in good and bad, from the Devils trembling at the thoughts of it,
which they have not so much reason for as Man. The punishment of loss with the
aggravations of it. The punishment of sense exquisite, without allay or
intermission, without end.
I Shall now proceed to that other consideration, which will make the
happiness of Heaven much greater; yea which considered apart, does much
commend the excellency of Holiness, and clearly demonstrate how much it is the
interest of mankind to follow after it, damnum emergens is as much to be
considered as lucrum cessans. We should not only consider the reward of
Holiness, but the wages of sin; if a sinner could cease to be, or might be
annihilated when he dies, or if there were any state between Heaven and Hell,
our plea would have less force: but there will be but two ranks of Men at the
l^st judgment, whereof one shall go into eternal life, the other into
everlasting punishment. Mat. 25.46. Now I shall use the same method in
considering this state of ungodly men after the end of the World, which I
followed in considering the state of holy men. First, giving some general
demonstrations of the misery of it, then some particular reasons why it will be
so intolerable. As first, the Glory of Heaven may be imagined to be exceeding
great by the preparations which God is said to have made for it: so by the same
Anthropopathy we may conceive of the misery of Hell, God being said to prepare
the punishment of the damned. Mat. 25.41. It is said indeed it is prepared for
the Devil and his Angels, but wicked men shall be coheirs with them of the
same misery. He is laying up his pile of Fire and Wood. Isa. 30.33. and laying
sinners as stubble in the Sun to dry, that the eternal flames may prey more
furiously upon them, Nahum 1.10. suffering them to fill up the measure of their
iniquity, and so to treasure up to themselves wrath against the day of wrath,
that they may be fit for destruction. Let us in the next place consider what
Godly men have suffered in this Life, read but the Marryrologies and see the
dreadful torments that the Martyrs have suffered, enough to make one tremble at
the reading of them; and if these things be done to the green tree, those who
are the objects of Gods love, and dear unto him as the apple of his eye, such
on whom he has determined to show the Riches of his mercy, what will be done
to the dry with whom he is angry every day, and on whom he will show the power
of his wrath? if judgment begin at the house of God, what will be the end of
those that obey not the Gospel? Further, let us consider the terrors of
Conscience which Godly men have suffered in this World, when they have had
lively apprehensions of the displeasure of God against them. If his rebukes
have made them consume as a moth, fretting a garment, if his frowns have
distracted them and made them roar through the disquietnesse of their spirit;
What will it be for his jealousy to smoke and his wrath to burn like fire for
ever? Again, let us consider what horrors wicked men have felt in their
consciences in this life, which are but the foretasts of that misery which they
shall endure for ever. Read but the stories of Vaninus, Spira, etc. who have
dyed in despair, if such drops of wrath let fall like scalding Lead upon the
Soul, have so hideously amazed and terrified, surely it is dreadful and
astonishing to be cast into the lake that burns with fire and brimstone for
ever. And though there be many now can harden themselves against God; and think
by a stoical apathy to bear whatever God can inflict, yet some have found the
beginnings of Hell in their Consciences, worse a thousand times than all the
torments which the cruelty of Tyrants, or incarnate furies could ever invent.
And whereas some may think (with Spira) that the expectation of future misery,
is worse than the suffering of it, it is a wide mistake, for according as M^n
fears, so is his anger, Psalm. 90.11. ordinary calamities indeed are for the
most part worse feared than felt, but when a man has raised his mind to the
most dreadful and amazing apprehemions of the displeasure of God, and the
severity of his vengeance, he cannot reach the vastness of it, there is yet a
plus ultra, somewhat further, as it is in our apprehensions of the Glory and
happiness of Heaven: and at the last day the great and mighty men of the
World, who have set the judgments of God far above, out of their sight, and
scorned his threats, as a mere brutum fulmen, or a Mormo to fright Chrildren
and superstitious fools, would be glad if they knew how, to run under the Rocks
and Mountains to hide themselves from the terrible Majesty of their Judge, and
(to allude to the words of S. Paul, 2 Cor. 10.11. Let such think that as God is
now in his word when he seems to be absent from them, such will he be also
indeed, when he shall manifest his presence and his righteous judgment. We
begin to think meanly of all whom we can see through or go about, it is
incomprehensibleness that commands a veneration, and that we shall always find
in God both as to the Glory of his Grace, and as to the greatness of his Power
and wrath. Let us yet go a step further, and consider the apprehensions which
the Devils have of this condition, (for they and wicked men (as was before
observed) are fellow heirs of the same misery) and these tremble at the
thoughts of it, that is, have dread full amazing apprehensions at the
expectation of it, the consequent in that place being put for the antecedent,
according to the usual phraseology of Scripture; they seem not to have so much
reason to be troubled at the thoughts of it as men have, their sins perhaps may
have some aggravations, which the sins of Men have not; yet, I think there is
nothing can aggravate it so as the contempt of the Gospel, which they are not
guilty of. They had not a board after Shipwreck, whereon they might have saved
themselves, if it had not been their own fault. Again, they have no bodies to
be tormented as we have, many cannot apprehend how the Soul should be capable
of any considerable torment, and they think they could laugh at any punishment
that could be inflicted on the Soul, were it not for bodily sufferings, which
they have a clearer apprehonsion, and a more lively sense of: but, besides all
that we are capable of suffering in our bodies, we are capable of suffering the
same in our souls, which the Devils are said to tremble at the belief of, but
it is with us, as it is with little Children, who are pleased perhaps with the
pomp of their Fathers or Mothers Funeral, and proud of their mourning Clothes,
but are not sensible of their own loss, when those that are grown up to years
of reason and judgment, wring their hands to think of what sad consequence
such a loss will be to them. And in this respect it is said, Wisdom arms
misery against it self. We glory in that which is our shame, and the cause of
our misery, while the Devils tremble, who know what it is to lose Heaven,
(having been already in it) and know what Hell is, because they have felt it,
they certainly believe these things, having more understanding to apprehend the
clear demonstrations of the truth of them, they have their minds more fixed on
these things which are the matter of their torment being more in act and less
in Power than we are. We know not now what it is to lose God and Heaven, but we
shall know when we shall see them, not to enj^y them, but to envy them. We are
ready to fla^ter our selves into hopes, that these things may not be tr^e; or
our thoughts are ordinarily diverted to other things. And the Devil keeps that
out of our minds, which he knows not how to keep out of his own, lest
considaring well of it, we should be induced thereby to believe, and so obtain
salvation, Luke 8.14. For a conclusion of these general demonstrations, I might
add Christ's importunate pres^ing of Men to flee from the wrath to come, though
through so many hardships and difficulties, which he calls them to: he wept
over sinners, and was grieved for the hardness of their hearts, as sometimes
Jeremy was, or as Aidanus, a good man in this Nation, wept to think of the
miseries which were coming upon it. Sinners go on carelessly and securely, like
an Ox to the Slaughter or a fool to the correction of the stocks, but Christ
passionately pleads with them, to divert them from their own ways, knowing how
little they consider the misery of those devouring flames, which they are
casting themselves into. Now for proving more particularly, that this misery
which ungodly men shall endure, is very sad and dreadful. First, we shall not
only know (as I before intimated) the worth of that Glory which we have lost,
but we shall be convinced that we have lost it through our own fault. Many
think now to harden themselves at the day of judgment against God, and impeach
him of rigor and injustice, if he should doom them to an Eternal Hell, but then
when their Consciences are awakened, they will own their guilt, and say as
Judas, I have sinned. Mat. 27.4. though he did nothing but by the determinate
counsel and foreknowledge of God, and that which Satan had put into his heart.
John 13.2. Act. 2.23. And it will be an aggravation of Men's misery, that they
should lose Heaven through their own carelessenesse, and exchange it for a
trifle: should a Man have a dear Wife dangerously sick, and give her poison to
kill her, instead of Physic to cure her, merely through his own negligence,
surely he would bury himself with her, when he should see his own oversight, or
should he in a drunken fit stab his Children, certainly his first work after he
should come to himself again, would be to stab himself; but what are these to
our souls, our darlings, our only ones Psalm. 22.10. which we wound worse than
the poor Lunatic man, that cut himself with stones: we shall come to our
selves, and have far different apprehensions of all things, as soon as our
souls look out of these dark prisons of our bodies, and begin to see by the
light of another World. A child that should have the writings of a fair Estate,
and sell them for trifles, looking but upon the bulk of paper or parchment, not
regarding the contents of them, and afterward when he comes to be a Man,
should live in disgrace and misery, whiles he sees another bear high in the
World with his Estate, would bewail too late his own childish vanity; but what
is this to our selling of our hopes of Heaven for the pleasures of sin, in the
midst of which the heart is sorrowful, and the end of which is heaviness?
regarding the Gospel no more than a story out of Pliny, looking on the
Scriptures but as wast papers, Cleopatra's prodigality in drinking a little
Pearl at one draughtt was nothing to ours, we were never put to it as
Lisymachus, to lose a Kingdom, and subject our selves to perpetual slavery for
a draught of water. Oh! with what indignation shall we reflect upon our own
folly and madness, when we shall have time and occasion to settle these things
in our hearts, we shall need no Devils to torment us, no fire to burn us, our
own consciences will continually scourge us, and we shall for ever be our own
tormenters, when we shall be awakened to smite upon our thigh and say, what
have I done? there will be yet a further punishment of sense, the Scripture
calls it Fire and Brimstone, which if we understand literally, and in a proper
sense, we may easily imagine the dreadfulnesse of such a punishment, or at
least learn to understand it by holding our hand in a hot furnace but for one
minute, and this is fire, which shall not suddenly devour or annthilate us (as
some imagine) but prey eternally upon men, and never consume them, otherwise
the Devils, with whom (as I have observed) we shall share in the same misery
would rather rejoice, than tremble at the thoughts of the last judgment, if
they should then be presently reduced to nothing. See more of this in Austin De
civitate Dei. lib. 21. cap. 10. But if we understand this figuratively, or
metaphorically, then certainly God has chosen that which is the most exquisite
pain, which we can conceive of, to set forth something else which we know not
how otherwise to frame a notion of in our minds, and which does as far exceed
such sersible things, as are used to express it, as the Glory of Heaven does
exceed all that Glory which is borrowed from the Creatures to express it to our
weak imperfect understandings. Further, this punishment will be without any
allay, in Hell there is pure darkness, there will not be a drop of water
allowed to refresh in those raging flames, and company which some talk of, will
but increase men's torment; and as there will be no allay, so no intermission,
no lucida intervalla, as there will be no night of Darkness in Heaven, so
there will be no night of rest in Hell, and to complete the misery of that
condition, there will be no end of it. Eternity will make their misery
perpetual, but the belief and consideration of eternity will make it
insupportable, and swallow Men up in a hideous despair, they shall be like men
t^^sed (...) the midst of the S^^, the Wa^es to^^ing one after another, if he
could see any land behind those proud surges, there might be some hopes; but to
see nothing but the vast Ocean, and the Waves swelling higher and higher, and
raging against him like a Giant, this is that which amazeth him: and such will
the thoughts of Eternity be then to miserable sinners, when lifting up their
heads to see if they can descry any end of their misery, they shall see
thousands of Ages multiplying themselves to infinity, and there will be no
remedy left, but they must sink down into an everlasting despair; neither will
time or suffering at all alleviate their misery, as the Poet says of those,
who by enduring poverty make it at length more easy to be born: as our
multiplied thoughts of the happiness of Heaven, will not cloy and weary, but
increase our pleasure and fruition; so will our thoughts of torment, more
enrage those eternal flames which shall burn within us, and make that burning
surnace glow more and more, that as the duration of men's misery draws it forth
extensively, so it will also aggravate it intensively, till it come to that
extremity, beyond which there can be imagined, no degrees to which it may be
further heightened.

SECT. XII. How much Religion conduces to the good of humane Societies. And
first, of Families, prescribing such rules to all therein, as well observed,
would make them happy in each other.
IF thou be wise, thou shall be wise for thy self, says the wisest of Men.
Prove. 9.12. He that has the fear of God, which is the beginning, or chief and
principal of all wisdom, does (as is evident from what has been said already)
best provide for himself, and consult his own sovereign good, and indeed God
has out of his abundant goodness to mankind, so twisted and interwoven their
happiness with his own glory in the business of our salvation, that while
they best serve him, they do most advantage themselves, and according as they
seek his Glory, they promote their own happiness; but yet we are not born for
our selves, but as every member should do its office for the common good of the
whole body, so every Man should as a member of the universe or community, stand
the whole in some stead, and not be as a Wen or a Wolf, a disease or deformity
only drawing away nourishment from the body, without doing it any service,
being an unprofitable burden of the earth, living undesired, dying unlamented.
Wherefore I will now come to consider Man as a sociable creature; and as he
stands in relation to others, and so we shall find that a good Man is a common
good, and that Religion and holiness does not only make men Tzadikim, or just
but Chasidim, or good, for which (if for any) men will venture their lives.
Romans 5.7. And first, I shall consider Men in an Occonomical state. Families
being the first in order among the Societies of Men, others being made up of a
conjunction, or combination of several families, as families are made up of
several persons. Now in Families there is a threefold society. The 1. Conjugal
between Husband and Wife. The 2 Paternal between Parents and children. The 3.
Despotical between Masters and servants


Though all these not be found in every family, yet they are all found in some,
and some in all. And let us but consider the Rules prescribed to all these by
Christ in the Gospel, and we shall see a perfect draught of Oeconomicks, and
the most exact pattern of an happy well governed Family. And if any professing
Godliness do not come up to such rules, what I have undertaken to prove holds
good in Thesi, and it is not Men's Godliness, but their want of it which is to
be blamed; though we may find this amongst Christians, sooner than Plato find
his Commonwealth, or the Stoics their perfect man. For the Conjugal Society,
Husbands are to love their Wives as themselves, as their own bodies; yea, as
Christ loved his Church, a proof of which he gave in giving himself for it, so
that he is to provide for her whatever is meet and necessary, not to be bitter
against her, to be tender toward her, giving honor to her, by how much more
honor God has given to him, to instruct her in whatever is meet for her to
learn of him; and in a word to forsake all others in the World, and cleave only
to her, reckoning her and himself no more two but one flesh. Wives on the other
hand are obliged to submit themselves to their Husbands, to reverence them, to
obey them, diligently and frugally to manage the affairs of their Family, and
to ease their Husbands as far as may be of the burden of cares that lies on
them; and to carry themselves, with that prudence, modesty, chastity, gravity,
that they may be a Crown to their Husbands, that the heart of their Husbands
may trust safely in them, and that they may do them good, and no hurt all their
days. So in the Paternal Society, Parents are bound to take care of the Souls
of their Children, and to bring them up in the nurture and admonition of the
Lord, to teach them the way wherein they should walk, while they are young, and
to take care of their bodies also, providing for them, laying up portions for
them, and not to use too much rigor and severity toward them, so as to
discourage them, yet to give them that moderate correction, which the vanity of
childhood and youth many times makes necessary. So Children are to obey their
Parents in all things lawful, to honor and reverence them, to requite their
care of them, by maintaining them (if need require) in their Old Age concealing
their infirmities, and abstaining from all expressions of contempt and
disrespect. In the Despotical Society. Masters are obliged to exercise humanity
toward their Servants, not ruling them with too much imperiousness, or rigor,
considering they have a Master themselves likewise in Heaven, by whom they
would not be dealt with, in strictness and severity; they are to provide for
them, to give them that which is just for their service; yea, that which is
reasonable and equal, rewarding industry and faithfulness with more than
Servants can in strictness require. So Servants are bound to submit themselves
to their Masters, not only in doing their work, but doing it in simplicity and
singleness of heart, as to God, considering it as a duty which they owe to
God, as well as to Man, and that they must look for their recompense from him,
so they must study to please their Masters, not provoking by rude or cross
answers, not purloyning or wasting unnecessarily their Masters goods, not
taking of their time, which is their Masters, to spend in their own service, or
in pleasure, or idleness. Oh! how happy would families be, if all therein did
observe these rules? We should have no complaints of the churlishness, or
carelesseness of Husbands, of the Prodigality and disloyalty of Wives, of the
harshness or severity of Parents and Masters, of the undutifulness and
unfaithfulness of Children and Servants.

SECT. XIII. How far Religion advances the happiness of Kingdoms and
Commonwealths, not only naturally, as it prescribes the best Laws, and rules
to all sorts of Persons, and keeps Men within the bounds of their duty; But
morally, as it brings down blessings, keeps off judgments. The false
accusations which Christians have lain under in all Ages. Julians wicked policy.
NOw let us proceed to consider Man in a Politic State, as part of a Kingdom
or Commonwealth: and if we would describe some Vtopia, or set down a Model of
a happy well governed, flourishing Commonwealth; we need go no further than
the Scriptures for our maxims, and describe the several members of it according
to what the Gospel requires that they should be. I know the great ones of the
World have been jealous of the Kingdom of Christ, as Herod was troubled, when
he first heard of his Birth. I know not what occasion the abuses of some
Imposters may have given to Men's prejudice and suspicion, but (as I said
before) that the observation of Christ's precepts would prevent more diseases,
than his miracles cured, so I may boldly affirm that his spiritual Kingdom,
were it set up in the World, (that is, did his Laws take place, and were they
duly observed) they would attract more, and be more taking than his supposed
earthly Monarchy, which made multitudes run after him in the days of his
flesh, John. 6. And it is the great honor of Religion, and an evident argument
of the real worth and excellency of it, that not only those whose corrupt
affections have baffled their Judgments to believe that Religion is but a
fancy, a devised fable, or at least to wish and pretend it to be so, but the
wisest of such men as have followed the dictates of natural reason, and men
whom none can imagine to have been fore-stalled with too favorable an opinion
of Religion, or to have been (...), superstitiously over-awed by a Deity, that
these I say, such as Plato, Plutarch, Tully, Seneca, Machiavel, Campanella,
should look upon it as such a good Engine for moving the huge bodies of
Kingdoms and Commonwealths; yea, a necessary basis to found government upon,
(as Plutarch shows) without which it can no more subsist, than a Castle or
City in the air, it shows clearly that there is that proposed in Religion,
which if men according to their opinion can be but flattered into a belief of
it will keep them in their due place and order, that every part of such a vast
Machina may move regularly. And it is a good observation of the Historian, that
Rome had the happiness in the first founding of it, to have such Kings
successively, as did by degrees take care of such things, as did most conduce
to its flourishing and establishment, and that when Romulus had built the City,
and erected a new Kingdom: Numa Pompilius did immediately succeed him, and
establish Religion and the worship of God so far, as the light of Nature would
guide him thereto. And the truth is, the belief of another life after this, and
of some invisible power, superior to the power of man, is absolutely necessary
for the swaying and managing those two great engines of Hope and Fear, which
turn about the whole World, so that (as Campanella well observes) Religione e
anima della Republica e diffesa della leg natural, etc. Religion is the Soul
of a Commonwealth, and Bulwark of the Law of Nature, because the Love and Fear
of God, and of eternal punishment and rewards do compel Men to the observation
of the Law. What will a man care for his Life, if he apprehend that there is
none after this? and there is no means to restrain men from, whatever
insolences or violences they may think necessary to the contentment of their
present life, if they do not look for an after-reckoning: but they might well
say, Let us eat and drink, for to morrow we shall dye, and rather contemn a
miserable life, than omit any means for the bettering of it. He that sets light
by his own life, is Master of another man's, says Seneca. And we know the form
of endictments in our own law for any crime, is, such a one not having the fear
of God before his eyes, did wickedly, etc. commit such an act. And Abraham
thought when he was in Gerar that they would not stick at any the vilest
action, because as he supposed the Fear of God was not in that place Genesis
20.10. So we find the Atheist in Lucretius Lib. 1. complaining of his being
overaw'd by the suspicion which he had of an eternal punishment after this
life; if he could have been assured that there should be no life after this, or
that then there should be an end of Men's sufferings, he could easily laugh at
Religion, and despise the threatenings of their Vates. But, seeing he knew not
the nature of the Soul, whether it was propagated with the body, or infused,
whether it did dye with the Body, or were cast into the Stygian Lake, he could
not free himself from the fears of an eternal misery after Death. But I will
come more particularly to show how Religion does contribute to the happiness
and welfare of the Societies of Men, setting the boundaries of every ones Duty,
prescribing to all from the highest to the lowest, telling the great ones of
the World, that they which rule over men, must be just, ruling in the fear of
God, whose Kingdom is over all, who rules in the Kingdoms of men, and gives
them to whomsoever he will, and he makes them his Ministers, not to be terrors
to good works, but to evil. To be Fathers to the poor, and to search out the
cause which they know not, to break the jaws of the wicked, and pluck the spoil
out of their teeth. Inferiors are thereby likewise instructed to submit
themselves to their superiors, to give them due honor and tribute, to be
Subject for Conscience sake, which is the best foundation of disloyalty and
fidelity. As Constantius would say, those that would not be true to God, would
not be true to him. If any shall here say, Quid verba audiam? We have found the
contrary true, and have often seen Religion made a Cloak to palliate Sedition and
Rebellion. I might answer by an Antistrophe retorting the objection. It seems,
Religion is good in it self, because it is made use of to palliate that which
is evil: Men do not counterfeit ordinary stones, or Iron, but Gold and Pearls,
as I have already upon occasion observed. If Satan be transformed into an Angel
of Light, what wonder if his Ministers be sometimes transformed into the
Servants of God. I may again say with Tertullian, Si accusasse sat est, quis
erit innocens? None can maintain their innocence, if upon a bare accusation
they shall be condemned, without a fair hearing. Not Christ himself. John.
19.12. Nor his followers. Acts 17.7. This odious crimination has been used in
several Ages, as the most effectual means to subject Christians to the
displeasure of Princes, and to popular hatred, which they had some pretense for
in those times, when the Emperors enjoined such things by their authority as
Christians did justly scruple, which occasioned that wicked policy of Julian,
(that he might avoid the imputation of persecution, which he saw was grown
odious) to set the Heathen Idols by the Emperors statue, that while they
refused to give Religious honor to the one, they might be accused of denying
civil respect to the other.

Let us now descend to consider the aspect that Religion has upon fellow
Citizens or Subjects, or how it conduces to the mutual benefit and advantage
of them. And first, let us consider what an influence that general rule of
Christ, Mat. 7.12. would have upon all Mankind to bring back again the Golden
Age, if when we have to do with others, we would put our selves into their
condition, and consider how we should desire to be dealt with in such a case:
How gently and tenderly would superiors carry themselves toward their
inferiors? and with how much respect and observance would inferiors carry
themselves to their superiors? the Rich would not withhold from the poor, when
he had wherewith to relieve him, and supply his wants, but would bring upon
himself the blessing of him who is ready to perish, and make the heart of the
peor to rejoice and sing. The poor would not by his idleness be unnecessarily
burdensome to the Rich, or commit rapes upon his charity, but would labor
diligently with his hands, and abate the allowance which men ordinarily give to
their lusts, that so he might be in a capacity rather to give, than to receive.
The lender would not take advantage of the necessity of the borrower, nor the
borrower ingratefully defraud the lender; the seller would not deceive or over
reach the buyer, nor the buyer undervalue the goods of the seller. Consider
further, how Christ more particularly requires that we should be like God in
goodness, doing good to all, forgiving injuries, and making their condition
our own, ready to be (...), for each other (as Ignatius often speaks) laying down
our lives for our brethren, dwelling in Love, which works no ill to her
neighbor, envies not, vaunts not it self, is not puffed up, behaves not it self
unseemingly, seeks not her own, is not easily provoked, thinks no evil,
rejoices not in iniquity, but in the truth, bears all things, believes all
things, hopes all things, suffers all things. If such commands of Christ were
observed, Men might beat their swords into Plow-shares, their Spears into
pruning hooks, there would be no leading into Captivity, no complaining in our
Streets, no vexatious (...), no groaning of the oppressed, no extremity of
poverty, or want to put Men upon violence, private injuries, public sedition.
If men would according to the command of Christ, obey their teachers, prove all
things, hold fast that which is good, prefer others in honor before
themselves, not thinking of themselves above what is meet, not being wise in
their own eyes, but humbly enquire after truth, suspecting their own judgment,
following after those things which make for peace and edification, studying to
be quiet, letting their moderation be made known to all Men. And if those that
are Teachers and Rulers in the Church would not Lord it over the heritage of
God, but be gentle toward them, as a Nurse to her Children, not seeking theirs
but them, doing all things for their edifying; we should soon see an end of
divisions and Schisms, and separations in the Church. If any here object that I
fancy a Church of Catharists, and such purity and holiness in Men, as is not
to be expected in this World; I answer, I speak of what is rather to be desired
than hoped for, and what religion would do toward the happiness of Mankind,
were the rules of it duly observed, and would Men be faithful to the
principles of it, which is sufficient to this Apology, which I here make
against such as would reproach it, and bring it into disgrace in the world, and
to prove that the more Religion flourishes in any Nation, the happier it is,
and the better ordered, and that we may conclude with the Tragedian. Where
modesty, righteousness, holiness, piety and faithfulness are neglected, that
Kingdom cannot long stand, and if any think this would do well indeed, if all
would agree to do thus. I answer, the neglect of others does not discharge us
from our duty, we owe it to God, though Men should not deserve it, or requite
it with a reciprocal care of Justice and equity. And further, it is a great
advantage for raising our honor, when others neglect their duty. Sometimes
singularity is the only means to get a name, as the Satyrist could say, Aude
aliquid brevibus gyaris aut carcere dignum
Si vis esse aliquid; probitas laudatur and alget.


There is yet another way, whereby good men do promote the weal-publick, and
that is by the education of children, which in well governed Commonwealths
there has always been a special care taken for. Those are counted good
Common-wealths-men that build and plant such things as the Commonwealth may be
the better for, and enjoy the furit of when they are dead and gone. But those
that stock the Commonwealth with Plants of righteousness, which may in future
times bring forth the fruits of Justice and equity, do more promote the public
good, and those who let go Foxes and Wolves are not more worthy of punishment,
than such as bring up Children in a Commonwealth, which through their fault
and neglect of good education, are addicted to nothing but idleness and luxury,
and as Midwives form and fashion the head while the bones are tender, so
Parents should fashion their Childrens minds, and form their manners while they
are tender and plyant, which if then neglected, do very hardly afterward yield
to Discipline Ecclesiastical or Civil. Thus far I have showed how Godliness
does promote the good of a Nation in a way of natural causality. There is yet
another way whereby it does conduce thereto, and that is by a moral causality:
God delivering often the Island of the innocent, which is delivered by the
pureness of his hands. Job. 22. 30. These are as the Trees in a Cawsey, which
having life and substance in them, though sometimes they cast their leaves, do
keep it from going to ruin and mouldering away, to which the Prophet is
supposed to allude. Isa. 6.13. I know Ahab looked upon the good Prophet as the
troubler of Israel, who indeed was as the Chariot and Horsemen thereof for its
security and defense. And he justly retorted that crimination upon Ahab
himself. So in the primitive times, if there were War, Earthquakes, plague,
inundations, the poor Christians must to the Lions, as if they were the cause
of it. When Aurelius upon experience found that they prevailed more by their
prayers for the good of the Empire, than others could by prayers and arms, so
that he desired the Senate to cease their persecution against them, lest they
should turn those spiritual weapons against the Empire, the effects of which he
had found in such an eminent instance, and that they might pray for the good of
the Empire. As Darius defired that the Jews might offer sacrifice of sweet
savors unto the God of Heaven, and pray for the Life of the King, and of his
Sons. Ezra. 6.10. Upon the same ground Justinian (as we may see Constit. 6. ad
Epiphanium) took such care for the establishing of the true Religion, and for
the observation of those sacred Rules which were given by the Apostles as that
which would conduce much to the happiness of the Empire, and especially for
the settling of a pious Ministry, by whose prayers he hoped for so great
blessings upon himself and his Government. And a wise and great Prince in our
own memory does not only acknowledge that natural influence which Religion has
upon the obedience of Subjects (whereof I have alittle before spoken) who
himself does best express his own sense of it. It is no wonder (says he) if
Men not fearing God, should not honor their King. They will easily contemn
such shaddows of God, who reverence not that supreme and adorable Majesty, in
comparison of whom all the Glory of Men and Angels is but obscurity, but as
knowing also how far it does conduce morally to the happiness of a Nation,
gives it in charge to his Son (his Majesty now reigning in England) to begin
and end with God, and always to keep up solid Piety, and those fundamental
truths, which mend both the hearts and lives of Men, it being not only the
Glory of Princes to advance Gods Glory, but the means to make them prosperous,
and keep them from being miserable. Whereupon his Majesty as remembering such
pious words and counsels of His Royal Father, did at his first restoration
express his just displeasure against such, as pretending a great zeal to his
Cause and Service, did not only discredit it by the license of their lives and
manners; but hazard the driving away those approaching mercies, which they
should rather have acknowledged in their several stations, with circumspection,
integrity, and reformation in their lives. It is ordinarily said, -- Delirant
Reges plectuntur Achivi.

But it is true on the other hand also, that Rulers are punished for the sins
of the People. 1 Samuel 12.25. God ordering it so in his wise and righteous
Providence; not only as they partake many times in each others sins, but as
they have a joint interest, so as one suffers in the sufferings of another. I
remember Machiavel (who was never thought to be over-precise, or to be troubled
with a bogling conscience) complains of it in his Commonwealth, as that which
he feared would be the ruin of Italy, that wickedness did so much abound, and
that there was such a decay of Religion amongst them, and they were so far
degenerated from the purity of the Primitive times, that they had reason to
expect the vengeance of God upon them. Whereupon he shows how necessary it is
for Princes to have a special care for the preservation of the purity of
Religion, which I am sure is an innocent policy, and the wisest maxim which he
lays down: for besides, that the Church has always been a burdensome stone,
which has broken in pieces all that have burdened themselves with it, Zach.
12.13. Whilst Righteousness does exalt a Nation, Prove. 14.34. Wickedness
(like the talent of lead in the Ephah, Zach. 5.8.) sinks it down. We know ten
righteous persons would have saved a Sodom, and God would do nothing against
it, whilst there was one in it. And if God did not for the sake of such, many
times spare Nations, and show them some peculiar favor, there had been no
ground for that which he himself has pronounced of them, that they are such,
of whom the World is not worthy.

SECT. XIV. An enquiry into the causes, why Religion is so much neglected. The
remoter causes the corruption of Man's nature, the malice and power of the
Devil, the nearer cause, the prevalenccy of sense against Faith and reason,
which is removed by showing in how many in stances of our Lives, we do by
reason correct the errors of sense.
HE that shall read what I have hitherto written, and observe the general
practice of the World, will perhaps wonder, that if these things be so, Men
should no better understand their own interest, but generally neglect this
which is pretended to conduce so much to the making of the World happy, and
what I have said, though it may seem to some to have some show, of probability,
will hardly obtain belief, but lie under some suspicion, like the honest
projects of some well-wisher to the public good, which never obtained so much
credit as to be reduced to trial. Wherefore I shall a little enquire after the
causes of that ungodliness and profaneness, that so generally reigns in the
World. And first, we know the Scripture has often taught us that the nature of
Man is so corrupted by that which is called Original Sin, That the imaginations
of the thoughts of his heart are only evil, and that continually, his heart
desperately wicked and deceitful above all things; his understanding so
darkened that he is alienated from the life of God, through the ignorance that
is in him: filled withal unrighteousness; fleshly lusts, warring against the
Soul, and prevailing in our members to bring forth fruit unto Death. The Wisdom
of the flesh is enmity against God, so that man is wise to do evil, but he has
no knowledge to do good. Now experience does more confirm us in the belief of
this, than a thousand Arguments. Again, we often read of the enmity of the Devil
against Mankind, and though his power be not much discerned by many, yet it is
like the influence of Celestial Bodies (Sun Moon and Stars) upon these
sublunary things, powerful and effectual, though not discerned but in the
effects: hence we read of his working effectually in the hearts of the Children
of disobedience: of men being taken captive of him at his pleasure: of the
strength of delusion: of his going about like a roaring Lion: of wrestling with
principalities and powers: and resisting the Devil steadfast in the Faith. He
that should have seen the Poor Man cured by Christ, offering violence to
himself, and casting himself sometimes into the fire, sometimes into the water,
would have easily concluded that he was acted by some evil spirit to such
things as were destructive to his own nature: so to see men sin against their
own souls, and run such desperate hazards against their own interest, is a
clear argument that they are acted by some other nature, which seeks their
ruin and destruction. Now these may be remote causes of the prevalency of that
Atheism, which we see and lament in the World, but yet there must be some
nearer causes searched out; for (unless it be in some secret Sympathies and
Antipathies) Man does ordinarily act according to reason, that is, what is
either really so, or seems so to him, and there must be some ratio motiva to
elicite, or draw forth the acts of his will. The Grace of God is powerful in
good actions, yet it works congruously to our natures, moving by the means of
some rational arguments and principles: so the efficacy of the Devil is very
great in evil actions; yet he makes use for the most part of moral arguments,
though he had such a hand in Judas, his Treason, and Annanias his cosenage, as
that he is said to put these things into their hearts, yet, by the whole tenor
of their story, we find that there were some moral motives he made use of, and
that it was covetousness that did more, immediately sway in these sins. Now (it
seems) one main reason of Men's Atheism, which is more near and immediate, is
the prevalency of sense, as there are some actions, which do prevent the
reasonings of the mind, which we call actiones hominis, but not humanae, which
indeed are actions of Men, but not humane actions, proceeding from the
essential principle of man, objects coming to the sense, before they can have
access to the understanding; the spirits move disorderly till the understanding
taking cognizance of the matter, do rectify such motions of the spirits: as in
a sudden noise or unexpected sight, the senses as the Sentinels take the first
alarm; but as soon as the news is carried to the understanding, as the main
guard or principal officer, and found to be of no dangerous consequence, this
sudden commotion is allayed: so in more important passages of our lives, sense
makes many disorderly sallies and motions, without taking counsel of the
understanding, and objects do make very deep impressions upon them; and the
Scripture does take notice how much we are led by sense in this frail state,
wherein we are so as we may all say with the Propher, Law. 3.51. Our eye
affects our heart, this is the foundation of the Apostles argument, 1 John
4.20. He that loves not his Brother whom he has seen, how can he love God
whom he has not seen? We have a thousand times more reason to love God, than
to love our Brother, considering the perfections and excellencies that are in
God, to render him amiable, and the obligations which we are under, to him who
has done more ten thousand times for us than all the friends which we have in
the World; but whatever reason there may be in the thing it self, the Apostle
argues according to our poor capacity, and the access that things have to us,
and does clearly suppose that things which have access to out senses, are more
effectual for moving our affections, than such things as are only the object of
faith. So though we hear of an infinite Majesty that created and sustains our
selves, and all other finite beings, who sees all our actions, and will one
day call us to an account for them; and likewise of an eternal weight of glory,
made up of things, which eye has not seen, nor ear heard, nor ever entered into
the heart of Man to conceive: these things do not move us, because they are far
out of our sight, and the things of the World which are nearer to our senses,
and are the immediate objects of them, pleasing the taste, delighting the smell,
tickling and flattering the Ear, dazzling the eyes, have more prevalency upon us.

But yet, upon examination we shall find this is not sufficient to prevail
against those important considerations, which I have already proposed, nor to
leave mankind excusable for abandoning himself to the pleasures of this life,
so as to neglect those better things which are propounded as the reward of
holiness. Let us but quit our selves like men, and exercise those common
principles of reason, which we exercise in other affairs of our lives, and
though we cannot perhaps thereby silence the clamors of sense, yet we may
confute them, and reject them. Do we not ordinarily see men correct the errors
of sense by reason? Do we not see them part with their blood, to prevent the
inconveniency of a disease? which for the most part they do believe or suspect,
not upon the evident demonstrations (but probable conjectures) of a Physician,
or at best by their own reason. Do not men endure the cutting off of a member
to save the body, and lengthen out a miserable life for some days or years? Do
not men drink the most unpleasing potions for the recovery of their health, or
repairing their decayed strength? Do not men cast their seed into the earth, in
hopes of receiving the increase of it? Does not the Merchant send away his
goods, in hope to receive others for them, which may bring him some gain and
advantage? And what is all this, to denying ungodliness and worldly lusts?
denying our selves the pleasure of sin, for the pleasure of Heaven? yea, do we
not see men ordinarily binding their Sons to some Apprenticeship, for many
years, that so they may learn a Trade to maintain themselves in some repute in
the world, when they shall come to years? rather than let them live in
idleness and pleasure, giving up themselves to childish sports and vanities,
when they are young, which would afterward expose them to poverty and
contempt. And he is accounted a cruel and unjust Father; that will not thus
love his Child, with such a prudent severity, rather than undo him by a foolish
indulgence; yet, how wide a difference is there in these cases? And how far
does this fall short of expressing the unreasonableness of such as will rather
enjoy present pleasures, than prepare for future happiness? A Child is bound
to an Apprenticeship, and he perhaps dies before his time be out, and so all
his labor and charge is lost, or he does not live seven years a Freeman after
he has lived seven years in a hard service. But he that gives up himself to
the service of Christ, let it be imagined to be as hard as some men's prejudice
persuades them, the sooner he dies, the sooner his service is ended, and though
he dye never so soon, he loses not his Freedom, but is made a Citizen of
Heaven, and once entered there, he never dies but does for ever reap the fruit
of his labors. Do we not give twenty times as much for the Fee-simple (as they
speak) of an Estate as it will bring us in one year? and according to the same
rule, were we sure to enjoy the pleasures of sin twenty years, and could
imagine them to be equal to the joys of Heaven, yet we should quit them for
those everlasting pleasures, which we should enjoy for ever our selves; and not
only for some Ages, as we hope to do Estates on Earth, not in our selves, but
only in our posterity. Further yet, we see it is in vain to lay a snare in the
sight of any Bird. Prove. 1.17. they will not come into the Net to feed, if they
perceive it, or swallow the bait, when they see the hook: yet foolish men do
venture on Hell, which they are told will certainly be the wages of sin, and
will enjoy the present pleasures of it, though they have all the assurance that
a man can have of any thing which he sees not with his eyes, that it will cost
him his life, and that his Soul must rue for ever in Hell. God indeed does not
manifest himself to us ordinarily here, nor take us up as he did Paul into the
third Heavens, to show us the Glory thereof, but he will have us to exercise
faith here, and to take his word, which he has so fully confirmed to us, that
we may as certainly trust to it, as if we had the clearest evidence in the
world. The Husbandman casts his seed into the ground without any fear or
suspicion of losing, having been confirmed by many experiments in the hope of
receiving it again with increase; but a thousand experiments will not so fully
persuade, as a divine testimony confirmed by Covenants, Oaths and Seals, (the
ordinary ways of confirmation amongst men) so that a Divine faith, founded
upon the word of God, is as the substance of things hoped for, which are but
future, and makes them as it were really subsist, and is the evidence of things
not seen, confirming them to us, and as fully persuading us of them, though
they are not obvious to the sense, as any Philosophical demonstration can
confirm any truth, so that notwithstanding the Apostle owns sense to be a great
means to move affections in this frail state wherein we are, yet faith serves
believers for a sufficient foundation of love and delight, Though they see not
Jesus Christ, they love him, and rejoice in him with joy unspeakable and full
of Glory. 1 Pet. 1.7. We are short sighted, and cannot see a far off. 2 Pet.
1.9. but faith as a perspective brings things nearer to us, that we may judge
of them as really present. Let not our senses therefore usurp authority over
Faith and Reason, but lot Faith and Reason have their perfect work, let not the
Men of the World be wiser in their Generation than Children of light, let us
not be wiser in the things of the World, than in the things of Heaven. We choose
not the fairest of things, (for the most part) but such as are more serviceable
and durable, nor the sweetest, but that which is wholesome and nourishing, we
choose not the cleanest or pleasantest way, but that which leads to the place
which we are going to. So let us judge of things, not according as they present
themselves to our senses, but as they have a real intrinsic worth to commend
themselves to our judgments, and let us not judge of things according to their
suitableness to our present fancies, but as they conduce to our abiding good,
measuring every thing not by Time, but by Eternity.

SECT. XV. Inconsiderateness, another great cause of Atheism, against which
the best remedies are a serious apprehension of the great moment, and
importance of spiritual things, frequent reading and hearing the word of God,
Christian communion and conference about matters of Religion, mutual
admonition. The prevalency of evil customs and habits, the folly of deferring
repentance.
ANother chief reason of that Atheism, which abounds so much in the World is,
inconsiderateness, the most important truths do not affect us any longer than
we consider them. The Platonists observed this who made knowledge nothing but
remembrance, or an actual consideration of that which Man knows, not reckoning
that to be knowledge which lies dead in the habit, and does not at all affect
the Soul. And we find that the Scripture lays much weight upon this
consideration or remembrance, yea, as much as Man's salvation comes to. We may
observe, Isa. 1.3. There is an Epimone, wherein the Prophet lays the sin of
Israel upon this, that they did not consider. So 1 Kings 8.47. We may observe
affliction brings men to bethink themselves, that brings them to repentance,
and repentance is a means to obtain pardon; and we find by experience, that
when Men are by sickness brought to a serious weighing of matters, they are
easily persuaded to make good promises and resolutions, which when their minds
are afterward (by the pleasures of the World) diverted from the thoughts of,
they turn to their former course; yea, we see many times that Men are so
ingenuous as to yield to reproofs, and to condemn themselves and their own
ways, when they are admonished of them, as if they stood in need of no more,
but to be put in mind of such things as they have in their own hearts, and only
to have conscience awakened, and we find Ezekiel, 18.14.28. that the turning away
of a wicked man, from the evil of his ways, depends chiefly upon
consideration. I have already showed that the Devil is the remote cause of that
wickedness and profaneness, which abounds in the World; yet, he uses this as
the great means to draw Men from God, to divert their minds from the thoughts
of such things, as may have an influence upon their affections and actions to
make a change in them, as we see plainly in the Parable of the Sower. Luke
8.12. Men hear the word, then comes the Devil and takes it away out of their
hearts, lest they should believe and be saved. First, we find by experience
that M^n are often seriously affected with those things, that they hear while
they are lively represented to their minds, and pressed seriously upon their
consciences, presently we observe that their thoughts are quite taken off from
those things, and (like water which has been warmed) they return to their old
temper again. We see here Christ himself assigns the cause of it, it is the
Devil that does this, where it is supposed that he has power to do it, though
we are not so easily able to understand how he does it, unless it be by
propounding other objects to us. We see here his design in it discovered, which
is to hinder their believing, and consequently their Salvation, which we find
by sad experience to be the woeful consequent of this his malice. Now the most
effectual remedy against this inconsiderateness, would be a serious
apprehension of the great moment and concernment of these things. It is the
means which Moses prescribes to the Israelites, Deuteronomy. 32.47. for setting their
hearts to those things, which he testified to them. It is not a vain thing for
you (says he) it is your life, and by those things you shall prolong your
days. It is a rule of Prudence which prevails throughout, that we should look
to the main chance, and not neglect the important affairs of our life. The
Husbandman sorgets many petty businesses, but he never forgets to Plow and sow.
He would be accounted a mad man that should go to the Market and buy trifles
and toys for his children, and forget to buy them bread. A Traitor will not
forget to sue out his pardon, or a Man that has a suit for his whole Estate,
forget to produce his evidences, and prepare his answer against the Term. This
is our case, we are condemned already in law, John 3.18. that is in force
against us, we know not how soon we shall be setched to execution. If a Man did
but apprehend the danger he is in continually, while he is a wicked man, and in
an unregenerate condition, standing continually upon the pits brink, and ready
to fall in, it would surely awake him out of his security, and prevent his
sleep, till he should have some hope of his pardon, or the thoughts of the
infinite advantage that true Godliness brings with it, would make him
continually apply his heart to it. The abundance of the Rich, suffers him not
to sleep; by reason of his care and solicitude for the keeping of it, and we
have more cause a thousand times to be sollicitous in this case, lest a promise
and possibility being left us of entering into such a rest, we should by any
means fall short of it. The ordinances of the Gospel, the reading of the Word,
the Communion of the Saints are prescribed by God, as a further remedy of this
evil. Heb. 3.13. Daily mutual exhortation is commended as a means to prevent
the hardening of our hearts through the deceitfulness of sin, which the more it
is indulged, the more it insinuates, and prevails upon us. Men's knowledge makes
not the Word of God less useful to them; therefore it is a vain ignorant thing
for Men to neglect it, upon pretense of knowing as much as their Teachers:
though the Saints to whom Peter writes, were instructed and established in the
truth, yet he thinks it necessary to write those things to them, 2 Pet. 1.12.
to put them in remembrance, and thereby to stir up their pure minds. Cap. 3.1.
The words of the wise being not only as nails to fasten, that Christians may be
established, but as goads to excite, that so they may not grow negligent, Eccl.
12.11. and the work of Ministers lies more in awakening the conscience, and
quickening the affections, than informing the Judgment, and there are few men
that live where the sound of the Gospel comes, but know, that which duly
improved, would make a considerable change in their lives, and I think it might
be of singular use in a Christian life, for those that have near Relations (if
such as are prudent and faithful) or those that have friends which are to them
as their own Souls, if they live together, and have opportunity to know well
each others conversation, seriously to oblige themselves to each other, if they
observe any thing in each others lives, or carriages which is unbecoming their
profession, to take the first opportunity (with all Christian meekness and
privacy) to tell them of it, how they spoke such a thing unadvisedly, did this
thing unseemly, exceeded in the other thing. I know it is a duty of zeal and
charity, which all Christians owe to each other, but those have the best
opportunity for it, who have daily intimate conversation with others, and
advantage for observing the whole procedure of their lives. And this which I
have now been speaking of does likewise make that gracious Christian
communication, which the Gospel requires more necessary. And for this cause God
did not only require it of the Jews, but further enjoins them the use of their
Phylacteries, and the writing, the most important Periods of the Law, upon
their Gates and Posts, that so the things which did so nearly concern them,
might be continually sounding in their ears, and represented before their eyes.
I might assign further, some other causes and cures of men's Atheism and
wickedness, as the corruption of man's nature does strongly incline a man to
evil, so Regeneration is that which does change their natures, and dispose them
to holiness; but there are many acts of morality, which conduce to Men's present
advantage, (both in a personal and a relative capacity) to which regeneration
is not absolutely necessary, and I have already spoken something of it, Sect.
7. therefore I shall say no more of it in this place. Concerning the
praevalency of evil habits, and customs, and the prejudice that does thereby
arise against holiness, as also concerning the advantage that one who is a
Christian indeed, (and has experience of spiritual comforts, and the
sweetness of the duties of Religion) has above one that is only outwardly a
Christian, and does duties only as a task, I have elsewhere spoken somewhat
also, and so supersede from any further consideration of them. I confess, I
think the putting off, and procrastinating of repentance, detains many in the
snares of Satan: but the former part of my discourse does wholly militate
against this folly of men, and deprive them of all such pretense in that,
(besides the imprudence and extreme madness of putting off that which we know
not whether we shall ever have opportunity for, and leaving a matter of such
importance, as our eternal Salvation at uncertainties) the advantages which Men
have by observing the precepts of the Gospel, even in this life, do require our
most speedy applying our selves to the observance of them, and argue the
deferring of our repentance of the greatest folly, and all that have been
brought thereto, (especially in their old age) have been ready with Austin to
complain, that they have known God too late, and repented that they did no
sooner exchange the pleasures of sin, for the joy and peace which is in
believing.

SECT. XVI. Objections, from differences in Religion answered, though we could
not be fully assured that the Christian Religion is true, yet it would be our
wisdom to observe the Rules and Precepts of it. The proofs which some have of
the truth of Christian Religion, clearer than those which some desire to have,
and clearer than any produced for the truth of any other Religion. Objections
from the improbability and seeming contradiction of many things in Scripture
answered. Notwithstanding the difference amongst Christians, all of them are
agreed, in so much as may serve for the well ordering of our conversations.
THere are some yet that (being willing to find any pretense for palliating
their sin) will ask how we shall find out the true Religion, amidst so many
differences as there are amongst men about it. When we see men agreed and come
to some accord, about matters of Religion we will consider of the whole
business. Now to such I answer, that if their doubt be concerning the
Christian Religion, whether that be the only true amongst those which are
professed in the world. First, the esteem which it has obtained in the World,
and the reverence wherewith it has been received in all places, to which the
knowledge of it has come, may challenge from any wise man the most serious
weighing of what is offered for the proof of it, which I will not here stand to
sum up, but will only say, (and that with much confidence) that whosoever shall
but seriously peruse what has been written in several Ages, for evincing the
truth of it, will (see at least) so much probability for the truth of it, and
so much reasonableness and equity in the precepts of it, that they will
account it madness in any to run the hazard of losing that reward, which it
propounds, or suffering the punishment which it threatens to the despisers of
it, rather than submit to a Law so holy, so just, so good. Let us suppose it,
many prove false, yet, what would Men lose thereby? indeed they would lose
their future reward, but they would have the present advantage of it, for (as
Chrysostom truly says, (...) Scil. (...). The way of sin is more difficult than
the way of holiness. And I cannot but here subjoyn the saying of a Learned
Man, on Mat. 11.29. Precepta Christi, talia sunt ut si par ponatur consuetudo
unius hominis ad recie vivendum, alterius ad flagitia, non dubie multo dulcior
sit futura vita quaesecundum virtutem est, gravissima enim tributa pendunt qui
ambitioni, qui avaritiae, qui libidini serviunt: that is, Suppose several Men
equally accustomed to a sinful, and a Holy life, and the way of Virtue and
Piety shall be found to be much more pleasant, and those that are Vassals to
ambition, Covetousness, sensuality will find the tribute heavy, which they pay
to such Tyrants. So that as those who search into the secrets of nature to find
out the Philosophers Stone, though they attain not their end, yet find out many
secrets and experiments, which may be pleasing and useful: in like manner,
those who seek eternal happiness in the Gospel, though it should be supposed
that they may miss of it, yet they shall find such real advantage by the
observation of those precepts, that are there given, that their labor would
not be in vain, but they would be sufficiently recompensed for it. But now
suppose, the things therein delivered, should prove true, what a woeful case
would those be in, which should be found to be neglecters of it? what a
dreadful thing would it be for them to fall into the hands of the living God?
and you that think good to suspend your belief of the truth of the Gospel, that
so you may without disturbance enjoy the pleasures of sin, and prevent the
clamors of an unquiet accusing Conscience. Gird up your loins like Men, and
tell me, (I beseech you) do the arguments which you have against the truth of
Christian Religion, as far exceed in probability, those which are alleged for
the proof of it, as the Glory which it propounds (as the reward of holiness)
exceeds the pleasures of sin, (supposing that pleasure in it which you imagine)
or as far as the torments threatened, as the wages of sin exceed the utmost
severity that men can be imagined to submit themselves to, in obedience to the
Gospel? yea, let men but act congruously, and allow as much in matters of
Religion, as in other instances of their lives, and we shall find that, as the
Christians of old argued against the Heathens, that they believed many things
in Philosophy, and humane learning, upon less evidence than what was offered
for the proof of Christianity: so men do make much greater adventures upon more
improbable grounds than any they can be imagined to make by conforming
themselves to the Rules of the Gospel, upon the grounds laid down for
confirmation of it. And if men were as suspicious and wary in other things as
these Scepticks; in matters of Religion, they must not eat, lest through the
malice or negligence of some, there should be poison mingled with their meat;
they must not go into an house, lest it should fall upon their heads; they must
not obey any commands of their Princes, unless they should come and deliver
them in express words to themselves, because some might possibly counterfeit
their hands and seals; yea, it is most evident, that they must forbear so many
things, that they would not be sit for converse with men, but would quite
overthrow human Society. Let me go a little further, I desire (in good earnest)
to know of Men, what evidence they require to persuade them of the truth of
Christian Religion, and it may be what they have already will be found more
convincing. Some may fancy a voice from Heaven would satisfy them. I answer,
they have already a more sure word of Prophecy. 2 Pet. 1.19. They think perhaps
if one should come from the other World, of their former acquaintance, and tell
them what is done there, they should believe; but he that does not believe the
Scriptures, will not believe though one should arise from the dead. Luke 16.31.
Neither do I beg the question, in alleging these things from Scripture,
grounding them wholly on its authority, but assert them boldly as theorems,
which are demonstrable by reason, being assured that there might be more
objected against such kind of evidence, than is to be objected against that
which is brought in the Scriptures. For tell me, I beseech you, in case there
should be such a voice from Heaven, might we not as easily suspect that our
senses might be deceived, or that it might be formed in the air by some spirit,
as suspect that we should be imposed upon, by the Prophets who wrought so many
miracles, for the confirmation of their mission from God, which so plainly
foretold many things to be accomplished after many Ages, which could not be
foreseen in their causes, that were holy men, and such as could not be imagined
to have a design to deceive, especially the things which they delivered, being
such as exposed them to danger and trouble and were not likely to bring them
any advantage in the World. Or should Moses, or one of the Prophets, or
Apostles arise from the dead and tell us, they did indeed live here upon the
earth in such times, and preach such Doctrine, and work such miracles; yea, and
they have found since their Death, that those things which they Prophesied, or
Preached, are true, they see those who obeyed their word triumphing in Heaven,
and those who contemned it, tormented in Hell: might we not as easily suspect
that this might be some Spirit, which appeared in their shape to delude us, as
that the Jews who are Enemies to the Christian Religion, should devise a
writing and disperse it abroad in the World, which should so plainly confirm
the Christian Religion as the Old Testament does, which is at this day owned
among the Jews, or that those Ancient Writers should conspire together, to
deceive the World, in recording the same things, which we find in Scripture, or
that the Scriptures should be translated into so many languages, and dispersed
all the World over, so soon after the Apostles times, and none be so false to
the divulgers of it, or so true to the World, as to give notice of it, if it
were a forgery, or that these things should be recorded in the Roman Registers,
and the acts of their Senate to which Tertullian durst appeal, if there had
been no such thing? This one thing would I learn, should one come to us, as
from the dead in the likeness of Alexander, Caesar, William the Conqueror,
Wickliff, Luther, Calvin, and tell us in sober sadness that they were such a
one, that lived in such a time, did such things, Preached such Doctrine,
whether should we believe such a Testimony sooner than the unanimous consent of
History concerning them, and those Books and Writings which are generally
received as the works of such Men? If any shall say that Turks and Heathens are
as confident of the truth of that Religion which they were brought up in, as we
are of the truth of ours. I answer, they have not like ground for their
confidence, as for the Heathens, what became of their Gods, their Oracles, when
the Hebrew Child was born, and when the Gospel began to spread in the World?
Compare the miracles wherewith other Religions have been confirmed, with those
wherewith the Gospel has been confirmed, and see whether they be so many, so
confessedly above the power of Nature or Art, so evidently, wrought in the
sight of all, as those whereby the Christian Religion has been confirmed. What
is the reason that the Turks admit no enquiry, or dispute about matters of
Religion, but require an implicit Faith? Truth seeks no corners, error shuns
the light. Examine the Laws of Turks and Pagans whether there be that Purity,
Equity, Wisdom, consonancy to right reason, and the light of Nature, in them
which is to be found in the Scriptures. Examine the ways and means by which
they have been propagated, whether they have reached any further than their
Swords have made way for them, whether the Weapons of their warfare were
spiritual or carnal: whereas the Gospel prevailed through the evidence and
power of the Spirit against the pretended authority of the Jews, the Wisdom and
learning of the Grecians, the power and force of the Romans, and Fishermen were
too hard for Rabbis, Philosophers, Judges, Generals, Armies. If any object the
improbability of some things delivered in Scripture, I shall only propound
whether there be not some things which we are fully assured of, either by
experiments, or Mathematical demonstration, which to others seem as improbable
as any thing in the Scripture seems to us, and shall we not grant God to be as
much wiser than our selves, as we are wiser than other Men, and suppose he
could as easily convince us of those things which now seem impossible to us, as
we can convince others of those things which they cannot at present believe?
And if the seeming contradictions that are in Scripture be urged to weaken the
authority of them, they are rather an argument of the integrity and sincerity
of the Penmen, and their leaving things so securely, which do not at first
sight seem to accord with other Scriptures, shows clearly they had no Plot to
deceive the World, otherwise they would have conspired to make their
testimonies, agree in words more exactly; yet upon examination of the matter,
and considering the several circumstances of time, place, Persons, scope,
occasion, the several uses of the same word and phrase, the latitude which all
Authors use in their writings, the several places and Persons of the same name,
the several names given to the same place or Person, the shortness of
Scripture, History, and supplying in one place, what is wanting in another, the
attending rather to sense and substance, than to words and phrases in citing
Scripture, we shall find that there is a very fair accord between those places
which seem to be at the greatest variance, and if we cannot reconcile all
places, yet if we consider that we have by attending to such things as I have
mentioned already, composed so many seeming differences, we may conclude it is
from our own ignorance, that we cannot compose the rest, and that there is yet
somewhat else that we are ignorant of, which if we could find out, we might as
easily reconcile the rest, which at present seem most irreconcilable, and it is
obvious to every one how many difficulties and contradictions seem to be in
every Science, while Men are but smatterers in it, which presently vanish as
soon as they come more perfectly to understand it. But now if this objection be
framed against the differences which are among Christians, which profess the
Gospel, I will by the way observe this, that differences do most abound, where
men (upon serious apprehensions of the weight and importance of the matters of
faith) do diligently apply themselves to understand themselves, the mysteries
of the Gospel, and to see with their own eyes, being afraid to be deceived in
matters of such moment, by depending upon the testimony of others, and
unwilling to lose their Souls and Heaven, and God, to save the labor of
searching after truth, and in those Nations where I have had opportunity to be
conversant, I have found most differences amongst them, which have been most
addicted to Religion, and most sollicitous about the condition of their souls,
and most agreement amongst them, which have contented themselves to follow
others by an implicit faith, without troubling themselves much to search after
truth, and where there has been such a coldness and indifferency in matters
of Religion, that all have quietly accorded together, as the Philosophers
observe, that cold does congregate Heterogeneal things, or such things as are
of different kinds, making them all to consist quietly together, which heat
does sever and separate. So that I am almost ready to say with Luther, that I
know not how to believe, that the Gospel has been preached in a place, where I
do not see errors and divisions. And it is further observable as an argument of
the general concurrence of all Christians, in the belief of the necessity, and
excellency of an holy life, that setting aside some few, who (being themselves
Slaves to vile affections) have laid down some loose principles to patronize
their own corrupt practices, and draw after them such as are laden with the
like sinful lusts: men of all opinions and persuasions have earnestly pressed
men to the greatest strictness and accuratenesse in their conversations, and
have served themselves at least of a show of holiness, as the most effectual
means to induce men to a belief of their Doctrine. But to come nearer to the
matter, let us leave men to suspend their belief a while of those things, which
they see controverted, and where they find probable arguments alleged on the
one side, and on the other, yet their objection holds not against such things,
wherein all are agreed, as are most of the precepts of the Gospel. That rule
which was formerly mentioned, given by our Savior, Mat. 7.12. is not only
allowed by all Christians, but by the very Heathens. Alexander Severus did so
much esteem it, that he would have it written upon the Walls of his Palace. So
many other important truths, which are a sufficient Foundation, of the most
strict and holy conversation are agreed on amongst all, as Gods omnisciency
overseeing all our actions, a future judgment, wherein all must be sentenced
according to their actions, insomuch that even Robbers, and such as conspire in
wickedness, and seem to bid defiance to Heaven, are self condemned, and
witness for God against themselves, in obliging themselves to secrecy and
faithfulness to each other, by solemn oaths wherein they swear by the name of
that God, whose commands they live in the open breach of, and so acknowledge
him as a witness and spectator of their actions, and one who will severely
punish the contempt of his authority, in the breach of such oaths. Many cannot
agree indeed about methodizing their notions, and disposing them into such a
systeme as that every part may agree, and that there may be an harmony in the
whole. Some cannot agree about the order and nature of Gods decrees, yet all
believe that no decree does excuse a Man's sin, or that any can pretend any
benefit by their election, that have not some evidence of it in their
sanctification. Men differ in their notions about the cause of sin, yet on both
sides they hold; that as the kind of fruit is not according to the root or
stock, but according to the Graft or Cyon, out of which it immediately grows:
so the specification of actions depends not upon any remote causes which may
have an influence into them, but upon the will of him that is the immediate
cause of them, and that there is nothing in the decrees of God, or the
temptations of Satan, which will excuse the sinner, or quit him from guilt. Men
are at variance about the extent of the efficacy of Christ's death, but agree
that none shall have any saving benefit by it, but those that believe. Men
differ about the Power of nature, and liberty of the will, but on both hands,
own so much power as will leave men inexcusable, and may be a ground of our
endeavors, and so much necessity of Grace and Divine assistance, as may bring
us upon our knees, and force us to our Prayers. Some difference there is about
Perseverance, but a consent in this, that he that does not persevere in
holiness shall never be saved. Some difference there is about the hand that
works have in our justification, but all agree that they are necessary in those
that are justified. Men vary in their opinions about the obligation of the Law,
the nature of the Covenant of Grace, Christian liberty, etc. but in this they
consent, that the things required in the Law are necessary to be done, though
not perfectly, yet sincerely as we can: that the Covenant of Grace is not so
far absolute, that men may be saved without faith and holiness: that Christians
are not to abuse their liberty, as an occasion to licenciousness. Now happy is
he that condemns not himself in the things which he allows. In short, let us
pray as if all depended wholly on Gods grace, without our endeavors. Do good
works, as if we were to be justified by them. Trust to Gods Grace, and mercy in
Christ, as if we had done no works at all. Live as if there were no Gospel.
Hope as if there were no Law. (I speak not in respect of the lowness and
servileness of our principles, but in respect of the diligence of our
endeavors) Let us walk watchfully and cautiously, as if we feared falling
away; yet love God, and hope in him, as if we were certain to persevere. In
short, (if I may take liberty to mention such names) let us pray like
Calvinists, endeavor like Arminians, act like Legalists, hope like
Antinomians; be Papists in our works, Protestants in our Faith. Let me again
add, to prevent mistake and offense, I speak not of the principles of Men's
actions, but the matter and substance of them: nor of what they do in
Hypothesi, which come under such distinguishing names, but, of what such Men's
principles do really (or at least are supposed by others to) lead them to.
Finally, whereto we have already attained, let us walk by the same rule, let us
mind the same things.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 6. line 8. read Isa. 6. l. 11. Phil. 3.19. p. 34. l. 25. for God read
Gold, p. 37. l. 6. r. Col. 3.23. p. 51. l. 15. blot out Mankind, l. 28. blot
out yet, p. 53 l. 15. for them r. him, p. 58. l. 10. r. out of joyn^, p. 129.
l. 15. r. (...), p. 145. l. 9. r. Zech. 12.3. There are some small faults in
the pointing, but such as will not much trouble any Reader.


