A SERMON Preached before the KING At White Hall, March 18. 1665/6.

By the Right Reverend Father in God. B. Lord Bishop of Lincoln.

Published by His Majesty's Special Command.

printer's device of Timothy Garthwait C R


London, Printed for Timothy Garthwait, 1666.

1 Thessalonians. 4. Ver. II. -- And to do your own business.


THE whole Verse, whereof these words are a part, is an Exhortation to the
study of Two Lessons; One for Quiet, the other for Business: That ye study to
be quiet, and to do your own business.

Of the former, the last time I had the honor to be called to this Service, we
treated particularly; and it was a point well worthy our care and study. But
the Lesson we are now to learn, seems not much to deserve or need it.

I have not (I confess) sought far for a Text, but took that which came next to
hand. Nor does the Text put you to seek far what you are to do; It is but your
own business. In both respects it may be thought unfit for this Audience, which
is not of that quality to be entertained with no better Provision than what
comes next to hand; and especially, if that should prove plain and homely, as
this is, To do our own business; and as it follows, To work with our own hands:
This is but a kind of Mechanical Doctrine; and what should that do here in
Court?

Not to leave my self and the Text under this prejudice; That I sought no
farther for it, was not of easiness or neglect, but Choice; Because I found it
not only in conjunction and company with the excellent Study of Quiet, to which
any kind of retainer at large might deserve respect; but also, Because I saw it
set by the Apostle, in a place of near and intimate relation, a Principle and
Foundation to it. The next way to be quiet abroad, is to be busy at home. And
though it be but plain Doctrine, it is never the worse for that use; for
Foundations are best, when plainest. It is noted as a cause why men make little
proficiency in Arts and Sciences, that the Principles and Elements are not so
well studied as they should be. And the reason why they fall under that
neglect, is, Because none of the great things which the Art it self promises,
are seen in the Principles at first. And therefore Quintilian, that the
Scholars of his Art might not be discouraged with the meanness of his First
Elements, tells them, that Latent Fundamenta, conspiciuntur aedificia; there is
little to be seen in the Foundation, that lies hid under ground; all the beauty
and luster is in the Superstruction. This doing our own business, (...) is a
practical principle, whereupon depends much of the business of our whole lives,
and so has the fate of other foundations, to be little seen and regarded; It
lies low under ground, and we overlook it, as a thing not worthy any man's
thought or care. But to give it the due, we must not look upon what it is in
Sight, but what it is in virtue; a Principle and Foundation whereupon is built
that, which is the desire of all good men, the public peace and quiet of the
Church and Kingdom. And then we may allow it to be good Doctrine which has so
good a Use. It is a good tree that brings forth good fruit.

But then you will say, It must be in season too. Now the wise man tells us,
There is a time for war, as well as a time for peace. Eccles. 3.9.
And can it then be seasonable again and again thus to importune the study of
such things as make for peace, at a time when we are all, and have cause to be
in preparation for war? Indeed if it were such a peace, as would weaken the
hands of any in the pursuit of that Just, Necessary and Royal Expedition, it
were a most unseasonable Solecism: But we must know, As there is a War that
makes for Peace, so there is a Peace that makes for War. Unity among our
selves, binds us close together; we are the stronger for it. Vis unita fortior;
in divisions and discord, strength is distracted and scattered; Dum singuli
pugnant, omnes vincuntur. Domestic Peace then, though it comes not out of the
Artillery, is good Ammunition for War: And it falls in well too, with the
express Letter and Doctrine of the Text, It is our own business. As it is the
proper business of a King to protect His Subjects from the Insolences and
Injuries of proud insulting Neighbors; so it is the business of every good
Subject too, to assist Him in it with their Lives and Fortunes. Whether
therefore we seek for Peace at home, or have cause of War abroad, the duty of
the Text is for us. We are doing our own business. But though it be a good
Foundation to build on every way; yet, except the Lord build the house, their
labor is but lost that build. Let us therefore before we go farther in the
work, go to him for a blessing upon it, etc.

That ye study to do your own business. I Take in the word (study,) being
forced by the necessary construction of Grammar and Reason. For an object
without an act, imports nothing: to do our own business, may be as well a
fault, as a duty; but if study be taken in, the sense is certain and perfect,
it is that wherein we shall do well to employ our study. As we are to study to
be quiet, so we are to study also to do our own business.

The words will bear two senses; as there are two sorts of offenders about
business, nihil agentes, and aliud agentes, And in the words of the Apostle,
(...), and (...), the idle that work not at all, and the busybodies; 2 These.
3.11.
so we translate (...): The Text will reach them both, for either it sets every
one awork, to find himself some business, or it restrains and confines him to
that which is his own.

The former against Idleness, is a good lesson, that, to awaken the lazy
sluggard out of his dead sleep; for, they are, as St. Paul speaks of his idle
wanton widows, dead while they live. 1 Timothy 5.6.
There is no more life in an idle man, then in an Idol-god, that has eyes and
see not, ears and hear not; but the other sense seems to agree better with the
scope of the place, and will afford work enough for this time; the Apostle
seems to have observed some among them too much busied in matters that brought
trouble and disquiet to themselves and others; for remedy whereof he enjoins
them to look to their own business.

But how their own? For it may be a fault, and a great one too, so to do our
own business, as not to regard what becomes of others; that if our own turns be
served, and we get, no matter who loses. This is deservedly forbidden by our
Apostle himself to the Philippians, chap. 2. ver. 4. Look not every man on his
own things, but every man also on the things of others. And in the 21. v.
complains of it too, that every one seeks his own, and not the things which are
Jesus Christ's. But our own here, and our own there, are two different things:
That which he blames there, is our own of interest; there may be too much of
our own in that: but that which he commands here, is our own of duty and
office. In this it must be so much our own, that it must be none but our own.
Having reduced the words to their proper genuine sense, in this lesson there
will fall to be learned these particulars.

1. That, there is and ought to be a propriety in business; that to every one
there belongs something that he may properly call his own. 2. The Obligation of
Duty and Religion, to confine himself to that which is his own. 3. The
Operation it has had in the World upon our Quiet or Disquiet. 4. From these is
inferred a Necessity to Study it; That ye study to do your own business.


I.
First, That there is a Propriety in Business. This must be laid for a ground;
all the rest else will fall to nothing. It will be no Religion to keep it; no
Sin to break it; no need to Study it.

That which S. Paul spoke of the Doctrine of the Gospel in general at Ephesus,
A great door, and effectual was opened to him, and there were many Adversaries;
1 Cor. 16.9.
is true also of this particular Doctrine of Propriety, It is a door open to
all wise and sober men; yet it has many Adversaries.

There is a busy humor in the world, to lay all common; and it is grown to be
a Sect of Religion; yea, more than one; as many as there are kinds of
Propriety, so many Sects endeavor to fling down the Enclosures.

Propriety in Goods and Possessions; and against this, there rises a Sect of
Levellers, who tell us from the Psalmist, The Heavens are the Lords; but the
Earth has he given to the Children of men: Psa. 115.16.
That to which every man has a Right by the Gift of God, the Pride and
Covetousness of a few have engrossed, and made their own.

Propriety of Respect and Honor due to some above others. Against this arises
another Sect of Levellers they call Quakers, who refuse to give Honor to whom
Honor belongs: Though this looks like a Religion against good Manners only, or
were but some Quarrel with the Grammarians against proper Names; the Mischief
of it lies deeper, and is of the spirit of Anabaptism, who oppose the very
Powers and Dignities themselves, which they despise in their Titles; for they
cannot be so foolish, though simple enough, as to make a Religion of Names
only. These are dangerous Sects of Levellers both; but they lie not in our way.
The Text touches only Levellers of Business, who think they are not to be
barred the liberty of doing any thing that is good; bonum quo communius eo
melius, and ought not to be impropriate to any. But that there is a Title and
Propriety in some to business, wherein it is not permitted to every one to
interpose, a necessity in Nature requires. The World is replenished with
infinite variety of things, and a great deal of work is to be done to make them
useful and serviceable to us. Now it is not possible for every one to do all,
and hardly all, in any one thing, to gain the full use and benefit of it. But
when the works are distributed severally to some, the benefit may redound to
all.

All the business of the world refers either to a Spiritual End, the good of
the soul; or to a Temporal and Civil, our well-being while we live here upon
earth: And to both these Ends God has appointed and assigned particular
persons; he did not leave them in common. In the Temporal there is private
business and public. For private use, as in Families, there is the business of
the Husband and Wife, the Parent and Children, the Master and Servants: And out
of Families, for private use likewise, there is the business of Physicians and
Advocates, Husbandmen, Merchants and Mariners, Mechanics and Laborers; and
all these are of private nature, though of common benefit. Then is there the
public business, by which all these are ordered and governed, and they are by
S. Peter distinguished to our hands, as that of the King as Supreme, 1 Pet.
2,13.
and of Governors sent by him; and they are Magistrates and Judges for Peace.
Captains and Commanders for War. And besides these, there is the business of
Ministers and Assistants to the Supreme Power, Counselors, Lawyers, Officers
and Servants; and all these are for that temporal end.

And for the Spiritual, whose business refers to the soul, there is likewise a
Propriety; as in Bishops to Ordain, Institute and Order the rest of the Clergy
specially, and of the whole Diocese occasionally, as the necessity of it shall
require. Then is there the business of the Presbyters, in the several parts of
the Diocese, in a more particular and immediate Cure and Charge, to be directed
by, and accountable to the Bishop. There be others Diaconal and Ministerial to
both. And all together, Temporal and Spiritual, as several Members, make one
Body; and every Member, says the Apostle, has not the same office, Romans 12.4.
God divided his Gifts to every one severally as he will, 1 Cor. 12.11. he did
not scatter them in common, but divide them, and all hold in severalty.

And as that Severance and Propriety stands upon good Authority; so Authority
was, no doubt, induc't upon reason of Profit and Interest. It conduces more to
the common good, than Community it self could.

To avoid fornication, 1 Cor. 7.2. let every man have his own wife. Upon the
same Equity, to avoid the promiscuous lust and curiosity men have to mingle
with any business, Let every man likewise have his own.

Artifici in sua art credendum. Men are most trusted in their own Trades. We
trust the Lawyer with our Estates, the Physician with our Bodies. I say nothing
of our Souls; we are so wise at that work, as to trust none but our selves.

one would not do, though he could: and all are such, as through the mercy of
God we need not do if we will, unless it be our own business.

We are now fallen upon the Second Part, that as every one has some business
that is his own, so Duty and Religion obliges him to take upon him no business
but his own.

II.
THis Lesson will not be so easily learned, as the former: all confinement of
it self seems uneasy. He that has no mind to go abroad, would not be tied to
stay at home. And he that cares for no business, will take it ill to be barred
any. But this confinement besides, nips the growth and increase of good,
whereof they think, more would be done if every one have free liberty to do it;
and therefore it is just and reasonable to allow any one a concurrent
jurisdiction with others in any thing that is otherwise good, though that be to
govern with the King, to pray and preach, or what they please, with the Priest.
And they have as much of propriety as any can have to business; yet even to
these, they think any man may make a sufficient title, that has understanding
to know what is to be done, as well as any other, and affection to do it,
perhaps more then others. And all have right and interest in the public,
especially that wherein Religion and the soul is concerned; how God may be best
served, and wherein his glory may be most promoted. Will not all these make a
Title good enough to any business?

The Glory of GOD, indeed, is a high and overruling Title; if we do not set it
on our own heads, as the manner is, to make Gods glory serve our own. Otherwise
that, and the rest are such things, as all men of wisdom or conscience should
have regard to, in any business they undertake; provided yet it be their own.
In that every one has liberty to improve his understanding and knowledge for
the best, as well for his own soul as the public good: In that let the glory
of God be the Star to guide him. But all these do not make the business ours;
they are a good qualification in any for business, yet give no right or Title
to it. Great knowledge and skill in the Laws will not set a man upon the Bench;
nor of Divinity, in the Bishops Chair; nor will the dexterous glib-gifted
tongue put a man into the Pulpit. There must be besides a Title and Commission
to make them ours.

But must all the obligations we have to the Public good, and to Gods honor,
stoop to Commissions, Titles and proprieties, which are but the creatures and
constitutions of men?

To this question, I answer in the words of Job, 13.7. Will you speak wickedly
for God, and talk deceitfully for him? It is deceitful talking, to plead for
God against himself; for though it should be granted, that the sorting of
several employments and functions have something of man in them; yet the
confirmation and approbation of God makes it his, and so divine: for as God
has founded a divine Moral law, upon the propriety of goods and possessions,
Thou shall not steal; yea, thou shall not covet that which is another; and yet
it comes not to be another, but by humane Laws: So though different states of
life and employments have somewhat in them by disposition of Law, or our own
choice; yet upon them also is founded this moral duty, to keep within those
bounds: For though men laid the Landmarks, yet God commanded They should not
be removed, Deuteronomy. 19.14.

It is a kind of Burglary to break into another man's business, as well as into
another man's house: or if you will not allow it to be theft to have another
business found with you, as it is to have another goods; it is as ill as theft
in S. Peter's opinion. The Murderer, the Thief, the Evil-doer, the Busie-body;
there is a Mess of them, he puts them all alike together, 1 Pet. 4.15.

To shut up this point, If the glory of God, and the public Good, and such
like fair pretenses, might let us loose upon one another business, it would
quickly bring us round, where we were, to that confusion and disorder, for
remedy whereof, the Apostle added this Lesson to the former. We shall never
learn to be quiet well, unless we learn also to keep within our own business.

Yet I deny not, but that Discord and Dissension have other causes besides;
for, of Pride comes contention, says Solomon, Prove. 13.10. And from
covetousness, says S. James, they desire, and have not, James 4.2. It is true
of other Lusts, Wrath, Revenge, Envy, Slander, and Curio sity too, break the
peace too often, and had need be bound to their good behavior all* Yet we may
observe it, That none of all these do actually any great mischief that way,
till they first bring it to this, till it draws us from our own station, and
fling us upon some thing that is none of our own business.

III.
THE truth of this will more fully be seen in the Third Part, which comes next
to be considered, The Operation it has had in the world, by disturbing the
Peace and Quiet of it. Meum and Tuum has not filled it with more Suits and
Contentions in our Goods and Possessions, than it has in the actions and
business of our lives, What is our own, and what is not our own.

To arraign all that are guilty of breaking this Rule in several kinds, would
ask a long process We will therefore take notice only here of the attempts
upon Government and Religion, by those whose business it was not; because the
most and greatest tempests and storms in the Christian World, have blown from
that Coast.

The Wars and Combustions over all Italy and Germany, in the time of the
Emperor, HENRY the 4th, had their beginning from hence. Pope Hildebrand, GREG.
vij. not content with that which his Charge and Office of Bishop allowed him,
began to measure out to himself a Greatness equal to the City he served in,
which had been Domicilium Imperii; first brake in upon the Temporal Power, not
heard of before in the Church, though then a Thousand years old: Where, for the
better support of his Greatness, he endeavored to get into his Disposing, all
Church-Promotions; and for that end, called a Council at Rome of a few Bishops
for his purpose, and there Decreed all Patronages and Donations by Laymen,
Princes not excepted, to be void, and of no effect in Law. What could be
expected from so Unjust a Decree, but vehement Opposition, and a Bloody
Dispute? What troubles the same Patronage and Investiture of Bishops brought
presently after into this Kingdom, our Stories are full of. But the angry Pope,
when he saw he could not quietly enjoy the Rights of the Crown, falls fiercely
upon the Crown it self, and would be Master of that too; and then he thought he
should Rule to purpose for the Catholic Cause. And for an Essay of this bold
Usurped Power, fairly Deposed the Emperor, and absolved his Subjects of their
Obedience This was certainly no Bishops business. He may bless the Coronation,
not dispose of the Crown. He may pray for a Godly and Peaceable Government
under it, not make a prey of it. To absolve Penitents of their Sins, is a
Bishops work; not of their Duties; that is not to remit their Sins, but to make
them Sinners. Now what was likely to be the effect of all this, but that which
happened, Wars and Combustions over the whole Empire?

Though that Pope did not long out live that Feite of his, yet his Successors
and their Parasites have so plied the Cause ever since that time, some
directly, some indirectly, that the fire is not yet extinguished. Now if the
Pope met with some Princes that would not endure his Ranging thus in their
Dominions, but thought it high time to quit his Miter, to secure their Crowns,
he may thank himself for it. They may call it a Schism, if they please; but it
is a Schism without a Sin. That word will hurt none so much as the Causers and
Authors of it; For it is but reasonable and just, That if the Pope would not
know his business, that Princes should know theirs. This is my First Instance,
of the Troubles that by this means brake into the whole Church.

in this Kingdom by a Civil War. I meddle not with the fault, let that sleep
under the Act of Oblivion. We may, I trust, without offense, enquire into the
cause of it. What were they doing that gave us that disquiet? Look upon the
Standard set up for the War; I mean, the most Execrable GOVENANT, Quomodo
legis? how read you there? was it not meddling with business was none of their
own? They Covenanted first to extirpate the Government of the Church
established by Law. That Law, with hands lifted up to Heaven, they swore they
would abolish. The Legislative Power we know in whom it is, to make or mend
Laws; it was none of their business. In this they were certainly too bold with
the Kings Scepter. At the next turn they take hold of his Sword too, and engage
themselves to a mutual Defense against all Opposition. This also was none of
their business. For though a Self-defence may be allowed as natural to all; it
is against private, not public Opposition; and then too, as Divines generally
resolve, Cum mother amine inculpatae Tutelae; never to the hurt of others; that
is, Every man may defend himself clypeo, but not every one gladio. The Sword is
the Kings, and He that takes it from any hand but His, where God has placed
it, shall perish with the Sword. In this the Covenanters, as ill as they like
Bishops, would be, in the Apostles phrase, (...), 1 Pet. 4.15.
the worst sort of Bishops, that is, medlers in business was none of their own.
The Worshippers of the Covenant have therefore been well dealt with, as the
worshippers of the Golden Calf were by Moses, Exodus 32.20. As he made them
drink that, so have they been made to eat this; though some of them be found of
so foolishly distempered stomachs, that they choose rather to part with that
which is their own, than renounce a Business was none of their own. But the
Covenant is past, and let it go. I wish for quiet sake, we may never hear of
the like again.

Leprosy on the walls, that could not be cleansed, but by pulling down the
House. From these we have felt already but too much, and have cause yet to fear
more.

But can we charge them with doing a business is none of their own? Can any
thing be more properly our own business, than the care of our souls, and to
serve God in the b^st manner that our understandings and Consciences shall
direct us?

They are mistaken that think the Charge lies upon this issue, what every man
may do for himself and his own salvation. He may without question do very much,
for he may keeep all Gods Commandments, if he can; and when he cannot, he may
be truly contrite and penitent for breaking them; and then he may assuredly
believe his sins shall be forgiven him by the merits and passion of our Lord
Jesus Christ. And again, He may serve and worship God with as much fervency and
devotion as he can and will; he may abound in Charity, Meekness, Humility,
Patience and Temperance, and all other Christian virtues: And so long as ye
thus follow that which is good, says S. Peter, who will harm you? 1 Pet. 3.13.
And I may say too, who can hinder you in all this? but if he makes himself a
party in a Sect, if there be assembling together in companies, gather
Congregations, incorporate in a Body, module Churches, give Laws of Doctrine
and Worship, set up Teachers and Leaders of their own; to all this they have as
little Right, as they have need. A man may go far, ye see, in Religion, without
troubling any; and if then they fall into some Error or Misbelief in Religion,
they ought not to be severely handled; but when they betake themselves to a
Sect, that alters the case, it will then be compassion mistaken. A Locust alone
is no such perilous beast to be feared or regarded by any; but when they come
in shoals and swarms, and cover the face of the earth, they are a plague to the
Country where they light. So to look upon a Sectary single, who out of
simplicity and good meaning follows his Conscience, our hearts should be every
whit as tender for them, as their Consciences are. But if we look upon them in
Company, they are as ill and dangerous as the company they are found in; and
the danger of all popular Meetings, and Associations to a State, makes it the
proper business of a King and his Ministers to look to it, and to provide
against it; wherein the care has been taken, deserves a just commendation.

And yet when I assert and refer this business to the KING, I look to be called
to an account for that; For they take the boldness by way of recrimination, to
turn the Text upon the King himself, That His Power is Civil, and Matters of
the Church and Religion are Ecclesiastial, and so none of his business.

This is, I confess, too weighty a matter to be here thrust into the corner of
a Sermon; yet it will be necessary to say so much as may somewhat lay that loud
clamor against it: For the Papists and Presbyterians both, how ill soever they
may agree in other matters, hunt in couples against the Kings Power and
SUPREMACY. But as we deny not all to others in their places; so we claim not
all for the King. If I shall but only now set out His Part in matters of the
Church, it will appear sufficiently, that he is Rectus in Curia, stands right
in the Text, and takes not upon him business which is not his own.

We acknowledge the Civil and Ecclesiastical to be two distinct Powers; and
though they may be both in one Person, and were originally so; yet by the
Divine, positive Laws both of Jews and Christians, they were so distinguished,
that though one person were capable of both, yet not without a lawful Title and
Investiture to either. I cannot therefore think, That the King is an
Ecclesiastical Person, who was never Ordained or Consecrated to be so.
Therefore when some Learned in our Laws affirm, That the KING is Supreme
Ordinary, and mixta persona, it must be understood in some other sense, and for
some other purpose; for we do not find that he attempts the doing any thing
that is the proper act of an Ecclesiastical Person.

Yes, they say, he claims by his Title of Supremacy, To govern all persons in
all causes, as well Ecclesiastical as Civil.

We acknowledge this to be his just Title; but deny, that he does any thing by
it, which is not properly his own business, and in Right of his Crown. That he
is the Fountain also of all Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, though it be not
expressly in his Title, we acknowledge to be in his Power. But here I must crave
leave to say something of the nature and notion of JURISDICTION, though it
shall taste somewhat of the race and harshness of the School; yet much of the
Case depends upon it, and no little mistakes there are about it.

It is agreed generally, That there is in the Church a Power of Orders, and a
Power of Jurisdiction distinct; that is, for the Power, though not distinct in
the object and matter of that power; for that is ^he same in both: As,
preaching Gods Word, administering the Sacraments, or the Censures of the
Church, are of the power of Orders. And the putting all, or any of these in
execution, is by a power of Jurisdiction. The former, as Divines distinguish,
is a power in ^abitu, the other in actu. So that Jurisdiction is nothing else,
but a power to do actually, what was potentially or habitually received in
Orders.

I do not here take Jurisdiction in the strict vulgar sense, to be a power jus
dicendi in^er parts litigantes only, as the word imports; but more largely, as
it reaches to any act of Order, without which it cannot lawfully be put in
execution.

Now the Question here will be, How a King can be the Fountain of the
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction used in his Dominions, who neither gives Orders
himself, nor executes any; that is, has neither power of Orders, nor Power of
Jurisdiction?

My Answer to this Question, is, That the Kings Power lies without both these,
and is that which gives Commission and Faculty to persons ordained to execute
their Orders within his Dominions. And the Reason, Ground and Necessity of that
is, Because the Ecclesiastical Function cannot be put in execution, but by such
ways and means as are absolutely and originally in the King, and in Right of
his Crown. As first,

Subjects upon whom they may execute their Ecclesiastical Orders; now all the
Subjects within His Dominions, are the Kings, who must of necessity lose so
much of the Right he had in them, as any other assumes without Him. From hence
grows his Right to order and constitute Diocesses and Parishes, and to set them
their bounds and limits; that is, upon which of his Subjects, and how far he
will allow them respectively to execute their Orders; for without those bounds,
it is not, nor is used to be taken for any part of their business.

assemblings of people together, are absolutely in the Power of Princes; all
States in all times have ever been jealous of them, and provided severe Laws
against them; for it is impossible, be the pretenses of Meeting never so fair,
to govern people, and keep them quiet long, if they may have liberty to flock
together at their pleasures.

instruct them. How dangerous a thing is it promiscuously to suffer Harangues
and Orations to be made to the people by such who possibly may be Trumpets of
Sedition; who by slandering the Government, and speaking evil of Dignities, may
inflame people to Rebellion? We have known such things done. It is therefore
necessary, that none be allowed that liberty to speak to Multitudes assembled
together, but such with whom a King may safely trust His people. And this gives
Him a Right and Capacity of Patronage and Nomination to Ecclesiastical Charges?

Articles and Doctrines of Religion, which gives Him a Right to that, which in
other respects, no doubt, belongs to the care of the Church.

Articles of Peace, we find that the King in His Laws declares what is Heresy:
That, if any thing, seems to be the proper work of the Ecclesiastical Power;
yet even in that he is not out at his own Civil business. For seeing mere
Ecclesiastical Censures are found not to be of sufficient force to suppress
dangerous and Heretical Opinions, without the use of the temporal Sword: Out of
the care the King has of the Lives and Estates of His Subjects, he will not
let His Sword loose to the will of others, who by declaring what they please to
be Heresy, may bring them in peril; He therefore confines them to such cases
only, wherein He is content His Sword should be made use of. This is all, and
is that which must be allowed to be the proper business of the King to assign,
how far, and in what cases His Temporal Power and Sword shall be employed, and
can be no invading the Ecclesiastical.

Pope with, who in order to his Spiritual End, Usurps the Temporal Power; so
the King in order to his Temporal Government, invades the Ecclesiastical?

No, the case is far different; If the Pope did order temporals by spiritual
means only, i e. Ecclesiastice, we had the less to say against him; he is not
out of the way of a Bishops power, though he should abuse it. But he for his
spiritual end, usurps temporal means, and takes upon him to dispose of temporal
Estates, that is none of his business. But the King in ordering Ecclesiastical
things to His temporal end, uses no Ecclesiastical means, but temporal only,
which are His proper business. He does not excommunicate the Pope out of the
Church, as the Pope would do him out of his temporal Dominions. But the King,
if he see cause, may banish him and his Emissaries out of his Kingdom. That
cannot be denied to be the proper business of a King to secure and free his
Kingdom from any thing that is destructive to it. Now if in all this the King
moves not out of his own civil Sphere, To return to our Sectaries, who put us
upon this digression, they still remain as we left them, guilty of doing much
that is none of their own business.

What then is to be done with them? According to a late Statute, a Mittimus (I
think) might be made to send them to prison; but the Apostle here deals more
kindly with them, and sends them only to School to study better, which is my
Fourth and last Point.

IV.
THat ye study to do your own business. I will take no more out of the word
Study, then what any one understands to be in it; A serious weighing and
considering of the matter; and there is need of it.

Title he can make to it. It is utterly a fault amongst us, to think that no
part of our business, to consider whether it be our business or no. If a qualm
comes over the stomach, that we begin to grow Government-sick, or that the
Ceremonies and Superstitions of the Church offend us, presently without further
dispute, what ever comes of it, it is resolved we will have a better
Government, and a more pure and reformed Church. That is commonly concluded,
before this be disputed. No good Student will do so, conclude without premises.
We must see whether it be our own business first, how we can derive a Title to
it.

We know, that Government and Religion come both originally from God; to which
none can have Right, but they to whom God has set over, and entrusted the Care
and Charge of either: Our part is to see by what mean Conveyance it comes from
them to us. If we have nothing to show that either of them have been
particularly committed to us, we may safely and certainly conclude, it is none
of our business.

a manifestis ad obscuriora: Let him begin at that which is without question
his own business. Has he done all that belongs to his proper place and
Function, which is certainly his own? Or has he a Family at home to govern,
that no doubt is his too? Are his Wife, and Children, and Servants well
ordered, all as they should be? S. Paul gives a charge to Timothy, not to set a
Bishop over the Church, who has not governed his own Family well. Though some
have not a Family without, yet every one has a Family within, and a large one
too: To rule his passions and inordinate desires only, asks a world of work,
and they will find it so, when ever they set themselves upon it.

What a preposterous method and course is it to hunt eagerly after Liberty from
some imaginary Pressure in Government, or some poor Ceremony in the Church,
while in the mean time we are true slaves to some base, vile lust within us.
Here we should begin to set our selves at liberty from our selves. And this the
method of Charity requires, as well as the method of Art. Charity begins always
at home, at our own business. Tantumne ab re tua otii est tibi, was well said
in the Comedy, Aliena ut Cures? True Charity will find no leisure for other's
work, till her own be done. If this method were carefully observed, the world
would be a great deal quieter than it is.

Religion in reforming others; they take it for a wrong from any that think not
so of it: But by considering well, they will find they are disappointed of that
hope; for whatsoever sets them on work, it cannot be true Religion, that is not
contrary to it self. All Students know, that One truth is not repugnant to
another; nor one virtue to another.

comes no good. All we do in other men's business, runs wast. S. Paul, 2 These.
3.11. calls it idleness; (...), working not at all; but are busybodies;
busy, and yet not work at all. He says the same of his Widows of Pleasure, 1 Timothy 5.3. That they were (...) and (...), idle, and busybodies both. He
thinks that not worthy to be called business, which is not our own.

charges our account more than needs; and there is no Wisdom in that; for when
the Conscience brings us in more Work than either God or Man particularly
requires, though it be not our own of Duty here, it will be our own in Account
hereafter: For the conscience of doing it, makes it ours howsoever; and so
guilty both of it, and all the mischief that comes by it.

Justice: That does suum cuique tribuere. Justice lets every man enjoy his own.
He that takes upon him another man's business, because he can do it better, (for
that is the great pretense, to do that which is best) may as well take another
man's Purse, because he will spend the money better. I think we will hardly
allow of that Justice.

Hope, that Christian hope which supports us in all our Sufferings and
Afflictions. Whereof, when S. Peter, 1 Ep. 4. c. had for the consolation of his
Contrymen, scattered abroad, poured out a plentiful measure, v 13, 14.
Rejoice, in as much ye are partakers of Christ's sufferings, that when his glory
shall be revealed, ye may be glad also with exceeding joy. Ver. 14. If ye be
reproached for the Name of Christ, happy are ye; for the Spirit of Glory, and
of God rests upon you. But presently in the very next words, ver. 15. he puts
in an exception to busybodies; they have no part or share in that
consolation: Let none of you suffer as a Murderer, or a Thi^f, or a
Busie-body. They have as little right to the comfort in suffering, as they had
to the business for which they suffer.

Lastly, As it disappoints them of the hope of that Mercy from God; so it casts
them into the snare of the Devil. It was safe and wise Counsel the Apostle
gives, Ephesians. 4.27. Not to give place to the Devil. He whose busy thoughts
carries him abroad, to pry into, and meddle in others business, gives place to
the Devil in the mean time to enter in, ransack and disorder all at home, where
there is none to resist him: There is no better fence against the Devil, than
this, si invenerit occupatos, if he finds us diligently employed at home in our
own business.

If for all this, the meddling Reformers of others would be thought the men of
Religion, and of the first rate too; Let them know, That it is of such a
Religion as has neither Prudence in it, nor Charity, nor Justice, nor Hope,
nor Safety. And when he has weighed all these mischiefs that follow the
breaking this Rule;

Let him in the next place, consider the benefit that comes by keeping it. At
that I began, and with that I will conclude. This lesson was set us of purpose
by the Apostle to second and enforce the other of Peace and Quiet. The best way
to be quiet with others, is to be busy with our selves. It is the natural and
genuine effect of it. All discord and dissension must be between two, either
persons or parties; and that which commonly kindles the fire, is envy, or some
supposed injury; now he that intends his own business only, can give no
occasion to others, of either envy or complaint; and so in recompense of
keeping to his own business, he shall quietly sit under his own Vine, and under
his own Fig tree; he shall have own for own.

Lastly, Besides this outward quiet with others, it will produce another within
us, the quiet and tranquillity of the Conscience, without which, outward peace
may prove to some but a quiet passage here, to eternal misery hereafter. But
this makes it a thorough quiet, both sides alike, within and without; for it
lays those busy, unsatisfied thoughts within us, which otherwise give^
trouble both to our selves and others: That when we see not, or think we see
not all things so well carried in the Church and Government, as we could wish;
yet having gone as far to mend it, as the line of our own business will reach,
and the farthest end of that is, having peaceably moved for it, and heartily
prayed for it, we may with a safe and quiet Conscience, leave the rest to God,
and those to whom he has committed that Care and Charge, whose proper business
it is. And as many as walk according to this Rule, Peace be on them, and Mercy
from the God of Peace and Mercy; To whom be all honor, glory and praise, for
ever. Amen.

FINIS.

