A TREATISE Of the Nature of a MINISTER In all its Offices. To which is annexed
an Answer to Doctor Forbes concerning the necessity of Bishops, to Ordain.
Which is an Answer to a Question, proposed in these late unhappy times, to the
Author, What is a Minister?

LONDON, Printed by Thomas Ratcliffe for the Author, and are to be sold by
Edward Man at the sign of the Swan in the Strand near York-House. 1670.

To my ever most dear and now only Brother Francis Lucy, Esquire
My most dear Brother,
I Send you here no new Present, but such, as you have been long acquainted
with; and did first by sending me the Question in the Title, occasion my
Writing: and what I remember St. Basil says in his Epistle ad Amphilochium, in
putting the Question, you taught me. For although a studious man cannot but
read of these things here discussed, yet I am confident they had never by me
been digested into Method, and by that been so conclusive to mine own and other
men's judgments, without your satisfaction had provoked it. Indeed in those sad
times when this was writ, there was a rebellion against virtue it self, and
men's friendship was extirpate, Root and Branch; For the communication of
friends, scattered about the Kingdom, was broken, by the intercepting, yea,
the betraying of Letters, to the Writers prejudice, which I felt: but yet we
kept an intercourse by that dumb man's language, of inviting, as often as we could
with safety; and communicated our thoughts by Letters, when we could not
personally meet. You were tied to live in London, by a necessary duty you had
to a very near and dear friend of ours, who was committed to your care; I at a
parochial charg to attend my flock, so long as I could in that time; How were
my thoughts perplexed for you when those accursed Oaths (for which with their
dependencies I know the Land ought to mourn, or else I fear will suffer more)
flew about, fearing by some surprise, you might be ensnared, to act that, which
your soul abhorred. I was often satisfied by letters of your freedom, yea,
sometimes by the questions you sent me about these inquiries which were then
started; As my fears were great before, so my joy in your integrity was high
afterward, as my admiration, how it could be: But do you praise God daily for
that, whose Providence invisibly looked over and protected you from those
evils; And trust in him, who will always preserve you loving and fearing him;
Amongst others this was one question, you enticed me to write about, which, at
such leisure, as I could steal from Domestique troubles, I answered in a
treatise: You writ to me to Print it; I knew not, nor could remember any such
thing, which I meddled with; when I came to London, you showed it me, I knew my
good friend Mr. Thomas Otwayes hand, who took the pains to transcribe it for
me; read it, and knew mine own Notions some of them, and so gave way to the
Press: If there be any thing which adds to the common Notions of Scholars, let
the Reader thank you, who were the occasion and informer of my studies in it;
and not so only, but a preserver of it; In the first, you were a Father; In the
second, a Foster to it and by this other men may take notice of our mutual
kindnesses and wherein our friendship did consist in those times; When men
could scarce know, how to live; our thoughts were employed about thinking, how
to live for ever. Farewell, God bless you you, is the hearty Prayer of him, who
is not more truly your brother, than.

Most dear Brother Your Most Real and Hearty Servant WILLIAM
St, DAVID'S
To the Reader.
Reader,
THere are some things which I thought fit to acquaint you with; first, with my
self who am here styled a Bishop, and so may be mistrusted to speak, as a man
biassed in the cause, writing for my self, and our Order; but although I am
one, yet when this was writ, I was none: but a Presbyter only, and never
thought to be a Bishop, or to see one in England, nor could; unless I could
have foreseen such a miraculous deliverance, as it pleased God to give the
King; for which his Name ought always to be magnified; so that the writer,
should not prejudice the Cause, being then impartial.

The next thing is concerning my meddling with Mr. Thomas Hooker of New England
in this controversy, which I cannot call to mind by what reason: But this I
remember, that there was a Clergyman of mine acquaintance, who warping that
way, highly commended that Author, and had some Conference with me about his
Book, and it was much honored by a friend of mine in London, who occasioned my
buying of it, an ingenious man he was, with a very Logical and Methodical Head;
but so overcome with his own opinions; that even opposite expressions appear to
him, as if they were for him, as will appear in perusing the Treatise.

My way of writing was to follow my businesses, as they lay before me; not
consining my self to any others Method, who had treated of such things; Many
times you may find me writing the same things, which twenty before me have
done, Aliter non sit Avitaliber it must needs be so; but sometimes again you
may be rewarded with such notions, as are not ordinary; without which, a Book
is but repetition, but in all you shall find mine own manner of expressions,
which may possibly meet with some, understanding more agreeingly, than others
have done; and so may be profitable to the quieting of different judgments, the
greatest and most Noble work of any man's industry; and if I have done it, but
in part, I am ^atisfied and God should be glorified, which is all the endeavor
of your Brother in Christ Jesus.

WILLIAM St. DAVID'S.

An Answer to a Question proposed in these late unhappy times to the Author,
What is a Minister?
CHAPTER. I. What the word Minister signifies.
IN this Question first we must clear the Quid Nominis, and then discourse of
the Essence of it.

First, in the Greek, this word (...) in its own genuine signification is
properly rendered some Serving work, or Industrious serving, so Luke 10. 40.
Martha was cumbred with much s^rving; the word (...) is there rendered serving.
The places which would illustrate this truth might be exceeding many, but, as
needless, I let them pass; from hence it comes, that sometimes this word is
used in the New Testament for such Service as is done about Spiritual things,
by such as are destined to that work: so Saint Paul, 2 Cor. 3. 7, 8. If the
Ministration of Death was glorious, how shall not the Ministration of the
Spirit be rather glorious? and so likewise in the 9. verse. In all which is
signified under this word (...), the whole Negotiation that Spiritual Officers
perform for the Spiritual good of men. Again, it is used for a particular
Office, which was allotted to the taking Care of the poor; thus ye may find it,
Acts 6. 1. In those days there arose a murmuring of the Grecians against the
Hebrews, because their widows were neglected in the daily Ministration: there
is the same word again; and upon that ground the Apostles ins^ituted the Office
of a Deacon, as you may see afterward, and for that reason because of their
Ministration they were called (...), that is, as we use to call them, Deacons,
but indeed is Ministers. Again, from hence it comes, that this Office being the
lowest, and the foundation of the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy, because all that
serve God for the good of men's Souls, are at the least Deacons or Ministers:
That this word is sometimes in its general Notion applied to the very
Apostleship, Acts 1. 17. speaking of Judas who was one of the 12. Apostles, He
obtained part of this Ministry: and verse the 25. speaking of him whom God
should choose, that he may take part of this Ministry and Apostleship from
which, etc. where you see the Apostleship called Ministry; so likewise 2 Cor.
11. 23. Are they Ministers of Christ? I speak as a fool, I am more, speaking of
the Apostles, I am more, more Ministerial, more industrious. Thus, as we may
say, a man is a vegetable Creature, which is the remote Genus, so are these
said to be Ministers; but I can never observe, that in any particular
Application, this word Minister is used for that second Order of Presbyter
either in Scripture or Antiquity, as in this corrupt Age by usurpation it is
abused; But I think in this question you understand by it the whole body of the
Clergy by what Titles soever, and in that sense I mean to speak of it, and so
address my self to the consideration of what a Minister is, and I conceive
that I may thus define him.

CHAP. II. What a Minister is, in his Definition.
A Minister is an Officer ordained by God to do something conducing to the
salvation of men's Souls.

In the first place, his Genus is an Officer, which nature he has in Common
with multitudes of others, who are such, either Magistratical or Servile. I
need not discourse now of that, it is so apparent; Secondly, in his Difference:
the first phrase is, ordained by God; that is, by the Command or Institution of
God: There are many Officers that are instituted and ordained by men, who have
power from God to do this Act of Instituting Officers; but a Minister is an
Officer instituted by God: from him he has power in Divine things, these no
man can have power over, but he who has this Authority granted him from God,
and that is it which St. Pa^l affirms, Heb. 5. 4. No man takes this honor to
himself but he who is called of God, as was Aaron. Nay presently after he
affirms of Christ, that he assumed the Priesthood not of himself, but from
the Father; so then this Ministerial Function requires Gods Ordination: but by
the word Ordination I not only conceive an Institution of God, but likewise
some Duty commanded which God orders thereunto; So that by giving this Order
(so the School, and we in English, call these holy Functions) God exacts a Duty
in these men who exercise it: For the graces given these men being such as the
School calls gratis datae, not sanctifying the person who has them, but such
as are for the sanctification of others, God who gives nothing in vain, will
require an Account of these graces and abilities. And to this purpose St. Paul,
1 Cor. 4. 1. Let a man so account of us as of the Ministers of Christ* and
Dispensators or Stewards of the mysteries of God; Verse. 2. Moreover, it is
required in Stewards that they should be faithful; that is, to lay out the
moneys according to their Lords appointment and direction, according to the
Lords Ordinance; but there is more intimated in this word Ordinance, to wit, an
enabling the person who is ordained to do some supernatural Work, but the
enabling must be understood in Actu primo, not secundo, that is, he is enabled
with Authority to do that is required. A man gives his keys to his Steward,
bids him search such Rooms, such Boxes for such occasions as he has need; here
he has Clavem, the Authority and right power to do this Duty to open the doors
in Actu primo, but perhaps his hands are weak, he cannot turn the key, or he is
ignorant, he knows not how to do it, yet what he does is regular, he has Power
and Authority to do it, and should another who has more ability, do it in the
second Act, and not in the first, he does it like a Thief, not like a Steward:
This first right is certainly Conveyed by the Ordinance of God with holy
Orders, but not the second: and they who do these duties without this Authority
given them from Christ, are therefore called by Christ Thieves and Robbers;
John 10. 1. He that enters not by the door into the Sheepfold, but climbeth up
another way, he is a Thief and a Robber; they are Thieves, but they who come by
the door, by Authority from Christ, are the right Shepherds, and have Authority
to go into the ^old and do their Duty there; so that though a Minister have
Authority given him to do holy Things, yet he may not have the Science or
Integrity to do accordingly, but what he has, so far is ratifyed by God, but
others who have not this Authority, though they do the same things, yet they
are responsible for a presumption; as may appear out of Acts 19. v. 13. where
certain Exorcists took upon them the power Divine of Casting out Devils, which
was Apostolical; but they stole the keys of this power, had them not given
them, and the Devils rent and tare them? from all which it appears, that the
enabling with this power such as may be justified, comes from a Divine
Ordination, and not else. The next Term is, To do something conducing to the
Salvation of men's Souls: I put this phrase (to do something) more largely than
the Schools, and the great Consent of the Church of Rome use to do, who
restrain it only to the holy Communion; as if holy Orders were only referred to
that Mystery, and so with wresting, bring in those little Ecclesiastical
Officers into the Number; but we may observe, that for ought I find, a Deacon
by his Institution or Practice at the first in the New Testament had nothing to
do with the Communion, nor indeed has more now than to assist with the Cup:
And the great Power of the Keys touches not the Act of Communion immediately,
but by reason of admission or prohibiting such as shall or shall not
Communicate: I choose therefore this phrase (to do something) which comprehends
all, even that and Preaching, and whatsoever else conduces to man's Salvation,
but yet we must apply this to what went before likewise, and take all together;
there are many Acts done by men, who are not Ministers, which conduce to others
Salvation, and are very useful, and commendable in them, nay are done out of
Duty; as the Example of a good life, discreet admonishing men of their faults,
encouraging others to virtue, and the like, which are all Acts of Duty from one
Christian man to another, but not Acts of Office; Acts of Charity as they are
Christians, not as they are this or that sort of men.

We must therefore recall the first Term, (that they must do. something
Conducing to the salvation of men.) This phrase must be a little farther
cleared likewise. There are things which Conduce accidentally to the Salvation
of others, as persecution, affliction; so it was with St. Paul; sometimes
assisting in villainy, which starts up some Divine Speech or Action; so those
wicked persons, who assisted in the Crucifying of our Savior, their Wicked Act
made them Spectators and Auditors of those supernatural words, which then
declared him to be God, and made them receive that Faith in him, and confess
that he was the Son of God; But these persons are in themselves the Devils
Ministers, though Gods almighty power and providence Conjured them about, as he
will the very Devils themselves, and draw his honor out of their Wickedness,
his light out of their Darkness; These Acts in themselves Conduce to Hell, but
God wrought them miraculously about to Heaven, and therefore not understood
here, but such as in themselves are disposed to it; and because Heaven is not a
result or an Effect naturally arising out of our Works, but a blessing bestowed
upon the Workers according to their Works, for Christ's sake, therefore those
things which Conduce to Heaven in themselves must be such as God is pleased to
Covenant with us, that upon them and the doing of them he will give this
Salvation; for no man can obtain that by Fraud or Violence, and therefore it
must be on such Terms as he Covenants for: And these things are those of the
Word and Sacraments, (as the whole Christian World has named them, though they
have no such name given them in the New Testament) to wit this: God has
provided Salvation in Heaven for his Servants, the Means for them to get this
Heaven is by these Covenants, Sealing these Deeds, obeying these Ordinances of
his ^or which he has appointed Officers, and given them Power and Authority to
administer these Covenants, (Letters of Attorney* for it is a Legal, Juridical
business* and a legal phrase befits it) to act these things betwixt him and
men, and teach them his Laws and will, by which they shall be Sharers of this
blessing, and they who have an Office,) and from that Office Authority to do
All or Some of these things, are the Ministers we speak of: And I think this
may suffice to speak, what a Minister is; How he is ordained, and who they are,
will follow.

SECT. II. These Powers must be given by God.
TO understand these heads, we must first conceive, that a man can receive or
assume no such power (that is effectual) to himself, unless it be given him
from Heaven, as St. John speaks, John 3. 27. Heaven being Gods gift, the
powers, the Covenants which bring men thither, must be by his Appointment, and
the Officers who work and effect these powers must be by him authorized
likewise; I write these Conclusions briefly, being of great Evidence in
themselves, and for ought I know denied by none.

SECT. III. The way to understand who these are.
AND now, in my Conceit, the readiest way to clear this truth, will be, to show
what Officers Christ has appointed to this purpose, and this must be done two
ways: First, to show Historically what was done; and Secondly, to show how
that History shall agree with the Design it had to bring men to Heaven, and how
unfit other pretentions are to it. The History I shall divide into two parts;
First, to lay the Foundation of this glorious Building, to show what our
Savior acted himself in it, what the Church Discipline was in Embrione, in
Ovo, in the Foundation, then to show what Superstructures the Apostles built
upon it, what it was in the birth when it was a Chick. The first must be sought
out of the Gospells, or the beginning of the Acts, where the Story of our
Saviors immediate Commerce with this World both in his life, and after his
Death, is set down for us: The second part must be cleared from the later part
of the Acts and the Epistles; and thus my design is laid.

CHAP. III. The Election of the Apostles, and what to do.
THE first remarkable business in the Gospel, is the Election of the Apostles,
which we may find recorded in the 3d. of St. Mark v. 13. and the 6th. of St.
Luke v. 13. In St. Mark we may observe that he ordained Twelve, that they
should be with him, and that he might send them forth to preach; and in St.
Luke we may note, that he gave these Twelve the Name of Apostles: out of this
we may Consider, that our Savior having many Disciples such as had leaned and
listened to his Doctrine, he chose out of them Twelve, which he gave particular
Favors to, and gave them that name of Office to be Apostles; That there was
some Mystery in that Number of Twelve I am persuaded, because that after the
Apostasy of Judas, in the 1. of the Acts, v. 22. St. Peter says, That
according to the Prophet David, Psalm. 109. 7. another should take his Office:
It was necessary another should succeed him in that Ministry, and they chose
one and no more to Complete the Number. What that Mystery is, is not so
apparent: That which fits my Apprehension is this, That our Savior did, in
very many things, lay the platform of his Ecclesiastical Government according
to the pattern of the Jewish Polity, and in this particular he resembled the
Twelve Patriarchs; but this he laid as Pillars only or a foundation, intending
it only to support the rest, not to figure out the Number of these Officers
which were afterward to be, a Number I know by none pretended to: but yet they
then were so many pillars to support this building, and whatsoever Structure
should be raised must be erected upon these: But besides their Number we may
mark their Office, which was twofold, about our Savior, and about the Church,
or other men; about our Savior, that they should be with him hearing and
learning his Doctrine, spectators of his Miracles, and most exemplar manner of
Life, that so they being to bear Witness of him and his Actions afterward,
might the more Constantly and Confidently do it, when they had in such a manner
been Conversant with him. That which concerned other men, was, That he might
send them forth to preach. Here was an Office Instituted, as St. Mark records
it, and to have power to heal sickness, etc. This Gift of Miracles was not the
Office it self, but a sign and token by which men might know that they were
sent from God; for they taking upon them a new Office, and pretending that they
received it of God; executing it for him, it was necessary that they should
bring with them some evidence that they had it from him, and this evidence or
sign of it was this power of Miracles, which accompanied them. Thus St. Mark
has described the Office, and because men should not be mistaken in these
Officers, St. Mark and St. Luke have set down the particular Names and
Characters of many of them; upon which I insist not, as not material to my
work. But then it must be marked farther, that St. Luke sets down the Name of
the Office, as well as the Officers, and says the Name was imposed by Christ,
which he called Apostles, which Name is derived from (...), which is mitto, to
send, and an Apostle is missus, one sent; thus the general nature of the word
signifies, and so the word is used John 13. 16. Neither is he that is sent
greater than he that sent him; (...), he that is sent, but in this place it is
perpetually put for the Name of this Office; and to the same sense is that word
Angel, which with Apostle, Amen, and diverse other words, all languages observe
and derive from the Original; Angel is derived from (...), which is Nuntius, a
Messenger to relate some Affairs to others, now the Apostles received this Name
as men sent about the most excellent Errand that ever was; the Messengers, the
men sent. In a word, we see there were a certain Number of men chosen, they are
set down what they are, what their Names were, and the Number of the Committee,
and we see the names of their Office, as likewise what their Authority hitherto
was, that is, to preach. No doubt but Beza's word which he interposeth, (to
preach the Gospel) is a good gloss, though I think it not the right Text. But
although they have Election into an Office provided for them, and a power and
Authority to execute this Office, when they are sent, yet they must not go
before they are sent; we will consider therefore their Mission in the next
place.

SECT. II. How and to whom the Apostles were sent.
AND for that we must come to St. Matthew 10. 1. and to St. Luke 9. 1. there we
may observe, in either place, that as before they had the power given them, so
in these places they were Commanded to execute this power. In St. Mark it is
said, that he ordained Twelve, that they might be with him, that he might send
them forth to preach; ready they were for the bunesse, they lacked nothing but
Mission, and that they had in the former places. In St. Matthew, 10. 5. we may
observe these Twelve sent forth, we shall see there the place where they were
to execute the Commissions described; First, negatively, verse the 5. Go not
into the way of the Gentiles, and into any City of the Samaritans enter ye not:
then positively, but rather go ye to the lost Sheep of the house of Israel,
verse. 6. Not that our Savior would forbid Salvation to any Soul in the World,
for others besides Jews were Converted; [but accidentally] the Office of the
Apostles, in our Saviors time, was while he lived restrained to them; And
therefore we may observe, that St. Peter himself, in the 10th. of the Acts,
until he was admonished by a Vision of his Errors, was of Opinion, that it was
not lawful for a Jew to have any Communication or keep Company with a Gentile,
as he expresses it to Cornelius, verse. 28. So then you see their Commission
restrained in place; and, Secondly, you may observe their Commission explained,
what they were to preach.

SECT. III. What they were to preach.
BEfore, they had Commission to preach, now a Command what to preach, St. Luke
the 9th. ver. 2. to preach the kingdom of God; St. Matthew. 10. 7. The Kingdom of
heaven is at hand; the kingdom of God, and the kingdom of heaven, are the same,
called from God as the King; as we may say Caesar's Kingdom or Empire, called
from Heaven as the place, the Empire of Rome, the Kingdom of Jerusalem: Now
this Kingdom is from the Eminency of it called the Kingdom of Heaven, because
there is as it were the Court where Gods Glory is most manifestly apparent,
that is called his Kingdom, as Rome; but though his Court be there, his Kingdom
is on Earth; though Heaven be the Court, yet Earth is the Country of this
Kingdom; though Heaven be his Throne, yet Earth is his Footstool: So then, by
his Kingdom, or, the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand, is meant, that Christ's
Kingdom was coming near; That now the time was Coming, in which he should
conquer the Devil, and lead Captivity captive; now the time was Coming in
which he should Settle his Dominions in the World: And this was much the same
with the Subject of St. John Baptist his Sermons, Mat. 3. 2. Repent ye, for the
Kingdom of God is at hand; nor indeed could other Doctrine be preached, for
Christ had not yet Conquered the Devil, nor settled his Government, and
therefore, as their Commission was settled and restrained to a place; so it was
in the Doctrine much unlike what it afterward came to. Thus you see that the
Apostles had now at the last* a Commission to preach; you see their Diocese,
to the Lost Sheep of the house of Israel; you see likewise what they were to
preach. The next thing to be Considered, will be, what other Officers our
Savior Instituted, and what Enlargement he gave to this Commission, whether
any or no.

SECT. IV. What other Commission our Savior gave to other men.
TO understand this, let us consider Luke 10. 1. where we shall find that our
Savior called and sent Seventy, or Seventy and two other Disciples besides
these Twelve before named: the diverse Lection of the Number is not material to
any thing in hand; but we may observe, first, that there was the same
business, in which they were employed, as the very Apostles were, out of the
9th. verse, where they were commanded to preach the same Doctrine: The Kingdom
of God is come nigh unto you: That they had the same Assistance for their
preaching, the power of Miracles; That they had the same way of Congratulating
Cities or houses, whither they came; That there was the same Curse upon them
that received them not; that they were so to demean themselves both to the
receivers and them who did not receive them: But herein we see some difference;
the Apostles were first ordained, and then sent; these ordained and sent
together. Secondly, the Apostles were taken into a Near attendance about
Christ, and from that had a more Intimate Acquaintance with both his Life and
Doctrine; and from thence, although these were sent equally with them in all
respects, yet they only had the Name of Apostles, given them by a prerogative
Eminence, which throughout the Gospel is not attributed to these later
Disciples; Besides these, I read not of any persons which had any Mission from
Christ to do these great Works concerning man's Salvation. But hitherto we find
only the Authority of preaching given. We will therefore in the next place
Consider who were made Ministers of these Covenants of Heaven, called Baptism,
and the Lords Supper; whether these, all these, or other besides them.

SECT. V. Who were made Ministers of the Sacraments.
TO begin with Baptism: that Baptism was instituted in our Saviors life time,
is very evident out of the 3d. of St. John, v. 22. where it is said, That our
Savior camo into Judea, and there tarried with them, and baptized, that is
expounded Chapter 4. v. 2. that he did not baptize, but his disciples: out of
which it is evident, besides the Conference he had with Nicodemus in the
beginning of the 3d. Chapter, That there was a Baptism used and instituted by
our Savior, and they who were the Ministers of it were his Disciples; But now,
when it was instituted; and what it was that was Instituted, are mighty
difficulties, not fully cleared: For the first part, I leave all those parties
which fix it to any times, which are these two, either when St. John baptized
our Savior, of which we may read Mat. 3. 13. or else in his Conference with
Nicodemus, John 3. 5. where he uttered these words; Except a man be born again
of Water and the holy Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of Heaven; I can
consent to neither of these: Not to the first, for we find nothing like an
Ordination; but indeed by the descending of the Holy Ghost, and the voice from
Heaven, a foundation for an Ordinance, but not an Ordinance it self: Not the
second, for it was a private Conference between our Savior and that man,
wherein he might well declare that there had been some such Thing, or that
there should be such a power given; but this did not settle any such power, nor
any form or Minister of it: I conclude therefore, that as many things were
done, without doubt, which are not written, as St. John speaks in the last
Chapter of his Gospel, and the last verse: so amongst many things this is one,
which yet was done, we may safely Conclude, because it would be a mighty
presumption for the Disciples, to usurp a power of baptizing without a
Commission, and that they did baptize is apparent, I therefore Conclude that it
was done, but when is not apparent: and now let us examine what was done.

SECT. VI. Concerning Baptism.
THis Question seems to me to be very unsatisfactorily handled by those who
have treated of it. To understand what can be comprehended in it, conceive with
me, that there comes a threefold Baptism in Consideration in this Question:
the Baptism which we are baptized with, which in express terms was ordained by
our Savior after his resurrection; the Baptism of John Baptist; and the
Baptism of the Disciples of our Savior in the time of his residence upon
Earth: the Baptism of John, and the Baptism of our Savior, have been disputed
with a great deal of vehemence betwixt Calvin and the Church of Rome, whether
it were the same with our Saviors or no? and I am in this Conclusion against
Calvin, and do think that he causlesly rejects the Fathers with a slight in
his Institutes, when certainly in it self the Question is of no great use to
any Design of faith or piety; I will not trouble the Controversy now, but
shall be ready to give an Account of it to any man that shall require it; but
hint out to the Reader that one place Acts 19. 2. Where St. Paul finding
Disciples at Ephesus, asked them, whether they had received the Holy Ghost?
They answered, that they had not so much as heard that there was an Holy Ghost:
and he replying, to what were ye then baptized? they answered; unto John's
Baptism: Then in the 4th. verse, St. Paul tells them, that John indeed baptized
with the baptism of repentance, saying unto the people, that they should
believe on him who should come after him, that is, on Jesus Christ. When they
heard this, they were baptized in the Name of the Lord Jesus: Observe, that it
could not be the same which was instituted by our Savior, because they had not
heard of the Holy Ghost, which is an express phrase appointed by our Savior;
and then, that they were baptized by St. Paul, which was a sign the first was
not perfect; This particular is miserably shifted off by Beza, and that shift
wonderfully extolled by Chamier, when the Text is evident that they were
rebaptized.

SECT. VII. Whether the. Baptism of the Disciples before Christ's death, was the
same with John's?
THere is a second Controversy, whether the baptism of the Disciples before
Christ's Death, differed from John's? sure it seems to differ; because John's
Disciples came to him in the 3d. of John, v. 26. and told him how Christ
baptized, and seemed enviously to clamor, that he and his baptism was followed
more than St. John's; which, if it had been the same, they would never have
done: because by that their own Church was increased; but wherein this
Difference was placed, we can hardly discern, by the Gospel; for, as I have
showed, their Doctrine was the same, that the Kingdom of God was at hand, and
they could not go further but as Prophets, for yet it was not Come, but
Coming. Now there could be no baptism into any other Faith, than that was
taught: Thus briefly of that second Question.

SECT. VIII. Whether our Sacramental Baptism be the same with that before
Christ's death?
NOW the third, may be betwixt that Sacramental Baptism, which we have, and
that which they administered before our Saviors death, whether they are the
same? For my part I am against it, and not I alone, but many more, both Ancient
and later Writers. First, because that preaching the Word, was only out of
Office to be done to the Jews, and they retained Circumcision still, the
legality of the Ceremonial Law being not yet abolished, until our Savior put
a period to it with his Consummatum est: It is finished, at his Death; for
although there might be an use of both together, yet both could not be used
Sacramentally; and although Baptism might have an Institution, and have Laws
made and Directions for it before, as must needs almost be in the Making of any
Laws, yet these Laws had not their legal force till the execution was ordained,
which could not be until the Abolishing of the old, which was not (as I say)
until our Saviors Death; So Heb. 9. 16. For where a Testament is, there must
be the Death of the Testator; for a Testament is of force after men are dead,
otherwise it is of no force, while men are living. Now although Christ might
make these Covenants, and this Will and Testament, in his Life, yet it is of no
force, until after his Death. Again, the signification and mystery of Baptism,
which it imparts to every baptized Man, is not, nor could be before his Death;
for as St. Paul speak^, Romans 6. 3. Know you not, that as many of us as were
baptized into Jesus Christ, were baptized into his Death: (baptized into Jesus
Christ) that is, by Baptism Incorporated into his mystical body, or as he
speaks, planted, verse 5. (were baptized into his Death) by the same phrase
incorporated into his Death, dead with him, and this enforces the 4th. verse;
therefore we are buried with him by baptism into Death: If we be incorporated
into him by Baptism, if incorporate into his Death by Baptism, then we must be
buried with him, and then we must be raised with him: Now this mystery could
not effected until our Saviors Death and Resurrection; For, although I doubt
not that the Death of Christ was powerful to the saving of believers, which
believed in his Death to: come, before it came; yet it was a diverse way of
Faith which looked upon Christ to Come, and Christ already Come. And again, as
the Faith was diverse, so the Means to get this Faith and the Covenants, by
which Christ was impar^ed, were diverse. Now this Baptism looks upon Christ
dead; it could not therefore in this Notion be applied to them before his
Death, and after his Death too, And to Confirm this, we may observe, that the
very Apostles themselves were slow in the belief of this Fundamental Truth, the
Death and Resurrection of Christ, until after it was done, as you may observe
Luke 24. 25. where our Savor chides their slownesse of belief in these
Articles: Now if they had not a Strong ^aith in these Articles themselves, it
is not reasonable to believe that they preached them to others, and then not
baptized others into it. These reasons are not observed by Bellarmine, or
Gamacheus, or Estius, or any others I meet with who handle this; Gamacheus, in
general, affirms something to this last Argument, that Christ's Death was
powerful to the salvation of Souls even before it was, which I grant (but not
by that means which takes his Death, for a Pattern or a Stock, in which it must
be grafted; for the Graft supposes the Stock and the thing drawn the pattern)
to such means as are Types or Figures of Christ to Come, not Impressions or
Signs of Christ already Come.

Again, he answers, that it were enough without his Death, if he institute such
a power; but it must be proved then, that he did institute such a power: for it
is most certain, that whatsoever Covenant God makes, that he will perform; and
since God has pleased to make such Expressions of this Baptism as have their
foundation upon his Death, it is not probable, nor can we be easily induced to
think that he should do it without his Death.

Another Answer he has, which bears some show of prosecution of the first
Argument: that although Baptism was not Complete omni ex part, in all
Circumstances, in respect of its remote Effect, which is to open the Gate of
Heaven, until the resurrection of Christ, yet it was essentially perfect to
the production of Original Grace, which is its nearest and formal Effect.

I reply: Neither could it do this; For since Circumcision was yet on foot,
which had that Effect proper to it, these two had not both the same Operation
at the same time; and again, since the Introduction of Original or any Grace
must be by the Death and Merit of Christ, men must receive this blessing by
that, and that communicated by Baptism; for although these mercies were given
by other Covenants before his Death, which related to his Death to come, yet
not by those which referred to his Death passed, as this Complanting by Baptism
did, Gamach. in 3. qu^st. 66. cap. 4.

SECT. IX. Another Objection answered.
BUT what I find not Objected by them troubled me more than their Arguments,
until I studied the reason of it, which was, What meant all our Saviors
Covenants and Promises concerning Baptism before his Death, which are
understood by all Consent to be applicable to our Baptism which we use, if then
this Sacrament was not ordained to be exhibited? And to this we shall find this
Answer (I think) most reasonable: That our Savior did settle Laws, and Rules
and Covenants for Baptism in his life, which had not their Life and Operation
till his Death, when he settled the frame and manner of it. So you may find the
Doctrine, and Law and Covenant concerning eating his body and blood delivered
in the 6th. of St. John's Gospel, ver. 26, 48, etc. which yet had not its truth
and force until the Institution of the Communion, and Commission to Celebrate:
So likewise for the power of the Keys, Matthew. 18. 27. Tell the Church, which
could not be in force till Churches were settled, and so must needs these places
be understood. I will examine one, John 3. 5. Except a man be born of Water and
the Spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God: this cannot be understood
at that Instant according to that Generality, a man; any man in general, which
must be taken inde^initely, as the Context does mightily evince, because in the
3d. verse preceding it is said, except a man be born again, which has an
indefinite truth: so likewise in the following 6th. verse, That which is born
of Flesh is Flesh, that which is born of the Spirit is Spirit; this involves
all that are in the World. Flesh and blood cannot inherit the kingdom of God;
therefore that which is not born again, and so not of Water and the Spirit: Now
this cannot have this Extent at this time; for, as I said before, Circumcision
was not yet abolished: for it was impossible that this Law could at this time
be divulged and communicated to men, and therefore it was impossible, that a
Law made in a Corner without publication of it could exact an obedience, and
therefore it could not be but like other Laws, it was then made, Christ taught
Nicodemus the Doctrine which afterward should have its force and vigor, when
the time came, that it should be divulged and taught. Well then, out of this
that has been said, it may appear, that although there might be an Institution
of this Sacramental Baptism, which we now use by the Mercy of God for our
Admittance into the Church, for our Incorporation into his body, although this
might be instituted, and many Laws concerning it made in his life, yet those
Laws were not of force till after his death, and the promulgation of them
then. We will in the next place Consider the Communion, and examine what
Minister was appointed for that in the Gospel, for we find none for Baptism yet
in Christ's life.

CHAP. IV. What Minister was appointed for the Communion.
THis Communion was Instituted by our Savior a little before his Death, in
those famous places of three of the Evangelists, (for only three mention it)
Mat. 26. 26. Mark 14. 22. Luke 22. 19. to speak of which, is only pertinent to
the thing in hand. The two first Evangelists affirm, that only his Disciples
were with him; see Mat. 26. 19. The disciples came and said to him; so Mark the
14. 16. The disciples went forth, but St. Luke comes more close, and in the
14th. verse of the 22. Chapt. says, And when the hour was come, (that was to
eat the Passover) he sat down with the Twelve Apostles: So then, here we have
them who were with him, not intimated only by their general name of Disciples,
which they had in common with the Seventy, but the name of their particular
Office, which was appropriate only to them: St. Luke does particularize in the
Case of these men sent into the Town, St. Matthew verse. 17. where before,
leaves it at large* That he sent Disciples, but how many, or who, is not
discovered by him, St. Mark Chap. 14. v. 13. punctually sets down the Number,
he sent two of his Disciples; But St. Luke, 22. 8. tells who they were, James
and John. I put down this, to show the punctuality of that Evangelist in his
Description, who writing after the other, seems more particuarly to set down
some things than the other did; especially in this Story. Well, we see who they
were that were with our Savior at the Celebration of his last Passover, and
the last indeed that ever was, or could be exacted of the Jews: That at the
Celebration of it, and so likewise at the Institution of the Lords Supper, his
Twelve Apostles were those that were with him* Now they being at Supper, in the
places before alleged, you may observe, that he took bread, etc. But in the
10th. of the 22. of St. Luke, at the later end of the verse, he said, this do
in remembranc^ of me; this do, hoc facit^, do this thing, this thing ye see me
do: It cannot relate to their own Actions, which were only eating and drinking,
which could in no resemblance Communicate the Death of Christ* But Consecrate
the Bread and Wine with a Benediction with this Expression, this is my body,
this is my blood, and so in my place distribute this in Commemoration of me;
for although in St. Luke this very phrase, do this, is only applied to the
Bread, yet St. Paul, according to what he had received from the Lord, 1 Cor.
11. 25. says, that he used the same to the Cup likewise, this do ye as often as
ye drink it, in remembrance of me; and indeed, St. Luke does most punctually
imply the same, although not expressly enforce it, in verse 20. likewise also
the Cup after Supper, saying. This likewise referring, as St. Paul expresses,
to the Conclusion of the 19. verse, Do this likewise in remembrance of me; he
said the same likewise ter the same manner concerning the Cup. Well, you see
both of these how they are to be celebrated according to Christ's Institution;
now there is a Question raised, which I do not find from Christ's time downward,
untile now, Who is the Minister of this Sacrament?

SECT. II. Who the proper Minister of this Sacrament?
THere are many disputes, I grant, but moved newly there is (as I hear, though
I read it not) a Question, Whether there be any proper Minister, or no, of the
Communion? Consider therefore with me this Text: There were none with our
Savior but the Twelve Apostles, it is said to these, Do this; from that Time
downward, it has been held, that none but Apostolical men, Successors of them,
should do it: It is a Thing of the greatest and highest Concernment to a man's
Soul that ever was, Heaven or Hell is at Stake upon it, if we miss. Consider,
it is a kind of lifting up a Creature beyond its Nature, Bread and Wine to the
body and blood of Christ, it is no matter which way, one way or other; it is a
Command given to a selected Number of men: These are described by that Office,
not by a General Notion, to be the men are spoken to; who then can conceive but
so great a power, with so great a blessing, should be Committed to such men?
Well then, I think it clear, here was a Covenant instituted, what it was, is in
other places and Laws of our Savior described; and belongs not to my
business; this only appertains to my business, That the Apostles were
Instituted, and they only the Ministers of it; only this little I will add,
lest some men's observation may stagger at it.

SECT. III. The Communion was Instituted before our Saviors Death.
THat though our Baptism may, perchance, appear to take its force from some
Command of Christ's, after his Death, yet this of the Lords Supper was now
instituted before, and yet does relate to his Death; First, because
Circumcision was not determined, but the Passover was, which prefigured the
Lords Supper; and this which he now celebrated, and had finished, was the last
which by Gods Command should be celebrated among the Jews; Secondly, because
the Death of our Savior was at hand, so near, that there could be no Communion
interposed betwixt this and that; and therefore it was, as it were, given in
the very Nick of time; and, as while the Passover was on foot, no Communion
could be expected: so; as soon as that is expired, no I^terim betwixt this and
that. This must appear in its Institution: I have done with this: I only
Consider, that as in humane Affairs, he that should take upon him the Kings
person, to act as he, without he make him Chancellor, or Judge, enters into an
high presumption; so, and much greater must his pride be, that dares to act
Christ in the Sacrament, to call for a Sacramental Virtue to the Elements
without his Authority, which seems to be granted only to this Sort of men, and
to none other, thus I think you see the full Commission of the Apostles, until
now restrained to the Jews, and they were instituted as yet Preachers of the
Kingdom of God to come; At this Institution of the Communion the Celebraters of
that; That they and the other Disciples did baptize, before is evident; That
they did not do it without a Commission, in honor to them and their piety, I
am resolved it could not be; But what that Baptism was, or when, or how far
they had a Commission I find not, and therefore dare determine nothing.

CHAP. IV. Gods Method for Man's Salvation.
WHen our Savior was Dead, and had suffered for the Sins of Mankind, he then
brake down the partition wall that was betwixt the Jew and Gentile; he then, as
he suffered for the Sins of the whole World: so he took Care how all the World
should be partakers of these Sufferings of his; he could by Divine power have
stamped their Souls with infused Graces, and by Compulsion have forced men to
that ^aith which should be saving; but then Heaven and Hell had not been
praemium and poena; he took therefore such a Course as might most ordinately
bring men to his Service, without Compulsion; and since he was to leave the
World himself, he took Order with his Servants to Act as if he were present,
and Negotiate the great Work of Salvation of Souls by a Delegate power from
him. Therefore in the 16th. of St. Mark v. 14. you may observe, that he
appeared to the Eleven, that is, to the Eleven Apostles, for one of them,
Judas; had apostatized, and had hanged himself; and in the 15th verse, he gave
them Commission, Go ye into all the World, and preach the Gospel to every
Creature, that is, to every Creature that is Capable of it, etc. there was
their Commission. The same Story is thought by many to be a little more fully
described by St. John, Chap. 20. 21. after he had appeared to them as before,
he said, Peace be unto you, as my Father sent me, so send I you, and then he
breathed on them the Holy Ghost. Mark this phrase, As my Father sent me; It is
a particular phrase not used elsewhere, and therefore intimates some
extraordinary matter. God had sent many men before, but never any besides
Christ with the fullness of Authority, as it is described Mat. 28. 18. All
power is given me in Heaven and Earth. All power was never given to any before:
I send you therefore with all power, as my Father sent me; So the power then of
Giving powers to others, which was never given before but to my self; and
therefore in that place of St. Matthew before cited, in the last verse too, I
am with you to the end of the World, with you teaching, baptizing, giving
Orders to others, for that is mightily enforced out of the word Sicut, as my
Father sent me; and, indeed, else he could not be with them in their persons to
the end of the World, but in their Succession, by which means he might well be
said to be with them to the Worlds end. Having now touched upon these places, I
will Collect this, here was in the 28 of Matthew, verse. 19. Baptism Instituted,
Matter, and Form; In the Name of the Father, of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost,
which we read not prescribed before: we see the Officers appointed, these
Eleven in their personal bodies, or succession; we see their Diocese
enlarged, preach to all Nations, and as preaching, so baptizing as large, they
go together; we see the Subjects of their Sermons enlarged, before Christ's
Death. When they had to do with the Jews only, it was, the Kingdom of God is at
hand: Now it is, to observe all things that I have commanded you; So that then
we see, first, before our Saviors Death two sorts of Officers, Apostles,
Disples, their Office at the first, limited to preaching, and that to the
Israelites; that they did baptize we are assured, but not in what Form, nor by
what Commission, until after our Saviors Death; then we have seen the Holy
Communion Instituted just before his Death in Matter and Form, and
Commissioners appointed to Celebrate it, to wit, the Apostles; we see after his
Death a full and Absolute Commission granted to these persons, to whom the
Communion was committed, to do all things, Baptize, preach, celebrate, forgive
Sins, to choose and send forth others; and for ought I can collect in this
Story, the whole Ministerial power invested in them; But because something may
be objected against this which has been delivered, which I take to be the
foundation of what shall follow, I will clear those objections which seem most
troublesome to me, and so proceed to show how the Apostles managed this
Stewardship committed to them.

SECT. II. Whether the power of preaching was given only to the Apostles?
FIrst, It may be questioned, whether the power of preaching was given to the
Apostles, and them only? To understand this, we must look back and remember,
that the Seventy likewise were sent, but that was to the Israelites only, their
Commission extended no farther, before our Saviors Death; and after his Death
we find no Commission given, but to the Apostles, and what Authority they, or
any else could have to preach the Gospel, it must be from them; let no man
trouble this or any other part of my discourse with that frivolous Objection
which is often intruded into these Controversies; We read not that these, or
these men, that these Presbyters received new Commissions from the Apostles,
and yet find them preaching; for Answer, once for many other times in which it
may be needful; it was impossible that the Acts or Epistles could keep a
Register of all that were ordained by the Apostles, or Bishops in their Age; it
is enough for us to know, that all power for these things was given to the
Apostles, and we may reasonably think, that of these 70. which were chosen by
our Savior, such as proved worthy, should be Commissioned by the Apostles, and
such as were unworthy, (as some were) should be suspended ab Officio: but for
these particular Registers, and how and when each man was, is not apparent, nor
to be expected. Well then, now it seems the Apostles had all the power of
preaching, none others being sent in this Embassy to the World but themselves.
But could none else preach? not gifted men? Consider these men, never any so
Extraordinarily gifted as these were, yet see (as I observed) they preached
not, without an outward Calling, by Christ, nor then until he sent them.
Again, it is observable, that by his outward Word, he directed their Doctrine
to the Jews, that they should preach the Kingdom of God was at hand; and to the
Gentiles, Mat. 28. 20. Teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have
Commanded you; So then, Christ had given them Command before what they should
preach. I do not find, no not in these, yet any inspired Sermon, but upon
Direction; and although these men had (no doubt) the most immediate Call that
ever any had, and the most extraordinary Gifts, in the most extraordinary way,
yet for to enable them for their preaching, they had Conversation with Christ,
which does the most resemble the most Industrious life of Studious Scholars,
which in Books Converse with God, as possibly a thing can do: so that in that
time, in the time of our Saviors Life, and until his Ascension, we can find
no place for inward Calling, without an outward, nor an outward execution,
without means to enable them for this great Ministry of preaching, but
throughout a most Methodical Course.

SECT. III. Whether these, and these only were Commissioned for Baptism?
THE next thing to be looked upon, is, Whether these and these only had the
power of baptizing? No doubt we may say of this, that they had the Duty only,
none other obliged to either, but they; and when I have named the Duty, I think
I may justly add the (...), The right and Authority will go along, for it
seems to be a branch, and a main one, of that Great Commission, Mat. 28. and,
without doubt, a great piece of the Power of the Keys, John 20. Now then, they
and they only, that we read of, had from Christ this Commission; those
Questions come not to be handled, whether Bishops, Priests, or Deacons have
this power? there was yet no such distinction of them, as I find, but whether
the Apostles only or no, I do not find any other; the Seventy had a Commission
to baptize among the Hebrews, as well as they, their Commission of preaching
and baptizing, equal, but what that was I know not; but here all the power is
granted to the Apostles. In whom and whom alone, I can discern all the
Ministerial power belonging to men's Souls; so that they, or men sent by them,
have this power or none; I know there is a great dispute, whether Laymen can
baptize? and the Church of Rome is mightily offended with Calvin, for saying
they cannot; but I do not find the least Argument out of Scripture to confute
him, and certainly this place of Mat. 28. seems exceeding strong for his Cause,
and they themselves grant, that the ordinary Minister of Baptism is Sacerdos,
by which word they understand Bishop and Priest, that in their Absence a Deacon
may, and so go on to the little Orders, but in extremity a Layman: For my part,
I grant for certain, that the Apostles were the only men Ordained for it. I
conclude, that baptism is necessary, and that it is a great Mercy of God to the
Children of believing parents, that they are capable of it; that baptism is
necessary, is evident out of the Dialogue betwixt our Savior and Nicodemus,
John 3. 3. Except a man be born again he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God,
verse. 5. Except a man be born of Water and the Spirit, he cannot, etc. verse. 6.
A reason is given, That which is born of the Flesh is Flesh, as if he should
s^y, nothing can work ultra sphaeram; Flesh there ore cannot inherit more than
Flesh, nor be in a better than ^ ^eshly estate, and that is not the State of
Heaven; therefore there must be some way by which that which is flesh and blood
may become Spiritual, which alone is by baptism. That which Calvin most
^^g^niously urges, That Children which dye uncircum^ised are not to be judged
damned, may thus be Answered, That their bond of Circumcision was dated the
eighth d^y, and therefore nor due before the date; but ours of baptism, being
without da^e, is due presently; So that then ours is like the State of those
who were not Circumcised the eighth day, when Circumcision was due, not of
those before the eighth day, when it was not due: Now upon this reason, the
Care of the Church laid a mighty Charge upon all preachers, to be diligent, to
preach all dangers which might surprise Children before they come to do their
Duty. Now although I place such a necessity as that we see no ordinate means,
without it, of Assurance of Heaven, yet I will not despair of Gods mercy to
such, who add not evil of their own Acting which should hinder the Effect of
Christ's Death, and the daily prayers of the Church for all men: And therefore,
with Calvin, I think it a rash adventure of any man to open the Gate of Heaven,
who has not the key committed to him, which was not given to him; yet I
question, if he has turned the key in the Lock, whether it do not open the
door, although he has not the legal power, which Calvin cannot deny, but that
it has been an universal Opinion of the Church; and for all ^ see, in his 18th
Section of his 4th. Book of his Institutes, he does not deny but it is valid;
and I believe he would not allow to re^b^ptize such a Child which he knew had
true b^ptism according to matter and form; but I am confident, no man ever had
^his power given him from God, but the Apostles, and therefore it must needs be
a mighty presumption in that Man, who without Authority ^ven him, should dare
^o put Gods Seal to any Article or Covenant, by which he might be obliged to
any Duty.

SECT. IV. Whether administering the Communion was appropriated to the Apostles,
in our Saviors life?
THE next thing to be examined would be, Whether in his Lifetime our Savior
did appropriate the Administration of the Communion to the Apostles only? and
because we see that Commission only given to them, nor ever semblance of any
thing to the Contrary, because it is a Work of so great height in its self;
because, as the other, so this Sacrament Conveys with it a Covenant on Gods
part; and because from Christ's time downward the right of Consecrating was
never pretended to by any Man until now, I cannot but think it a monstrous
pride, in such men, who having no Authority from the Apostles should dare to
undertake it; and although I have heard of such an Opinion, yet I never heard
or read any reason for it.

SECT. V. Whether the Power of the Keys was given to them only?
AND then next I will examine, Whether the power of the Keys was given to
them, and them only? by which power, I understand the power of binding and
loosing, the power of Government and ruling in the Church, and Church Affairs.
Here are two pretenders; the on^, that it was given to St. Peter only; the
other, that it was given to the whole Church. I will examine both. First, for
St. Peter; this Controversy betwixt the Church of Rome and Us, has been so
vastly handled in such large Volumes, as it would be a little impudence to
offer at it in these few sheets, and to stop my intended Course with tedious
disputes, which have so often been repeated and Canvased by others; only I will
point my singer at that which I think may Occasion a Reader in Studying this
Controversy to fix himself upon what is pertinent, and to take notice of such
Things as may easily induce him to the Truth; for though I am persuaded I could
add something, at least ^llustrations to some Arguments which are Discussed in
this Controversy, yet that would drive me from satisfying your doubt, and make
my few lines swell to a Volume. I only say thus much, That in all those places,
Mat. 18, 19. John 21. 15, 16, 17. which are the main pillars upon which St.
Peter's prerogative is settled, no man living can show me other power, which a
man can Conceive reasonably to be Conferred on him, than on the whole body of
the Apostles; In those two places, 28 Mat. 19. etc. and 20. John 21. if we
should understand him a Rock in the 16. of St. Matthew, which yet without
Partiality a man cannot do; But rather think that St. Peter's Confession was
that Rock, upon which the Church was built, or that our Savior, who by his
Confession was acknowledged the Son of God, was that Rock, has with some a
great Consent of Antiquity; yet should we grant him there to be termed a Rock,
yet it must be no otherwise than derivative, secondarily, Christ is the Chief
Corner Stone, the Spiritual Rock, 1 Cor. 10. 4. and then there was no more s^id
to him, that St. Paul expounds of them all, Ephesians. 2. 20. and are built upon
the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the
Chief Corner Stone to them all; the Apostles were secondary foundations and
Rocks as well as he, were that place to be understood to call him a Rock: Nor
can there be any stronger foundation affirmed of him, either in person, or
Succession, than of the rest, Mat. 28. I will be with you to the end of the
World; that is, assisting them in executing their Duty. For the second place,
Mat. 16. 19. I will give thee the Keys of Heaven, it is but a promise, and he
performed it to him and the rest, John 20. 22. For the Third, Feed my Sheep, it
is a poor Argument drawn from a mere Simile of pastorizing; but let it be what
it can, there can be no more in it, but preach, baptize, give the Communion,
give Orders, govern the Church; all which are involved in those two places
insisted upon before; and therefore I desist from further discourse of them;
and supposing that the Apostles had equal Authority to minister Divine
Mysteries to the whole World with St. Peter, we will now come and enquire,
whether any other men had any such Commission given them by Christ, or not?

SECT. VI. How it is to be understood, that the Power of the Keys is given to
the Church.
THe Chief place, if not the only, which I have observed in the Gospel,
pretended to be wrested to any such Intent, is Mat. 18. 17. If he shall neglect
to hear them, tell it to the Church* Thence it is by some enforced, that the
Church is made the Judge in Ecclesiasti^al Discipline; and by the Church they
will understand others besides the Apostles. To apprehend which, conceive with
me: First, that this was one of those things which our Savior delivered for a
Rule, to govern the Church and Christian men by; not at that present, but
afterward, when Church Discipline was settled, for as yet there was no such
Thing as any Discipline settled, but like a Commonwealth in the ^raming by
degrees, Laws projected, ye^ Contrived and enacted, which might take their rise
and force afterward, when established. It is a poor Conceit (methinks) of Beza
on this place, who would have it understood of the Jewish Synagogue, since he
himself Confesses that the word Church is no where else used for the
Synagogue, nor indeed can it be, and why it should be forced to that meaning
here I see no reason; and therefore the true understanding of it must be taken,
from those settled Laws which our Savior made after his Death, of which I have
discoursed: Now that this Law could not extend to any other men, but these
Apostles, who had all the powers given them, as I have explained, will appear
first; First, because it seems to be a Juridical way of proceedings; and it is
impossible that the multitude should have Juridical Discretion to make a man as
an Heathen or a Publican, being many of them illiterate men, and we should
con^ine the limits of Christian men and Religion in much too narrow bounds, to
say it belong only to the learned, or men enabled for such or so high a work.
But there must be Officers in a Church to hear and judge of such a Cause, which
Officers we understood by the Church, and although this Censure ought to be
done in public in the face of the Church, or the Court, where such Matters are
discussed, yet it is not necessary, nor can have a face of reason with it, that
every one of the Church should be there present, or they who are present should
have the Nature of Judges, only such Men as are Officers enabled to act in this
power; then if Officers, these men who h^d the power given them in the 20th. of
St. John, are these which are here in the 18th verse said to bind and loose; So
that then, I can see nothing that can hinder us from agreeing, that after our
Saviors Death all Ecclesiastical power was seated in the Apostles; how they
understand it, we shall Consider, in the future Discourse, by their Actions set
down to us, which must be our next undertaking.

SECT. VII. The Apostles Authority, and Management of it.
NOW we see the Eleven inthroned in the Chair of Ecclesiastical power; They and
they only having Interest in it, but yet they had only power, the right and
Authority; they received (...), the virtue and qualities, enabling them to
execute this power according to the Extent throughout the world afterward,
when the power of Tongues was given them, Acts 2. 4. and you may find this word
(...) used for this virtue, Acts the 1. v. 8. where it is promised; so that
they had all Power and Authority before, but this Faculty of Tongues they had
not until then, and this will be of little use in our Discourse, being a Gift
of no constant Succession in the Church, but only those Authorities of
Administering the Sacraments, of Preaching, of Giving Orders, of Governing;
these will always be necessary in the Church, and therefore must be insisted
upon. For this therefore; the first thing we find them Acting in this kind, was
to settle their own Society, and Complete the Number of Twelve, and this you
may find recorded in the 1. of the Acts, v. 13. where we may observe first,
that they referred the Election of this Apostle to God by ^asting Lotts, they
Chose two, Barsabas and Mathias, and referred it to Divine Election; the
reasons of which, guessed at by Divines, rather than demonstrated, I omit; But
now there are Twelve Apostles, Bishops; for if Judas was a Bishop, by being an
Apostle, (as he is termed, verse. 20.) the rest likewise were, or Twelve Deacons
or Ministers, for that phrase is affirmed of Judas in regard of his
Apostleship, verse. 25.

SECT. VIII. What Additions were made to the Apostles.
BUT yet we must not leave them, but examine, Whether there were any Addition
made to these Apostles, and what that was? To understand this: We may find St.
Paul in abundance of places called an Apostle; instead of many, take this one
Instance, Galat. 1* 1. Paul an Apostle not of men, neither by man; but by Jesus
Christ; An Apostle, not of men, not by man, that is, who received my
Apostleship not from the Authority given to men as before, when Christ sent his
Apostles, as his Father sent him with power to give these powers, John 20. As
my Father sent me, so send I you; not then, of men; that is, from this
Authority given to them; nor by man, that is, by any Ministerial Act of man's.
He received his Baptism by the Ministry of man, as you may find Acts 9. 18.
But his Apostleship he received of God, and by God, as the other Apostles did,
by the immediate Ordination of Christ; and in this I should place the
Difference betwixt these Apostles and others, That they are made such by an
Immediate Ordination of Christ; for it is not enough that (some sa^) to be an
Apostle, was to be such a Minister as conversed with Christ in his humanity, or
saw him in the Flesh, for this did all the Seventy, which yet were not called
Apostles; nor is it sufficient, which others say, they were such whose Office
extended to the whole world; for so we shall find in the Acts almost none
Confined to any place, but that others as well as St. Paul had a Care of all
Churches; But upon this a man may justly enquire, why St. Paul should in such
distinct Terms (not of men, nor by man) describe himself, since it seems every
Apostle was such. To clear this, and give further Illustration to this Truth,
Observe, that others besides these were called Apostles, so you may find first
Barnabas, as well as St. Paul, Acts 14. 14. which when the Apostles Barnabas
and Paul heard, etc. Apostles, in the plural Number; some have thought that
this Barnabas was the same with Barsabas, who Acts 1. 23. was Competitor with
Mathias, for the Apostleship; but (methinks) missing the place then, it were
strange he should be called an Apostle afterward; and indeed their Names
differ, their Original Names and their Additional Names, for Acts 1 his Name
was Joseph called Barsabas surnamed Justus; but in Acts 4. 36. instead of
Joseph is Joses, and instead of Barsabas is Barnabas; but besides him, we read
Romans 16. 7. of And^onicus and Junia, of whom St. Paul says, that they were his
kinsmen, his fellow prisoner, and of Note among the Ap^stles: which words,
although they have received a double sense, either that they were Eminent
persons among the Apostles, or else esteemed and noted by them to be such
persons of Esteem; yet there are many both ancient and Modern Writers, both
such as are for and against Bishops, that agree they were Apostles, as the
words very naturally bear it; and to take away the Scruple, both the Centuries
and Baronius agree upon it, which if there were scruple they would not have
done: then turn to Phil. 2. 25. there you shall find St. Paul calling
Epaphroditus my brother, and Companion in labor, and fellow soldier, but your
Messenger. Here I cannot but wonder at our Translators, who render it
Messenger, such a mean phrase intimating any common or trivial man, who is sent
on an errand: Beza did much better, who called him Legatum, an Ambassador, a
nobler phrase; but indeed the word is (...), your Apostle; and so those
Epithetes before express him, my brother, etc. This may likewise be showed ^ut
of the 1 Cor. 4. 9. God has set forth us the Apostles last, the Translation
here likewise is not good; for it is not, he has set forth us last, but us
last Apostles, us that were the last Apostles, who are they? in particular,
verse. 6. he names Apollo, these things I have in a figure transcribed to my
self and to Apollo, that ye might learn of us, not to think of men above that
which is written. Now then, although he may mean others beside himself and
Apollo, yet it is sit to conceive that he should be in the number of those are
called Apostles, because he is one of those from whom they must learn, not to
think of men above what is written; and among other Arguments, this is a main
one, That we the last Apostles, Apollo and my self, and perhaps more, are
unhappy wretched people marked out for misers, to be made a spectacle of
contemptible people, to the World, to Angels, and men. I could here likewise
treat of Gal. 1. 19, where James the brother of the Lord is called an Apostle,
who by many is thought, and from good reason, to be none of the two James's
which were of the Twelve, but a third who was made Bishop of Jerusalem; but I
desist: it is evident out of Scripture, that the holy Writ mentions more
Apostles besides the Twelve and St. Paul; and if besides the Scripture, any
man's Language may be heard, consider that of Ignatius, who was Contemporary (as
he speaks) with the Apostles, Paul, John and Timothy, in his Epistle to the
Ephesians, who there speaks in the language of the times, and by that language
calls Timothy an Apostle.

SECT. IX. A Reason of this.
NOW then, to draw this Discourse to some period, there were other Apostles
besides the first Twelve, and St. Paul the Thirteenth but why so? because, as
Theodoret speaks, upon Phil. 2. 25. in the case of Epaphroditus before handled,
that he was called their Apostle, to whom the Care of them was Committed. And
again, upon the 1 Timothy 3. 1. Heretofore they called Presbyters Bishops, and
those which we call Bishops, they called Apostles; but, says he, in process
of time they left the name of Apostles to them who were truly Apostles, and
they gave the name of Bishops to those which were formerly called Apostles: So
likewise St. Hierome, on Gal. 1. 9. Procedente Tempore and alii ab his quos
Dominus elegerat ordinati sunt Apostoli; In progress of time other Apostles
were ordained by those which the Lord had Chose^; and this is the reason why
St. Paul, where before Gal. 1. 1. says, he was an Apostle not of men, nor by
man, but by Jesus Christ; to distinguish him from those others, who were
Apostles by Constitution of Apostles, not immediately by God: and to the same
purpose may that be understood of St. Paul, 2 Cor. 11. 5. I suppose I was not a
whit behind, or less, or inferior to the Chiefest Apostles. Amongst the
Apostles the Twelve, there were not some Chief, and some Inferior; but the
Twelve were the Chief, and the rest Inferior. Now he having his calling and
enabling from Christ immediately, was not inferior to them. And though I read,
I know not where, the Authority of Theodoret slighted, yet I do not remember
what Satisfaction is given to his Reason: Nor can well Conceive how these
Scriptures can in any other sense be reasonably expounded.

CHAP. V. The Extent of the Apostolical Power.
AND now (methinks) I see the Apostles in the Church, as Divines say, Adam (if
he had lived innocent) and his posterity would have been in the World, they had
been Emperors of the whole World, and all the World would have been every man's;
yet being in their Integrity, would have so enjoyed all, that it should have
been to the good of all, and hurt of none: So these holy men were Bishops,
Apostles of all the World, all the Churches throughout the World, had absolute,
not order only, as the School speaks, to give holy Sacraments to any any where,
but Jurisdiction to Govern and rule all. That which Eusebius says, has some
truth, That they divided themselves into several parts of the World, but not
appropriating to themselves any piece, nor excluding any other from that Share
or portion which they superintended, but rebounding back often where they had
been before; and diverting as Occasions offered themselves into other
Precincts: this they did, and might do, by that vast Authority was given them;
Go preach to all Nations: and by that power Equalling their Authority which was
Conferred at the Pentecost; but it was not with other men, that universal
Authority would not besit the meaner powers of those who were to succeed and to
follow them; and therefore we will, in the next place, Consider in what
proportions they Communicated these Authorities to others.

SECT. II. How the Apostolical Power was Communicated.
THE virtue of which Communication we enjoy at this day, some for place, some
for Authority, some in part, some in the Lump. For the first, we shall for
place Consider, that their Successors were confined in place, Titus in Creet,
Timothy in Ephesus, Epaphroditus in Philippi; not that they were Confined or
pegg'd here immovably, (So is no Bishop in his Diocese, no not quoad Officium,
as if his holy Duties which he performed out of his Diocese were invalid, or
of no force; for without doubt, if a Bishop baptize, preach, celebrate the
Communion, give Holy Orders, secundum materiam and formam, Canonically,
according to Matter and Form, out of his Diocese, they are firm and good to
the receivers, although perhaps without leave, or extreme necessity, they are
not Commendable; Nay, without doubt, if either Bishop or Presbyter remove to
other Diocese or Parish he takes not a new Ordination, but an acceptance or
just Election to that place suffices.) Now his Confining to that place, is to
restrain the Ministering of his Office out of Duty there; so that he is out of
Duty to have a Care of that place, and to look to that flock which is Committed
to his Charge, which is part, not the whole as it was Committed to the
Apostles; and no doubt (that which Dr. Field has learnedly discoursed upon
this subject) in Ancient Times Bishops were the Pastors of their Diocese
solely, Presbyters their Assistants and Associates, as the Apostles with that
almost immense power were made Bishops of the World, yet being men with
Confined bodies, were forced to use Deputyes, and the help of other men in
their Charge even whilst they lived; and certainly the Church was better
Governed by that Subordination, than if every one who has not Apostolical
Integrity should assume Apostolical Authority; so it was by these, they had
great Diocesses committed by the Apostles, and (as I shall show anon) they had
many Inferiors Assisting them; but these were their places over which they were
made Overseers, and they had not Authority of Jurisdiction over others; Thus I
could set down how almost all the World was divided in the Apostolical Age; but
I let this alone.

SECT. III. How the Apostolical Power was divided to Particulars; and
concerning the Office of Deacons.
NExt we will Consider, how the very Office of the Apostleship was divided: And
the first thing that comes into our Consideration (to begin at the foot, and
climb upward) will be the Office of Deacon; in handling which I find some
matter of Dispute: First, about the Institution of him, when this Function was
first erected: There is a general Claim to Acts 6. the Story may thus be
observed; In the Infancy of the Church, when it pleased God by the preaching of
the Word to increase the Church beyond the expectation of men, or less power
than Apostolical, there were many poor among the Disciples; but the piety of
the Christians was such, as you may read Acts 4. 5. in ver. 34. of the 4th.
Chapter, there was no lack, for as many as were possessors of lands or houses,
sold them, and brought the price and cast it at the Apostles feet, and Barnabas
is presently particularly instanced in; but in the 5th. Chapter we read the
fearful Story of Ananias and Sapphira; who would seem righteous, to do as the
fashion of Godly men was; but being hypocrites, were punished for their
hypocrisies. Now these Sales bringing in great sums for the relief of the poor,
the Apostles, as it seems, were troubled with it, and the Care to relieve the
poor took them off from attendance upon that mighty work of planting the
Gospel; this was the rather awakened, by a murmuring of the Grecians against
the Hebr^ws; that is, either such Grecians as were made Proselytes, or else
such Hebrews as lived, and perhaps were born amongst the Greeks, (for as yet
the Apostles had no Communication with the Gentiles,) now these Grecian Jews
murmured, because it seems the Apostles (as I can guess) had left the
administration of this Charity to some who had dealt partially; for I am
confident they themselves would not; wherefore they Convented the Disciples
together, and bid them with all Care (who must needs know the Integrity of men's
conversations better than the Apostles, who could not search hearts) select
some men fit for such a purpose, and appointed the Number of Seven; the
Disciples did accordingly, and they chose Stephen, and Philip, etc. as you may
read in the 5. verse. of the 6. Chap. and set them before the Apostles; when the
Apostles had prayed, they laid their hands upon them, no doubt, rectifying
their Choice, and Authorizing them to the work: Thus we see these men receiving
Title to execute this Office.

SECT. IV. Reasons why the Office of a Deacon was not Instituted, Acts 6.
BUT for my part (salvo semper meliori judicio) I cannot conceive how this
should prove that Ministerial Office of a Deacon, which was afterward used in
the Church, from this place, for these reasons; First, because this was an
Occasional Office, necessary for that Time, in which there being many poor,
which lived under the correction, and rod, and persecution of the politic
Magistrate, no legal Course could be taken for the relief of them, but such as
came by Charity out of the bowels of their own Fraternity, to wit from
Christians, who might be persuaded, not compelled to that Duty; and by reason
of this, there was a necessity to have some Officers chosen Overseers of the
Poor, which by a Religious Tie, where could be no legal, should be bound to the
Execution of this Duty, for which they instituted this Office; but why these
should be called Deacons, that Ministerial Office used in the Church, I see
neither Authority nor Ground in the Scripture for it. That they should not be
annual Officers, as our Overseers of the poor, I can see no reason; or why in a
settled Commonwealth, where the politic Laws provide for the poor, and Law
makes such Charity a Duty to the Commonwealth, there is no Ground. It is true,
in the Times of persecution these things are necessary, as there is often
mention both in St. Paul's Epistles and the Ecclesiastical Story; and Julian the
Apostate himself, in an Epistle to Arsalius, the Heathen Pontifex, or Chief
Priest of Galatia, The wicked Galileans, says he, (under which name he vented
his malice against the Christians) relieve not their own poor only, but ours,
with a Counterfeit holiness; There he acknowledges the Christians abundant
Charity in those days, when he made all Christians poor; and because he would
not be out-acted in a Work of so much piety, he gave that Priest the Collection
of vast sums toward the relief of necessitous people. This was necessary in
Time of persecution; but what further use is there of it in particular
Churches, than those Collectors for the poor which we have, and Charity and
Sweetness preached to men, whereby they may be spurred on to enlarge their
hearts, beyond the Exactions of Statute-Duties, to the overflowing of Charity.
Now then, because it was an Occasional Office necessary then and there, at such
times in such places; we cannot conceive why it should enforce such an Office
perpetual in the Church, and universally in all places or Churches.

SECT. V. Another Argument to prove the former Conclusion.
SEcondly, Consider the business they were designed to, we shall not find that
ascending to these Ministerial Duties, it being only to relieve the body, not
the Soul, to take Care of the Tables, to look that the Grecian widows, and poor
be not despised, in Consideration of the Native Jews; I know it is objected by
Catherive, that these Tables there spoken of, was the Lords Table, and the
Ministration they were employed about, was the Communion; but these phrases of
Daily Ministration, and the murmr of the Grecians, do enforce the other: for
if they had a daily Communion, it is not to be imagined the Apostles would be
standers by at so heavenly a Duty; and if they were actors, it cannot be
thought that any should be neglected in it: I therefore, with a mighty Consent
of Writers, Conclude, that it was an Administration of Temporal Things; but the
Administration of such makes not to that Ministry we speak of, which concerns
things so Spiritual as affect the Soul immediately with some Divine blessing,
when these immediately only concern the body and Temporal Things, and therefore
could not belong to our Ministry.

SECT. VI. A third Reason for the former Conclusion.
A Third Reason may be drawn from the persons which were elected into the
Office, which were (as Epiphanius reports in the end of his 20. Chapter of his
first Book, Contra Haereses) of the Seventy two Disciples, of which Number
there he reckons many more of equal rank, if not an higher esteem than these.
Now then if they were of those Seventy two, it is not reason to think that they
should be Ordained into an Inferior Order of Clergy, and the lowest of all;
for all hold that they were Presbyters at the least, either by their first
Ordination from our Savior, when he sent them to preach, and baptize the lost
Sheep of the house of Israel; or else by a Confirmation from the Apostles,
after they were invested with the whole Ecclesiastical power in themselves, by
that Grand Charter, As my Father sent me, etc. Now then, this had been a
disparagement to Presbytery. But lest any man should doubt, whether these were
Presbyters or no? let him Consider that extraordinary work of St. Stephen, who
went up and down (as you may read in the latter part of the 6th. Chapter of the
Acts, doing Miracles, and disputing and preaching (I dare call it so, say Mr.
Thomas Hooker what he can) with such a Spirit as they could not resist. But Mr.
Thomas Hooker, in his Survey of Church Discipline, Part 2. Chap. 2. page 36.
denies St. Stephen to be a Preacher, and that most Sermon-like discourse (I am
sure) of his Acts 7. he calls an Apology, not a Sermon; truly, I see little of
Apology in it, and I know some have drawn a little Body of Divinity out of it;
and I know that verse. 51. he draw^ a most powerful invective against their
manners, which cost him his present life in this World. If Mr. Hooker will not
allow this to be a Sermon, he can find few in the whole New Testament.

SECT. VII. Some of these were Preachers.
BUT he shall not escape me so: Though this propagation of the Gospel will not
be allowed to be a Sermon, because I cannot find an express Term, so p^rasing
his discourse, I will show him another of these Deacons in the next Chapter,
Acts 8. whose discourses to this purpose are called preaching, and that is of
Philip, Acts 8. 5. Then Philip went down to the City of Samaria, and preached
Christ to them: The very word used for preaching in English as well as the
Original is there placed; Hooker himself, where before alleged, although he
omits this verse, yet cites the 38th verse of that 8th. Chap. where Philip is
said to baptize the ^unuch; therefore more than a Deacon by his Doctrine: but
in vain that, as I shall show hereafter. But now I will examine his Answer.

SECT. VIII. Whether Philip were an Evangelist, and what an Evangelist?
PHilip (says he) was an Evangelist, and so appointed by God, as afterward
appears, and by virtue of that, and not of his Deaconship, he did baptize.
Indeed he is called an Evangelist, Acts 21. 8. And lest we might think them two
Philips, the Text says, he was one of the Seven; that is, one of those Seven
was chosen, Acts 6. to take Care of the Poor, (but by the way consider, that
neither then or elsewhere in Scripture are these Seven called Deacons.) Well,
first Consider, here was a great space of time betwixt the 8. and the 21.
Chapt. he might be an Evangelist long after, and not one then; Degrees and
dignities came by steps, not the highest at first; but suppose he were, and
suppose he was one before he was made Treasurer or Overseer of the Poor, and
suppose I conceive an Evangelist did preach the Gospel, might baptize; then I
Conclude that such a man was at the least a Presbyter, and that he was as it
were degraded in being made such a Deacon, by his Consent a Deacon has nothing
to do with Spiritual things, but only the Treasure of the Church: And therefore
it is strange, that both he and my Lord Say, and Nathaniel Fiennes, in their
Speeches at the beginning of this Parliament, affirmed, That because the
Apostles would not have Ecclesiastical men meddle with Temporal things, they
instituted a new Office out of their rank for the performing even these Duties
of Charity, which in nothing agrees with the Text; for it seems, at the first,
the Church laid all the burden upon the Apostles, when they put it off, then
they chose Ecclesiastical men again, and such as were next them either of the
Septuagint, or else Evangelists; certain we may be, famous Churchmen, St.
Stephen, Philip, and the rest, who have honorable mention in Ecclesiastical
Story.

SECT. IX. An Objection answered.
BUT before I Conclude this Argument, I will frame one great Objection, Acts 6.
2. The Apostles said, it is not reason we should leave the word of God, and
serve Tables; was it not reason that they should, and why should others do it?
Yes, much differen^^: one Sermon of the Apostles and prayer of theirs, is of
greater power and force with God than twenty others; they out of Duty must
travel through the whole world, they cannot attend the Care of the poor in a
particular City, the others, though being Evangelists, may upon particular
Occasions be called off from their place, yet they shall return again and
overview their Charge, the people; therefore, when they could not have their
particular eyes over that blessed work, took those that were next them in that
dubious time, to take Care of the poor, and these men could not therefore be
chosen to an Inferior Constant Office, such as they feign their Deacons to be,
because ^hey were men of higher Employment and greater Concernment in the
Church, but were chosen for that Occasion (how long I know not) to attend that
Duty.

SECT. X. Another Argument for the former Conclusion.
A Fourth reason may be drawn from the Design which Mr. Hooker takes for this
Office, which is such as would make any Nation tremble to think upon, an
Erection of the greatest Tyranny which ever was exercised in any Commonwealth;
you shall find it described in the 36, 37 pages where before; For first, he is
Treasurer; this may be without exception. Secondly, he must address himself to
receive what is brought into the Treasury, but mark, not what is, but what
ought to be brought into the Treasury, to be committed to his Trust; for this
(briefly I will set down his sense) purpose he must inform himself, by advice
and counsel from the body, what every man's Free Will Offerings should be; this
upshot results out of his Discourses, that only Free Will Offerings should be
accepted; yet because the maintenance of Church and poor must not be arbitrary,
they must understand men's Estates as well as they can, if they be negligent,
admonish them, then if they stir not, go to Christ's Discipline, tell the
Church: and so upon contempt of that, to Eccleliastical Censure. To this
purpose he cites two places, Deuteronomy. 16. 10. and Levit. 22. 18, 19. In both which
places, if he had transcribed the words without further trouble there could
have no more appeared, but that men should bring their Free Will Offerings, and
then do this or this, but the Sin lay upon him who was to bring it in, he was
not to be compelled to it, nor do they, perhaps they will say; but I will
reply, Ecclesiastical Censure of putting out of the Church, making a man an
Heathen, is the greatest Compulsion in the World, and as they order it upon the
Consultation and Advice of the Deacon (it will arise to be upon the Imagination
of the Deacon) and instead of his Judgment, perhaps oftentimes, unless they
be better than those the Apostles used before this election, the partial
Affection of the Deacon, which would betray Souls to a most unhappy and
arbitrary Government for Religion, for Estates.

SECT. XI. The opposing Arguments answered.
UPon these reasons I am persuaded, that the Office of a Deacon was not
established in that of Acts 6. to be as a rule for all Churches, but only these
(...) of and Authorized in this great (...) that di^y in the Church at that
time; and thus I have disproved those Answers which Mr. Hooker seems to frame
to my reasons, his Arguments for confirmation of his Cause I shall undertake in
a more proper place presently; yet least men may think I introduce a new
Opinion into the world, know, that this was the Opinion of St. Chrysostom, and
Oecumenius: Estius in 4 Sent. did. 24. Sect. 18. observes as much; and for
Oecumenius, throws him out with Cujus Authoritas non ita magni est momenti; For
St. Chrysostom (it is in his 14 Homily upon the Acts, about the middle) he
says, it is so obscure, that it may be suspected of Corruption I answer, it is
very clear, and no man will corrupt a Father without a design, which cannot
appear in this what it should be; but rather than yield, he will charge the
rest of his Doctrine, because, says he, he affirms, non fuisse Episcopos tunc
in Ecclesia, when Acts 1. it is said, let another take his Bishopric, To this
I reply, that he says not there were no Bishops, but Apostolos solos, only the
Apostles, and this is true, nor Presbyter neither yet, as will appear
hereafter. But now it may be enquired, Was there no such Office as that of a
Deacon proper to the Church?

SECT. XII. Whether there be such an Office as a Deacon proper to the Church?
YEs, without question, in the 1 of Tim. 3. 8. St. Panl describes at large the
Qualifications of such a man who must be chosen to that Office. I shall need no
proof of it, because all consent to this Conclusion; but if a man should
enquire when and where he was Ordained, I must answer, I know not; nor do I
find any Register of it in the New Testament, nor amongst any learned men any
Consent; the greatest is upon that place in the 6. of the Acts, which seems to
me to be built upon weak grounds; the Church of Rome in general makes all their
seven Orde^ to be erected at the Institution of the Communion by our Savior;
but I leave that imagination as of no moment, since there is no word in
Scripture which seems to countenance it, and I will pass from this Question to
the other; What his Office was to do?

CHAP. VI. What is the Office of a Deacon.
THE Office what it was, receives the greatest Illustration from his Name,
which signifies a Minister, a Servant to the Ecclesiastical Officers, Bishops
or Presbyters; so that as when a man is known to be a Minister or Servant to
another, he is by that made apparent to do such things as Conduce to the
assistance of him who is his Superior or Prelate in his Office, so do these in
respect of their Superiors, Bishops and Presbyters. I do not find one word in
Scripture setting down what their Office was, we can therefore have no
knowledge of it, but from the History of the Church, from which we receive,
that their Office was to Baptize, to assist at the Communion with delivering
the Cup, and sometimes the Body; but not to Consecrate: so likewise to assist
in the Divine Service; some other things we find various, according to the
Customs of Churches, but all these are subordinate and ministerial Offices;
likewise they had power to preach upon particular occasions* and licenses
given, to wit, by that Order they had a qualification to receive a License;
these things I can particularly give an Account to be the sense of the Ancient
Church, if any man require it, but am loath also to lose Time about it; only I
will now undertake Mr. Hooker.

SECT. II. Mr. Hookers opinion concerning a Deacon examined.
HE therefore, Part 2. Chap. 1. falsely printed, for Chap. 2. page 33. in his
third Acception of his Deacon, defines him thus.

Lastly, when it (that is, this word Deacon) is taken shortly, and as it
concerns our purpos^ in hand, it sets out such Officers who are designed by the
Church, to dispose the State and Treasures, to those several purposes for which
God has appointed them, as the occasions and necessities of the body, and any
member thereof may require.

This is his definition, or rather description at large of a Deacon, which I
conceive to be very short, because it touches but the poor; concerning whose
Care I acknowledge, that in the primitive Time there were certain persons
employed, because those times were times of persecution, and the poor of the
Church could not exist without some such Collections by Church Officers to take
care of them; but that this was the sole Office of a Deacon I deny. He proves
it thus; Romans 12. 8. He that distributes, etc. Here (says he) the Apostle
reckons these as a distinct kind from those that went before. In our
Translation it is, he that gives; or in the Margent, imparteth, and that most
naturally; but to make it an Office, he changes the phrase: Well, from hence,
in this place, he thus argues. Here, says he, the Apostle reckons these as
distinct Offices. This Term (these) might well relate to Prophesy, to Ministry,
in the 7th. verse* as well as the rest, which is the most general way with the
Ancient Fathers discourse upon that Text; but he explayned himself before in
the first Chapter of this 2d. Part, page 8, 9. That Prophesy is a Genus to
Teaching and Exhortation, and these two distinct Offices under that one head,
of which I shall discourse hereafter, (God willing); but giving, or, as he
calls it, distributing, ruling, showing mercy, are three distinct Species's or
several Offices under (...), or Ministry: so then this word (these) must be by
him applied only to these five at the last named; which exposition he had, as
he acknowledges, from Beza, and before him, as I find, none. ^or Calvin
himself, upon that place, seems to make all these distinct Gifts; but I pass
by this, and will examine his Ground upon which he builds. [It being (says he)
the Apostles aim by a Similitude drawn from the body, ver. 4. to discover
several parts, by the Actions which were in a peculiar manner appropriate to
them; as there are many Members in the body, and all have not one Office or
Action, so in the Church there be many Members, but their several Offices
appropriate to them. Whereas, were this a Christian Duty common to all, he
should overthrow his own purpose; for he should have showed things agreeing to
all alike, when he should have showed that some things are peculiar. Thus I
have set down his words, and the Arguments, as by him urged.

SECT. III. Romans 12. 8. Expounded.
HEre he puts me to a great deal of Trouble to enlarge my self in expounding
this place, which I intend to do, and show what I conceive of it, and then
refute his imagination, and show how inconsistent it is with the sense of these
words. He begins his Exposition from the 4th verse of the 12. Chap. to the
Romans; but he that will expound it aright must go further, because that verse
begins with a For, and that relates to the 3d. verse, and that likewise begins
with another For, which must look upon what went before. Let us therefore first
examine the first verse; I besceeh you, etc. present your bodies, etc. which is
your reasonable service; verse. 2. Be not conformed, etc. but be transformed,
etc. that you may prove what is that good, that acceptable and perfect will of
God: The presenting the body a sacrifice, the not conforming to the world, the
transforming by renewing the mind, all tend to this, that we may prove what is
that good and acceptable, etc. that is, have some Arguments by which you may
know it; he that does thus mortify, etc. and presents his body thus, that does
transform and conform his mind, shall find Arguments to prove what is Gods will
for him to do; verse. 3d. For I say unto you, etc. you ought to know this,
because ye ought to perform this will of God; therefore do these things which
may make you prove it. Now this good and acceptable will of God, is, that you
do not think too highly, (or higher,) for this phrase (of himself) is a Gloss
of our Translators, not the Text; and indeed this same too high thinking,
whether it concerns a man's self, or his work he has to do, is that which
disturbs a man in his duty, whatsoever he is, or it is; as if he think himself
too good to be an hearer only, it makes him thrust himself into the Preachers
office; or when he has that Office, he thinks too highly of himself, that he
is too good for it; or when he thinks too highly of that Duty which he does, it
makes him, with the Pharisee, despise his brother, who is not excellent or
eminent in that way; so that this same high thinking puts a man besides the way
of Gods will; and therefore he adds, but to think soberly, temperately,
modestly; he must not plus sapere, think more or higher than his Condition, but
he must think soberly, be lowly in his own eyes, not to intrude into others
business, or go beyond his own qualification, according as God has dealt to
every man the measure of Faith: By Faith* I conceive as most do, Fidelity; that
is then, according as he is entrusted by God, according to that measure of
trust which God has laid upon him; there will not be difference, I guess,
about that, and therefore I let it pass; verse 4. For as we have many members
in one body, and all members have not the same office; so we being many are one
body in Christ, and every one members one of another.

SECT. IV. No Argument can be enforced from a Simile, farther than the Parallel
leads.
HEre we see all Christians are one body, of which Christ is the head; that as
they have a duty toward the head, of obedience, so they being fellow members,
one toward another, have that duty one toward another as fellow member, not
to think too highly, but to consider their mutual assistance each ought to give
to the other. Here now, if I would stop, let us Consider, how it were possible
to urge me farther: Comparisons are not to be haled and pulled farther than the
Letter, there may be more in one part, than another; but an Argument cannot be
drawn farther than the Comparison leads. It is true, St. Paul says, in the
4th. verse, that all members have not the same office; but can I force that to
the parallel, when St. Paul does not mention it? We may find the like in many
places of Scripture, as that parable of our Savior of the Sower of the Tares,
Mat. 13. where our Savior expounds pieces of the parable; we may according to
those pieces, from thence draw Arguments in Questions of Religion; but from the
rest, which he expounds not, the Arguments will be but probable; so here I may
say, Mr. Hookers Argument is weak, because members have diverse offices in the
natural body; and St. Paul says, we are a body, and one another members, like
the other so far, but leaving out the rest, and diverse Offices distinct; might
I not say, that this does not enforce it. But let us go on: I will not say so;
for although I think this Text does not enforce it, yet I think it true
Doctrine, That there are diverse Offices in the body of the Church, like
diverse members in the body; Anselm, H. Rabanus Maurus, with others, have
paralelled them in their Comments on this Text. Let us now go on.

Although it be true Doctrine, that as in the body many members have distinct
offices and abilities to perform their duties, which are not competible to
other: so it is in the Church, there are diverse Member^, which have distinct
Offices, and those Offices assisted with diverse Graces peculiar to them, and
not to others; yet this Text goes, not to discourse of the distinction of
Officers, but of the Manage of them: It never parallels that, (and all Members
have not the same Office) but only that (we are one body, and one another
Members.)

SECT. V. Diverse Gifts and Offices.
HAving then, etc. I will stand upon no Criticism here, to talk of an Hebraism
without necessity; methinks the Text is full, having then diverse Gifts; mark,
diverse Gifts: there are many Organical members, which have besides their
Offices, Abilities and Gifts, as beauty, strength, and the like, which are
powerful Assistants ad been operandum, to do their Office more dexterously and
commendably; Now then, as we find amongst us there are diverse Officers, and
diverse Gifts amongst these Officers, Abilities of utterance, of knowledge, and
the like, so may in these men here spoken of; but indeed, the very Authority is
a Gift of God, to do these things of God, and these Authorities or Gifts
whatsoever are distinguished by the Grace of God that is given us, not our own
Merits, but his Favor and Grace, both gives the Gift and the Difference; but
since it is a Gift of a Member, therefore it must be used to the good of the
Members, and not for our own private ends: and here the Apostle does not make
that division of Gifts so contradistinct, that they cannot come together; but
says, that whatsoever Gift any man ^ath of doing good, as he must acknowledge
it the Gift of God, so he must use it to the good of his Neighbor, whether
Prophesy or Ministry: that this is the sense, appears out of that clause in the
Similitude not paralleled. So we see it does by this Instance made by the
Apostle, where is no opposition in the persons, but only a difference in Gifts,
which may well be in the same Office, without any inconsistency or reluctance.
If any man will see this Discourse more fully, let him read the same Apostle 1
Cor. 12. 4. There are diversities of Gifts, but the same Spirit; then go to
verse 9, 10. To one is given by the Spirit the word of wisdom, etc. Let any man
peruse them all, and see whether they were Offices or Gifts, and the same word
is used for those Gifts there as here, which is (...)* and in the 12. verse, to
make these places meet, he deduceth the same Simile out of these premises of
these Gifts, as in this Text he deduceth the Condition or Scope of the Gifts
from that Simile: so that then I conclude some of these Gifts being the same,
are used there, the word the same that is used there, and it is impossible to
force those to Offices; therefore it should be a violence to force these: let
us come to the particulars, whether Prophesy, etc. Whether this be an Office,
or no, is hard to determine, I am sure it is mentioned amongst those were no
Offices, 1 Cor. 12. 10. But let us conceive what it is? It is possible that it
was the Gift of Prophesy to foretell the will of God concerning things to come,
of which there were diverse in the first Age of the Church; or else by Prophesy
may be meant preaching, which expounds the will of God revealed in Scripture:
of both which I may justly affirm that of St. Paul 1 Cor. 14. 3. He that
prophesyeth speaks unto men to Edification, and to Exhortation and Comfort.

SECT. VI. A Conceit of some Commentators refuted.
NOw see here the Conceit of Beza, Tolet the Jesuit, (I know not which had i^
from the other) Cornelius a Lapide, with other late Writers upon this place of
my Text in hand; see how vain their Conceits are who make Prophesy here a Genus
of Teaching and Exhortation, because they would make them two sorts of
Officers; and Prophesy only a general name predicated of them; when St. Paul
makes Edification, which is the same with Teaching and Exhortation, to be Gifts
or qualities of a Propher, both belonging to the same Offices.

Concerning Prophesy.
Prophesy, if you will, is a Gift sometimes as well as an Office, every Office
is a Gift, but not every Gift an Office; but whether Prophesy be taken for a
Gift, or an Office; it is not a Genus to the other two, but the other are
rather Integral parts or qualifications belonging to it: and therefore I wonder
at these men, that they expound this Text to such an impossible Sense. Hooker
gives this reason, because, says he, if these (Prophecy he means, and
Ministry) were several functions, then there should be seven: what if there
were seventeen? If there be so many, what is that to the purpose? this he
speaks, Chap. 1. of his second Book, p. 10. Well, but what says the Apostle?
He says not this is a distinct Office, as the Eye in the body, but drives at
the main, that we are one another members; that this man must not think too
highly, but follow his business; let him prophesy according to the proportion
of Faith: what that is, I will not examine, it is something for the good of
others, who are his fellow Members.

Concerning Ministry.
The second is: Or Ministry; let us wait on our Ministry: Has a man received
the Gift of Ministry; Here a man might have looked for a Deacon, for the very
word is put; but because the word is not to his sense, he lets that slip, and
takes his sense without his word. And it is worth any man's marking, that in his
treating of the Office of a Deacon, which begins Chap. 1. page 32. he first
sets down the Acceptance of the Word, and page 33. he explains the word
strictly as it concerns our purpose, but shows not one place, where this word
is used to his Sense, and indeed he cannot; he had showed Phrases in the
Scripture for the other, but not for this; but in this very place the Word is
used according to his sense, for the Genus of three Officers, but another for
his Office. Well, let us examine it: this is the general Nature (says he) to a
sort of Ministering Officers, which come after; he faith so, what proof? none
but his own Authority; and then ask him, where it has that restrained sense to
these three Officers, he cannot show it in Scripture, nor Beza, nor Tolet, nor
any other; St Chrysostom upon the place, says, it signifies all Ministration,
even Apostleship; and Oecumenius, with Theophylact, is to the same sense, and
Anselm something like it, sive habentes Ministerium sicut Diaconu^ ut
ministremus sacris Altaribus, vel Ministerium, ut terrena alimenta Sanctis
ministremus. Now consider the meaning: If you have received the Gift of
Ministry, in what kind soever, use i^ as a Member of that body, think not so
highly of your self, to be too good for that Office which God has enabled you
for, but serve in it: I go on.

Concerning Teaching and Exhortation.
Or he that teaches on teaching: Here now the Authors before mentioned will
make this a Species of Prophesy; but this and Exhortation are not Species's of
Prophesy, but Parts, Endowments, Qualities, for there can be no Prophet without
these powers and acts, nor can they be severed; the same man that teaches a
Doctrine, in that exhorts to a Duty; suppose it the most speculative in the
World, the Doctrine of the Trinity, he that teaches, when he teaches it,
exhorts to the Adoration of each person; and so for Exhortation, no man can
exhort, but upon Grounds of Doctrine, he exhorts foolishly else; therefore they
cannot be distinct Offices, but parts or Gifts in the same Office; for one
Preacher may have a greater power in Logic to prove his Doctrine or
Conclusion, and another in Rhetoric to persuade the practice, and these
diverse abilities and Gifts bestowed upon those men by the Grace of God: and
therefore in these, as in the other, have you the whole Gift of Prophecy, use
it as a Member, not thinking too high, but use it for the good of your brother,
who is your fellow Member: so likewise the Spirit is given in measure, one
excells in one piece, another in another, do all like fellow Members; but no
one word, that these are distinct Offices, as that of the hand, or the eye, or
the ear, that piece was not paralleled, nor is exemplified.

And therefore these Sentences cannot be enforced for two Offices, but two
Qualities of the same Office, which may and must be in him who is a Prophet;
but because they may according to their Eminency well be severed, one may have
one eminently, and not the other, and likewise because they cannot be both
actuated at the same instant; therefore directions are given either to the
diverse persons or to the same man of his several seasons to do both these.

SECT. VII. His Deacon, enforced hence, Confuted.
NOW we come to that, which he makes a Deacon: He who gives in Simplicity (he
who distributeth he reads it,) But why he and Beza should do so, since they
pretend nothing out of the Original to force it, (but their own Conceit only of
making this a Species of the Minister or Deacon before spoken of) and all
Antiquity, both Greek and Latin Fathers reading it otherwise, and no one that
I can find putting in one word to this purpose, is a strange Conceit; I cannot
Conceive why, unless it be a too much love of their own newly hatched Opinion.
But see what weight Mr. Hookers Opinion has: By this is meant a Deacon; what
word shows it? he says it is but a Species of that Deacon before spoken of;
and if that Deacon which was before mentioned be the name, then the two other
Species must be Deacons as well as he, which he will deny, as you shall see
hereafter; then, that this is a distinct Office of a Deacon, that is, was an
Office spoken of, no man can prove, but a pious duty, which God gives men gifts
to do for others good, and therefore no word of distinction here, but without
all question a Prophet may do this, a Minister or Deacon, a Doctor or Exhorter;
yea, it will be a good Argument in Exhortation, to do as I have done my self. I
should go on with the next, but I reserve that for another time, and the rather
stayed so long upon this, because in part I shall stop two Gaps with one Bush;
but I will leap to the last, which is, (He who shows mercy, let him do it with
cheerfulness.

What is meant by He that shows mercy.
WHat a deal of do Beza, and he, and Lapide the Jesuit have, to make an Office
of this? They make it to be the Widow; He, Masters of Hospitals: when
Antiquity insists chiefly upon the Inward Act of Mercy, which is larger than
giving; Mercy is in forgiving, as well as giving, and the like: but what one
word is there all this way, of distinction of Offices? not one; but of Gifts,
which like members of the same body, must with lowliness of mind be used to
the good of our fellow Members.

Now I having showed what appears to me to be the meaning of the Text, and
although by this his sense is already Confuted; yet in a Logical manner I will
now undertake it again.

SECT. VIII. The first Confutation of his Conclusion out of this Text.
THat Sense must not be wrung out of the Text, which the Text in nothing
invites to.

But his sense is such. Ergo,

His sense is: That by this (that distributes,) is meant an Office, designed by
the Church to dispose the State and Treasure of the Church, etc. and so page
33. But page 9. he says, Those several (meaning these Offices expressed in
this Text) are set forth by way of opposition, and contradistinct one to
another, and therefore cannot be subordinate, and meet in one subject, where
they should be both formally acted. A strange kind of discourse to deceive men
with (as it seems to me) by great words; for first, the parts in the Text he
makes subordinate, to wit, teaching and exhorting, to Prophesy; secondly,
distributing, ruling, having mercy, to Ministry: And again, these things which
are subordinate are in the same subject, as Animal and Corpus are in Homine.
But that they are not opposed, or distinct, or any way inconsistent, will
appear presently.

To prove my Minor then: First, whereas he says this phrase (he that
distributes) does signify an Office, I can deny the words, and say, they are
not found in that place. Secondly, I say, that those words there do not
signify an Office, no more than those about them, but a Gift, as it is called
by the Apostle. Where he says it is that Office called Deacon, he himself
disproves it, since it is distinct and inconsistent with the Minister or
Deacon, which is both one. Thirdly, whereas he says it is an Office to dispose
the State and Treasure of the Church, Is there the least mention made of
Church, or Treasure of it? not a word: this word Gift would import otherwise.

SECT. IX. Another Argument.
NOW to this last, in page the 9th, I frame this Syllogism: Those Gifts which
have been, and are many times in the same, are not so Contradistinct as they
cannot subsist in the same Subject.

But many of these Gifts in the Text have been, and often are in the same
Subject; Ergo.

My Major is clear from the Act: that which has been, and is, is possible, and
crosses not the nature of any thing.

My Minor may be proved in the Lump: First, I doubt not to say, that the
Apostles had all these; for they were Prophets, they were Minsters, they were
Doctors, Teachers, Exhorters, did give to the poor, did rule, had bowels of
mercy, with all the requisites.

Take Prophesy for Preaching, many a man now has all these in the same Lump.

Secondly, Teacher and Exhorter cannot be severed: This Gentleman styles
himself, Pastor of the Church of Hertford upon Connecticutt, in N. England, Mr.
Cotton Teacher of Boston in N. England, both of them have written concerning
these businesses. If a Pastor be an inconsistent Office with a Teacher, why
does Mr. Hooker teach, and so Logically endeavor to prove his Doctrine? and
Mr. Cotton the Teacher, use Rhetoric to persuade? These things seem to me
inconsistent, a Teacher, and not an Exhorter, or an Exhorter, and not a
Teacher: so far they are from being inconsistent one with the other, that
they cannot exist well one without the other; and for this particular phrase,
Distributer, or Giver, neither one nor other be good men, unless they be both;
the Clergy must not be altogether upon the receiving hand, there is time and
place for them to give, as well, yea rather than others, and take Care of the
poor, and have bowels of Compassion toward them, and by their good Example
exhort others to do as they do. I have been something too tedious here; but
this will save future labor.

SECT. X.
His Second Argument refuted.
HIS Second Argument to prove his kind of Office, is drawn from the^ 1 Timothy 3.
8. where the Description how he must be qualified, is set down: I grant it; but
is it set down, that he is an Officer to dispose Church Treasure, and nothing
else, which he disputes for? For he offers at such a thing, and therefore that
place, in his own Judgment, can speak nothing, for it proves only, that there
is such an Office as a Deacon; and how he should be qualified, but no one word
what the duty of that Office is, and therefore he draws no Argument from it,
but only sets it down with a figure of 2. for his second Argument, although he
argue nothing from it.

His Third Argument refuted.
HIs Third Argument is drawn from the place before hand led, Acts 6. to which I
have (I doubt not) spoken enough; but that it may appear wherein he and I
agree, and wherein differ, in this point; Consider with me, that he says, that
this was a public Office; I grant it. Secondly, that this service was about
Tables: I grant it. Thirdly, page 35, that the full and careful attendance
upon this work, could not stand with careful, constant, and conscientious
Attendance upon the Ministry of the Word, as the Office of a Minister so
employed did require; This I deny: because I have proved they were Ministers of
the Word, and have before answered his Arguments drawn from the Apostles, It is
not meet, etc. verse. 3. and do now add; It is one thing to say, It is not
meet; another to say, It is inconsistent, it cannot stand with it. Again, many
things might be and were sit for Inferior Ministers, which were not fit for the
Apostles: It is not meet, was truly said by the Apostles: But now I doubt,
whether this Office was for this occasion only, or for their lives. I 2dly.
affirm, as before, that these men were Ministers. And 3dly, I deny that this
was of that Deacon St. Paul speaks of, and was after used in the Church. His
continued Discourse is but a repetition, only a passionate expression or two,
that we make a Deacon half a Priest, or a Preparation to it, and he says, that
this was the first Inlet into the Usurpation of Bishops. I let these things
pass, and come to his Dispute against us.

His First Argument from Reason, Answered.
THat which is made by Christ a distinct Office from Pastor and Teacher, that
cannot be any part of either, or a preparation to either. But so the Office of
a Deacon is.

I answer: That, First, I deny that ever the Office of a Deacon was instituted
by Christ; but by the Apostles. Secondly, although I grant that the Apostles
instituted this O^^^ce distinct from them, yet it may be a preparation or part
of either; for that which is a preparation, is distinct from that it is
prepared for, and although all the parts united together do not differ really
from the whole, yet any one part does. And Thirdly, I say, that although it
were neither part nor preparative, yet it may be subservient to them, in which
Consists the Office of a Deacon.

His Second Argument from Reason, answered.
HIs Second Argument: That Office which is to attend Tables, has nothing to do
with Pastors, or Doctors, etc.

But this Office is to attend Tables.

To the Major: That Office may do both, those in the Acts did.

To the Minor; I deny that the Office of a Deacon is solely to attend Tables;
but if he leave out that word solely, his whole Argument is lame* that which he
urges out of Acts 6. is not to the purpose, for as I may deny them to be
Deacons, because never so called in the Scripture: so I do deny them to be
those Deacons St. Paul directs, 1. Tim. 3.

His Third Argument answered.
HIs Third Argument: If the Apostles who were extraordinary persons, could not,
shall men of ordinary Abilities be sufficient?

I have answered this before. It is no where said, that they could not, they
could without doubt have done much more; but as they were men of extraordinary
abilities, so they were men of extraordinary employments; and it was not meet,
that that employment should be impeded by any of these less affairs. Again, we
deny that the Office of a Deacon exacts the duty of a Pastor from him, but only
that he should minister to the Pastor, which he may do well with such a Charge
upon him.

Page 36. Number 3. I understand not those Figures; He says somewhat that
would be answered.

Another Argument from 1 Timothy 3. 8. answered.
THE Gifts of Deacons which are required by the Apostle, are such as will not
furnish a man to be a Minister; (he means a Presbyter, I think) for such should
be Apt to teach: to be a teacher, and not apt to teach, is to be a Bell without
a Clapper.

I could answer this in his own Coin, but I love not scurrility and sharpness
in these Grave and Serious things; they taste not of that lowliness of mind
which should be amongst fellow Members.

I answer therefore; That the Gifts of Deacons are not such as qualify a
Bishop, of which St. Paul spoke there; but I will tell you, very like them; and
as that Clause is not inserted to a Deacon, that he should be apt to teach: so
it is not required of him; but when he is found fit to teach, and it is
required, he may: I think I have spoken enough to him. If I knew any more of
this kind, I would not account it lost time to handle it, although tired with
this.

CHAP. VIII. SECT. I. Of a Ruling Elder.
THE next particle or Branch of Ecclesiastical Authority which I will undertake
to handle, is that they call a ruling Elder, or a Lay Elder: he is called an
Elder, but I am confident that the Name is new, and the Office not known in the
Primitive Church; nor has any mention in Scripture, but by phansy. Now to
understand this, I shall first show, what manner of Office this man is imagined
to have, and then answer such Arguments as are brought for him; and so
Conclude, with mine own reasons against him: First, the Examination of his
Office, what it is to do, is set down by Mr. Hooker, Part 2. Chap. 1. page 16.
I will not transcribe all he says, but set down the heads.

SECT. II. What those Lay Elders are, according to Hooker.
BEfore the Assembly meet, he is of the Common Council, and his voice is to be
taken in with the rest in the Consultation and Consideration of the business,
(by which, I think, he means the business should be agitated that day) Here he
ciphers out 3. places of Scripture, I think to no such purpose; read them he
that will, Heb. 13. 17. 1 Cor. 12. 28. Acts 20. 28.

When Offenses are to be brought to the Congregation, it belongs to them to
ripen and prepare the business, by way of praeconsideration, to state the
Cause right, etc.

Thirdly, when the Church is met, he may interpose his Judgment, without asking
leave.

These he has in Common with other Elders: what he has peculiar to himself,
is;

First, visiting the Sick, and such as are any way under Spiritual wants, these
men should send for these Elders, and they shall be the Physicians of their
Souls; for this he quotes James 5. 14. but no word there, of a Lay Elder.

Secondly, by the same reason he should seek out such, and visit them.

Thirdly, He is to make peace amongst Members.

Fourthly, If there be a Fame of a Member, that he misbehaves himself toward
such as are without, (that is, I think, not of their Church) by which the
Church may be scandalized, he is to enquire of the Truth, and (I think) inform,
or else all is in vain.

Fifthly, He is to Consider of the persons that are to be admitted into the
Church, and to pronounce Excommunications.

Thus, in general, we see what manner of Office this is; let us now examine,
whether there be semblances of any such thing in Scripture, which they pretend
should be the Guide in these Affairs. And first, I will begin where I left; for
that, in the first place, he cites Romans 12. 8. As he found a word for his
Deacon, He that distributes: so he has another for his Elder, He that rules,
with diligence.

SECT. III. Whether any such Elders truly in Scripture.
THis Question Mr. Hooker enters upon in the same 1st. Chapter of the 2d. Part,
page 8. Here he says, he has nothing to do but with the Hierarchical party,
whose main Arguments are, a Pursuivant, and a Prison, armed with Authority of
an High Commission. This man, (I observe) though civil in many places to
others, yet very passionately bitter, when any thing crosses him, to speak
against that Cause which I conceive right, and do not doubt but I shall prove
it. First, he undertakes to prove this Office, that there is such an Office,
from the former place; but goes now somewhat higher, Romans 12. 7. He argues for
it first, thus; The Gifts here mentioned and considered, are not such as have
reference to a Civil, but to an Ecclesiastical Condition; so the words, verse.
5. We are one body in Christ. This is no strong Argument, we are one body in
Christ, therefore that which is spoken of that body or members, must be
Ecclesiastical, not Civil. In the same body, consisting of the members of
Christ's Church, his mystical body, there are many Civil Duties, even as they
are Christians, exacted from them, and as members of that body: Duties of Kings
to Subjects, of Subjects to Kings, Husbands to Wives, and theirs to their
Husbands, betwixt Masters and Servants, and so they mutually; a little of this
Divinity will make all things Ecclesiastical, and reduce all Obedience for
Christ's sake to a Pastor or Teacher, an Elder or Deacon. Secondly, the
Operations which issue from these Functions evidence as much, Prophesying, etc.
Exhorting, etc. I would he had put in showing mercy too, but we see they do
not; showing mercy, giving, ruling, may relate to any member of this body.
There is nothing therefore in these Arguments that enforce, these should be
Ecclesiastical duties of members in the mystical body of Christ.

He has another Figure of 2, I think he means by it another Argument for the
Cause, that is, page 9.

An Argument of his answered.
GIfts here, are not such as are Common, and belong to all Christians, as
Faith, Hope, Charity, etc.

What if they are not? are they Ecclesiastical Orders? that will never follow;
but he proves it, although to no purpose, if it were proved.

First, those Gifts are here meant, by which the Members of the body are
distinct one from another, and have several Acts appropriate to them. He proves
that, because verse 4. (...), etc. all members have not the same office; this,
I have said, is not paralleled in the Simile, and therefore not to be urged
further; But, says he, Common Graces are not so distinct, for in them they do
agree. I answer, these are not Common, nor yet Ecclesiastical only, nor the
duties required, witness this one which is instanced in, He that rules with
Diligence: To be a Ruler, is not only in Ecclesiastical Affairs, but Civil; and
he that rules in Civil affairs, is to do it with diligence; so Origin upon
this very place: so St. Ambrose, St. Hierom, Theophylact, Anselm, H. Rabanus
Maurus, out of them; all of which use phrases to this purpose, qui praest vel
fratribus vel Ecclesiae. So that by this, although there is not a Common Grace
that is universal to all Christians, yet it is so Common, as that it belongs
to all Governors whether Lay or Ecclesiastical, nemine contradicente, but these
late men; and the duty enjoined, is as Common as the Grace given, to wit, to
govern or rule, not barely, but with diligence. So that this Conclusion is
Confuted out of this very Instance, and may as easily out of any other, but
Prophesy, and teaching and exhorting, although, perhaps, something of this
sense may be affirmed of them. Again, he urges the Emphasis of the phrase
(...), etc. The weight (says he) of the phrase having the Article in that
manner added, notes not every member, but some by way of Eminency, to whom
these appertain; it is true, and so does this Instance; He who rules, notes
not all men, but Rulers only; but does it note by these Caveats a Layman,
ruling in Ecclesiastical Affairs? or if it should, why not a Chancellor? that
were a fearful Exposition.

His 3d. Argument, drawn from the Distinction mentioned in the 4th. verse, is
abundantly answered before, and his new division of these Offices; I come
therefore to his 2d. Argument, to prove that there is such an Office.

Another Argument of his answered.
THis is drawn from 1 Cor. 12. 28. where the Apostle expressing many other
Offices or Gifts which God has given to his Church, he names Governments, or,
as we read it, helps in Governments; or as Beza and he, helps Governments: I
shall not trouble my self with that phrase much, here he lays this Foundation,
That the Apostle names here some ordinary, some extraordinary Offices; amongst
those ordinary ones which are to last in his Church, he reckons (what he
pleases, and how) Teachers, Helps, which were Deacons, Governments which were
Elders; were all this granted, will all this prove them Lay Elders? I can grant
likewise his second Foundation that he requires, That the Gifts themselves are
put in the Abstract, yet the persons who were possessors of them were
understood in the Concrete; by these abstract Phrases I can grant his third
Foundation likewise; which is, That although some, as the Apostles, had all
these Gifts, yet they might formally be in some Subjects, as appointed by
Christ to that purpose. I deny not this; but because they might be, will it
follow affirmatively, therefore they were; certainly a potentia ad Actum valet
Argumentum negative, It cannot be, therefore it is not; but not affirmatively,
It may be, therefore it is.

Now let us Consider his Arguments: As the Apostles, Prophets and Teachers were
distinct, so are helps and Governments distinct; for the Apostle puts them in
the same rank; I deny that, for they are put in distinct ranks, first, second,
third, and then these Phrases put (after that) then, (then) and no distinction
betwixt. Gifts of Healing, Helps, Governments. I could here show the
Expositions of St Chrysostom, Ambrose, Theophylact, Anselm, St. Hierom, in no
one of which do I find a Lay Elder understood, by this phrase Governments. I
could show you the Expositions of others, some making him an Archdeacon, some
a Parochian; but I study brevity where there is no proof, and I will add but
one thing, which I find observed by none, which is, That, as if the Apostle
would prophetically in his manner of writing, as well as the words he writes,
Confute this man, and this side of men, if they prove such an Office from this
place, they must prove, that this phrase Government signifies a distinct Order,
and that this phrase signifies that thing they intend it for; this latter is
against Antiquity, and has no color for it The former, upon which the latter
is grounded, he thinks he has proved, because that Apostles and Prophets, etc.
were distinct Offices or Gifts in distinct persons. I answer, it follows not;
for St. Paul in the two following verses, 29, 30. reckoning up a distinction of
the other Gifts, Are all Apostles, are all Pr^phets, etc? does never say, are
all Helps, are all Governments? but does reckon that which comes after this, Do
all speak with tongues? So that methinks the Apostle does, as it were of
purpose, to make this not appear a distinct Office from the rest. Indeed all
the other are helps, and most of them Governments, and therefore he could not
use this phrase to them, are all helps, etc.? as he did to the other; but he
stands not much upon this, these are too weak Grounds to support this new
Building: The Achilles which is ex^lted of follows, and that it is taken out of
(as Mr. Hooker calls it) that Famous place 1 Timothy 5. 17. this is, page 11.
where before. Here he spends a great deal of Rhetoric in Commendation of this
place to his purpose, and in Scorn and Contempt, and vilifying his Adversaries,
which might have been better spared, and he immediately fallen to his
business, as I will.

SECT. IV. His Argument from 1 Timothy 5. 17. answered.
THE words of the Text, are, Let the Elders which rule well, bt worthy of
honor, especially they who labor in the Word and Doctrine. First, we may
observe, that from hence is pretended no Institution of such an Order.
Secondly, that there is not pretended any Demonstration, that there was any
such Office executed with the Approbation of the Apostles; for that although
the Institution were not registered, yet it would Argue there was such an
Office, without which they could not execute the Office; but the force of
Argument is only drawn from this, that the Apostle should here name two
distinct Officers, one, whose Office was to rule only, and another, to labor
in the Word and Doctrine. I will first endeavor to expound the Text, and then
satisfy the Objections; In the Exposition I find these pieces necessary to be
opened; who are meant by this word (Elders;) 2dly. what is meant by (ruling
well;) 3dly. what by (double honor;) 4ly. what by (labor in the Word and
Doctrine;) lastly, what by (especially.) First, this word Elder is diversely
used in these Epistles, and in this very Chapter, either for a man of ancient
years, which is its genuine signification, or else for an Officer in the
Church, and of the Church; for there may be Officers in the Church concerning
politic Affairs, which must have a Discipline, in the Church; of this Sort
are all Officers in a Christian Commonwealth, which are Officers in the Church,
but not of it; but an Elder is taken for an Officer in and of the Church,
having to meddle in Ecclesiastical Affairs; and this latter is a borrowed sense
of it, because that Gray hairs are stayed and Judicious, which are Attributes
belonging to the Office of a Presbyter; therefore they have their denomination
from that. In the first sense it is taken in the 1. verse of this Chapter, by
the Consent of all, where it is said, rebuke not an ^lder, but entreat him as a
father; there the Elder in Age is understood, as all agree, both ancient and
later Writers: this word is again used in this Chapt. a little after this Text,
verse 19. Against an Elder receive not an Accusation, but before two or three
Witnesses; How an Elder is understood here, is disputable: The Grecians, St.
Chrysostom, Theophylact, Oecumenius, understand an Elder in Age only, as Beza
observes; but it is not so universally true, as he affirms; for Theodoret upon
that place expounds it of a Presbyter by Office; and the Latins, St. Ambrose,
etc. with one Consent suppose it an Office. Here is a difference, and the
Arguments of no moment that are brought of one side or the other, nor much
material; for the Doctrine is true of the least Elder, there is Capitis
reverentia Cani, some Civility to be paid to Gray hairs; such men should not so
easily be accused, or if they be, Accusations not so easily entertained, as
those are made against others; but I have writ this, to show that this word
Elder is not always taken for an Officer, no not in this Epistle, in this
Chapter; yet here I doubt not but it is taken for an Ecclesiastical Officer,
both because of the word rule, as likewise labor in the word; but whether two
Officers or one, will be questioned.

SECT. V. That Elder here signifies but one Office.
FIrst, no man can show any where in the New Testament any usage of this word,
but either for a mere Senior in Age, or this one Presbyter, which is the
Ecclesiastical Officer; and besides this place, they themselves will Confess,
that no strong Argument can be produced, it were hard then, if there were
nothing else, that this word here should enforce it. Again, this word Elder is
used but once, which has influence upon both these Actions of ruling and
laboring, which were not proper in Speech, if they were two Offices, without
some Term of Distinction; for it would be more rightly and significantly put,
an Elder that rules, and an Elder that labors; but this word Elder being
named but once, it should seem to enforce but one Office, with diverse Actions;
for there are but two sorts of Elders, as I find: either that Lay Elder, which
is an Elder by Age, or an Ecclesiastical Elder, who is described how he should
be qualifyed, either in the 3d. Chapter of this Epistle, or the first of Titus;
but the first sort are not pretended to here, nor the second as they pretend;
some other word then must afford it, not this word Elder.

SECT. VI. What Ruling well imports.
THe next is, rule well, that is, certainly, Govern his flock Committed to him;
now this word will imply no distinction from the other, Presbyter, by their own
Consent, this is a part of that other teaching Elder, he is a Ruler too; and if
a Ruler, then no doubt, if a good teacher, he rules well; or else as may happen
out, he may be a good Teacher, and a weak Ruler, and again, a good Ruler, and a
weak Teacher: So that if Ruling do not make a distinction in the Office, ruling
well does not; for Offices are not distinguished by the diligence or qualities
of their Officers, the men that use them, but their Officers, the men that use
them, by their Offices; there are good and bad in every Office, and so in the
Ministry, but his goodness or badnesse in Execution of his Office makes a Man
a good or bad Officer, but not of another kind of Office. By this phrase then,
that rules well, cannot be understood any thing which can enforce a new
Office; I will therefore remove to the 3d. phrase, (labor in the Word and
Doctrine.

SECT. VII. What is Laboring in the Word.
AND certainly, this phrase yields no matter for an Argument against the unity
of this Office; for he nor they cannot deny, but that both these are joined in
one, that the same man who is a Labourer in the Word, is a Ruler; but let us
observe, that this word Labor signifies an industrious and painful doing that
he labors for; so that it is more than an ordinary prosecuting his
undertaking: Now both these phrases being affirmed of that one word Elder, they
cannot signify diverse Officers, but diverse performances in that Office; that
one man is more careful in Ruling, another in Teaching; the one rules well,
the other labors well.

SECT. VIII. What Double honor signifies.
WE will pass to the 4th. (Double honor,) that is by all understood to be a
double proportion, or much larger maintenance than that of Widows; I will not
trouble it therefore; but considering that it is but once used, though in two
places applied, as double honor to Rulers well, and much rather to Laborers,
it being the same word and sense in both, and in both applied distinctly where
distinctly put, and implyedly* where implyedly put, as the same word ^lder is
expressly or implicitly delivered; that therefore cannot enforce a Difference;
if it be any where, it must be in [especially.]

SECT. IX. The force of the word Especially.
BUT neither does that do it; for that adds but an Increase of the Debt, when
majus and minus non variant speciem; it is due to one, but rather there is a
greater Obligation to the other, not another due; or if there were another
Debt, yet that would not prove another kind of Office, but more obliging Acts
of that Officer. It is then, as if we should speak of Shepherds; that Shepherd
deserves his wages who takes care of his flock, even he that shall fold them at
night carefully, and let them out in the morning, and do many Shepherdly
duties; but when there are diverse Shepherds belonging to the same flock, he
shall best or chiefly deserve it, who having Cunning to do it, shall
industriously, and with great labor of his own, cure their Diseases, and heal
them, and both these may be Shepherds, and deserve their wages, but especially
the latter, and yet not distinct Offices; and the first sort may grow up to the
latters abilities, and then as well deserve as he; or as we may say of a Privy
Counselor, he has a twofold relation, to the Subject, and to the King; he
deserves his honor well, that rules well; but especially he that advises his
King well: yet these are not two Offices, but two duties of the same Office,
and, as we have seen, distinct Abilities have shown themselves in these diverse
Effects. This is the sense of the Text, there are two duties in these Elders,
to rule, to labor in the Word and Doctrine; they that rule well, and do that
piece well, are worthy of double honor, but especially they that labor in the
Word and Doctrine, their flock ought to have a more particular Care of them;
thus the Text being explained, as appears to me clearly, the next thing to do,
will be to vindicate it from such Arguments which seem to be deduced out of
this Text, for that Imaginary Office which is so much boasted of, to be already
with great ^vidence confirmed by it.

SECT. X. The Arguments answered.
MR. Hooker, where before, Part 1. Chap. 2. p. 13. thus lays his Foundation:
the words carry a distribution, (...), (neither of which are in the Text, but
(...), but I let pass these things, as mistakes in him, though a most supine
negligence.) And this (says he) Tractatur Collatione imparium a Majoribus. All
this I can grant, but the Imparity must be in the Execution of the Office, one
does it better, or more industriously than another.

The Sum (says he) of the verse is expressed in a discreet Axiom, the
Arguments are Comparata imparia* the things compared are the persons, a Ruling
Elder, a Teaching Elder, I will not cavil at the phrase, the singular number
for the plural; it is Ruling Elders, and teaching Elders: but I deny that
proposition absolutely, It is not a ruling Elder and a teaching Elder, but such
ruling Elders and such Teachers, which labor not in the Word; There is a great
difference in this sense, it is a falacy a been conjunctis ad male divisa: see
it explained, every Elder is a ruling Elder, but if he rule ill, he is not
worthy of Double honor, no, he deserves reproof; It was a mighty falacy put
upon the Reader, to say the Comparison is made between ruling Elders and
preaching: when the words of the Text say, it is such as rule well, and
Teaching Elders are not the second branch, Extemporary Preachers have nothing
to do with it, but such as labor and take pains in the Word, as St. Chrysostom
most excellently descants upon that place; and the very letter introduces it
(...), from whence (...), here used, signifies as much as one that with great
labor and pains effects what he does; not the Sweat in the Pulpit but the
Study, as may be most apparent, is it, which makes him capable of this Double
honor. I wonder much at the Writer therefore, not that he was deceived, for
that is humanum, subject to humane nature; but that he who seems so punctual in
Logic, should offer such a fallacy, the fraud whereof is so manifest; but he
goes on, and I.

It is (says he) especially to be observed, that their Works are not the
Things compared, but the persons notified by the kind of their Works; for the
words are not, the Elders because they rule well, and because they labor, but
those Elders that are ruling, those Elders that are laboring in the Word.

See again, what a mist he lays before the Readers eyes, in his Exception, he
puts the phrase aright in the first place, It is not because they rule well,
Rule well is the phrase of the Text; but in his affirmative it is (those Elders
that are ruling) there that emphatical Epithete (well) is left out. And then
again in his second Exception, That it is not because they labor; there (in
the word) is left out; but in his Affirmative it is put in, (but those Elders
that are laboring in the word.) This is mere Juggling; but to his Sense. I
grant that the persons are notified by their Works, although not by such kind
as he expresses; The persons I grant distinct, but the diverse persons, and
the same Office, the Office is not distinct.

He proceeds to this Sense, that their phrases are the Subject of the
proposition only, and therefore the persons and Officers being the Things
compared, it is certain they must be distinct persons. This is the very phrase,
he names here only distinct persons, which I grant, but deduceth this
Concession out of that Addition of Offices to persons, but I will grant they
are distinct Officers too, but not distinct Offices, which is the Question.

He goes on: First, those Conceits vanish, that Elders are not attended for
their holiness or private Conversation, I grant it, but for their demeanor in
the Church. Secondly, (says he) nor will the Conceit hold, which says, there
be not diverse Elders, but diverse works of one Elder attended, when (...), are
persons compared, not Acts. These phrases, (...), are not in the Text, or if
they were, it would but enforce diverse men, or diverse Officers, not diverse
Offices, which he must prove, or he proves nothing to the purpose; but Consider
how fallaciously he deals; now he labors to prove thence diverse persons,
which is granted; then diverse Officers, which is granted, under these notions
hoping to beg^ile the heedlesse Reader; when he never comes close to prove
diverse Offices, which is his only Work.

Afterward he comes to discourse of the Consequent, as he calls it, (let him
call it what he will) I will follow him: The Consequent part (says he) of this
discreet Axiom, is, The first Elder is worthy of this Double honor, the Second
Elder is worthy of Double honor, but with this difference, it is chiefly his
due, (the second he means) First, in the Order to be attended; 2dly* in
measure, more of it is due and debt to him. Now (says he) it is well known, it
is required that the two parts of a discreet Axiom be not only discreet, but
true in themselves: I consent; let us see what he deduceth.

Whence (says he) again that Conceit utterly van^sheth, which makes the
Comparison to be betwixt the two Acts of one man, namely, the well ruling of a
Pastor is worthy of Double honor, be it alone in its self considered; which is
an Assertion grossly cross to the rule of Divinity, as the former was to the
rule of Logic.

What the Logic of his deduction is, I have showed, what the Divinity, will
appear anon; he seems to prove it against Divinity thus.

That Interpretation which makes the performance of the least part of a
Pastoral Calling, though it be with the neglect of the greatest Work, worthy of
Double honor; that is grossly contrary to the mind of God, and the verdict of
Scripture, etc. rather a double Woe is to be denounced against them, than a
double honor bestowed upon them.

But this Interpretation does this. Ergo,

SECT. XI. Neither ruling nor preaching are more excellent absolutely, but in
relation to circumstances.
I Will discourse first upon his Major: Suppose we now, which is most true,
that there are diverse duties in a pastoral C^arge, Preaching, Administering
Sacraments, Ruling, Guiding his Flock, put the question which of these is most
excellent, take them distinct in sensu diviso, only in themselves, without
Consideration of times and persons, and whosoever shall affirm either of these
most excellent or useful for the Church, shall be Confuted by another, who
will say that at such a time or to such persons the other is most necessary,
most honorable: without question to Heathen people that have not heard of
Christ, preaching is most necessary, No man can come to God, unless he believe
that he is, and that he is a rewarder of them that seek him diligently, Heb.
11. 6. But faith comes by hearing, Romans 10. 14. So then, to that State of men
in that Condition preaching is most necessary to generate Faith, and lay the
Seeds of Religion; but when men are Converted to a belief in the Principles of
Religion, so that they are ready to cry out with the Converted people in Acts
2. 37. Men and brethren, what shall we do? then is necessary and useful that
which the Apostles did with them; Baptize them after Conversion by preaching,
Baptism is necessary, then the holy Communion to confirm and strengthen them in
all godliness and righteousness. Now it is possible that a Soul, after he is
Converted, and studious, himself may persevere in Godliness, and improve (no
doubt of it) without hearing more Sermons, but by Study and Contemplation, as
in the Times of persecution multitudes do; and in those places where they are
persecuted, yet their Obedience to Church Discipline and the Canons of
Ecclesiastical Government, such as concern such persons, are necess^ry; yea,
because many administer Sacraments who cannot have the opportunity of Preaching,
therefore things may be necessary then and there, and more necessary than the
other, as likewise in the Case of dying men; not the Doctor and Disputer in the
mysteries of Divinity, nor their Lay Elder, (whose duty they make it to visit
the sick, and not to authorize to preach) are the welcome men; but he that can
bring the Seals of Gods Covenants by Absolution by the Communion, is necessary.
Consider again, Such a Church (as many there have been) which is furnished with
learned Pre^chers abundantly, in such a Time a man with discretion of ruling
may be most acceptable; and his endeavors applied that way will be more
grateful, and better to Gods Church, than his preaching, where is no need: and
as the use of these things is in differing places and occasions most necessary,
so the Application of men to them (supposing all these belonging to every
Officer) in their several sit occasions, deserves Double honor, although they
do neglect that which is most excellent. It is the most excellent endowment for
a man to be a Scholar, and learned, and ^he greatest excellency man's soul is
capable of; yet he is an honest man (...) deserves honor, that applies himself
to Husbandry, and a Con^cientious Manage of a Trade, although he neglect the
^est; a man is not bound to be best, but to be good; to rule well, not best; to
labor in the Word, not to be most excellent: yea, in such Cases, it is better
for such a man to apply himself to ruling, than preaching, that being more
needful. And again, that lord to neglect the better, which is inserted in his
Major, is ^oo h^rsh to be applied upon such occasions, for, that is better for
one, which is not for another, at one time in one place, which is not at
another, in another: where there is pre^chi^g abundant, and many such as abound
in Divine Eloquence, there prudence of ruling is more necessary; the best
Preachers are not alw^yes the wisest men. Again, where the Abilities of a man
are more sitted to the one, than to the other, there he ought principally to
apply his Endeavor: so that if his ^bilities in ruling (...) g^^^ter, he ought
to apply himself to that (...), and ^or force himself to that which his
Disposition is not so fit for. Again, as I said, to dying men, who can feed
their Souls with that Store of Doctrine which they had stored themselves with
before, but lack the Seals of Gods Covenants, these are most necessary; but I
wonder what a Lay Elder should do with them, who must neither Preach, nor apply
Gods Seals to any? Again, we may observe out of the Text, that it is not said,
Does not preach, the negative is not there; yes he will object, because it is
opposed to those that labor in the Word; It is true: but there is a difference
betwixt those who do not labor in the Word, and those who do not Preach;
Laboring, as I have showed, signifies one industriously doing it, spending his
main source and bent to it: Now they, who finding their Abilities and the
necessities of the Times and places in which they Converse, requiring Ruling
from them, rather than Preaching, do not bend their Endeavors to preaching,
but to ruling, and yet may sometimes preach likewise; as St. Paul, who was the
most glorious preacher in the World, yet took sometimes from preaching to
bestow upon ruling: so may they likewise, who give their labor and endeavor
to ruling well, take off some time from it, and give it to preaching, and yet
not be (...), men laboring in the Word.

SECT. XII. Another Argument answered.
SO then, to his Argument; having laid these premises, thus Expounded, I
answer, That laboring in the Word is not absolutely greater to all persons at
all times, in all places, at all occasions. If he urge the Text, that because
there is especial Honor due to these Laborers, therefore their Labor
deserved it. I answer, in the days of St. Paul, at the planting of the Gospel,
it was most necessary; but since not in such places where it is planted. 2ly. I
deny that upon such occasions, as I have said; it is his duty, who finds great
abilities in himself for ruling, to labor in the Word, but to labor in that
by which he may do most good, which is ruling. If he Object, that to Convert
Souls, is the best Work, which is the proper Effect of Preaching. I answer, yet
when men are Converted, keeping them in Ecclesiastical Discipline is more
beneficial. And again, although it be the best Work for him that is excellently
Gifted, yet it is not for him who has greater Abilities for others, and less
for it; and therefore, although he may be more excellent, who as St. Paul
himself did, can rule well, and labor in the Word likewise, yet he may well
deserve double honor who rules well, and more seldom preaches; but if he can
do both, have this word especially added to his double honor.

SECT. XIII. Another Argument answered.
BUT Page 14. he has another of the same, the same Argument framed another way
with this phrase, or thus I may reason; If the Apostle in this Text does not
speak only of Elders, Preachers, then he speaks of Elders no Preachers.

But the first is true: (what the first is, I know not, for there is no second,
it being but one Proposition.) He speaks in the place of some Elders, which are
no Preachers, which is thus proved.

If he speak only of Preachers, then there were some Preachers, who preached
not at all; but there be no Preachers who preach not at all.

The second part is past denial; The Consequence is proved.

If these Elders who are most worthy of double honor are said but to labor in
the Word: Then they who are accounted but worthy of, etc. did not labor in the
Word, but etc.

I have put down his Argument verbatim word for word, that the whole force of
it may appear, as well as the weakness shall be manifest: And I answer in a
word, It is one thing not to labor in the Word, and another not to preach it
all. To labor, as I have said and showed out of the Word, is to do it
industriously, with his chief endeavor and might; which does not imply that he
does it not at all, yea rather that he does it, and that he cannot rule well if
not preach at all, but not with his might and main. I will retort this
Argument. If none may preach but Clergy Elders, then it seems here, that these
must be Clergy not Lay Elders, which rule well; for the Text that says the one
labors in the Word, implies with that, that the other does it, but not
industriously, and therefore must be such Elders who may preach, and would have
more honor if they did it laboriously, or rather that honor more due.

SECT. XIV. A Digression concerning Preaching.
BUT because tbese men seem to place the whole work of the Ministry in
preaching, I would learn from some of them, what this preaching is, which they
magnify so much, which I could never know to be so defined, as to make a
peculiar Work of a Minister, so that it should, as they make it, swallow up his
Function, and belong to none but such as they call Ecclesiastical Presbyters. I
hope it will not be unuseful to the Explication of the Text; nor unprofitable
nor unpleasant to the Reader, if I, beyond the bounds of an Answer digress a
little, to discourse of this Theme; Laboring in the Word, is not only
laboring with the Word in the pulpit, but an Industrious and studious
Endeavor; and therefore, in the 4th. Chapter of this Epistle, verse. 13. he
advises Timothy, to give himself unto reading, that is, Studying, Exhortation,
Doctrine; and verse. 15. Meditate on these things, this is laboring in the
Word, and this labor is such as is expressed, like an Ox, as he expresses it
verse. 18th. of this Chapter, Thou shall not muzzle the mouth of the Ox that
treads out the Corn: it must be as much, or greater, or else his Argument
would not hold; It is the labor of the mind by day and night, reading,
meditating.

And such are worthy in an especial manner of double honor; but because the
Apostle advises to Exhortation and Doctrine, and every Ecclesiastic Officer
is not for himself, but for the Church, this reading and meditating, must not
be for his private Contemplation, but for the public, to teach him to rule
well, upon Occasions to exhort to all piety, to teach the Truth of Gods will,
both to believe, and to do all these at their several Occasions; not only in
the pulpit, but in Writings, and in Conferences: Every man who is fit to be a
Presbyter, is not cut out for a popular Auditory, he may have Gifts of an
higher strain, and they ought to bestow their pains upon those greater duties:
As I have heard it was answered Erasmus, when he scrupled to receive a Benefice
in England, because he had not that Language to teach the people, You teach
their Preachers, which is more than to teach them; so may we say of these, that
they may teach Preachers, which is a greater Work: Preach to them in
Conference, preach to them in their Writings. I have known in mine experience a
learned man, who had not himself the Faculty of Pulpit-preaching, yet did more
good by directing and teaching others to preach, and advanced the Cause of
Christ more than Twenty peeachers could have done: Did not this Man labor in
the Word think you? Others again who have not that Convenience of doing it by
Conference, have written learned books for Preachers to study, and by them
Preachers preach: Did not these men labor in the Word? It is reported of
Salvianus, that he wrote and penned Homilies, which others preached and
repeated, which of these (think you) was the Preacher? I think both: and both
took pains, and did their utmost endeavor, and labored in the Word and
Doctrine; perhaps, one could not pen exactly, perhaps the other could not
Orator-like deliver; or, perhaps, and it is likely, Salvianus could do both;
but his Sermon might serve both places, and did good and was applauded, in both
his own Church and his that preached his Sermon; he preached, perhaps, in two
places at once, and both these put their Talents out to use; and I doubt not
but they may hear, Well done, good and faithful Servant, thou have been
faithful in a little, I will make thee Lord over much. But let us a little
Consider what Preaching is.

SECT. XV. What Preaching is.
I Can think it nothing but teaching the Gospel of Christ, that is, his Life
for Example, his Doctrine for Precepts, and his Death and Resurrection for our
Meditation; now then this is done by words written or spoken, either of these a
man preaches by: He preaches, that writes such Arguments as Convince or
Persuade, as well as he that speaks them; yea, perhaps, does more by that, and
makes an Everlasting Sermon, like a persume when the body is gone, yet there is
a sweetness remaining behind, which is grateful to all such as Converse with
it; so, the Preacher being dead, the Sermons yet live; the fruit remains, when
the Tree is felled. That this is Preaching, is most evident, because these
teach the truth of Doctrine, and these persuade to Godliness, Again, it is
pre^ching, and he pre^cheth, who using others words and matter in the Pulpit,
persuades the Auditory either to Christian faith or manners, this is preaching;
and for my part, I conceive the saying or reading a Godly Homily, to be
preaching, and more useful than those vain Sermons which Trivial Presbyters
and proud men utter, even in pulpits with you in London* I call them proud,
bacause many take upon them to preach, who scarce ever did read a Body of
Divinity, nor are able to balance the Doctrine they deliver, by the Analogy of
Faith, or if they could do it by leisure and study, take not time to do it,
being always preaching, but never learning; these men, if they were humble,
would content themselves either with such Sermons as are penned by the Church
to be read or got without book; or with such excellent Sermons which St.
Chrysostom, Bazil, Gregory, or the like made, as the whole Church of the
Muscovites do; for by that means both the people should be instructed in the
fundamentals of Faith and Life, and they secured from that fearful
presumption, of undertaking to teach, being not taught, and that vanity of
being unestablished in the Faith, and being carried about with winds of
Doctrine, and that other pride of seeking their own vainglory; truly these
thoughts have often made me startle, when I go about to study a Sermon, and not
da^e to adventure on any thing, which I have not carefully Considered on. To
repeat another Homily or Sermon is preaching, it is teaching the people the
Gospel of Christ; for it is not material who penned it, so the Message of God
be delivered: and because Nihil dictum quod non fuit dictum prius, I know not
why men should be so squeamish of it.

But I will stoop one degree lower; since Preaching is Evangelizing, and that
is teaching the Gospels, who can say, that reading the Scripture in a known
Tongue is not preaching, which teaches the people out of Scripture all that
they ought to know concerning their Souls Good. Let no man trouble this
Discourse with St. Paul's saying, 1 Cor. 9. Woe is me if I preach not the
Gospel, and then Gloss upon it, that St. Paul meant none of these preachings I
have named; it is true, he did not; but yet Consider, that St. Paul's preaching
was infallibly inspired, and there he might have full assurance of what he
delivered with Ease, without Pre-thought what he should deliver, which we have
not without mighty pains and study; therefore his preaching was by the power of
his utterance: and yet he, St. Paul, did not only use vocal preaching, but
writing, and those Sermons he wrote have been, I dare say, more beneficial to
the Church than those he preached, and then we read those very Sermons which he
wrote: His Epistles are very Sermons, we have the same, and there is reason, if
we be not self-conceited, that they should do as much good amongst us, as the
Ro^ans, Corinthians, Galathians, etc. If they be hard to us in many places, I
doubt not but they were hard to them, and we have besides these, Expositions of
the Fathers in the Ancient Church, by which Souls were directed to heaven, and
all that have been saved these 12. or 1300 years have been saved by them,
unless some few of late, who have found a new Road to Heaven.

Well then, to end; This is a low degree of preaching, but is pre^ching, and
preaching the Gospel: These are Sermons which St. Paul and the Church thought
fit to be divulged, for the Salvation of men.

SECT. XVI. To what Preaching every Presbyter is bound.
I Have expounded what preaching is; now let us see to what preaching every
Presbyter is bound. First, without Question, every Presbyter should be a ruler;
so St. Paul in the 3d. Chapter of this Epistle, verse 5. For if a man know not
how to rule his own house, how shall he take care to rule the Church of God?
there he supposes, That he must be a Ruler; otherwise his Conclusion were
nothing, drawn from the Governing his own house. There ruling is necess^ry in a
Bishop or Presbyter, for you will see hereafter, that these Offices had one
name, and in many things agreed. Now there you see ruling is required in a
Presbyter, and he himself will not say that this was a Lay Presbyter; But then
Consider, that in this whole Character of a Presbyter, there is no one word of
preaching, although there is of ruling, and can you think if a Presbyter were
chosen, such as St. Paul here nominates, it were amiss? But it is objected,
Tit. 1. 9. there it is required, that he should be holding fast the faithful
word as he has been taught, that he may be able by sound Doctrine, to exhort
and convince the Gainsayers.

I may well think this to be a Caution of Advice, not necessity: But if Timothy
had chosen and ordained such as were prescribed him, they might have been men
sufficiently qualified, yet ex abundanti, if this might be had in another
Condition, although that were well, yet this would be better; there is a
latitude in Good, though not in Truth; but then let let us scan the Text,
suppose it be a requisite. first, let us observe, that [he must hold fast the
faithful word] that is, the word, I conceive, of the Gospel; hold fast, that
is, apprehend it strongly, adhere close to it, as he has learned, so we in our
Translation; or in learning, as the Margent; or secundum Doctrinam Sermonis, as
Beza; the business will not be much. It must either be holding fast that
Doctrine which he has learned, heretofore, and then there will be little left
for new Invention; or else it must be, he must hold the faithful word in his
teaching; and then I answer, this will be made good in the reading the
Scriptures, in the reading or repeating Homilies; The next Clause is, [That he
may be able to exhort and convince Gainsayers,] This likewise will be acted in
the other; But Consider first, Can any man think, that this ability must be
understood in such a vast Capacity, as that every Presbyter must be able to
Convince all ill Opinions of Gentilism, Judaism? Surely, I believe not; If so,
I dare say, nor he, nor any Fellow he has is a Presbyter. I remember once in a
Conference with a Gentleman of his mind, a Presbyter, I proposed to him an Old
Heresy which I had newly lighted on, and those Arguments were made for it, he
was forced to Confess an inability for that time, and yet a man of as great a
Name as any in England of that Side. Well then, what must it be? that there
must be some Capability to this purpose, upon occasions, not pulpit work, but
by discourse, when any such thing shall be objected, and that such men should
endeavor to improve themselves in their Abilities to this purpose; so that
here is a great Latitude, and Men's abilities in all Elections and Ordinations
should be considered, how far they extend to this purpose: but I perceive not
here that kind of preaching which is now so magnified, at all exacted. So the
Heresy be convinced, so the men be exhorted to piety, whether by an Homily out
of some Ancient Father, or such which the wisdom of the Church prescribes, or a
Declamation of a man's own penning, it is not material; for although those who
have least Abilities, commonly do most magnify the latter, and practice it,
yet without question the former is much safer, both for the Strong Convincing
of ancient Heresies, and likewise for sure Grounds of Exhortation. Put the Case
that it were as it was in Queen Elizabeth's days, that there was such a
Reformation, as abundance of learned men would not yield to, but rather leave
their Benefices than subscribe, it is necessary that those Churches should have
each a Presbyter in them, you will have* men gifted with abilities to preach,
and make Sermons of their own invention, I presume there were not then an
hundred such in all England. St. Paul had then provided ill for this Church,
who should require as necessary, such Conditions as could not be found; Put the
Case as it is, that there be four or five hundred, yea a thousand, two or three
thousand, that have abilities fit to be licensed to preach Sermons of their own
making, it is a mighty matter, yet what are they amongst those multitudes of
Churches and Parishes, certainly but an handful, the Parishes are 9284.

It cannot be then, that there is a necessity of more abilities to a Presbyter
than to do these Duties in that general way, which I have discoursed, and so to
endeavor in and by such means to instruct others, and upon Study and Industry
either from himself, or more learned men, upon the starting any new Doubt, by
Study convince the Gainsayers, it is not required he should do it ex tempore.

SECT. XVII. What peculiar Interest a Presbyter has in this kind of Preaching.
HAving thus Considered Preaching in its latitude, it will now be worth our
Thoughts to reflect upon this Officer called a Presbyter, and see what peculiar
Interest he has in it, distinct from other men. First then, without Question,
such a preaching as is Occasional, by private Conference, or in public
Assemblies, when in public Opportunity is offered to manifest the Glory of
God, or Convert or Confirm by Conference any soul to or in the Christian
Religion, or Godliness of living, which indeed is a great part of
Christianity, when upon occasions of Discourse or otherwise, Opportunities
shall be granted to any man, he may, if he have abilities, so Confer, as to
persuade men to a newness of life; and this is preaching in its latitude, it
is preaching the Gospel of Christ, and each man that has abilities ought to do
it, but each man is not bound to have abilities; a private man's strength is
chiefly discerned in holding fast the Word of Truth, that so he be not carried
away with the wind of Doctrine: he has other Offices which are his Duties, and
in which he ought to expend his Studies and Endeavors; but to have abilities,
or to endeavor to have some Abilities for this purpose, is the Duty and Office
of a Presbyter. It is the Duty of the Shepherd to take care of his Masters
sheep, but it is a comely Charity in every Servant, though he be not the
Shepherd, when he finds his Masters sheep run astray, or ready to starve, to
throw them a lock of Hay, or call them back to the fold; Nay it is his Duty out
of Charity, though not out of Office; but to take upon him the Office when he
is not Authorized to it, would be Intrusion, and it would bring a great
Confusion into the Church, as it would into a great Family, where every man, or
every man that would, might take upon him the Manage of any Office he would.
St. Paul therefore says of such, How shall he preach, unless he be sent? that
is, how shall he take upon him the Office of doing it, unless he be authorized
for it; let us then Consider who is authorized.

SECT. XVIII. Who is authorized to Preach.
THat this Authority must be joined to every Presbyter that has power to
administer the Sacraments, preaching must be taken in a large sense, for
reading Homilies, for reading the Scriptures in known languages; for it is not
possible to find men of Abilities to do the other, in such a Nation as ours is,
and yet it is necessary that they should have these Sacraments, because by them
men receive the Covenants of God concerning their Souls, which to teach and
encourage us to, is the chief Duty of preaching; and this is done (I am
persuaded) more securely, by the other way projected before; but then if we
will have men preach nothing but what they make themselves, there had need be a
mighty ability for a Weekly Preacher to do that, and such indeed as cannot be
expected from every Presbyter that may be fit for the other; and therefore,
that way of penning their own Sermons, is not, nor can be exacted from every
Presbyter: And to preach Sermons not penned, although upon urgency there has
been or may be such a Thing, yet it is nothing but laziness and supine
negligence, and undervaluing of that great Work (by those to do it Constantly)
and not worthy the thought of Christians. But whether Presbyters alone may do
this, is a Question started in this Age, but was disputed long since by learned
men, and how determined I will set down, with mine observations upon it. The
Story is thus; Origin, a man most eminent for learning of any man in that Age,
both for humanity and Divinity, and indeed such as may not only be accounted so
for that Age in which he lived, but deserved to be placed in the first rank of
Scholars, both of his own or any other Age, when he lived at Cesarea, by
Authority given him from the Bishops of Palestine, interpreted the Scriptures
publicly in the Church when he was not a Presbyter, nor, that we know of, had
received any degree in Ecclesiastic Office; Demetrius the Bishop of
Alexandria, who envyed the deserved glory of Origin, and that honor which
rather as a debt was paid to, than given him, for his Excellency in Preaching,
inveighs bitterly against him, and having little else to be offended with him
for, says, it was an unheard^of thing that a Layman should preach, and writes
to the Bishops of Palestine about it; They patronage that excellent Work of
their own, and gave him Instance in three or four that they knew of; and no
doubt, (say they) there were more which had been licensed by Bishops to do so,
and did preach even before them. I could have wished that the dispute had been
larger set down, that so the Arguments from Scripture or reason might have been
set down for our Instruction, but for defense of him, who it is pity did not
write his own Apology. If any man object St. Paul's How can he preach unless he
be sent? I shall answer, he was sent, and by that power that had Authority to
send, that was the Bishops in that Province in which he lived, who had
authority to delegate as Apostles, (of which I shall treat hereafter) by our
Saviors Charter, As my Father sent me, so send I you, to send others, not with
a plenipotency, but as they saw expedient with divided powers, to baptize and
no more, to administer the Sacraments and no more, and why not preach and no
more; this way of preaching; penning, and contriving Orations to the people,
requires great abilities inherent, acquired by mighty industry and pains; and
when men are found so Gifted and enabled, although they think themselves not
worthy to take a Pastoral Charge upon them, or to administer the Sacraments;
yet when they find abilities for this, and their Bishop think fit; why should
they not preach? but not without the Bishop; he is the Supreme Pastor, he may,
if he find an Inferior fit for that place, give him Authority to feed, or
fold, or drive his Flock, and no more; and he that is authorized by the Supreme
Pastor, may do it, and others who without his leave undertake to do it, are
Intruders; but he being so authorized does it orderly, lawfully; thus did
Origin, who had he lived in our Age, could have discoursed much more powerfully
to this Theme; and I can guess, that this may satisfy most of that which many
in our Age object concerning their Gifts. If they are Gifted, let their Gifts
be examined, and if he (the Bishop) find them to be such as can enable them for
such a Work, let them be licensed, otherwise not.

CHAP. XIX. His Argument answered.
I Have been over tedious in this Discourse. Here you may discern the vanity of
his Argument from that Text, if preaching be taken in that late sense, as I
have expounded it, I deny that there are any Presbyters which are not Teachers.
If Preachers be taken in this strict sense for such as preach Studied Orations,
I say that there are many Presbyters which are not Preachers, and do not labor
in the Word in that sense, and yet there are no Presbyters which have not the
power of Administering the Sacraments. It is very weak that he says there must
be Preachers, which are no Preachers; for Presbytery, does not depend upon
preaching in this kind, nor does the name or office signify a Preacher; but if
he will, there may be preachers who do not labor, make it their Chief pains to
preach; there may be differences in the Industries of men, and industrious men
may be industrious in one piece of their Office, and not in another, 1 Cor. 15.
10. St. Paul says, he labored more than they all, that was, without doubt, in
preaching, and yet 1 Cor. 1. 14. he baptized but a few, industriously attending
one, and not so much the other; but the sense of the Text is apparent, I think,
and do you forgive my tedious digression.

But he urges, that the Bishops Factors provide ill for them; for by the
Apostles determination, the meanest Minister that is conscientious and
laborious in preaching should have more respect than his Diocesan, who sits,
etc. but labors not to feed them with the Word of Life.

The Text does not say the meanest conscientious Minister, etc. but says, that
those who rule well, and labor in the Word likewise, are more deserving that
honor, than they that rule well only. It may be it is spoken only of Bishops;
howsoever it is only an Addition of the obligation to him who labors; and
truly I think that Bishop who does not labor in the Word is worthy of little;
but I confine not laboring in the Word to preaching only studied Sermons; but
to instruct Preachers, to write, to overthrow ill opinions, and the like, and
this is laboring in the Word and Doctrine.

SECT. XX. St. Ambrose Expounded.
LAstly, he has found a piece of an Ancient and truly to be honored Father of
the Church, St. Ambrose, which he rejoices in, like one that had met with some
unexpected blessing; see how he commends it; It carries (says he) an Amazing
Evidence, and again after the place quoted, The brightness and patenesse of
the Witness is such as though it had been writ with a beam of the Sun, and
dazles the Eyes of almost Envy it self. But observe this one thing, as he and
that sort of Writers when they will urge Scriptures which they cannot find to
make any thing for them, they put not down the words but Ciphers: So here the
words seem to serve his turn, but the place where they are put overthrows it;
(but it is not set down by him) I have hunted it out, and it is upon the first
verse of the 1 Timothy 5. the words are these. Apud omnes ubique Gentes
honorabilis est Senectus, unde and Synagoga and postea Ecclesia Seniores
habuit, sine quorum Consilio nihil agebatur in Ecclesia, quod qua negligentia
obsoleverit, nescio, nisi forte Doctorum desidia, aut potius superbia, dum soli
volunt aliquid videri. Now consider, this is Writ upon the first verse before.
The Words he comments on are these, Rebuke not an Elder, but entreat him as a
Father, and the younger men as brethren. St. Ambrose, with all Commentators
(even Beza) does acknowledge this word Elder to signify an Elder in Age; St.
Ambrose his words before these written down are, Propter honorificentiam
aetatis majorem natu, cum mans^ctudine ad bonum opus provocandum. And upon that
he brings the words cited, Amongst all Nations old Age is honorable; and this
word is as it were put of purpose to overthrow those men, he uses Senectus,
not Presbyter, which word Senectus was never used for an Officer; so then what
does St. Ambrose mean, but that in the Jewish Synagogue and in the Church, they
used grave men to assist and counsel, without whose Advice nothing was done in
the Church; I grant it; but these men were not your Elders, but grave and
learned men to advise with; I will put in, it is fit to be so still; and for
that reason Chancellors, men learned, used to sit in the Consistory. But he
gives two cautions page 15. Wherefore let him know, (that is, the Reader) that
the Elders mentioned by Ambrose, were such that their places and offices were
almost worn out; (I agree) but such were not the preaching Elders, (I agree to
that likewise;) but say withal, that these men were not such Elders who had
Office in the Church, but were Counselors, as he says.

His second Observation upon St. Ambrose, is, That the defacing of the power
and Rule of these Elders, came, as he conjectures, by the sloth, especially by
the Pride of the Teachers, because they alone might be lifted up. The word in
St. Ambrose was Doctorum, of Doctors, which was a phrase applied to Bishops,
who in his time were the only Preachers, as appears in the famous Story of St.
Austin, who when he was a Presbyter, was fain to have a license to preach; now
then, why he should say the sloth of the Bishops, I cannot tell, for
sloathfull men are willing to have others joined in Commission with them, that
so others may act what through laziness they are unwilling to meddle with; but
what he says of pride may have some color, that they would Act all alone, and
so have all the Curchy and Application made to them; therefore they would admit
none of these Lay Counselors with them. Here is the drift of his Speech, and
what word in all this tends to the Addition of any Ecclesiastical Officer? much
less by a Divine right which is pretended to, but only some Chancellor, as I
have said, to advise with; and now suppose, I say, clean contrary to him, that
the sloth and pride of Bishops put all business upon these Lay men, so that
indeed in our Times they are more Bishops than the Bishops, and all through
their sloth, because they would not act in business, and pride, because they
disdained to stoop to petty occasions, I doubt I should say true, and yet
neither his Saying nor mine make one word for their Elders Jure Divino; the
rest that he says vanishes of its self; thus they would make themselves
eminent, by the disannulling the honor of others places, they could not be such
as were of their own rank, or did possess any of their places, I grant it,
neither were they such Elders as we speak of, nor you.

Thus now is apparent, I hope, how weak his Arguments are, and what he said of
that place of St. Ambrose, that it had an amazing kind of discovery with it, I
may say of this whole discourse, that it has an amazing kind of discovery; but
what it discovers, is the strangeness of these men, who opposing a known
truth, and the universal practice of the Christian world from Christ's time
downward, dare urge these places for their Conceits, which had very little
semblance for them, although they had been expounded by practice; but having
none but great words and commendations of their own to that purpose, it will
easily persuade men that they made first their Form, and then hunted for
something to insinuate a belief, that they were induced by Scriptures; and
thinking with my self upon what design they should introduce this kind of
Ministry, I could imagine no reason, but as when cunning people would change a
Monarchy into an Aristocracy, or Oligarchy, they have no way to divert the
people from their old obedience, and introduce it to themselves, but by making
them believe they should have some share in that Government which was engrossed
by one. So these men breaking from Episcopacy, would persuade the people from
the old to the new yoke which they would impose, that they had a Share in
Ecclesiastical Government, and that they should send out of them into the
Consistory their Lay Elders, which would wonderfully provide for their Security
and good, much better than before, with other Things of the like Nature of
which I may speak hereafter; but indeed their hopes are frustrate in all this
design, for they could never set up any thing more Tyrannical or Arbitrary than
this.

CHAP. VII. SECT. I. What a true Presbyter is. The Name first Expounded.
I Have done now with their Presbyter, of which I see no footing in the Word of
God, or Antiquity; I now come next to treat of our own Presbyter, what he is:
and first, that we may avoid all Equivocations and doubtful Interpretations of
Scripture, we will discourse of the Quid nominis, what is meant by this and
other Phrases which are used in Scripture to intimate this Office.

First, he is called a Presbyter, which as it naturally signifies an Elder in
Age, so from that analogy it signifies a grave and reverend Man; another word
is Bishop, which we always render for (...), and signifies always a
Superintender, and it is applied to Presbyters, who have a Particular Charge to
overlook and see to. I stay little upon this, because it has received very
little Controversy; but yet say somewhat of it, because it will illustrate
some future passages; They are likewise called Pastors or Shepherds, because
when they are in a Charge they look over it, as a Shepherd over his flock, to
govern or ^ule, to feed them, and do such Duties; They are called Doctors and
Teachers, because they instruct the people in the Mysteries of Godliness,
although perhaps this word may be extended farther than to them; but these were
the Chief names by which that superior Order which succeeded the Apostles were
called in the Primitive Church, in the writings of the Apostles and after; and
this is the Sense employed by these names.

SECT. II. Certain Concessa by all who have engaged in this Controversy.
BUT now to sever Granted Truths from Questioned, and not to wast my time in
unnecessary discourses, It is granted by all that I have seen, that these all
were ordained by the Apostles to do these Duties, to administer the Sacraments
of Baptism and the Communion, to preach the Gospel; although, I think, no man
can show me any place of Scripture expressing such a Canon, which shall enable
such men bearing such names, under such Titles to be authorized to such Duties,
but only a Constant practice of it; but it being supposed that they were
authorized to do this Duty, we may find rules directing how these should be
performed by them; I let that pass therefore* and shall now enter the lists
against two Opinions which I oppose, one which makes Pastors and Teachers two
Offices; a second which makes no distinction amongst these.

SECT. III. Mr. Hookers distinction of Pastors and Teachers handled.
FOR the first, Mr. Hooker disputes in his Book before cited, Part. 2. Chap. 1.
page 19, 20. And first to understand his Opinion, Consider, that he makes two
sorts of Teaching Elders, one he calls Pastors, and the other Teachers; the
scope of the Pastors he describes with a great deal of handsome Circumlocution,
exceeding fine expressions of the Rhetorical persuasive part of a Preacher, the
result of all which is, to persuade by such Arguments as have power over the
Will and the Affections, as it is page 19. The Teachers Office is to lay the
Fundamental points of Christian Faith, the Principles of Religion, as he
expresses it in the bottom of Page 21, and the top of 22. These two parts he
makes distinct Offices in the Church, both of them being ruling Elders as well
as teaching, and both of them having power to administer the Sacraments; but in
their preaching the one is to bend his force, his endeavor, to the Teaching
and informing the Understanding, the other to the persuading and moving the
Affection; the first he calls Teachers, the second Pastors: Look for a reason
for this distinction unheard of till of late; I find none but in a reply to Mr.
Rutterford, page 7. where it seems Mr. Rutterford urged, that these formal
Objects of these two Offices (Information of the Judgment and Exhorting) are
not so different as that they should be incompetible, page 7. Chap. 1.

To this he replies, that in themselves, and full breadth, (that is his phrase)
these are not so incompetible, but look at the specialty of the Gift that fits
for one, and which furnishes for the other to attend mainly and chiefly upon
each according to the Gift, they will prove inconsistent; These are his words,
and these imply, that where there are distinctions of Gifts and they diversely
to be endeavored, there should be diverse Offices, or else I see no force in
this Discourse; but this has no probability of color for it: Consider Civil
Offices, a Justice of Peace, one Justice has a great Cunning in the Statutes,
in rendering them to a legal sense, he applies himself and endeavors to that
most; another has a great ability in reconciling and taking up Quarrels, and
persuading men to friendship, he endeavors that most; and perhaps did either
of these by framing himself to endeavor what he were least fit for, less
attend what he were more dexterous in; he might attend his Office in general,
but the less profitable way, and these are both one Office, though in it
diverse Gifts or Abilities, which cannot both be attended with any man's utmost
endeavor. Pass from Civil to Ecclesiastical Offices, and this very business:
Among Presbyters Preachers, one has great Excellency in giving the Grammatical
sense of the Text, another in expounding it Scholastically, a Third in the
Historical part of Divinity; and these are several Gifts or Abilities, and men
according to them apply their utmost endeavors, but these make not distinct
Offices, but several Gifts and Abilities in the same Office, which is just the
same with these; and as there is no foot-step in the Historical part of
Divinity, to show any one president: so is there no color of reason for it;
But he quotes Scripture. The first is that place so largely discoursed of
before, Romans 12. 7, 8. He that teaches, on reaching, he that exhorts, on
exhortation. This place I have at large showed in the Case of their Deacon, not
to signify distinct Offices, but diversities of Gifts, and it imports no more,
than that he who finds in himself Abilities of Teaching or Exhorting, should
use his Talent as a member of the same body, to the good of his brother. But I
wonder, why they should not rather distinguish th^se Offices by the Names of
Teacher and Exhorter, because these Names in this place signify distinct
Abilities and Endeavors, in those two ways which they intend them to; but
there is nothing in either word which intimates the nature of a Pastor, which
is to gove^ as well as feed; But these words are found Ephesians. 4. 1. where the
words Pastor and Teacher are used, and are urged for this distinction in his
Treatise of the Preachers Office, Part 2. Chap. 1. page 20. but how unluckily,
let any man Consider: The words are these, And he gave some Apostles, and some
Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some Pastors and Teachers; let any man
Consider this place, and think whether the Apostle should put these as
distinct: Those which are distinct, he distinguishes with this phrase, (some
Apostles, some Prophets, some Evangelists, some Pastors; now mark, he does not
say, some Teachers, but some Pastors and Teachers; Coupling these together as
one, not distinguishing them as the other; and therefore, let him not dare to
sever them whom God has joined.

But he ^ites Beza upon this place to answer mine Argument which he touches;
let us examine therefore what he says, I assent, (says he) to Ambrose, who
makes these Offices distinct, for ratio parum firma est; for (says he) the
reason is not firm which moved Hierom and Austin to Confound them; that is,
because the Copula is put without the Article, he says it is not firm, but he
offers no reason why it is not firm; the Apostl^ distinguishes the rest, with
(...)* and joins these with, (...), then (...), and, is put to join these
together, can any man imagine these to be severed, he names Hierome and Austin,
but he might have cited St. Crysostome, Theophylact, Theodoret, all the Greek
Fathers, whom any man would credit in the Greek Tongue, before Beza, when he
has no reason for what he says; But the Trick of these men, when they have no
reason, they speak great words in Commendation or Disparagement of what is for
or against them; It is parum firma ratio, says Beza, but gives no reason, when
besides the propriety of Speech, he has all learned men against him: I, but
Beza has Ambrose; it is true, Ambrose does in his Comments upon this place
distinguish these; but Beza will not stand to Ambrose, for first, he begins
with Apostles, they (says he) are Bishops, Prophets, Expounders of Scripture,
Evangelists, Deacons, Pastors, Lectors, that is, Readers, Magistri, Masters,
which we translate Teachers, were Exorcists; this last Beza mentions to be
not agreeing with his Opinion, I may say, nor any one of the rest. But take
this note of Ambrose, he took the words as they lay, and so expounded them, but
not observing that Criticism, which perhaps he looked not on, he gave an
Exposition such as was agreeing to the present face of the Church in which he
lived, which it is possible easily for any man to do; but did ever any man, who
observed and marked the language of St. Paul, think it fit to be cast off with
a parum firma est ratio, amongst these I have named who marked it amongst the
Latinet, as Beza, Hierom, Austin, I can add to them Anselm most punctually,
and our Bid likewise upon the place: so that sense is invincible with an
uninterrupted Exposition, and a strong literal sense of the Text; for St.
Ambrose, although Beza agree with him in the division, yet his Authority
prevails not with him for the Office, what it should be, nor Beza's opinion
with Hooker: so they serve one another Turn so far as their own design leads
them, but no further; for Beza makes this Teachers place to be such as should
read a Divinity Lecture, Scholam regere Ecclesiasticam; but Hooker denies this:
There is (says he) Doctor in Schola, and Doctor in Ecclesia, and (says he)
the second is here meant; but I would fain know the difference betwixt a
Teacher in the Schools, and in the Church, for I conceive these men not putting
difference in the places; and if they take the Church for the Congregation of
men, I know no difference betwixt one and the other, nor can there be this
Exposition of Mr. Hookers, which as it is most singular, so it is far from
the language of St. Paul. I will add this only note, That he nor any other can
show me that place of Scripture directing any Duty to either of these Offices,
in their distinct Notions as they express them, which will not agree to both,
and therefore they have no ground upon which to build this fancy.

SECT. IV. Whether there be a distinction of Offices.
I Come now to the other dispute, Whether there be any distinction amongst
these Offices, by Apostolical right? This is a Question which has been
mightily debated, and therefore a man can scarce handle any thing which has
not been often discoursed on before; yet if by varying the Method of Handling
it, or by other manner of expressions, or applying other men's expressions in
another way than they have done, that which I shall write shall fit some men's
understandings better than other men's words before me have done, I shall think
it an happy work, and not repent me of my pains: and although I think that
other men have abundantly spoken of this question, and so fully, that they have
satisfied my self; yet because I find others are not satisfied, I conceive our
blessed Saviors Command to St. Peter to be a Precept to all of us, when thou
art confirmed, strengthen thy brethren, Luke 22. 32. and although it be but
little I can speak, yet put in that little. For the understanding therefore of
this Question,

First, Know, that although this Question about that Order we now term Bishops,
whether they have distinction and a right of pre-eminence beyond Presbyters
that are barely such, yet it is not de nomine, barely of the Name, whether this
word Bishop be such as must always be applied to that Office; but of the
Thing, whether there be such a Thing as a Degree Instituted by the Apostles,
which has a pre-eminence above other Presbyters; and then, because the word
Bishop, or Superior, or Superintendent, or Superinspector, being a word applied
to this Office, will by Consent of a perpetual Language in the Church be well
fitted to the Expression of that Office, we may use it often in this Discourse
without prejudice as we shall see occasion.

Secondly, Let us Conceive (as was before taught) that all Ecclesiastical power
was seated in the Apostles, and none else, from those words, As my Father sent
me, so send I you; and therefore they had power to settle Offices for the
Church as they pleased, and there is no Office which had not its foundation
from them: so that although this question be often handled under these Terms,
whether Bishops be a distinct Order Jure Divino, yet they that hold it
Affirmatively, must defend it with this phrase Apostolico Divino, Apostolical,
by such a Divine Right; not as if Christ immediately instituted it, for he
instituted none but the Apostles, as we read of, for the whole World; but by
such a Divine Right as Christ gave his Apostles power to Institute, and they
did institute.

Thirdly, Let us Conceive, that although perhaps there can be found no Law or
Decree by either one or more Apostles, which shall in express Terms say, that
by the Authority given us we do erect and institute such an Office; for such
Registers (as I have said) we have not: yet when it shall appear to be the
Apostles practice to ordain such Officers so qualified, we may be Confident it
was not without Authority; for men of such Exemplar obedience and humility,
even to death, would not in their practice act without Law and Authority.

Fourthly, That where any place of Scripture that directs our Practice, shall
abide a double Interpretation, because Quisque abundat sensu suo; there the
doctrine and practice of such men who were Apostolical, conversed and lived
with those Apostles, themselves must needs be the best Gloss upon such a Text,
because as it is reasonable to think that they should best understand the
Apostles meaning: (for when Laws are newly made, their sense likewise how they
should be understood is fresh in men's apprehension; but Laws antiquated or
grown old must be entrusted to the letter) so likewise it is most reasonable to
think, that they could not write or do amiss in these public Acts or Writings
without Control; and therefore, certainly, it must needs be the best Comment,
when the Text abides a doubtful Interpretation, to show, that the Apostles
disciples which Conversed with them, did so understand them.

Fifthly, That the pre-eminence that I place in a Bishop over a Presbyter
consists in these two things; The power of giving these Orders, which a bare
Presbyter has not; and secondly, The power of Jurisdiction over such as are
only Presbyters of the lower rank.

These Truths being granted, as they must without impudence, I address my self
to the Question, wherein I can Complain for lack of mine Adversaries books; for
such as write for the Opinion, I profess I care for none; the Scriptures and
Ancient Fathers which I have by me serve my turn: but I have their Hooker, and
I shall, I think, in re^utation of his Arguments, discuss most of that matter
which is necessary to this Question; if I find any thing unhandled which is
necessary to this Question, I shall treat of it afterward.

SECT. V. Mr. Hooker undertaken in this Controversy.
FOR their Hooker, he undertakes this Controversy, Part 2. Chap. 1. page 22.
in which he wastes that Page and the 23d. upon a bitter invective distinction
of a threefold Bishop, Divine, Humane, and Sathanical, and his description of
them, which I let alone, as impertinent ^roth and Fury of a man that is angry,
not charitable, and as one inquisitive after truth, disputing; but Page 24. he
comes to some sober dispute, and to bring reasons against this Usurped Order
(as he calls it) which I undertake at this present.

His first reason is, as he says, the express Testimony of Scripture, than
which nothing can be more pregnant, Titus 1. 5. 7. he only Ciphers out the
place, I will put down the words; For this cause left I thee in Creet, that
thou should set in order the things which are wanting, and Ordain Elders in
every City, as I had appointed thee: then verse 7. For a Bishop, etc. Now
(says he) the Apostle having enjoined his Scholar to Appoint Elders in every
City, and how they must be qualified, he adds ^he reason of his Advice; For a
Bishop, etc. Where the Dispute of the Apostle shows, not only the Community of
the Name, but likewise the Identity of the Thing signified thereby, otherwise
his Argument had not only been a false reason, but false in form, having four
Terms, but in truth, had not reasoned at all; for it had been ready to reply
(here is a Gap, as if the Copy had been imperfect, but may easily be made up,
thus) a Bishop is another thing from Presbyter.

SECT. VI. His expressions very unhandsome.
I Will examine this Discourse, and see how partial his expressions are to
trouble the Truth. First, he disparageth Titus with, although a true, yet a
diminishing Term; He calls him St. Paul's Scholar only; St. Paul, in the 4th
verse, calls him his Son, yea, his own Son after the Common Faith; and the
Postscript or Direction is, to Titus, ordained the first Bishop of the
Cretians. Secondly, He diminishes likewise that phrase which is of great force
to this purpose, that is, the phrase to ordain Elders, he says, to appoint
Elders, Thus when they Cipher Scripture, for the most part Scripture is abused,
and the heedlesse Reader swallows in a Misconstruction, before he is aware:
thus having examined his misrepeating the Story in things of importance, we
will sift his Arguments.

SECT. VII. His Argument examined.
THE force of it is this, that there a Bishop and Elder are one thing as well
as name, I grant it for this dispute; but let us see what will result out of
it, no more but this, that in the Apostolical Age this name of Bishop and
Presbyter was used for one Office; the name Apostle was that which was used for
the Superior Dignity, which, as I showed before out of Theodoret, when I
treated of the Name Apostle, that in their Time many were called Apostles which
were none of the Twelve; but afterward, to avoid Confusion and an
Indistinction betwixt the Original Apostles and the Derivative, for such as
were made by men, the Church used this name of Bishops, and reserved the Name
of Apostle, to those men who were so Constituted by our Savior, and that one
who was made by Election of Lot into Judas his place: So we find diverse
phrases not used to such purpose in the New Testament, yet prevailed with the
Succeeders of the Apostles in such a manner, as they gained a Constant use
among Ecclesiastical Writers; such is (...) amongst the Grecians, and Sacerdos
amongst the Latins, words not used for any Order in the Church of Christ any
where in the New Testament, and yet amongst the Ancients are used for the whole
Order of Priesthood as it includes Bishops, and sometimes for Bishops alone;
but as they are the superior Order in that sort of men, and in the latter Age
are solely appropriated by the use of Writers, to that Order, which the
Scriptures and the most ancient term Presbyter, inferior to the Suprea^,
called by the Scripture Apostles, and to their Successors, called Bishops among
the Ancients; therefore in the reading of Authors, not the Institutions only,
but the usus loquendi is to be Considered in words. Cambden in his Remains has
a long Discourse like a Lexicon, where we may see to how various Senses in our
English Language the same words have arrived, by Tract of Time losing their
old, and gaining a new Sense, especially in Offices; so has it happened with
the words Bishop and Presbyter: they were most frequently in Scripture taken
for one and the same thing; but the word Apostle, or Angel, I can never find
given to the Inferior Sort of Presbyters; But now this word Apostle is
appropriated, in the Language of Divines, to the Twelve, and St. Paul only, the
word Bishop to the Superior Sort, the word Priest or Presbyter to the
Inferior Sort of Presbyters. I shall leave therefore to discourse of the
Names, and come to examine the Text concerning the Thing, whether there be in
this Text a Parity of Ministers prescribed?

SECT. VIII. The First Argument for a Parity answered.
FOR this Parity he urges nothing, but the Attributing these two names which
we use, in a distinct Sense, to one and the same thing, which proves no parity
of Office, but only the use of these words in those days. But I will go
further, and prove this Office we call Bishop distinct from the Presbyter, out
of that very Text; St. Paul says, I have left thee in Creet to do these two
things, that thou should set in order the Things that are wanting, and
ordain Elders in every City; Mark here, St. Paul had been in Creet himself, he
had laid the foundation of the Gospel, he being to go further into the World,
leaves Titus to build upon his Foundation; and he leaves him to do two things;
that he should set in Order, or Correct, or supercorrect those things which
were not perfected by himself; here is Episcopacy in one piece, he had
Authority to correct, to set in order, things that were out of Order, to
Correct what was amiss; then secondly, to Ordain Elders in every City; not to
appoint only, but to ordain authoritatively, to s^ttle them: I do not know how
a Bishop could more exactly be described, in so few words; and I wonder much,
why these men should produce this Text, which without a mind much prejudicated
with another Opinion, cannot be wrested to any other sense. Hooker takes no
notice of this, but some others say, That Titus was an Evangelist.

Their Exception, that Titus was an Evangelist, answered.
THey say so; but do they produce one word out of Scripture or Antiquity for
it: they might say he was an Apostle as well, and with much more semblance; and
I think he was of the Inferior rank; but then, can they tell me what an
Evangelist was? This is a shrewd Question; Those four that writ the Gospels,
are only known by that name amongst Ecclesiastical Writers: so that if a man
should say, the ^vangelist says so, we would Conclude one of them. Philip is
indeed called an Evangelist* Acts 21. but no man else in the New Testament; it
may be, because he was an excellent and powerful Preacher. Beza, with those
who affect new Opinions, makes an Evangelist to be one who was an Associate and
Companion to the Apostles in their travel; but there is nothing in Scripture
or Antiquity to give light to that Conclusion: I am sure St. Chrysostom,
Theophylact, etc. are against it in express Terms, upon the 4th. to the Ephesians.
St. Ambrose makes him a Deacon to the Apostles, which has some show of reason
for it, because Philip was an Evangelist. This word Evangelist is but three
Times used in Scripture, Acts 21. 8. where Philip is called an Evangelist;
Ephesians. 4. 11. where an Evangelist is reckoned amongst the Ecclesiastical
Officers; 2 T^m. 4. 5. where he is bid do the work of an Evangelist; which
could be nothing but industrious preaching the Gospel of Jesus Christ; or, as
some of the Ancients, suffering for Christ, because he is bid in the same
verse, immediately before these words, to endure Affliction, and in the words
follow^ng, to make full proof of his Ministry; but is there the least Color
that this Office should enable him to ordain Presbyters, or Correct
Misdemeanors, or to regulate things that are amiss, which Titus was
Commissioned to do. Again, it is generally agreed amongst them, that this
Office of an Evangelist was a Temporary Office; but these Duties of Correcting,
of Ordaining Elders, must needs be perpetual in the Church, and therefore could
not Constitute the nature of that temporal Office: Well then, to dispell that
cloud that would darken the light of this Text for Episcopacy, by saying that
Titus was an Evangelist, there is no word in Scripture, nor any Author in
Antiquity of any reputation in the World, which offers any thing toward that
Opinion. 2dly. If they did, yet they would be at as great a loss to show me,
that the Office of an Evangelist was to do such things as Titus is here
commanded to do. 3dly. If they could show Evangelizing to Consist in the
performance of such Duties; yet we might justly then Conceive them to he
Bishops, such as we require, and a Standing Office in the Church, because these
Duties are so: and it is evident, that Titus had Authority in both these kinds;
Therefore there were some men which had such Authority above others. But let us
go on with Hooker, as he does Confirm his Mistaken Opinion.

SECT. IX. Hookers Illustration from Acts 20. answered.
PAul (says he) Acts 20. sends for the Elders of Ephesus, and professes in
the 28th. verse, that Christ had made them Overseers or Bishops; where not only
the Name is Common, but the Thing signified by that Name is enjoined as their
Duty; (He means, to take heed to all the flock over which the holy Ghost had
made them Bishops or Overseers) here, as before, are left Gaps or
Interruptions; I will fill them as well as I can, to make up his Sense, thus;
What he implies or requires in a Bishop, that they (that is, these Presbyters)
were to do, If he shall require to lay on hands, to exercise Jurisdiction in
foro externo, that they must do, and should they have been reproved for so
doing, they might have showed their Commission, thus far he. But I wonder
where that Commission was given or read: I can find no such Thing in that
place, but that they should take heed, or have a care of their flock, which
they might execute according to that Authority was dispensed before, by
laboring in the Word, diligent baptizing, administering the Communion, but to
Convent or Summon their Flock, or Censure them, or give Orders and a like
Authority to others, of this there is no one word in particular. To express my
self: Although many men reasonably have thought, that St. Paul Convented both
Bishops and Presbyters under that general name of Presbyters, as Writs are sent
out ^o summon the Barons of the Kingdom to Parliaments, by which word was
understood both Earls and Dukes, although by the Name and Notion called the
house of Lords, So Bishops were called along being Presbyters, under that name
they are all called both from Ephesus and the Adjacent Parts, though that be
put down only; and then St. Paul gave them all their Charge, to look to their
Several Duties, and execute their several Commissions, which they had before
received* which is all that these words can enforce; although this is
reasonable, yet methinks this is more probable, that they were all, or for the
most part, but bare Presbyters; for in the first Age of the Church, when the
Conversion of men to Christ was new, and there were but few Christians, few
Presbyters were necessary, and then much sewer Bishops, especially the Apostles
living and Episcopizing, one of them enough for Twenty of us; and therefore one
Bishop for a great Nation, as Titus for Creet, where were an hundred Cities,
was sufficient; but Religion increasing in the hearts of men, more Presbyters
are necessary, and they increasing, there must be a greater necessity likewise
of Bishops, but that any of these should be such as we call Bishops, to have
power over other Presbyters, and to give them orders, is no way apparent; This
therefore proves nothing for their parity. But he adds, that the word Bishop
is never used in the New Testament, but the Actions therein required belong to
any Presbyter. He excepts the Case of Judas, Acts 1. 20. For my part: it is not
material how the word is used, but what I labor for, is, that there is such a
Thing as the word Bishop now used does signify; and that the more he or any
other Trouble themselves against it, it will appear the more clearly, as
hitherto it does. I will proceed therefore with him, page 25. He frames his
Second reason thus.

SECT. X. His Second Argument answered.
IF they be distinct, the Bishop is Superior; but he cannot be superior;
every Superior Order has superior Acts and honors belonging thereunto,
above the Inferior; but Bishops have neither above those that are Presbyters;
for if laboring in the Word and Doctrine be an Act above ruling, and is most
worthy of Double honor: then the Act and honor of a Presbyter is above the
Act and honor of a Bishop; for they only assume the Acts of rule, but give the
Presbyters leave to labor in the Word and Doctrine.

I have at large discoursed what laboring in the Word and Doctrine is. I will
not repeat now, but begin with his last [For they only assume, etc.] which is
the foundation upon which this whole discourse is built; and I answer, that the
Bishops do not only assume the Acts of rule, but esteem it their duty to labor
in the Word. And if Mr. Hooker would without prejudice Consider, even of that
kind of laboring which he and his Sort understand it, Pulpit-preaching, the
World never yielded more fruitful Industries than those of our Bishops, whose
Works live to bear witness for them being dead; and therefore I conceive this
to be an Argument of spleen, rather than reason; and for the second Clause of
this foundation, that they give the Presbyter leave to labor in the Word; they
do much more, for they Episcopize over them, and look to them, and by Authority
over them make them do it, encourage them who do, and punish those who do not;
If men have misdemeaned themselves in their Office, no doubt but Twenty
Presbyters have done so for one Bishop; but yet neither the one nor the other
are less Jure Divino, for that; Judas his Office was good, he was an ill
Officer. Nicholas his Office was good, he an ill Officer, this chose by the
Apostles, that by Christ himself; thus Offices are not disparaged by the
Officers. But Consider further, that although laboring in the Word with the
people, may be a more Excellent Work than governing or ruling the people, as it
is more excellent to persuade, than to compel men to virtuous Actions. They
are but half virtues that are forced; yet governing Presbyters, which is a
proper act of Bishops, is more excellent than laboring in the Word to the
people, by how much the Extent of the benefit is more General: It produces the
Good of a Diocese, as that of a ^arish. But once again, although I had thought
enough had been said to that Text, 1 Timothy 5. 17. Let the Elders that rule well
be accounted worthy of Double honor; but especially they who labor in the
Word and Doctrine; yet I will add somewhat for illustration. Suppose this
speech were turned from the Church to the Army, and a man should say thus; Let
the Elders, the Officers of the Army who govern or rule well their Regiments,
or the Army, be worthy of double honor, but especially they who labor and
toil in the heat of the battle; could any man Collect from hence, that it were
a better Act to labor in the Act of fighting, than to steer and direct the
fighting? No sure: it is an Act becoming a private Officer, and concerns a
few; but the other who rules well, has the whole fortune of the day, the fate
of a whole Kingdom sometimes depending on him; yet if he can and do upon
desperate occasions thrust himself into great hazard, he has an especialty of
this Double honor due to him, and yet it would not befit him to hazard the
day, which depends on his providence, by neglecting direction, to thrust
himself into perpetual dangers. These Bishops are the Generals of this
Spiritual Militia, they are to direct and oversee their Diocese, to encourage,
to command Inferior Officers to their Duties; when they do this well they are
worthy of double honor; but if when great occasions shall require, they act
themselves what at other Times they command, and take care that others shall do
it likewise, they have an Especialty of Double honor due to them, which is the
full Sense of that Text; Elders which rule well have a double honor, because
they have a double excellency; both do their own, and make others do their
duty; but if they who have abilities do rule well, and labor too, then
especially much more is that honor due.

SECT. XI. His Third Argument answered.
I Come now to examine his Third Argument, which I am sorry to read; for it is
so full of illogical deductions, as methinks it should not be possible for any
man to think he could persuade by them: It is thus framed, If they differ from
Presbyters Jure Divino, then there are some Ministers by Divine Authority
necessary for the gathering of the Church, and perfecting the body of Christ,
besides that of the Presbyter; for if the Church can be perfected without
these, there is no need of these.

I will stay here a while. This Consequence is not good; for Ministers may be
necessary for the gathering, which are not necessary for the perfecting the
body of Christ: we see Prophets were necessary for the Gathering, and the
Extraordinary part of Apostles, which are not necessary for the perfecting. Now
here is a Conjunction Gathering and Perfecting. His second Consequence is as
bad: If the Church can be perfected without these, there is no need of these;
this does not follow: things may be necessary ad esse, ad perfectum esse, and
yet other things may be necessary to the easy obtaining this Esse. I do but
give you the non-consequence of his manner of Argument; observe his Minor.

But there is no Minister necessary for the Gathering and Perfecting of the
Church, besides that of the Presbyters: He proves this: Because the Apostle
setting down the several Ministries which Christ had purchased, and by
Ascension bestowed upon his Church, when he gave Gifts to men for that end,
they are only comprehended in these two, Pastors and Teachers, Ephesians. 4. 12,
13. and they who are given for this end, can and shall undoubtedly attain it.
Consider here the Inconsequence of this Argument: Because (says he) the
Apostle in that place sets down none other; therefore there is no other. We
have examined that Text sufficiently (I thought) already, but this Starts
another Negative note, The Apostle does not say there, that there are no other
but what he sets down, nor does he put any Exclusive Term, as these, and these
only are they. I am sure in the 12. to the Romans he has another reckoning of
things like Offices, and so in the 1 Cor. 12. 28. I know he may say, that with
a Trick of Wit these may be brought about by subordination to amount to the
same thing and number, and so I can reduce them to two only, Extraordinary, and
Ordinary, or ruling and teaching, a principal and subservient; but unless he
can show a Negative or exclusive Term in the Text, he cannot draw a Negative
inference: So that although the means that our Savior appoints shall attain
its end, yet the means he appoints must be totally taken, not one piece without
another, and this Text does not say, that is the Total means: this is known in
Logic, posita Causa ponitur effectus, but it must be totalis Causa, not
partialis. But now suppose his Consequence were good in Logic, will the Text
bear him out in the matter? Does the Text name none but these Pastors and
Teachers? Yes sure: and although these two (as I have showed) are but one, yet
Apostles are different, and these seem without distinction to be necessary to
the perfecting of the body of Christ, and Bishops by all Consent succeed the
Apostles in t^is Duty; I will not des^ant upon Prophet, to show the sense and
meaning of it, as not pertinent; this is enough to show the weakness of his
Argument if the Text were granted to allow his deduction out of it. But he
proceeds as unluckily, as if all this were granted.

Where (says he) the Issue is, if Pastors and Doctors be sufficient Teaching
Ministryes, to perfect the Church; then there needs no more but these.

I will not lose my self in his long period; Suppose these were sufficient
Teaching Ministries, is there no more requisite but teaching? Yes; to look to
them that they do teach, and teach right Doctrine.

But (says he) if these be enough, all others be superfluous. I answer, these
are enough for their own Work, if they would be good, and all industrious
workmen; but there is necessity for some Custodire Custodes: I am weary with
this.

SECT. XII. His Fourth Argument concerning Jurisdiction answered.
HIs Fourth Argument is thus framed; Distinct Offices must have distinct
Operations: Operari sequitur esse; But they (that is, Bishops) have no distinct
Operations from Presbyters: if there be any, they must be Ordination and
Jurisdiction; but both these belong to Presbyters: Jurisdiction, John 20. 23.
Whosesoever sins ye remit, etc. Binding and loosing imply a power of Censuring,
as well as preaching, and both are given in the Apostles to their Successors,
the rulers and Elders of the Churches, who succeed them in their Commission.

Let him prove, that these who are here Elders of the Inferior rank Succeed
the Apostles in that part of their Commission, and his Conclusion is granted;
but that he can never do, and therefore labors not for it: otherwise I have
showed that there were parts of the Apostles fullness of power imparted to one,
and part to another, as the Divine Wisdom directed them to divide it for the
good of the Church; this they must grant, who make Pastors, Rulers, Teachers,
distinct Offices.

SECT. XIII. Ordination not given by Presbyters.
FOR the Second, Ordination, he brings Scripture, 1 Timothy 4. 14. He only Ciphers
the Text, I will put down the words; Neglect not the Gift that is in thee,
which was given thee by Prophesy with the laying on of the hands of the
Presbyters; His Collection hence is, That this Gift was his Presbyterial or
Episcopal Office, and that this power was Conveyed to him, by the laying on of
the hands of the Presbyters; and therefore Presbyters have power of Ordination.

I will not here dispute what is meant by Prophecy, as not pertinent to this
Cause; nor will I trouble my discourse with what is meant by this Gift, which
has received another Interpretation by some of best Authority, but will pitch
upon the word Presbytery, and, it may be, of Imposition of hands; For this word
(...) it is used only three times in the New Testament, Luke 22. 66. where we
render it the Elders of the people; but it is in the Original in the Abstract,
not the men, but the Presbytery of the people; The second place is Acts 22. 5.
where we read all the Estate of the Elders, the word is the same, (...), the
whole Presbytery; now the Third place, is this in my Text. In the two first
places, Presbytery is taken for the Magistrates or Senate of the people of the
Jews, no Christian Order; then from the use of the word in other places, it
cannot be Collected that this should particularize this lower Order, which he
fancieth, since there is no place to parallel it: But because Presbytery does
signify an Ecclesiastical Order in the Ministry, therefore this Presbytery
should do so likewise; but in as large a sense as Presbyter, not more
restrained. Now Presbyter takes in its latitude the whole Order of Priestood,
both Bishop and Presbyter, (it were in vain to insist upon particular places*)
So then must this be would be know, which I am Confident all Antiquity
understand it of that rank of Presbyters which we term Bishops, St.
Chrysostom, Theophylact, Theodoret, no man contradicting, but these late
Expositors; Then let us add one word more, Were that Gift understood for the
Ecclesiastical Authority which he had; or secondly were Presbytery understood
for a Synod of Presbyters, as they call them, which none but themselves affirm,
yet it would not follow, that they received it from their Imposition of hands,
but with it, says the Text, with the Imposition of hands of the Presbytery:
when in 2 Timothy 1. 6. he speaking, I think of the same Gift, he says, which
thou have received by the Imposition of my hands, here, by, as there, with, and
so is the phrase varied in the Original, (...), and (...), St. Paul's imposition
had some signal force, but theirs was only a Circumstance by the by, not
operative: But I enforce not this, although I am persuaded the Text would make
it good; but answer peremptorily, That Presbytery, there meant, was not a
Presbytery of the Inferior Order, and I speak no more than St. Chrysostom in
express words, This is not understood of Presbyters but Bishops, and all the
Ancients; if he shall require me to prove it out of Scripture, That Presbytery
ever signifies a Company of Bishops, which kind of Disputing is used amongst
some: I answer, in this place I am not to prove, but answer; and I reply, that
neither they, nor any, I think, can show me this word Presbytery used in any
other place than these I have named, and then I am sure it cannot be proved
that it should signify that inferior Order. Thus have I done with this reason
of his, I could collect even hence a Strong Argument against them, but I will
referr it.

SECT. XIV. Mr. Hookers Argument out of St. Hierome answered.
AT the last Hooker comes to that Canvased place of St. Hierome, and here he
begins to boast of Antiquity; If (says he) we look to ancient Times, that
prime place of Hierome ad Evagrium shows the Charter whence all the Authority
is derived, Unum ex se electum in altiori Gradu collocarunt, quem Episcopum
nominaverunt.

This piece of St. Hierome somewhat amazed me upon the first view of it, not
but he was a man, and might by passion be somewhat transported; but although I
have read it in him before, and often urged in the School, yet me thought not
in such significant words. To understand him therefore, Conceive that he writ
this Epistle to Evagrius against a Custom that had crept into the Church of
Rome, as it seems, that some men did pref^rre Deacons before Presbyters; this I
can guess to happen upon the rise of Cardinal Deacons, which began to flourish
in those days* upon this St. Hierome magnifies the Presbyterian Order, shows
how Presbyters and Bishops were one, and were called by the same name in
Scripture, which elsewhere he affirms likewise, and there he seems to make
the difference betwixt a Bishop in respect of Jurisdiction, not to be as two
Orders, but Gradus in ordine; and therefore he says, that in Alexandria which
was founded by St. Mark, in the time of Heraclius and Dionysius, Presbyteri
semper unum ex se electum in excelsiori Grad^ collocatum Episcopum nominabant.

But presen^ly he makes a Bishop in the same Epistle like a General in an Army,
and yet comes off, Quid enim facit Episcopu^ excepta Ordinatione* quod non
facit Presbyter; and at the Conclusion of that Epistle, compares Bishops,
Presbyters and Deacons, to Aaron, the Inferior Priests and Levites.

Whence it abundantly appears, that not only St. Hierome otherwhere, but even
here opposes these men expressly in the Case of Ordination, and surely
evidently enough in the business of Jurisdiction, Comparing the Bishops to
Generals and Aaron; But then mark these mistakes in his Quotation, where he
puts Collocaverunt for Collocatum, as if the Presbyters had given him his place
or Dignity; when it is no more but this, that from St. Marks time down-ward the
Presbyters of Alexandria had one chosen out of their Presbytery which was
elected above the rest, and called Bishop, which was, that their Bishop was
chosen among them, whether by them or no, I dispute not now. So that this
Epistle of Hierom being read, and this place Considered, I know no reason why
it should be urged against their power of Ordination or Jurisdiction; First,
because this was the Practice only of a particular Church, and as he disputes
concerning Rome in the same Epistle, may much easier be objected to Alexandria,
Si Authoritas quaeritur, Orbis major est urbe. And again in the same Epistle,
Quid mihi praeter unius urbis C^nsu^tudinem? This might be: but I yield not
that there is any force to this purpose out of St. Hieromes phrase, but only
that they had one elected out of their number which was placed in an higher
degree, and called a Bishop, not naming who ordained him, or who elected him;
but suppose they should Elect him, would it follow that they had power of
Ordination? Certainly no; the people or Patron may elect their Parson, but not
ordain him: or, if they should elect and ordain him, which will never be
granted; yet would it follow, that he had Jurisdiction and sole power of
ordaining others: a Master of a College is elected to his Office by the
Fellows, and ordained according to the Laws, yet unless by Authority
delegated from him, no Fellow can choose, much less make the least Fellow or
Scholar in the House. Take St. Hieroms Instance; The Emperor or General of an
Army dies, in his place the Army chooses and Constitutes another Emperor, as
often happened in Rome, when they had made their Election, then he had power
both of Jurisdiction in Governing them who chose him, and of Ordaining
inferiout Officers which were under him, but over the rest of the Army: So that
although it be true in Nature, that which can do the greater, can do the less;
yet it is not true in Politic Affairs, as thus. In an Elective Kingdom, or the
Empire, they who have power to choose the Emperor himself, yet, when they have
chosen him, have not power to choose the least Constable or Inferior Officer,
but the Emperor only: so that here are wonderful Inconsequences in this
Discourse, if much more were granted than indeed is any way true; and yet, as
if all were true, he deduceth strange Conclusions; Whence it follows (says
he) first, that Bishops were first Presbyters: I grant it; secondly, that they
had their first Constitution and Election from them: I deny that proposition;
First, St. Paul and the Apostles Constituted many Bishops in their several
precincts, Timothy, Titus, many more: Then I deny the Consequence or Dependence
it has upon the premises; ^or although all that were true in Alexandria, yet
that is no rule to the whole World, besides that the same Method was used any
where ^lse, which is apparently gross; his next Deduction is as bad, Ergo,
(says he) Presbyters had their rise and Ordination before Bishops; If they
had, what would follow? It is possible the Apostles might make Presbyters
first, and choose and make Bishops out of them, if not, the Apostles we have,
and shall prove were Bishops, who were before Presbyters.

He says, If they can give Ordination to Bishops, they may to Presbyters; Both
the Proposition and the Deduction have been Confuted already.

Last of all, he deduceth, They who have the same Commission, have the same
power from Christ.

But they all have the same Commission, John 20. 21. Prout mis^^ me Pater, ego
mitto vos; I put the words, as he does, in Latin, it was said to all the
Apostles Equally, and to all their Successors indifferently.

I deny that the plenipotence spoken there was spoken to all that succeeded the
Apostles in any part of their O^fice; there are diverse Things communicated to
one, which were not to another, according to their very Doctrine, only Bishops
succeeded them in their fullness of power, in Ruling, and Giving Orders; and
therefore these are bold Conclusions, which are only spoken, not proved by him.

SECT. XV. The Truth explained.
I Have done with his Arguments, and now apply my self to se^ down what I
Conceive ^it to prove my Conclusion, which is, That there was such a Thing as
Episcopacy settled by the Apostles in the Church; If I had no other reason, ^t
might persuade men easily to credit it, because that the Church in the old Law
seems to be governed by such a Discipline, where (as I said out of St. Hierome)
there was Aaron, the Priests and the Levites; for although this Argument be not
necessary, yet because the Wisdom of God is not to be paralleled in Polity so
well as Nature, it should be reasonable for men to think, that where is no
Ground for a Difference in this second Church under the New Testament, from
that former under the Old, there God should not vary in the Discipline; and, I
think, no man can show me a reason for such a Difference: either that men are
more united, or that the Church does require a less Union now, than then;
which two, as they are the heads from which we enforce Episcopacy in that
matter of Government: so they must be the heads from which any strong Argument
of force must be deduced, to show the difference. This being so, it is fit for
us to Conceive, (without strong reason against it) that there is such a
Conformity, especially if to this be added the great uniformity and convenience
that the Ancient Levitical Law had to our Ecclesiastical (which might
abundantly be showed) in other things, without some Language expressing a
difference in a dubious Case, it were ^it we should adhere to Gods former
practice.

But then again, our Savior in his lifetime hatching a Church in Embrione.
He, as I have showed, made two distinct Orders, Apostles, and the Seventy, and
these both Preaching Orders, without there were some main reason to the
Contrary, we cannot easily subscribe to another Discipline, nor surely would
have quarreled at that, but by reason of pride in themselves, that they would
be all Bishops, like the Conspirators against Moses, Numbers 16. who being men
of Quality in Israel, were not Content to be Princes in their Condition, but
would be Equal to the Supreme; So these men are not Content with their rank,
which is high and great in the Church of God, unless they shall pluck down the
highest of all; and not be subordinate, but supreme in their Prelatical
Principalities; or else, which is a spice of the same vice, there is amongst
them an Abhorring of Obedience, which indeed is the Mother and Ground of all
Virtue; and although they would have all their Subjects obey them in an
Insolent manner, yet they would obey none other themselves: and for a
Countenance to this prid^ and stubbornenesse study Scripture, and wrest it to
their purpose, which how weak it is for them, has been showed, how strong
against them, I shall now urge.

SECT. XVI. My First Argument from Scripture to prove Episcopacy.
MY First Argument from Scripture shall be thus framed, That Government which
the Apostles did settle in their Government of Churches, that is Apostolical.
But the Apostles did settle such an Episcopacy as I require; Ergo, such an
Episcopacy is Apostolical. My Major ^ conceive not to be denied; for, as I have
showed, we ought not to seek for express Terms to show that they made a Law in
such peremptory Words, That this or this we enact perpetually for the
Government of all Churches, this or the like is not to be found any where, nor
does any Government pretend to it. There is no Book unquestionable of their
Canons extant, but only Registers of their Acts, and certain Epistles, which
set down what they did do, and from that Assure us what we should do.

The first place I shall insist on, will be that I formerly touched, Tit. 1. 5.
For this Cause left I thee in Creet, that thou should set in Order the
Things that are wanting, and Ordain Elders in ev^ry City, as I have appointed
thee. This Text I have handled before, and have showed that in more exp^esse
Terms St. Paul could not Authorize one man to that Office, which we pretend to,
than he did here; I have spoken likewis^ of that Shift they have for it, to say
he was an Evangelist, and by that Authority did Act these things; to which I
think may be irresistably objected, that it can no where be showed that he was
an Evangelist; and 2dly. it can no where be showed that an Evangelist had such
an Aut^ority belonging to his Off^ce; and therefore that must needs be but a
weak refuge to fly unto: A Second Shift of some is, That this Commission was
gi^^ to Titus but in Common with others, as one of the Presbyters, conjunctim*
not divisim, joined with them, not severed (...) them* but by such Tricks men
may cast off all Scripture; but (...) I would have them show me where ever
there was such a Commission given to a Presbytery, which they can never do.
Secondly, Let them Consider, it would be as safe, nay much safer, for me to
say, that power given to the Presbytery, must be by the Sole virtue of
Association with the Supreme, as they can, when I show a Commission given to
one Man, say it is meant of him in the Company of others, and the more agreeing
to sense; because when this Commission is granted, it implies at the least that
he must be of the Quorum, which to none others could be enforced: And again,
when we read such a Precept given to any man, it must be understood, that he
must have power to execute that Authority, which certainly if he could only Act
in Commission with others, he could not; because suppose St. Paul Charge him
to Ordain Elders in every City, such, and so qualified, he might answer, in
many Cases the others will not join. Suppose he should stop the mouths of
Deceivers, It is likely the great deceivers would be amongst the Presbytery
themselves; he can do nothing without their Consent, which is nothing of
himself; not he, but they therefore must have the Charge given them; for he is
not, by these men, capable of performing it; and as for their Charge, it is no
where given: Upon these reasons, I cannot see a possible Color to avoid this
Text, but that Titus had such a Commission Episcopal, as Episcopacy is taken
with us.

SECT. XVII. A Second Argument to prove Episcopacy.
MY next place shall be out of 1 Timothy in which we may discern the same
Commission, as fully delivered as before concerning Ordination, Chap. 5. 22.
Lay hands suddenly on no man. The Qualities of the persons upon whom he should
lay on hands, described Chap. 3. from verse. 1 to 14. for this all may be said
as was before in the Case of Titus; Here is a Command and Direction to Ordain
the Clergy Officers given to one man, and therefore by the way of Episcopizing;
It was a strange unlucky violence to the Text which the Gloss of Beza gives:
Do not lay hands (says he) upon any suddenly, Quantum in te est, as much as in
thee lies; for (says he) This power was not in Timothy alone, but an Election
being made by the Consent of the whole Church; The Priest a chief man in the
name of the Presbytery, by Imposition of hands, did Consecrate him who was
chosen to the Lord, Is not this a strange abusing of the Word of God, and
forcing it to serve men's carnal designs; St. Paul bids him not do it suddenly,
that supposes he could and should do it, Beza says, he cannot do it not at
all, but is only the Mouth of the rest, he has no power to do any thing more
than another; but never shows any reason for what he says, but referres the
Reader to Chapter 4th. ver. 14th. where Timothy is said to receive the power by
the Imposition of hands of the Presbytery, of which I have spoken somewhat
already, and God willing shall more hereafter; but what is all this to the
purpose? Timothy is Commanded, therefore he could do it, yea, he is commanded
not to do it suddenly; therefore he could do it both ways, leasurely and
suddenly; and he himself, in his Short Notes upon the same Text, says, that
the Command is, Neminem Antistes leviter Ordinato, Do thou Bishop, for so
Antistes is often used, Do thou ordain none lightly; but this Exposition has
no Color for it, nor could St. Paul properly speak more distinctly; for it had
not been according to the usual Language of men, to say, Do thou alone do this,
when a man is authorized to do any thing; or, Do it by thy sole power: they are
not Languages used, nor do we use to bid a man do any thing which he cannot Act
alone, but bid him join with others in doing, such others who are necessarily
Co-operators with him in the Work he is to do.

SECT. XVIII. Episcopal Jurisdiction proved.
FOR his Jurisdiction I need not speak much, all that Epistle is full of it;
only ^ will touch upon one place, which being me thinks of great Brightness in
it self, will serve likewise to give light to the rest, and that shall be, 1 Timothy 5. 19, 20. Against an Elder receive not an Accusation, but before (or, as
the Margin, under) two or three Witnesses; Verse. 20. Them that s^n, rebuke
before all, that others also may fear.

From whence thus I discourse: Timothy was capable of receiving Accusations
against Presbyters, or not receiving, which is a great piece of Judicial
Authority; he was likewise Authoritatively to rebuke or correct Presbyters, in
such sort, as if they were Sinners, and Guilty of the Accusation laid to their
Charge, that others by their punishment might learn to avoid their faults Do
these things sound like fellow Presbyters without a Superiority of
Jurisdiction? Can one fellow Presbyter Censure another, or he who is barely a
Temporal Speaker or Mouth of the rest? This seems to me as full as could be,
how his Authority was not like Presbyters, only over their flock, but like a
Superior Shepherd over Inferiors.

But here, with some more Color, in the Case of Timothy they plead he was an
Evangelist; because, 2 Timothy 4. 5. he is bid do the Work of an Evangelist, and
therefore, by the prerogatives belonging to that Office, he might do these
works of Jurisdiction; surely, although he was bid do the work of an
Evangelist; yet that may ^e without being one ex officio. An Evangelist is
nothing but either a Writer or a Preacher of the Gospel; so that, do the work
of an Evangelist, is no more, but preach the Gospel: and I cannot ^^nd one man
among the Ancients that makes Timothy an Evangelist by Office; but, I do find
St. Chrysostom upon Ephesians. 4. peremptorily saying, That both Timothy and ^itus
were not Evangelists; and I find no one man among the Ancients, nay I may add
Beza himself, or Calvin, no one man making it a part of an Evangelists Office
either to give Orders, or the power of Jurisdiction. But these later make them
a Subservient Office to the Apostles; and if we should allow that, what more
proper Service than that their name implies, to preach the Gospel about with
them, as they traveled? So that it seems to me, that these Writers when they
utter such Things, being learned men some of them, and reasonable, cannot
deceive themselves with those Shadows, but think to drive on their Design with
the people, who ^earing the name of an Evangelist, and not knowing what it is,
imagine any thing of it what they please to insinuate, which in this particular
is, that an Evangelist had some transcendent power over Presbyters, both to
ordain and govern them, which was not Communicable to others* but they never
show, that any such Authority is assigned them, or any such Duty exacted from
them. Well, it appears that Timothy had Episcopal Jurisdiction, as well as
Titus, and this name Evangelist given by them for this Occasion only is but a
mere Illusion, I shall here therefore for a while leave St. Paul's Epistles, and
go to St. John, in the Revelation, Chap. 1. verse. 20. The seven Stars are the
Angels of the Seven Churches.

SECT. XIX. The Revelation asser^ing Episcopacy.
HEre these Angels were such men as had Episcopal Jurisdiction, appears most
reasonably to any Indifferent Reader, upon these Grounds; First, because this
word Ang^l, as I have showed, has in its own signi^ication genuinely the same
sense with Apostle, and therefore may well be fitted to the same Office; and as
that was never applied to any under a Bishop; so neither this, as any man can
show me in the whole New Testament. That it is a name likewise appropriated to
Spirits sent about Apostolical Employments, and endowed by God who sends them
with Apostolical Authority: So that then, whether Angel be applied to Spirits,
or men, it will in both or either receive this Common sense to be understood,
That these persons, whether Spirits or bodies, have divine Authority to act
those things they are employed about: Now then, thus the word being of such a
sense, and no where otherwise understood, we may from hence think it most
reasonable, that this name should be affixed to such men; nor do I find any man
adventuring to show any place where this word does less than signify a Bishop.

Then let us Consider, that they are called after in the second Chapter, The
Angel of the Church of Ephesus, the Angel of the Church of Smyrna, etc. which
being great and populous regions, could not reasonably but have many Presbyters
in them, and then to write to one Angel (if the name Angel did stoop so low as
Presbyter) were to write to no man knew whom, because there were so many there;
but if Angel (as it is) be understood of one in an higher and more exalted
State than the rest, who might be known by this name Angel, as peculiarly due
to him; then and then only we may understand who it is that is meant by it; but
if any man should allow nothing but Scripture to prove so clear truth, and say
there was but one Presbyter in each of these Churches, he may find that Acts
20. ver. 17, 18. St. Paul sent for the Presbyters (in the plural number) of the
Church of Ephesus, and when they were come to him he said to them; still they
and them, in the plural number. That Text will require a further Examination
perhaps hereafter. In the mean time take this, because it is urged for a Unity
of Office betwixt a Bishop and a Presbyter, from the 28th verse; where St. Paul
says, Take heed to your selves and to all the flock over which the Holy Ghost
has made you Overseers, that is, Bish^ps; then those that were called
Presbyters before, were called Bishops afterward: I have often said before,
that the name Bishop and Presbyter, I conceive to be taken promiscuously in the
New Testament for the same Office; That the word Apostle was solely that name
which was used, by the way of propriety to that Office, both to themselves who
were originally such, and to those who by their Appointment succeeded them; But
this is it I contend for, That amongst them which they made their Successors,
they gave to some of them a greater and fuller power than to others, both to
govern, and to ordain, which since the Church has called Bishops. Now then
from hence, whether there were many Bishops in the Province of Ephesus, or many
Presbyters only, yet many there were, and these many were so inferior to one,
that he is called the Angel, which name was so appropriated to him, as he might
know to whom the Letter was directed; or else, as if a Man should write a
Letter, and superscribe it, to the Alderman of London, where are many, no man
could know whither to send it, or who should receive it; but if a man
superscribe it to the Mayor, every man knows who that is: Thus must it be with
these, he to whom this Letter is superscribed must have this Angelical
Condition so fitted to him that he must be known by that name, that name solely
agreeing to him. But some here offer at an Answer, That he might be like a
Mayor, have a superior Dignity above the rest, such as is notified by that
name Angel, which yet may not make a Bishop such as we require. He may be a
Temporary Governor such as the Presbyterian allows, a President of a Synod who
this year governs, but the next resig^s his place, and when he is there he has
no more to do but regulate the Synod, no greater Authority than the rest. To
both these in their Order; No Temporary Bishop or Superior, I am Confident
that I never read of any such Thing, and therefore am persuaded, that no man
can show me out of Ecclesiastical Story, that any man was outed of his
Bishopric, but for Heresy, Schism or Gross Impiety of Life; when men have
grown, through old Age or Infirmities, otherwise incapable of ^xecuting their
Office, they have had Coadjutors and helpers in their Office, but not been
deposed, but by Death, or some such occasion as before described; and those
that by Ecclesiastical Story were reckoned Bishops of these places, at this
time are recorded to dye Bishops. And it seems a mighty Selfishnesse to me,
that any man should oppose his reasonlesse Conjectures against all Story, when
indeed these Epistles cannot be expounded but by Story, as in particular, the
13th verse of the 2d. Chapter, where speaking to the Angel (or Bishop I may
call him most Con^idently) of the Church of Pergamus, He commends him, because
thou have not denied my Faith, even in those days wherein Antipas was my
faithful Martyr; If a man would ask what Commendation of his Faith was this?
What was the Excellency of it? Can any man answer me but out of Ecclesiastical
Story? where it is recorded, that after a long and pious life full of all
virtue led in Pergamus, he was in the days of Domitian, for the Testimony of
his Religion, put into a brazen Bull, and in that Bull burnt: now then this
Bishops faith was Eminent, that in such a cruel and fiery Trial he kept his
Integrity, even in such a Time when tha^ horrid President of the death of
Antipas was set before him. Thus, I say, Ecclesiastical Story is necessary for
the Exposition of these Epistles, as you may find profane Story necessary for
the Exposition of the Prophets in the Old Testament; for a man then to talk of
such an Officer, concerning which there is no mention in the Word, nor any in
Story, but a Poem, a fictio^ of their own Imagination, is not like men that
guided themselves by Scripture, to undertake.

I close therefore with the 2d. Exception, which is, that their Government was
not such as is Episcopal; but only such as is the president of a Synod, to
direct the business, not Command more than others, and this certainly the
frame of these Letters does Confute mightily, for they make the Ang^ls
responsible for the faults and heresies which were under the Government, which
they could not be, if they had only the Authority of Presidents, but not of
Bishops; for a President of a Synod has no Coercive power in himself, but as
conjoined with the rest of the Synod, and involved: Nor has he any particular
Interest in the ruling or swaying the Affairs of the Church, but is the mouth
of the Synod; therefore, although if he neglect his duty in the Synod he may
well be censured for it; yet he cannot have the faults of the Inferior Clergy
or people laid to his Charge in particular: take one Instance in the 15th verse
of the 2d. Chapter; the Angel of the Church of Pergamus is censured, because he
had them which held the Doctrine of the Nicholaitans, which Christ hates:
Should any one ask why the President should be Censured for these things; He
could answer, I am but one man, perhaps they can master me in the Synod, I have
nothing to do alone; but a Bishop who has Coercive power, and can both examine
and censure any who are in his Diocese, he may be punished, because he did not
oversee the flock of Christ, over which the Holy Ghost had made him a Ruler.

And now here again discern the necessity of Ecclesiastical Story, to expound
this Scripture; What, can any man tell, is the Doctrine of the Nicholaitans
which God hates, and so we ought to hate, but by Ecclesiastical Story? which
sets it down to be as well in the Error of Opinion, the Doctrine concerning the
Creation, that it was not by God; as likewise that of practice, that it was
lawful to have Wives in Common; now by Ecclesiastical Story we are taught,
that these things were the Nicholaitans Opinions, and these are they which God
abhorrs. And now Consider, what fault would it be in the Angel, that these
things were he^d in his Church, but that he had Co^rcive Authority to Command,
and hinder the proceedings of these Opinions.

A Third Exception is, That these Epistles were written to the Angels, the
Presidents, but by Name, but to the whole Synod by Intention: so that although
he direct his Epistle but to one, yet it is intended unto all; as when a man
should send a Letter to the Speaker which is to be read in Parliament. But this
is Confuted in the Text most evidently, because all these things that are
Commended or censured in any of these Epistles, are in the singular number: so
Chap. 2. verse. 2. I know thy works and thy labor, etc. thy, in the singular
number, and so in the rest; now if he had meant it to the whole Synod, although
directed to the President, it would have been your works; nor could the Speech
be proper to say thy works, when the whole body was intended; nay it is not
imaginable, that those eminent virtues with which he and the other Bishops are
honored should appertain to the whole Assembly or Synod of them: so likewise
the fault he condemns that Angel of, verse. 4. that he should forsake his first
love, is not likely to be affirmed of the Synod; so it is most remarkable in
the Epistle to the Bishop of Smyrna, verse. 10. when he speaks of the rest, he
changes his phrase, The Devil shall cast some of you into prison, and the
like; So likewise to the Angel of the Church of Thyatira, verse. 24. To you I
say and unto the rest in Thyatira, as many as have not this Doctrine, etc. Here
it is evident, that when the Things concern others, he advertiseth the Bishop
to acquaint them with it, and he changes his manner of Speech, that notice may
be taken what was personal to him, and what to others. Thus you see with how
much wit, and with what shuffling the Intention of these Scriptures has been
diverted, but to little purpose, among such as Consider and weigh them.

CHAP. VIII. SECT. I. Concerning Ordination.
I Come now at the last to handle Ordination, because I find many things
discussed about that, the Clearing of which will Conduce much to the opening my
business in hand; and then that being finished, I shall review my Work, and if
there appear any thing unsatisfied, I shall insert such Discourses as shall be
useful to remove those Scruples: Mr. Hooker undertakes this, where before,
Part 2. Chap. 2. page 38. and in the handling of it, page 39. he proposes
these Questions. Whether 1. Ordination be before Election? 2. Ordination gives
all the Essentials to an Officer? 3. What this Ordination is, and wherein lies
the full breadth and bounds of the being thereof? 4. In whom the right of
dispensing it lies, and by whom it may be dispensed?


I have put down his very words, and do intend (God willing) to handle all
these Questions; but because he seems to me to follow an unjust method, I shall
begin with his Third Question, To show what that Ordination is of which we
dispute; for till that be Cleared, we dispute de non Concessis, as he does in
this Discourse. I will first examine his Definition, because I will not
multiply unnecessary Contentions. He defines it thus.

SECT. II. His Definition of Ordination confuted.
ORdination is an Approbation of the Officer, and Solemn settling and
Confirmation of him in his Office by Prayer, and laying on of hands.

In this Definition, that which I can blame, is, first that which he makes the
Genus, to wit, an Approbation of the Officer. This is a prevenient
Circumstance, not an Essential part Constituting Ordination; First, men are
Approved, then Ordained; and although he calls it a Description not a
Definition, which phrase abides a larger sense than Definition does; yet even
there this Term is faulty, for it must be a Description of Ordination of which
this is no part, no more than many other Circumstances belonging to it. Again,
where he says it is a Settling and Confirming him in his Office. If by Office
he Conceive a particular Congregation, as by his whole discourse he seems to
do* then that is not large enough to contain that Act which it is directed to;
for men may, yea must be Ordained before they are settled in particular
Congregations: So that as his Genus, Approbation, on, precedes Ordination, so
settling thus in his Office, is Consequent to it; last of all, the whole
Description is too wide for the Thing described. He takes settling in his Office
in that sense I have showed, for it agrees to the Mission of Barnabas and Saul,
Acts 13. 2, 3. who were ordained before, as will appear after, and is yielded
elsewhere by him. This Description of his is page 75. where before.

SECT. III. My Definition set down and explained.
HIS Definition being thus briefly perused, now take mine. Ordination is an Act
by which some Man is Constituted in some Ecclesiastic Order of Divine
Institution. This I conceive to be a Logical Definition, for Definitions should
be as short as may be, so they be full, and explain the nature of the Thing
defined. The Genus is an Act in General which agrees to it, and diverse others;
The Object of this Act is a Man; the Immediate Effect and End it Aims at is the
Constitution of an Ecclesiastical Order; the Explication of which will be the
Chief business to understand the whole Definition: Order is the disposition of
things either accor^ing to their place or time; For time, as yesterday, to day,
Order disposes when it should be done, or in place, before, behind, at the
right hand or the left, above, below; Now because there are many degrees in
Church Affairs, where one is above or below another; therefore, when any man is
put into any degree of these, this is called a Church Order; that which has no
degrees, but is where it was, is the lay sort of men; These are (as we speak in
Logic) of Individuums, they are not in serie praedicamentali. Now therefore it
is said Ecclesiastical Order, because there are Orders which are not
Ecclesiacal, as Kings, Judges, etc. where there is a sub and supra in the
Commonwealth, but belong not to our business. Again, because there are many
Ecclesiastic Orders in the Church of Rome, which are not truly such; but only
additions of human Invention, according as their Church fancyed would conduce
to the Decorum of Gods Service, I add this Term of Divine Institution, which
must be understood of divine Apostolical constitution, and then it may again be
put in these Prases, that Ordination is an Act by which a Man is Constituted a
Minister, as at the beginning of this Treatise the Minister is defined, for the
Man ordained, and the Minister before will be all one. And so now the nature of
Ordination being explained, I shall encounter with Hooker in his first
Question, Whether Ordination is in nature before Election?

SECT. IV. Ordination is not before Election.
IN answering this Question, we shall agree to say, No, it is not before
Election; nor surely can it possibly be: for a Man must be elected and chosen,
as fit to be ordained, before he is ordained. But because Mr. Rutherford, as he
expresses it, page 39, does conceive this Election belongs to the People, and
that Ordination is like the making of a King, the Election of the people like
the giving and appropriating this ring to the finger, by choosing this man to
this place, which Hooker opposes; I shall quit my self from Rutherford, and
then apply my self to Hooker: I say therefore, that first a man must be chosen,
before he is ordained a Pres^yter; but it is not necessary he should be Chosen
by the people, there is no semblance of any such Thing in the Scripture; nor
indeed do Rutherford or Hooker exact it, but out of his mistake, That they
suppose no man should be made a Presbyter which should not at that instant or
before be Elected to some benefice of the which the people should be Electors.

SECT. V. Men may be Ordained without the Election of the People.
NOW the Contrary is most apparent in some Case; As suppose Mr. Hooker and Mr.
Cotton were adjudged fit men for the Conversion of the Indians, they had need
be sent with Presbyterial A^thority, for else they could not have right
Authority to admit Converted men into Christ's Church, but the people to whom
they were sent could not choose them, these men must be ordained Presbyters
before they are sent, and elected before Ordained, but not by the people to
whom they are sent, or the people, that is, the Commonalty from whom they are
sent, who are not Capable to discern the fitness for such a Work; but their
Drift is, the people over whom they are to Pastorize. Thus then it is evident,
that in some Cases Election of the Congregation or Church over which a
Presbyter is put, cannot always precede his Ordination.

But suppose again, a Company of Christians whose Presbyter is dead, in many
Cases they may elect one to be ordained, before he is ordained; and in many
cases they may elect one to this Charge after he is ordained, (supposing that
the power of Election were in them) as thus; in the first Case they find an
able and fit man, they desire to have him ordained; in the second, they find an
able man already ordained (sine Cura,) I put the Cas^ without Exception; As
suppose his or Mr. Cottons Congregation destroyed by Enemies, cannot he be
elected to another Church, or if Elected, must he have another Ordination? I
believe he will not say so; Well then, in this Question the Answer must be, the
Election must precede Ordination, but Election to Ordination, not Election to a
Cure in the second sense* Election to a Cure may and may not precede Ordination.

SECT. VI. St. Cyprian explained.
IN all Hookers Discourse upon this business, I find n^thing remarkable
produced to Confirm this Conclusion, but some flashes against the Papists, and
then against the Prelates; but page 42. he brings certain Quotations of
Authors, to which he assents, among which there is only one worth the insisting
on, and that is St. Cyprian, out of whom, Lib. 1. Epist. 4. which is a true
Quotation according to the old, and Erasmus his Edition; but according to
Pamelius, in 68 Epist. Lib. 4. The words are, Videmus de Divina Authoritate
descendere ut Sacerdos pleb^ praesente sub omnium oculis delegatur, and dignus
and idoneus publico Judicio and Testimonio comprobatur.

This place he cites rightly, but what is here, but that the people must be
present as they are at our Consecrations, to this purpose, to know whether they
have any thing to object against the Man, or his life; but here is no word of
his Election: and I must Commend the Ingenuity of the man; for it is evident
out of the following part of the Epistle, that he meant no more, because his
Arguments enforce no more but the presence of the people; yet indeed the words
immediately preceding do seem upon the first view, to carry another meaning,
they are these, speaking of the people; Quando (says he) ipsa maximr^ habeat
potestatem, vel eligendi dignos Sacerdotes, vel indignos recusandi, which
words, if they be understood of more than a Custom of the Church which is
confirmed by many Canons, That there should be no clandestine Consecration, as
well as Marriage* but that the Consecration of Priests and Bishops should be in
the public Church, where any man may except against them if they have any
thing to that purpose; I say, if this potestas eligendi and recusandi, be more
than this, which St. Cyprians Arguments do not enforce; yet if there be more
meant, it is nothing, but that the people did Elect their Sacerdos, which is
understo^d of a Bishop, as I have intimated heretofore, and is clear in this
place, because the Case disputed of, in which St. Cyprian is consulted, is
concerning a Bishop; now it is apparent in Story, that many times it was
indulged to the People to choose their Bishop, especially about that Age,
wherein there was a kind of Impossibility of doing otherwise* when the World
was divided into so many great Schisms, and the Emperors peremptorily abetting
none, nor destroying any; so that you might know three Bishops together in a
City, one Orthodox, the other Arian, another Novatian; now in these cas^s the
people chose their Bishop when the old was dead, and adhered to whom they would
when he was alive, unless the Emperor interposed, as often he did, or some
Council Provincial, which likewise was used; but for Divine right, St. Cyprian
speaks of nothing, but plebe praesente, they were chosen in the presence of
the people, but to the Benefice, whether Bishopric or Parsonage, the Electors
have been various in all Ages, and may be so; there being nothing determined,
by Apostolical Constitution, or practice; yet there is nothing in all this that
shows that Election to a Benefice must be before Ordination, not the least
word, but rather after; for if it lies in the people to elect a worthy Priest
(I so translate Sacerdos) to his Benefice, then he must be a worthy Priest
before: for else it should be, they should elect a Worthy man to be Priest, not
elect a Worthy Priest to a Benefice, of which St. Cyprian seems to speak, and
which is his Aim; for his other Quotations, they are of such men as are of
little use with me, or with any their Adversaries; and therefore I trouble not
my self to examine them.

SECT. VII. His Argument from the Election of Deacons, Acts 6. examined.
AT the last, he urges Page 41, Acts 6. About the Election of the Deacons that
were chosen, first by the people, and after Ordained by the Apostles, I set
down mine opinion of that Act before, never dreaming then of this Design, which
it is aimed at here; but what I said then, will serve my Turn now; First, that
Election was Occasional, and therefore cannot be drawn to a President; but when
there is the like Occasion. 2dly. It was to such an Office which might easily
fall under the Cognizance of the people, to wit, the Caring for the poor, and
they might better discern the sufficiency of men for such a purpose, than the
Apostles themselves; First then we see here falls to the Ground, that if the
people had this liberty in an under Officer, there was much greater reason they
should have it in an Officer of higher degree, in whom they had greater
Interest, and by whose administration they were to receive greater good. This
follows not, for this Office was of such a Thing as they might best know, the
Integrity of those men with whom they Conversed; but the other, of an higher
nature, they could not be Judges of so well: and therefore there is a diverse
Case, the people may be fit to choose a Collector for the Poor, a Tithing-man,
but can they be fit to choose a Judge? And indeed it favors of an high
presumption, which his delight in this Conceit transports him with, when he
says, as he does in that page, That the liberty of the Apostles in ordaining
was not so great, as the peoples in choosing; when the Apostles had all Divine
Authority from Christ solely delegated to them, and the Apostles did not only
ordain these men but their very Office it self. I may add to this, that the
people in this inferior office did not authoritative of themselves choose
these, but by particular direction and command from the Apostles. I have
answered, as I conceive, all that he speaks concerning his first Question,
Whether Ordination or Election be first? He Conceives it not much material; and
therefore concludes, the proof of this will appear in the Explication of the
other particulars, which he undertakes, and I will follow him.

SECT. VIII. Whether Ordination gives all the Essentials to an Officer?
HIS Second Question is, Whether Ordination gives all the Essentials to an
Officer? In handling of which he examines two things.

First, how far the Essentials of the Ministry or Minister may be given by Man?

If they may be given and Conveyed by man, by what means men may be said to do
this, whether by Ordination, or any other Appointment of Christ's?

How their Ministerial Offices may be given by men.
COncerning the first of these, he makes his first Conclusion thus; There is a
Causal virtue put forth in a Subordinate way by some under Christ, to bring the
formality or specifical being of an Ecclesiastical Office to a person or party
that is Called thereunto, or stands possessed thereof.

Alas* what mighty words are these, and how easily might the business of this
Proposition have been expressed to the Capacity of any Reader, if he had said,
there is some power under Christ to Constitute Ecclesiastical Officers; there
is no need of such high and difficult Terms of Causal virtue, Formality, or
Ecclesiastical being, which do amuse a weak Capacity, and no way satisfy an
Intelligent.

The Drift of his Conclusion is to prove, that there is an outward Call
necessary to a Minister, which, he says, is by none denied, but by Anabaptists
and Familists, which folly and madness labors (as he says) with the
loathsomeness of it self: so he contemns them, but truly they are now grown a
Considerable Enemy; but I let them pass to answer for themselves, which I am
considen^ they cannot justly; and indeed I grant this whole Conclusion, and let
alone his proofs of it. But yet because he places a necessity upon it as
surely is Truth, I would ask, whether the necessity be not required out of the
part of such as are to receive the Pastor or Elder? and I am sure he must yield
it; for there is no reason Men should receive such a P^stor who is not lawfully
called, (to use his own phrase;) but then why does he despise the Bishops Seal
and Parchment in a Box, as he speaks page 40. when there can be none other
Evidence to the people of his Call, but this? And again, because this is a^
(...) a Causal virtue, which he uses, I shall add something (...) Explication
of it, which he has omitted; there is a physical Cause, and a Moral Cause.
This word Cause at the first reading sounds like a Physical Operation; and
although in his second Conclusion he adds this Term, Instrument or means, yet
that is not to be allowed in a physical notion; for these powers in men have no
physical influx into these Effects, no not as Instruments; for, as the
Philosophers speak, an Instrument has its particular work in the Effect: so a
knife or axe, which be both Instruments, have their several ways of Operation,
though used by the same hand, and do their work according to their particular
and proper dispositions; but now these Agents have no Influence on the Subject,
but only as moral Instruments; as a hand and feal have no physical Nature to
pay a Debt, but only a moral force, which is granted it by the Law of the
Realm; and from thence it has this moral force, not a physical. Of this nature
I conceive this power granted to men to give Orders, and it is founded upon
that great Commission; As my Father sent me, so send I you, with that Authority
to grant powers to other men; so that the powers, the Authority granted by
them, are Confirmed by God* they having a moral Causality to do such Things
which God will Confirm, but they working not so much as Instrumentally any
physical Effect. Thus the Conclusion being explained, I grant it, but in his
handling of it, many things deserve Censure; for although he bragg at the Top
of the 44th* Page, that he will lend such help to the weakest Reader, that he
may lay his finger upon the several Things; yet indeed he is mightily perplexed
and intricate, which I pass, and granting his Conclusion, will not disturb his
manner of handling it, only repeat what he says at the bottom of the 45 page,
whoever in a Complete way has received this outward Call, he is then a
Complete and true Officer, and may act any part of his Office, though not
inwardly graced or fitted worthy of such a place or Work by God; this I put
down, lest he may start from it hereafter, and so will pass it over, and
proceed with the same succinctnesse to his second Conclusion, which is p. 48.
and is this.

It is an Act of power as an Instrument or means under Christ to give an
Officer the being of an outward Call in the Church. Here an Instrument being
taken, as I expounded it before, a moral Instrument: This Conclusion has Truth
granted likewi^e, and so I pass to his second head, page 49. by what means the
essential of this power may be Conveyed?

SECT. IX. Whether Ordination does communicate the Essence to the Outward Call.
HIS first Conclusion is, Ordination as it is Popishly dispensed under the
Opinion of a Sacrament, and as leaving the Impression of an indelible
Character, does not Communicate the Essence of this outward Call.

In the handling this Conclusion, there are two things he insists upon; First,
to show that the Prelatical party are Popishly affected in this Doctrine; 2dly,
to dispute against the Indelible Character: for the first, he draws it from the
Answer in the Catechism which is in the Book of Common Prayer, where it is
said, that there are only two Sacraments as generally necessary to Salvation,
not as he puts it down, two only Absolutely necessary to Salvation, and then
glosses on it, q.d. there are more, and those necessary, but not absolutely
necessary. These are his words, which you see is a false Quotation; But because
that ever-to-be-honoured Book the Common Prayer is named, I will first
vindicate that, and then proceed: Know then, It is the first time that ever
read the Prelatical party accused under that Notion, that the Common Prayer
Book held the Doctrine of the Church of Rome, because it was the most
Authentic piece which expressed the Doctrine and Religion of the Church of
England; 2ly. Let the Reader observe, that this word Sacrament is a Term not
found in the New Testament, but an Ecclesiastical Term taken up by the ^athers,
and used by all Christians for that thing which is Ordinarily defined, a
visible sign of an invisible and spiritual Grace; Now if that have the Notions
which the Word Sacrament expresses, then Mr. Hooker cannot deny Orders to be a
Sacrament, because he grants an outward Call to be necessary, which is an
outward Sign, and he grants the Effect of that Call to be the Order given by
it, which is an Invisible grace, as Grace is taken largely for Gratia gratis
data; and yet the Common Prayer Book is most true, which says, there are two
only generally necessary, that is, to all men; for Orders are not generally
necessary to all men, as Baptism and the Lords Supper are, but only to such
persons as undertake such Duties. Let this suffice to have been spoken to that
which he unnecessarily to his business or mine inserted.

SECT. X. Of the Character left after Ordination.
AND such another pass^ge I shall have with his 2d. Discourse, concerning the
Indelible Character, a Thing not material to his business, but only to vaunt
and show his reading in the School. ^or this understand, that this Character
that he and they speak of, is the relict of that gift of Ordination, by which
the Ordained is enabled to do these Duties he is ordained to. Now that there is
some such Thing he must needs confess, who discourses of the Causation of
these Essentials, which imports an Effect, and certainly this Effect must be
permanent, remain in the Ordained, or else he has nothing in him which should
Authorize and enable him for those duties. Now then, it is in vain for him to
fustian the Reader with the various opinions of the School; whether this Effect
be a Qu^lity or Relation, and such unnecessary Discourse, unless he could show
what it is, if not one of these, since he holds that it is somewhat, and I must
needs say, that the worst of those Writers has done better than he, because
those Authors have expressed something with a guess of reason to it, but he
without reason to the contrary laughs at them all, and yet has said so much as
invincibly proves there is a Character, but not said what. If it were pertinent
to his or my Discourse, I would insist upon it, but although he is Tedious in
such impertinencies, I will not follow him in them, it is enough that there is
a Character, something left in the person of a man, (perhaps that is a righter
phrase, than to say in either Soul, or Understanding, or Will, unless for
subjectum quo.) But something there is left by that Act of Ordination, by which
that man in whom it is left is capable to do those Divine duties, whether this
be delible or not, is not yet material to this Question; we will come therefore
to his second Conclusion, where will be new dispute.

SECT. XI. His Second Conclusion discussed.
HIS Second Conclusion, is Page 52. That Ordination administered according to
the method and mind of Mr. Rutherford; namely, as preceding the Election of the
people, it does not give Essentials to the outward Call of a Minister.

An uncouth kind of phrase does not give Essentials to the outward Call; no, it
does not, for it is the outward Call of a Minister, what is that? a Deacon: he
should have spoken clearly, as his meaning expressed afterward is, and have
said to a Presbyter; but his meaning is in clear Terms, that without the
Election of the people to a Cure of Souls by no Ordination preceding, a
Presbyter does receive his being a Presbyter: And this I oppose: His first
Argument to prove it is taken from Acts 6. where it is said to the multitude,
verse. 3. Look ye out among you seven men, etc. Contrary (says he^ to their
present practice. Ver. 5. And the saying pleased the people, and they chose,
and they set them before the Apostles: His Collection hence is.

If none but those who were first Elected by the people should be ordained, and
all such who were so chosen could not be re^used, then to ordain before Choice
i^ neither to make Application of the Rule, nor Communion of the right in an
orderly manner; (I set down his very words, lest it might be urged upon an
Alter^tion I spoiled his Argument.)

But the first is plain from the place alleged. Then he answers that seeming
Objection, that this is only concerning Deacons. When (says he) the reason is
the same in both, and stronger in Presbyters, because the people have a greater
dependence upon the other, and are engaged to greater subjection to them, and
to provide for their honor in a more especial manner.

This kind of Arguing forces me to a repetition: Conceive therefore that this
Instance being singular and occasional, cannot be fitly called a rule, which
must give others, but only prudentially, when the like Circumstances concur;
2ly. Though the people may have a fitness to choose such an Officer for such
an employment as that was, the relief of the poor; yet not ^it to choose such
as should be their Judges in Spiritual Things, and have Authority over them,
and guide them, and assist their Souls to Eternal Salvation. But here he
inserts an Objection against himself, which he says is ordinarily in the mouth
of the Prelates, and indeed deserves to be likewise in their heart, Tit. 1. 4.
for this Cause have I left thee in Creet, that thou should Ordain Elders in
every City, as I have appointed; there the power of Ordai^ing Elders in Cities
is left to one man, not to the people. He answers; the Apostle did appoint him
to do this work, but to do it according to his mind, and in the Order which
Christ had instituted, and of which he had given him a precedent pattern. (To
skip unnecessary Discourse) Acts 14. 23. When they had Created them Elders in
every Church, or (as the Geneva reads it) when they had ordained Elders in
every Church by election, and prayed and fasted, they commended them to God.

^ First, this Text I have sufficiently examined before, but now must make
Application again in this business, it is urged, for Titus was bid do it, that
is apparent; and no doubt if our Savior had instituted any particular way of
doing it, that would have been employed in St. Paul's Command, it should be done
that way, and none other; but neither he nor any man living can show me any way
prescribed by our Savior; therefore that was in vain. 2dly. For St. Paul's own
practice, it might be various upon diversities of occasions, and therefore if
he had urged that, he would have said, as thou have had me for an Example at
such a Time; but this is not showed for this particular. Take the Geneva
reading, that the ^lders were ordained by Election, yet let us Consider what
election can be meant there, certainly that Election of which I have formerly
d^scoursed, which must precede Ordination, an ^lection of Paul and Bar^abas;
for if we will mark the Story at the beginning of this Chapter, they were both
frighted by the persecution from Iconium, then they fled to ^ystra, in the 19th
verse, you may observe St. Paul stoned at Lystra and Iconium, where they
ordained Elders in every Church, by Election, says the Geneva; suppos^ it. But
can it be imagined that such Concourses of people, which according to these men
should be the Electors of their Elders, durst assemble together in places where
the persecutors were powerful; without an uproar this could not be imagined;
and therefore no other Election can be understood, but that of the Apostles,
that they chose whom they thought hittest, and dismissed them to their
Parishes; and yet I am confident that Geneva reading cannot be enforced out of
the Original, as I shall more largely discourse elsewhere, God willing; and if
that reading were true, yet you see what Election must be understood; for
although if these Apostles Barnabas and Paul had been in quiet places, and
Ordained these men for those quiet places they were in, there might be some
Color; yet since they were in places of hot persecution, and this phrase every
Church, implies all those Adjacent Church; it necessar^ly follows in a Moral
necessity, that this Election was made by the Apostles, and not by those
Churches, who could not there be then assembled in such full Companies as would
become such a Duty; and herein observe a strange license of expounding
Scripture, to abuse a cle^r and evident Text by wresting it with a Gloss
(according as he had done before) to a Dubious Text; yea such an one as cannot
be expounded to their Sense without violent partiality.

But he urges at the latter end of this Argument, That this was the Apostles
mind and meaning in this Charge to Titus, the words of the Text show; for it is
added, that he should redress Things that are amiss: and (says he) must not
this be done by the Officers, and the Church also, according to the rule of
Christ?

I reply, there is no rule of Christ given, which says so, he should have
showed the rule, for that which perhaps may be aimed at; our Saviors rule,
tell the Church, must be understood of the Church Officers, it can have no
other Sense; for the Church totally, for every person cannot ordinarily be
assembled, and totally can never, but the Church quoad hoc, for this purpose in
its Officers, and no other way; and therefore the rule was given to him, and
him only, to redress such Things as were amiss.

SECT. XII. His Second Argument answered.
HIS Second Argument in the bottom of Page 52. is thus framed: It is not the
scope of Ordination, by God appointed, to give the Essentials of an Officers
call; therefore from thence it is not to be expected in an Orderly way. He
supposes the Consequence undeniable, and therefore undertakes only the proof
of the antecedent, for which he Ciphers out that place, 1 Timothy 4. 14. Neglect
not the Gift which is in thee, which was given thee by prophesy, with the
laying on of the hands of the Presbytery, out of this he would prove his
Conclusion; he therefore in the fear of God (as he speaks) addresseth himself
to the Consideration of three things.

What the gift is here said to be in Timothy?

2ly. How it was given by Prophesy?

3ly. What the laying on of the hands of the Elders was, and why used? In the
search of which he spends many pages, page 54. he begins, and ends page 59. I
will draw the sum of what he says; For the first (...), rendered Gift, he
after Discourse of diverse acceptations, conceives page 55. That those
spiritual Graces and abilities with which Timothy was enabled to do his great
work of his supposed Evangelizing are meant; but before I go further, here he
Contradicts himself; in the beginning of page 26. where he produces this and
this only place to prove that Ordination is the work of the whole Presbytery;
but here he distinguishes the Abilities from the Office, as Contradistinct
Expositions.

For the 2d. Term, what was meant by (given by Prophesy) he first discourses
impertinently of the Office of an Evangelist, to show it was extraordinary; yet
sometimes given by means, neither of, which has any foundation in Scripture:
That he says, Philip was made an Evangelist immediately, without the mediation
of man, has no one word of Scripture for it, but only Acts 8. where he is
called an Evangelist, but not described which way Authorized, either
immediately or mediately. For the 2d. That one should be made an Evangelist by
the Ordination of men, he produces this Text, where there is no word of
Scripture nor Exposition of any Antiquity, which says, That he was by this
Ordination made an Evangelist, but Antiquity, Theophylact, and abundance* say
Bishop. Again, he confesses it, against his own Exposition of this word Gift,
which before was only Ability, but now must be both Ability and Office: so hard
a thing is it for Error to be constant, and to raise a strong building upon a
tottering foundation. Then he proceeds, which is most pertinent to his intent,
to show what is meant by Prophesy; and concludes, page 57. that Prophesy is
taken here for a dictate of the Spirit to the Apostle to ordain Timothy. I will
not oppose this, as not prejudicial to this cause. Then he comes to his 3d.
Term, Eldership or Presbytery, which he says, notes not the Office, but
Officers; I will yield it, although unconstrained to it: Then he says, that
this Imposition of hands added not to the Constitution of Timothy his Office,
gave not essentials thereunto, but only a solemn Approbation: I will yield it,
but not his reasons; that which was (says he) beyond the power of the
Presbytery, that they could not communicate; but to give the Essentials to
Timothies place was beyond the power and place of the Presbytery: where can he
read that? He proves it, because his Office was extraordinary, and theirs
Ordinary: by this Office extraordinary he intends an Evangelist, I suppose,
which he cannot prove to be an Extraordinary Office. Much inconstancy is in
this Discourse, just now he brought this Instance, to prove that an Evangelist
might be called by the mediation of Men, now he is above their reach; and then
his second reason confounds this; For, he says, he has proved, that an Office
was not meant by this, but by Gift was meant an Ability to do it. A strange
uncouth way of Argument. He concludes, page 58. the outward gifting and fitting
an Officer to his place, especially extraordinary, as beyond the power and
place of a Presbytery. But the first is here.

This is most fearful incongruous stuff to abuse Readers with; Who can but
guess by his unusual language there is something in it, but he cannot tell
what. Who can tell what that is which he calls the outward gifting and sitting
an Officer for his Call? I thought this Gift here spoken of had been an Inward
(as he calls it elsewhere a gracious endowment of the soul) which enabled him
to serve God in his Bishopric, which Gift was bestowed upon him, as St. Paul
describes, not an outward thing, nor can any man imagine what that outward
thing should be. Then he draws this Conclusion, that the sense of the place is,
Despise not those gracious Qualifications which God by his Spirit in the
Extraordinary way of Prophesy has furnished, and betrusted thee withal, the
laying on of the hands of the Eldership by way of Consent and approbation
concurring therewith, to thy farther Encouragement and Confirmation in this
work.

Now suppose all this were true, will this prove, that the scope of Ordination
by Gods appointment, is not to give the Essentials of an Officers Call, which
was his antecede^t to be Confirmed from this Text, there is no manner of
Coherence betwixt these two Propositions; suppose this were not an Ordination
of Timothy to an Office, yet does this prove that the word of St. Paul, 2 Timothy
1. 6. By the laying on of my hands, mark the phrase (...), as I before
observed, and indeed he now observes out of Didoclavius; (although I wonder
what use they can make of it against us, though perhaps it may be of force
against Mr. Rutherfords Presbyterian Ordination.) I say, all this does not
prove, that Timothy was not ordained by St. Paul's laying on of his hands; or if
it did, does it prove that Timothy was not ordained at all, because we do not
read of it? Or, that he could not ordain without a Prae-election of some
Congregation to a Cure, when he is Commanded, 1 Timothy 5. 22. not to lay hands
suddenly on any? These things are all silently passed over, and the inference
from the Tedious vaunting Discourse can be nothing to this purpose: whosoever
will read it ^t large, with these notes, must needs loath it as unreasonable.

His Inferences page 59. are without all relation to the former Discourse;
Hence it is plain (says he) that Ordination therefore prae-supposeth an
Officer Constituted, does not Constitute. The rest are like this, in which
there is no manner of Dependence betwixt the Antecedent and the Consequent: So
that I cannot imagine, that a man of so fine words could have so little reason,
but that these things were fragments found in his Study, and crowded into this
place.

SECT. XIII. His Third Argument answered.
HIS third Argument, is, That action which is Common to persons and
performances, or employments, and applied to them, when there is no Office at
all given; that Action cannot properly be called a Specificating Act to make an
Officer, or give him a Call.

But the Act of Imposition of hand^ is applied to persons and performances as
special Occasion is offered, when there is no Office given, nor intended;
therefore it is not an Act which gives in the Essentials to an Officer.

Consider, in this Argument, how it never enforces the Conclusion which he is
to prove. His Conclusion is this, Ordination, a^ preceding the Election of the
people, does not give Essentials to the Call of a Minister.

Now instead of Ordination he brings in only an outward Ceremony, which is
Imposition of hands; as if a man disputing of the efficacy of the Lords Supper,
should say, other men may take bread and bre^k it which do not Communicate; for
such, and such only is the force of his Argument, Imposition of hand^ is used
in such Acts where Orders are not given; therefore the Essentials are not given
by the Imposition of hands. To understand this therefore, Conceive, That
Imposition of hands may be and has been used in Apostolical Times, for other
purposes than this, for Confirmation; and in that instance he gives, Acts 13.
1, 2, 3. It was a Confirm^tion of that Mission of Paul and Barnabas. Now
although Imposition of hands be sometimes taken for that most holy Rite which
we call Confirmation, as Acts 8. 17. and sometimes for this holy Mystery of
giving O^ders, as we have had it often repeated in this Discourse, or some
expression of a designment to a particular Duty, as in this place Acts 13. yet
we find the Adjacent Cirumstances easily ^ixing a Man's understanding upon which
particular he should look, and breaking of bread is an Action common to diverse
Occasions, yet is sometimes used in Scripture for the Communion: so likewise
Imposition of hands, which is used in other duties, is sometimes particularly
proposed to signify Ordination, although it be used in other Religious Duties,
and be but a Ceremony of this* yet it is a Ceremony used by the Apostles, and
pointed out by St. Paul, Lay not hands negligently on any man, to Timothy as
before; and therefore Argues a Spirit of Opposition in the Church of Scotland,
which, as Hooker says, reject this Ceremony, and use it not in Ordination:
Well, there is no force in this Argument to prove his Conclusion, but only that
Imposition of hands is a Ceremony Common to other Duties, which I grant, and
pass to his next.

SECT. XIV. His Fourth Argument answered.
HIS Fourth Argument is; If Ordi^ation give the Essentials to an Officer before
Election, there may be a Pastor without people; an Officer sine Titulo, as they
use to speak, and a Pastor should be made a Pastor at large; the rest is
nothing but an Application to Mr. Rutherford's Simile of a Ring, which concerns
not us: But this Argument of his invites me to speak of a pastoral Ordination,
which will perhaps give farther Illustration to the whole body of this
Discourse: A Pastor and a ^lock are relatives, and do mutually se ponere and
tollere; where one is, the other must be; where one is not, the other cannot
be. Now then, to be made a Pastor, will require to have a flock; this shall be
presupposed: and again, every Pastor has not all Pastoral Offices. I can well
suppose a mighty great flock which requires many Shepherds, but one Chief above
the rest, he has all Pastoral offices; folds, feeds, drives to field,
prescribes p^stures, medicines, and does all this by the Supreme Pastoral power
that is granted him, either by his own hands, or by the ministry of those
Inferiors which are under him; but they have partial Authorities, only to feed
or ^old, or catch or drive, as their several shares are d^signed; the second
part of the Division of the Pastoral Charge, these men must grant, who divide
their Governors into several Offices, Pastors, Teachers, Rulers, which have
their several Duties assigned them, and it is most unreasonable for them to
deny the first, That one should have Superiority over the rest, since as reason
would direct, without some body to overlook and attend them, they would easily
entrench upon one another duties, or neglecting their own, invite those others
to put their hands to their work; and what this reason directs, that I think I
have showed the Scripture likewise Crowns with its approbation: Now the first
sort of Pastors are those we term Bishops, the second Presbyters; the flock
they are to feed is the Church of Christ, when they are admitted Pastors, and
so ordained according to their several Duties; That which Hooker page 61.
brings out of one Mr. Best, as if St. Austin or some General Council had
d^creed it, is absolutely to be denied, namely, that an Apostle differs from
a Pastor, that the Apostle is a Pastor throughout the whole Christian World;
but the Pastor is tied to a certain Congregation, out of which he is not to
exercise Pastoral Acts.

This I deny, if he affirm it by Divine Right; but if by Ecclesiastical
Authority only, which has designed particular Bishops and Presbyters to
particular places, I shall yield much of it.

For the first part, concerning the Apostles, know, that their Commission was
universal, as it is set down, Mat. 28. 19. Go teach all Nations, etc. and John
20 As my Father sent me, etc. and we must conceive this to be divisim, not
conjunctim only, every one had all this power, not all only; nor as Bellarmine
would have, Lib. 2. De Romano Pontifice, Cap. 12. St. Peter only and the rest
from him, for we see the Commission granted to all; but yet we must know, that
their Authority was habitu or potentia only, in every one, it was not act^ in
any, they might Episcopize, Apostolize in any place of the World: They did
Episcopize, Apostolize only where they were r^sident; Just as I have Conceived,
if Adam had lived in his Integrity, every man had had an habitu^l and potential
royalty over all the Creatures in the world, yet he would have exercised that
Royalty only where he lived, yet he might have Traveled any where, and have
justly enjoyed any part of the World, although actually he could possess but
his Share; Now this was the Jurisdiction of every Apostle in all the whole
Catholic Church, habitually, not actually, as the Church of Rome would have
their Apostolical Man as they call him, the Pope, and all this was necessary
for them as Apostles, which is, men sent for the propagation of the Gospel, to
the planting and confirming of Churches, other powers they had of Languages, of
Miracles, which were necessary to the first plantation, but no longer; and
therefore they were not peculiar to them, but others had them besides, as
likewise that mighty power of being Inspired to write Scripture, which did not
appear in all of them; and some others besides them had that power, as St. Luke
and Mark; and some think St. James to be the Bishop of Jerusalem who writ that
Epistle.

But now of those which were the Apostles, it is evident that these Gifts were
not Apostolical, as belonging so to them as Apostles, and it will appear in the
other Cause, That the Bishops succeeded them in every thing that was
Apostolical, although not in these extraordinary Endowments, for the
Apostolical power of planting, settling Churches, of propagating the Gospel
throughout the whole World, and enlarging the Kingdom of Christ, must remain
for ever, and therefore, though the manner of doing it by such Signs and
Wonders be not communicated, yet the Office must; and therefore he who is a
Bishop or Presbyter by divine right, is such throughout the whole Word; to this
purpose you may observe in that famous place of Acts 20. 28. so much and so
often canvased by them who handle these Controversies in other points, but not
thought on in this, you may observe, that St. Paul speaking to diverse
Presbyters or Bishops, (which you will) he says, Take heed therefore to your
selves, and to all the flock over which the Holy Ghost has made you Overseers
or Bishops, to feed the Church of God which he purchased with his own blood.
Observe here that he spoke to many, and diverse Bishops or Presbyters, (I stand
not upon that now) he sp^ke to them in the plural Number; but when he speaks of
the flock they were to pastorize over, he puts it in the singular Number; now
if the Holy Gho^ had made them Bishops of particular Congregations only, it
must have been the flock, every one his several; but being all made Pastors of
the Catholic Church, he names it one flock; and so likewise to feed or
Sheperdiz^ over, not the Churches but the Church of Christ, which indeed were
no way congruous, if the Holy Ghost had made them Officers of particular
Churches, and confined them there, but making them Officers of the Universal
Church which Christ had purchased with his blood, and all Officers of that, it
is rightly put in the singular number flock, and Church. This likewise the Holy
Ghost intimates, every where describing the Church to us by the name of a
^ield, a Vineyard, a City, and multitudes of such Expressions, which as much as
this of a flock intimate the unity of that Body, which is his Church, his
^lock, over which these are Pastors in their several ways, not only their
little Congregations. Now the wisdom of the Church, finding that although the
potential and habitual power is universal, yet the actual cannot be exercised
further than where they have some manner of residence, has therefore
restrained the execution of it in other places than where they have that
residence, both to avoid Confusion, which otherwise must necessarily arise out
of the Intermedling in other men's precincts, and likewise because the main
scope of their endeavors may be applied to that place in a near Obligation,
every one being for the most part worthy of the Incumbents utmost labor. And
this they did by the Apostles own example, who appointed Timothy, Titus,
Epaphroditus, their several Diocese; yet we must further Concei^e, that this
Alotment of the Church is not such as does lay any restraint upon the power
given by the Spiris, but directs it only; for although a Particular man may
offend by intruding into another man's Pastoral precincts, and Officiating
there, yet factum valet: so that if a Bishop give Orders in another man's
Diocese, as was the famous Case of Epiphanius Bishop of Cyprus, in St.
Chrysostoms Diccesse at Constantinople, or a Presbyter Administer the Communion
in another Parish, which is the common practice; these things although done
without leave from the peculiar Pastor, are valid to the receivers, although
punishable in the Actors: Yea, yet once again, although a man be placed in a
Pastoral Charge, and shall either find upon his own certain experience, or the
Judgment of his Superiors, that he can advance the Glory of God, or improve
his own Commission by removing to another place, either for a time, as Timothy
and Titus, and the rest beneficed in particular places, were yet upon urgencies
of the public good called aside from the more particular Charge to the more
public, where they were employed; or else, if their whole residence may more
advance the general Good of the whole Flock, over which they are made
Overseers, they ought to remove totally to that great Occasion: So when a man
of great Abilities shall be beneficed in a private Corner, where perhaps less
Abilities would as well, if not better agree, it becomes him to be removed to a
place better befitting his Qualifications, or a man endowed with the strength
of rational Divinity, such a man to be sent to the propagating the Gospel in
the Indies among the Heathen, and he ought to endeavor to put himself into
such an employment; because he is a Pastor of the whole flock for which Christ
dyed: So that now I think it appears manifestly, that an Apostle and another
Pastor differ not in this, that one was an Universal Pastor, and the other a
Particular; but contrariwise they are both habitually, or Potentia, Pastors of
the whole Word, actually pastorizing in some particular only. This caused all
those admonitions from one Bishop to another, of which the Fathers are full;
This made sometimes Contentions; because it was the Duty of every man that was
a Pastor to take care of the whole flock he is Pastor over; and therefore to
endeavor their good: So that here you see his Argument fully answered by a
flat denial of his Minor, he is not a Pastor without a Flock, nor an Officer
sine Titulo, he has Title to the whole Catholic Church, he is Pastor at
large; He has a long Dispute with Mr. Rutherford about Preaching and
Administering the Communion out of his own Congregation, and the Communication
of Sister Churches, which touch me not; yet I will give the Reader a Note, that
whereas before he made Preaching almost the whole Act of a Presbyter, he now
seems to make it no proper duty of a Pastor, page 63, 64. But I let these
things pass as not pertinent, and apply my self to his fifth and last
Argument, page 67. which is.

SECT. XV. His Fifth Argument answered.
IF Ordination gives Essentials to a Pastor before Election, then by that alone
he has Pastoral power. Against which he disputes thus, He that has Complete
power of an Office, and stands an Officer without Exception, he cannot be
hindered Justly from doing all Acts of that Office; but this is the Condition of
a Pastor. Ordained without the Election of the people, he may according to rule
be justly hindered from Executing any Act of a Pastor. I could quarrel, were I
pinched with this Argument, with almost every word; as first, the changing of
the Terms of that Proposition he was to prove. In the Proposition he was to
prove the Terms were, give the Essentials of a Pastor, now they are, a Complete
power and an Officer without Exception. Many things are essentially right which
lack Completion, and are not without Exception: Then again, where it was in his
first Proposition, A Pastor before Election; here is added in his second,
Election of the people. But I insist upon this, upon which the Ground of his
Argument is founded, That an Ordained Officer may according to rule be hindered
from executing any part of his Office, as he enforces: Suppose all
Congregations full. To which I answer, Ordination does not give the Act, but
the Jus, or right to execute, and a man may have the Essentials when these do
not work: Mark, Mr. Hooker was a Pastor when asleep, and had the Essentials of
it, but not the Operation: Essentials do work their proper work, omnibus
positis ad agendum requisitis: The fire it self, although it have the
Essentials of sire, cannot burn things too remote, or such Things which are not
combustible; the reason is, that those things which are requisite to burning,
as fit distance, disposure of the matter, are not rightly disposed; I may say
the same of the Eye; Place the Object too near, too far, in the dark, it cannot
see; the requisites to sight are not sittingly disposed, although the Eye have
all the Essentials belonging to sight: So I may ^ay of a man Ordained, If there
be not a place, not any piece of the flock of Christ which has need of him, or
having need he knows not of their need, or knowing their need, cannot by
distance, or some such moral Impediment come to supply then need, the
Circumstances required to his Operations are so taken away that he cannot do
the Duties in Act which he has power to do. St. Paul himself could not
officiate any where where others of Authority were laboring, yet he had
Authority and was ordained by God; but says he, if all places are full, he may
according to rule, be hindered from executing any part of Pastoral Office, I
would fain know by what rule the Apostles were Authorized by Christ to preach
to all Nations, and so are all Pastors by Ordination, they have Authority over
the world, but are restrained by Ecclesiastical Law founded upon the Law of
Nature, which forbids any thing to go into a full place, which with another Law
says, Deus and Natura nihil faciunt frustra. And again, non sunt
multiplicandae Entia sine necessitate: so that when one looks to this part,
then the other should not intermeddle without the first give way to him, yet he
has the power and can do the work of a Pastor, when any place is empty, and he
invited to it; But yet Consider, with me, he does not only build who lays on
the bricks, and mortar, or timber, but he who brings these Materials, and helps
to make the mortar; yea chiefly he who steers the work, and directs this or
that way: So is it in building this House, this City of God, his Church. The
Builders may study to provide Materials for it, and improve their Abilities by
Study in the Universities, and if they are not called thence may live there,
and write such Things as may direct the Workers in this Building, and by that
rather build than they; however they have such a power as may be reduced into
Act, when all Circumstances are fit, which is enough to give the ^ssentials to
an Officer.

And thus you see an Answer to his Arguments out of this Discourse, Conceive it
applied to that Proposition, He that has Complete power of an Office and
stands an Officer without Exception cannot justly be hindered from doing all
parts of his Office.

This should have been, who has the Essentials of an Officer, as I said
before; but let it run as it does, I deny it slatly in these Terms, Ab Actu ad
potentiam non valet Argumentum negative, he can be hindered from working,
therefore he has not the power, does not follow; when a man sleeps he is
hindered, and that justly, from working, yet is a Pastor; it is true, in nature;
it is true in Moralty, that which has essentially the power of working may be
hindered in nature, you may put the light out of your Chamber, which essentially
has power to enlighten it. In morality, he who has the virtue of Valor in a
gallant and high portion, I speak of Active valor, of Military valor, as
suppose our Savior himself, of whom this Question is disputed in the School,
he had all virtues in the highest degree, and yet for lack of Opportunity to
use this virtue, did never produce an Act of this virtue. In policy the same,
We have in England many Barresters, learned men in the Law, yea perhaps as
learned as any Pleaders, who by their degree of Barresters have power to plead
in any Cause at any Bar, yet because not entertained by Clients, do not plead,
yea cannot plead, are justly hindered from pleading; the same footsteps of that
Axiom are evident in all Practique businesses: so that that Consequence, he may
be hindered from working, therefore he has not the power to work, is very weak,
when the hindrance is without; but if it be within that omnibus positis ad
agendum requisitis in outward Accommodations. If then he cannot do his pastoral
Duties, then it is an Argument he is no Pastor; but his Case is otherwise; I
say again, he who is a Bishop or Presbyter may officiate to the flock of Christ
any where throughout the World, when places are void, and opportunities given,
otherwise not.

Thus you see I have enlarged my self upon this Conclusion, which being little
spoke of by others, required more discourse, and I hope not impertinent.

He says now, that he has finished the negative part of his Discourse: What
it is does not give the Essentials of the Call of a Pastor; and I think I have
showed he has prevailed little in this, because he builds upon that false
foundation, That a Pastor must have a particular flock. Then he comes to the
positive and affirmative part, to show what does give the Essentials, page 66.
which I find is false printed, and should be page 67. as the former 6^.

SECT. XVI. His Conclusion, that the Pastor rightly ordered by the rule of
Christ, gives the Essentials to Ordination, discussed.
HIS Conclusion is, Election of the people rightly ordered by the rule of
Christ, gives the Essentials to an Officer, or leaves the Impression of a true
outward Call, and so an Office, power upon a Pastor.

This is the Proposition he undertakes to prove; and here I expected an
explication of his Terms, especially of that, what he means by leaves an
Impression; for since he before had despised the Schools for treating of an
Indelible Character, not only for making it indelible, but for making it a
Character, and contemned both its being quality or relation; I did justly
expect he should expound what he means by this Impression of an outoutward
Call, left in the receiver; but not a word. It must certainly be one of those,
either quality or relation; for it cannot he substance, or quantity, and
nothing else can pretend. But again, I expected he should have showed, what was
that rule of Christ he spoke of, which should order the Election of the people,
for without we know that, we dispute at random; for that must be our sole
guide; and indeed, at the first blush, when Christ is called and his rules to
countenance any Cause, it will stagger any heedlesse Reader; but be not
troubled with it, Christ never gave rule to the people to do any such Thing, If
he had, this man would have showed it; but the Truth is, he did not, all the
Rules he gave were by his Apostles, as before expressed, and therefore Christ
cannot Countenance that Cause with which he had not the least business to do:
and therefore although the Laws of Disputations would have required this at
his hands, yet he wisely avoids them, and from his Conclusion leaps into proofs
of it; the first of which is.

SECT. XVII
His First Argument answered.
ONE Relate gives being and the Essential Constituting Cause to the other.

But P^stors and People, Shepherd and Flocks are Relates. He introduces not
his Conclusion, nor is it possible for him, out of these premises; for the
natural result out of these Propositions can be only, That therefore Pastor and
People give the Essentials one to another, in which is not one full Term of his
Conclusion. But I will examine his Major, One Relate gives being, etc.
Relationis esse est ad aliud, non ab alio; and therefore relation, the whole
Predicament is termed by the Translators of Aristotle, Ad aliquid, not ab
aliquo, the whole being is a relation to another, not from another: it is true
they cannot exist severed, without either is neither is in a Relative Notion;
yet so we may say an Accident, it cannot be without its substance, yet that
Accident does not give the Essentials to the substance. So here you see were
high amazing words to amuse the Reader with, but no force to his purpose: It
may happen indeed, That one relate may Cause the other, for Cause and Effect
are Relates; the Father causes the Son, but the Son does not give Essential
being to a Father, no not as a Father, but that Act which made him a Father did
it. I write this to let a Reader see, that when Propositions are delivered even
by such a one as Mr. Hooker, who may have Authority with the Reader, and it may
be thought will deliver nothing as an Axiom, which is not such, yet men are as
partial to their Opinions as their Children, and will expound every Thing that
comes in their way to the Advantage of them, yea, it will seem so to them; and
therefore even these Propositions are not to be swallowed without Examination.
But yet suppose this were granted, that one Relate (as he phrases it) did give
the Essentials to another, would this prove, That the Election of the people by
the rule of Christ did it? Certainly no: for the Pastor and people are the two
relates, not the Pastor and Election of the people; People, and the Election of
the people are two Things; This latter an Act of the former. He says Mr
Rutherford seems to be much moved with this Argument; I have not seen his
books, but by that I have heard of him; it would be strange he should; but I
leave them together, and see what he urges for Confirmation of this Argument
which may concern my business; Page 68. He says, the Proposition is supported
by the Fundamental Principles of Reason, so that he must raze out the received
rules of Logic that must reject it; High language! But why so, I ask? He
answers immediately, Relata sunt quorum unum constat mutua alterius Affectione;
This is nonsense; for should I ask, if Vnum, which of the two? he could not
answer, the reason is, because as relates there is the same reason of one as of
the other; But I think he means utrumque; but Consider then, what is this to
his purpose? Suppose they did Consist in a mutual Affection one of another,
could one properly be said to give the Essentials to the other? The Father
indeed gives the Essentials to his Son, and Father and Son do mutually as
Father and Son depend upon a reciprocal Affection, as he calls it, one upon the
other, but the Son cannot be said properly to give the Essentials to the
Father, no not as Father, because all he has he has from his Father; as
Suppose again a Master and Servant are relates, neither of these give the
Essentials one to another; But properly that Covenant which engaged them in
their mutual Duties, that Covenant gave them the Essentials of that relation,
not one another; and therefore this Discourse, though he think it very Evident,
yet begets no Acceptance in me, although declared with the name of a
fundamental principle: That which he deduceth, that relata are simul natura is
most true, but not deduced, yea it is against that principle he deduceth it
from, for that which Constitutes another being is prius natura to that which
is Constituted, but these are simul, and therefore cannot give Essentials one
to another. His Assumption, that Pastor and Flock are relates, no man (says
he) that has sip'd in Logic, can deny; I grant it: Then (says he) the
Conclusion follows, but he sets not down what; I am sure his does not, That
this Election gives the Essentials to an Officer,

In the Conclusion he says, Hence again it follows, that Ordination, which
comes after, (he means Election,) is not for the Constitution of the Officer,
but the Approbation of him so Constituted in his Office, for relata are unum
uni, says the rule; there is no Connection in this neither; and for unum uni,
that must be understood in that particular relation, a Father may have many
sons, and so One to Many, but there are distinct paternities, and the
Logicians say, that although absolute Accidents Numero tantum distincta, cannot
exist in the same Subject at the same Time, yet relative may. So one flock may
have many pastors, the Catholic Church a Thousand visible ones, invisible only
Christ. The Church of Rome would desire no more, but that you grant, one ^lock
must have but one Pastor; they will quickly prove the Catholic Church one
Flock, and then will follow, the Pope to be the Universal Pastor; for none else
pretends to it; but indeed they themselves grant many Pastors to the same
slock, for their Teachers are Pastors, and their Lay Elders have Pastoral
Authority of Governing. But now punctually after a long Discourse: A Paster and
Flock are relates, there may be many Pastors to one Flock; where the Flock is
great there must be; the Flock of Christ is the Universal Church, in which he
has placed many Pastors, and there is no Christian man who is a Member of
Christ's Flock, wheresoever he is, in the World, and finds any Pastor, but he
may receive and require the Duty of a Pastor from him, and he ought to give it
him. Again, there is no Pastor wheresoever he is in the world, if he find any
of his Masters Flock in any place who have need of him, but he ought, out of
duty, if he can to supply his lack. And thus are the mutual bond^ and relations
betwixt Christ's Pastors and his Flock supplied; as soon as he is made a Pastor,
the Church of Christ is his Flock; and which way he can advance the good of it,
he ought, and i^ bound in Duty to do it.

His Second Argument answered.
AND so I pass to his Second Argument, which is this; It is lawful for a
people to reject a Pastor upon Just Causes, (if he prove pertinaciously
scandalous in his Life, or haeretical in his doctrine) and put him out of his
Office; Ergo, it is in their power to call him outwardly, and to put him into
his Office.

The Consequence is plain from the Staple rule, Ejusdem est Instituere (he
would say I think) and destruere.

The Antecedent is as certain by Gods word, Beware of Wolves, Mat. 7. 15.
Beware of false Prophets, Phil. ^. 2.

Now because he begins with his Consequence, I will so likewise; and that which
he so highly commends for a Staple Rule, I will examin^, and from henceforth
receive this rule: That great words with him are forced to be the Cloaks of
least performances; I do not believe he read that Staple rule in any Logic
Author; and am very Confident it is absolutely false in all Sciences. In nature
it is most evident, that water which destroys fire cannot make it. If he
answer, that in general the power of Nature which by Water does destroy fire,
by another hand of power does make. I will apply this to our particular, and
say, that in general men destroy it; therefore men give it, by the same way as
Nature by water destroys fire, and by fire makes it. If we look into Policy,
we shall find that sometimes when Kings have settled power, the people have
plucked them down; Those whom the people have Instituted, Kings have destroyed;
but perchance he may say, that lawfully out of right the same power can
destroy, that did institute; perhaps there may be Legality in some of these
Instances, but see a Clearer: A Tithing man is elected by his parish (like as
he would have Pastors) afterward he is sworn by the Steward of the Court (like
his Ordination) or perhaps by some Justice of Peace; The Parish for his
misdemeanors cannot pu^ him out, but the Justices who cannot choose him, may.
A Barrester who received his Degree at the Innes of Court, is degraded by the
Judges, who cannot make him a Barrester. I think I speak Law; if I do not, I am
sure this may be Law without any prejudice to the policy of this Nation, and
then I am sure this rule is false; and indeed besides Instances, there is
reason that that which gives life should preserve, not destroy, and that men
should look for other hands to pluck down, besides those that set up; but as it
is not universally true, so it is not universally false; and I think will not
be false in this instance he speaks of, and therefore I will apply my self to
his Antecedent, concerning which, he says, it is as certain as the other by
warrant from the Word, and no more certain: His places out of Scripture are,
Beware of Wolves, Mat. 7. 15. Beware of false Prophets, Phil. 3. 2. Here I
expected to have found these two Texts in these two places; but it is not so:
both in the same manner are in the first, and something like that he says in
the other. The words of the first are, Beware of false Prophets which come to
you in sheeps clothing, but inwardly they are ravening Wolves. A man may
wonder how he could deduce hence that Conclusion, That it is lawful for a
people to reject, or put a Pastor out of his Office; Consider the words,
Suppose it had been said, Beware of a wicked Judge when your Cause is to be
heard, or beware of false Lawyers which will come to you in sheeps clothing
with fair and excellent Language, but within are ravening Wolves, will secretly
destroy you; would any man think, that here were Commission granted to put
either out of their Office? It is Just so here, beware of false Prophets, such
as pretend they are Prophets, but are not, or false Prophets, such as prophecy
f^lse Things, nor can there be more meant in this, than that we should not be
deceived by them; for though they come in sheeps clothing, speak never so fair
words, commend their Doctrine never so much, it will destroy you, there can be
no more in it; This Speech is spoke, no doubt, to all and every person in
singular, yet I hope Mr. Hooker does not think that although every man must
beware he is not deceived by them, yet that every man, every p^rticular Man can
depose his Pastor.

The same reasons which have disproved the force of this Allegation, will
likewise* overthrow the Strength of the second against this Cause. The 2d. Text
is, Phil. 3. 2. Beware of Dogs, beware of evil Doers, beware of the Concision:
Suppose all or some of these were Pastors, which can in no strength of reason
be induced, yet what can this word beware enforce? Can it imply depose? there
was never such an Exposition, but only take heed of them, that ye be not
deceived by them; so that there is not the least thing in the Word of God to
prove that the people may depose their Pastor, and yet all his discourse which
follows in page 65. is as if this were most true, sublato uno relatorum
tollitur alterum; but where is either relatum taken away, or by whom? Again,
(says he) this rejection cuts him off from being a Member of that Congregation
where he was, and so from every visible Congregation, and therefore cuts him
off from having any visible Church Communion with Christ, etc. Consider how he
builds upon a foundation in the Air, has no reality; nor indeed were his
foundation good, are his Consequences, and see what an unhappy Condition such a
Pastor were in, s^th it is evident these Texts of Cautions are directed to
every particular man, and then the malice of one particular man may destroy a
Pastors Interest in heaven, because he can put him from Church Communion with
Christ: but suppose these Texts were understood of whole Congregations, yet
sometimes they are very few: or, if an hundred, it is hard that the Opinion and
Error for the most part of Ignorant men, though an hundred, should shut a man
out of the pale of Church Communion; these things fall of themselves; beware,
therefore depose, is not, cannot be admitted amongst reasonable men; yea the
clean contrary might rather be urgent; Beware, therefore they cannot depose,
for what a man can depose, he need not much Caution about it, the work is
quickly done. But here if any should ask, What, must the people submit to any
Pastor, though heretical, though scandalous in his life? If not, what can they
do? Certainly, to the first; there are some things which Heresy or wickedness
of life do not hinder, that is, administering the Seals of Gods Covenants in the
holy Sacraments. To this purpose he himself speaks, as I think, I forewarned,
in the latter end of page 45. and the beginning of page 46. in higher and
fuller Expressions than I make, but I need not set down; only Consider this,
that such Heresies as deny the Trinity, because they will not nor can baptize
in the form prescribed by our Savior, that is, the Name of the Father, the
Son, and the Holy Ghost, their baptism is not valid, and by their Ministry,
erring in the root, cannot effectually apply those Seals; but for other
mistakes in opinion, not fundamental, nor such as immediately reflect upon that
Seal they administer; so they set the Seal rightly to, according to matter and
form, their Act is good; and a man, a Layman may submit unto them, but take
care not to be misled either by his false Doctrine or wicked life, of which he
is not to take upon him, like a Judge, to censure his person, but like a
Cautelous hearer to avoid what is ill, and suck out what is good; The sheep do
not refuse the good hay, though they swallow not the worse, which the Shepherd
delivers; they may complain to them who have Authority, the Bishops, who are to
receive the Complaints made against Elders, and so have him soberly Convented
and adjudged, but without this course they have no power to depose him; and
this I think they ought to do, and more than this they have no power granted
them to do.

His Third Argument answered.
I Come now to his 3d. Argument, into which he enters slowly himself, with a
long Discourse, the heads of which being examined, will remove the difficulty;
page 69. he says, this Argument is taken from the manner of the Communication
and Conveyance of this power, To express this, He bids you know that
Conveyance of power is done two ways, either by Authoritative Commission or
Delegation from Office, or Office, power, or voluntary Subjection. The first
is, when a particular person or body and Corporation, delegates a power to
another, of themselves and from themselves alone, leave an Impression of
Authority upon another. Here he has a mighty tedious Discourse of the Way of
Communicating this power of many little Inferences and Consequences, which he
draws from his Imagination of no such power left to men, which, lest I should
vex the Reader, I omit, and direct him to page 70, 71, 72. for the foundation
being destroyed, the Invective and Scorning of his ^nemies, (as many have done
with an imagination only or rumor of Victory, when there was no such thing)
will fall of its self.

There is a power left by Christ to men, by which they communicate powers to
others.
FIrst then, I shall show that there is such an Office, power amongst men,
whereby they can Convey an Office, power Authoritativ^ to others. This may
appear out of our Saviors Commission, As my Father sent me, etc. John 20. and
the like. Now then, if our Savior was sent to appoint Officers, then so were
they, I will be with you to the end of the World, that cannot be understood of
their persons, it must be of their Succession, and that Succession they
communicated by the former Authority; So Acts 13. they sent Ba^nabas and Saul;
so 14. 21. They ordained Elders in every Church; so Titus was by St. Paul left
in Crete, Timothy received from Imposition of his hands his power; so in
succession Timothy and Titus are directed to lay on hands themselves upon
others, which is by all understood of Ordination: So then there is evident a
delegate power given by men of Authority, by which others are Authorized to
operate in this Divine Administration, I need say no more to this, but enter
his Second Conclusion, which he is briefer in, but is indeed the foundation of
this other. This you may find page 72. thus. Secondly, There is a Communicating
power by voluntary Subjection, when though there be no Office, power formaliter
in the people, yet they willingly yielding themselves to be ruled by another,
desiring and calling him to take that rule, he accepting of what they yield
possessing that right which they put upon him by free Consent; I put down his
very words which are not sense, making no Complete Proposition, but it may be
the fault of the Printer, and therefore read it possesses that right, etc.
(for possessing.) The reason (says he) is, those in whose Choice it is,
whether any shall rule over them or no, from their voluntary subjection it is,
That the party Chosen has right, and stands possessed of rule and Authority
over them.

This Argument is mighty Lame, for the Minor which is not set down, if
produced, would be, that the Case stands thus with Christians; That it is in
their Choice whether any shall rule over them or no, which is absolutely false,
taking Christians for such men who have given themselves and their names to
Christ in baptism, and supposing that they intend to be saved by persevering
according to that Covenant, for without doubt such must submit to this
Government; and indeed I wondered how any man had Confidence to obtrude such a
Conclusion concerning so high and material points, without pretense of reason
or Scripture, as he does in this place; but I remember how heretofore I had
read something to this purpose, in his First Part, and it seems he supposes
this granted out of his former Grounds, although he might have done well to
have eased the Reader with a reference to it; but I have hunted it out, and God
willing will pursue the Chase wheresoever.

CHAP. IX. SECT. I. Mutual Covenanting of the Saints gives not being to a
Visible Church.
IN his first part therefore of this Book, page 46. he discourses of the
formal Cause of a visible Church, and he puts this Conclusion; Mutual
Covenanting and Confederating of the Saints in the fellowship of the faith
according to the Order of the Gospel, is that which gives Constitution and
being to a Visible Church. This Term Consederating of the Saints is indefinite,
and seems therefore that he should mean all the Saints should Confederate,
which is impossible in any of their Congregations; if he had meant of any
limited Company of Saints, he should have said of a Company of Saints, or a
number of them, which he did not, but puts it indefinite, of the Saints.
Secondly observe, that whereas he interposeth in his Conclusion (according to
the Order of the Gospel) neither does he, nor can any man living show any
likeness or resemblance of any such Order in the Gospel, nor does he in his
whole discourse endeavor to show any such Thing.

Upon my perusal of this Discourse, I find that I have treated of it already in
some papers which passed betwixt me and another, who is since (as I hear) dead,
and I think I sent them you; therefore I shall speak only briefly to it, first
setting down his Conceit, then answering his Arguments, then Consuting his
Conclusion.

SECT. II. His Opinion explained.
HIS Conceit is, as I apprehend it, That a Company of Saints, as he calls them,
enter into a Covenant one with another, and with one which they call Pastor, to
submit to him in Pastoral duties, and he to perform Pastoral Offices among
them, as likewise in respect of themselves to submit to and exercise Churchly
Censures one toward another; some such Covenant (if I can reach his sense) is
that which gives to the receivers an Obligation and bond, and it is in
Conscience one toward another, which bond is the formal Essence and being of a
Church; I conceive this, but for lack of some Copy of one of their Covenants, I
can only guess at it; by the main drift of his Discourse he denies Baptism or
Profession to give the being to a Member, and only makes a Covenant to be it, a
superadded Covenant beyond Baptism. Page 47. he delivers, that this Covenant is
either Explicit or Implicit; Explicit, when there is an open expression and
profession of this Engagement in the face of the Assembly; Implicit, when in
their practice they do that whereby they make themselves engaged to walk in
such a Society, according to such rules of Government which are executed
amongst them, and so submit themselves thereto, but do not make any verbal
profession thereof.

And thus he says the people in the Parishes of England, where there is a
Minister put upon them by the Patron or Bishop, they constantly hold them to
the Fellowship of the people in such a place, etc. This being warned, that upon
their grounds there could be no Church in the Christian World, but in New
England, he could not choose but allow this Implicit Covenant to be sufficient
(which is the common opinion among them) although I doubt in some other Things
he will reject an Argument drawn from an universal practice.

SECT. III. His Conclusions concerning this Covenant.
PAge 48. he adds some Conclusions. First, an Implicit Covenant preserves the
true nature of the Visible Church.

Secondly, (which is much the same) an Implicit Covenant in some Cases may be
fully sufficient.

Thirdly, it is much agreeing to the Compleatnesse of the rule, (what rule I
would know) and for the better being of the Church, that there be an explicit
Covenant. He gives reasons of this Conclusion;

For thereby the judgment of the Members comes to be informed, and convinced
of their Duty more fully.

His Reasons of his Third Conclusion answered.
I Would ask, whether a new Duty added by this Covenant, or an old Duty which
arose out of Baptism? If a new, I cannot judge of the fitness without I knew
the particulars, but am assured, that whatsoever is added to the Covenant in
baptism, although it may have possible Allowance in Acts of Religion to some
particular men upon some particular Occasions, yet in general to press such a
Thing upon all Christians, is not tolerable; If it be no addition to that
Covenant, the only refreshing of that Covenant to the memory of a Christian is
abundantly enough. This likewise answers his 2d Argument, page 49. They are
(says he) thereby kept from Cavilling and Starting aside from the Tenure and
Terms of the Covenant which they have professed and acknowledged before the
Lord, and so many Witnesses. I answer, as before, If the Terms be additions to
what was in Baptism, he ought not in general to prescribe them to all
Christians. If they are not Additions, then that Covenant is the strongest he
can make which was made in Baptism. The same answer may be applied to his third
reason; For (says he) thereby their hearts stand under a Stronger Tie. I
answer, no stronger than Baptism.

SECT. IV. This Covenant of his cannot agree to Travelers.
THen he enters into a Second Question, how far this Covenant requires
Cohabitation? His handling of which is very weak, in my Judgment; for since he
allows Merchants and others upon diverse Occasions to be absent sometimes
diverse years, he gives no satisfaction at all to show how these men in their
absence can partake of Church-blessings: But methinks they must live without
Preaching, without Sacrament, or any blessing of any Covenant of Gods, because
their Pastors and Officers reside at their constant place; but contrariwise our
Doctrine, which makes each Presbyter an Officer of the Catholic Church, and
each Christian a Member of it; it follows, that any Ship may carry a Pastor,
and every man receive the Comforts and blessings of Gods Covenants from him,
which is like our Saviors providence for all and every particular. But I omit
this, at this time, as not necessary for our business; and apply my self to
his Reasons for his Conclusion, That this Covenant gives the Essentials to a
Church; which he begins, page the 50th.

SECT. V. His Reasons answered.
HIS first Argument is thus framed, in these words, Every Spiritual or
Ecclesiastical Corporation receives its being from a Spiritual Combination.

But the visible Churches of Christ are Ecclesiastical or Spiritual; Therefore.

I can justly complain here, that the Terms are altered, which In a Logical
Discourse should be the same; I will reduce them therefore, and so discourse
upon it; Combination must here be taken for Covenant, or a Combination by
Covenant; so that the sense of that Proposition is, Every Ecclesiastical
Corporation receives its being from a Combination by Covenant.

In the Examination of this Proposition, I will follow his own Expressions,
because I will dispute, ex concessis; He inst^nces in the Corporations of Towns
and Cities: There (says he) they have their Charter granted them from the King
or State, which gives them warrant to unite themselves, to carry on such works,
for such Ends, with such Advantage: So (says he) their mutual Engagements each
to other to attend such Terms to walk in such Orders which shall be suitable to
such a Condition, gives being to such a body. Thus he. Consider now, that the
form of every thing is that which last comes, to give every thing its being,
and make it Complete; Secondly, it is that which enables every thing to do its
proper work. Now Consider, a Corporation has first a Charter by which they are
enabled to unite, by Authority of which they assemble and come together, and
perhaps enter into some Engagement required by that Charter; by this Engagement
they are made the Matter of this Corporation; but the form is the Influence of
the Charter, by which these men so engaged by Covenant are authorized to do
this: So in every question when it is moved concerning any Action, we have
recourse to the form; Ask why this did heat or burn? It is answered, because it
was fire, had the form the burning form of fire: Why did that grow? because it
had a vegetable form. Now ask, why did a Corporation do this or that, let this
Lease, make that man free? The answer is not made, because they were Combined
by a Covenant, but because they have a Charter to do it; so that the influence
which that Charter has upon the Corporation, is the thing which gives that
Corporation its being, not their Union by Covenant, which makes them but the
Matter, when the other gives the life and being, force and operation solely to
the Corporation.

To apply this to our purpose: Suppose every little particular Church were a
Corporation, first they must have a Charter to unite in a Covenant, which nor
he nor any man living can show me; and although these men vaunt mightily of
Scripture, and Contemn all Doctrine which is not delivered there, yet this
which seems to me their Corner Stone and main foundation they have, no not the
least show of any words of Scripture, which can authorize, much less exact any
such Covenant; but then suppose they had some such Commission, yet not their
union upon the Commission, but the other Authorities expressed in the Charter
must be it which enables them to do whatsoever they do, not their union by that
Covenant; for ask, why any man preaches, administreth the Sacraments, or the
like, the answer is not made from any union, but from the Charter which granted
it.

Now I come to his Minor, but the visible Churches of Christ are Ecclesiastical
or Spiritual Corporations.

I deny this Proposition absolutely, that every particular Church is a distinct
Corporation, (and else he says nothing to his purpose) but are Members, or
branches of that great Corporation the whole Catholic Church.

SECT. VI. Scripture Phrases abused by him.
HE offers at Scripture to prove this, page 51. Every particular Church (says
he) is a City, Heb. 12. 22. an house, 1 Timothy 3. 15. The body of Christ, Ephesians.
4. 13, 16. 1 Cor. 12. 12, 27, 28. Here is Cyphered Scripture, All these places
(says he there) are spoken of particular visible Churches. When I viewed the
places I was amazed, to read the holy Scripture so injured, and that mighty
Article of our Creed, I believe the holy Catholic Church, to be made such a
Nothing, as by his Application of these Texts it is. Let us Consider the
particulars; the first place is Heb. 12. 22. But ye are come unto Mount Sion,
and unto the ^ity of the living God, (this is the phrase he must pitch upon to
prove it a City, but mark what follows,) The heavenly Jerusalem, and an
innumerable company of Angels; then verse. 23. to the General Assembly and
Church of the firstborn, which are written in heaven, and to God the Judge of
all, and to the Spirits of just men made perfect. I cannot imagine with what
color of reason this can be applied to a particular Church; for although it
may be affirmed, That such men who are religiously united to such Churches are
come to this glorious Society, yet that that peculiar Church should be this
City, this mount Sion, this heavenly Jerusalem, cannot be admitted; for first
it is called City, not Cities: now if one Church be this City, another cannot
be it; it is the heavenly Jerusalem, an Innumerable Company of Angels, the
General Assembly, the Church of the firstborn, which can be spoken of none but
the universal Catholic Church, of no particular in the world. That it is this,
and such a Company; let us look then upon his second place, where he says his
particular Church is called an house, 1 Timothy 3. 15, That thou may know how to
behave thy self in the house of God, which is the Church of the living God.
Hence he collects, or no where, that a Particular Church is a Corporation,
because an house; A poor Consequence, but see, is this spoken of a Particular
Church? Mark the words following, the pillar and ground of all Truth: Can this
be spoke of any particuliar, of a little handful of men in New England, or in
one Corner there? I am sure the Church of Rome has much more semblance for
Rome, than they can have for any of their Congregations, which have been and
are most unstable themselves, much less supports for Christ's Truth. His 3d.
place to prove this, that particular Churches are Corporations, is because they
are termed the body of Christ, for this he produces Ephesians. 4. 13, 16. The 13th
verse has not that phrase body; but only says in general, that Christians
must grow up in the unity of ^aith to the perfect Stature of Christ; but in the
16th verse there is the name body, from whom the whole body fitly joined
together and compacted, by that which every joint supplies, according to the
Effectual working, etc. To understand this, read the preceding verse, where
Christ is called the head, and then think with your self, whether this little
Congregation can be his body spoke of, or the whole Church? or whether Christ
be the head to so many bodies? or whether all Christians are not Members of the
same body? His last place is, 1 Cor. 12. 12. for as the body is one and has
many Members, etc. I am weary of transcribing; Consider, the body is one;
therefore not every Church a distinct body, but there is one body, the
Catholic Church. Then he urges, ver. 27, 28. of the same Chapter, verse 27.
Now ye are the body of Christ, and Members in particular: Can a man choose but
wonder, to think that any man should offer to apply this to a particular
Church, to say it is the body of Christ? The 28th verse reckons up the diverse
Officers which God gave to govern these Churches, which can be affirmed of none
but the universal, I am sure not of their particulars, they have no Apostles
neither literally nor successively Bishops, no way. This does weary me; but now
you see all that is brought to prove this mighty Conclusion out of Scripture.
In brief, to illustrate this Truth a little farther: Conceive, that the
universal Church of Christ is like a City, of which he is the King, or Supreme.
All men in baptism submit themselves to his Government. He institutes Officers
over the whole, as I have before expressed, these cannot actually be present
every where, and therefore by consent appoint these and these in their
particular Wards or Precincts; and as any man when he comes to plant in this or
that City, implicitly submits to the Government, as of the City, so of that
particular part of the City where he lives: so is it with Christians where they
go any where in the Christian world, having in general by Baptism submitted
themselves to Christ and his Discipline, take it in all places wheresoever it
is. So likewise the Church is an house, Christ the Master, in which every
person, in what room soever he rests, can receive nothing but from his
Officers. The Church universal is a body, he the head, from which flow all
those Spirits and Graces by which the body is enlivened. Now, as nothing can
induce me to believe, that each house in this City should be the City, each
Chamber in the house should be the house, each member should be the body: so a
man cannot be persuaded that these particular Congregations which are parts of
the whole, should be that whole which is called by these Names.

CHAP. X. Another Argument answered.
I Now come to his second Argument, which is thus framed: Those who have mutual
power each over other, both to Command and Constrain in Conscience, who were of
themselves free each from other, they must by mutual Agreement and Engagement
be made partakers of that power.

But the Church of Believers have mutual power each over other to Command and
Constrain in Conscience, who were before free.

Therefore they must by mutual Agreement and Engagement be made partakers of
that power. I can guess what he means by his Discourse, but make no sense of
this syllogism, for in his Minor there is a Nown of the Singular number put to
a Verb of the plural, against Grammar (the Church have); when indeed if he
would have expressed his meaning; it should have been, men in the Churches of
believers, or all men in all Churches of believers; were such, but I take it so.

SECT. II. The Text, If thy Brother offend thee, Tell the Church, vindicated.
HE offers to p^ove his Minor by Mat. 18. 15. If thy brother offend thee tell
the Church; In which (says he) we have a legal and orderly way laid forth by
our Savior, in which brethren only of the same Church ought to deal one with
another, which they cannot exercise with Infidels, nor yet with other
Christians, as our own experience, if we will take a taste, will give
undeniable evidence.

I deny his Minor, being understood as I expressed, for that ambiguous way of
his delivering it in Nonsense, poseth a Reader, what to speak or think.

I say then, that every particular man in a Church has not power to command or
constrain anorher; let us examine his reason therefore, out of Mat. 18. 15. If
thy brother, that is, one of the same Church, not an In^idel, nor yet other
Christians. This is his Collection, but extremely amiss, for I dare
confidently affirm, that every Christian is our spiritual brother of what
Congregation soever he is, and it is an high kind of Impiety to deny it: nay,
he is nearer than a brother, a member of the same mystical body of which Christ
is the head, and therefore this Argument falls in the very first setting out,
and can proceed no further; but to understand the Text, and so more abundantly
the weakness of this Argument.

SECT. III. What is meant by Church.
FIrst know, that by the Church we must understand the visible Catholic
Church, which has this power, and indeed almost all the promises of Christ,
which is his City, his house, his spouse, his body, but then it is understood
of her according to that part which has that faculty of receiving Complaints;
he who bids you tell a man any Story, bids you not speak it to its ^eet, or
hands, but his Ears, which are fit parts to receive the Story, or if he be
deaf, you must do it by writing, that his Eyes which are organized for that
purpose, may entertain that relation: Again, when a man commands, he does it
not with his Eyes, or Ears, but his Tongue, which is the part fitted for that
purpose. The Church is Christ's body, it has many parts; when you are bid tell
the Church, you are not bid tell the feet or hands, but the Ear, those who are
proper for that work; when the Church speaks, it is not with hands or eyes, but
with the Churches Tongue, which are the Officers for that purpose; these men
would make the body of Christ all Ear, all Tongue, every member of the Church
fit to receive Complaints, and fit to Judge and Censure, which is ridiculous;
Take his own Simile, Suppose the Church universal a Corporation; there was
never any such where every man was a Judge: It cannot be therefore so here;
Tell the Church, that is, tell those Officers in the Church, who are designed,
and organized, authorized for such a purpose; and then if he refuse to hear
them, let him be, etc. and this that very word brother, which he introduces
for the prop of his cause, evinceth, for all Christians throughout the
Catholic Church are brethren, and the Duty belongs to them; this I think does
satisfy, and what he adds is of no moment, for he (being full with his
conceit, that by Church is meant a particular Congregation, and each man in it)
labors to build upon that foundation, which being overthrown, his building
perishes.

He urges a place out of Whitaker, to prove that Laymen have Authority of
Censuring, page 52. but because he confesses, That Whitakers meaning is of a
General Council, that it has power over any particular Pastor; in the
Conclusion of that page, and the top of the 53. he forms this Syllogism.

SECT. IV. Another Argument of his answered.
EVery Member of a General Council has power in the Censuring of a Delinquent.

Brethren or Lay men (as they are termed) are Members of a General Council.

I deny this Minor; he brings no proof, although if he had studied this
question, he could not choose but know it is generally denied by such Writers
as Treat of it. Although he is extraordinarily Confuted, I am unwilling to let
any thing slip which may disturb a Reader. He says, the Proposition is proved
by Instance and Experience, but I know not where. He adds immediately, If
others had not Church power over this or that party, if he would have refused
to have come into their fellowship and joined with them, then it was his
voluntary Subjection and Engagement that gave them all the power and Interest
they have. To understand this; there is voluntary engagement in Baptism, and
besides this there is no more needful; for it is true, he who lives in
Scotland cannot be governed by the Bishops of England, because they cannot have
cognizance of his State; and because that the Church has confined the Exercise
of that habitual power which they have every where, that it shall not break out
into Act in such places, and upon such causes which they cannot have a full
knowledge of; but if he who now lives in Scotland will come and live in
England, and receive the blessings of Gods mercies in his Covenants from the
Church of England, if he offend, he must be admonished and convented before the
church quoad hoc, that is, the Church Officers, and if he obey them not, be as
an Heathen. If he refuse to Communicate with us in these Spiritual blessings,
he makes himself as an Heathen: So that in some Sense there is a Covenant
required, that which he calls implicit, even in a baptized man; for else he
makes himself an Heathen toward us, in regard of us: but this implicit is not
like their Covenant, which seems to be perpetual; This is only pro tempore, for
the time of his abode and no ^onger. That which he yet urges, that men travel
into far Coun^ries, where are Churches planted; certainly that man, if they
be Protestant Churches, he will claim a right in the Church Seals, if he be a
Protestant; if a Papist, and they Papists, he will do so likewise, or else he
will be as an Heathen. To conclude this, he brings some places of Scripture to
show that some would not join with the Apostles, as Acts 5. 13. where Heathens
refused to join with the Apostles; Luke 7. 30. The Pharisees and Lawyers
rejected the Council, etc. But can he show me, that any who were Christians
refused Communion with them, of what Church soever? It is not imaginable,

His Third Argument is only against Presbyterians; I meddle not with it: His
Fourth Argument is thus framed.

SECT. V. Another Argument of his answered.
THat Society of Men who may enjoy such privileges Spiritual and
Ecclesiastical, unto which none can be admitted but by Approba^ion of the
whole, that Society must be in an Especial Combination.

But a particular Combination is such a Society who enjoy such Spiritual
privileges, etc. Ergo.

I deny this Minor: Laymen in a particular Congregation have no such power, to
admit, allow, and approve of every man who comes into that Congregation; they
may inform, but they cannot judge.

His last Argument from an Induction avails nothing, where he says, If the
Inventory of all other respects being brought in, none can constitute a Church
visible, then this only must, he reckons up mutual Affection and Cohabitation
only, which are insufficient to make his Indu^ion. I shall therefore set down
what makes a Church visible.

CHAP. XI. SECT. I. What makes a Church Visible.
COnsider what makes a Church, that if it be visible constitutes a Church
visible; and certainly for the first, if we consider the Church to be the body
of Christ, the City of God, the Heavenly Jerusalem, then as we must conceive it
consisting of many men, we must conceive it likewise having these men united in
some form of Government under Christ, and like a City, an house, a body ruled
by their King and head Christ, who by his Inferior Ministers and Officers
rules and governs this body, this City; he is of this City, who is ruled and
governed by the Laws of this City; of this House, who is governed by the
Oeconomical discipline of this house; of this body, who is guided and governed
by the head of this body; So he is of Christ's Church who is governed by the
Laws of his Church; we are not born Citizens of the Heavenly Jerusalem, but
re-born by Baptism, by which we submit to that Discipline, and are Incorporated
into his body: Now then, as a man of any City if he live in the East part, so
long as he lives there, is governed according to the Laws of that City by the
Constables and Officers, whose Authority is there prevalent; yet if he remove
to the West part, by the Laws of the same City he is governed by other
Officers, yet by force of the same Law which ruled him before; so a Christian
submitting himself to Christ's Discipline by Baptism, if he live in any part of
this City, submits to those Governors which are there, if in another, to those
which rule in that, and all because a Citizen of that City; and these are the
powers of that City; yea, perhaps there are kinds of Governments in one part of
the City diverse from another, according to the condition of the pl^ce, one
fittest for that one, and another for that other, and (...) he submitting to
the Law of that City, varies in the manner of his Subjection* according to the
exigencies and rules of every place, by that general rule of submission to the
Government of that ^ity. This likewise is apparent in an house; A Servant
admitted into an house (so a man by Baptism) submits himself to the Oeconomical
Discipline of that house, and according to the diverse rules of that house in
diverse rooms of it, submits himself to diverse men, perhaps diverse
Disciplines: So in the Hall he meets with one Governor, with another in the
Kitchen, another in the Larder, another in the Pantry, and in all these he has
diverse Officers to submit to, and diverse ways of Submission in diverse
Things. Consider it a Body, and in a Body consider those parts which walk up
and down, and go to several parts of the body, as blood and spirits; each of
these, by that general rule and Law of being Ministerial parts of the body, in
their passages through diverse parts receive diverse disciplines, and are
obedient to several Laws in the heart, the hand, the head, yet all by that
obedience they have to the Law of humane bodies, not by a New Covenant in every
particular place, but by virtue of that first Covenant to be Servants to that
head which governs all: Now then, thus you see by Baptism we are made Citizens
of the Heavenly Jerusalem, and that being a visible sign, makes us visible
Members of this visible Church.

SECT. II. Baptism is not the Form which Constitutes a^ Churchmember, but the
Visible Act, by which men are made such.
I Would willingly leave this Truth so clearly expressed, as it might be
without Question; therefore Consider a little further; that I do not conceive
that Baptism is the Form which Constitutes a Church Member, but that Baptism is
that visible Act by which a man is made a Member, a visible Member of Christ's
Church, and the Effect of that Act is that form which ^o Constitutes him. The
Indenture is not the form of an Apprentice, but the Deed by which he is made an
Apprentice, and that relation or Quality which is got in the person bound, is
the Effect of that Indenture, and is the formality of his Apprenticeship.

Now because Mr. Hooker seems to oppose this Doctrine, I will examine his
Arguments, which he enters upon, Part 1. Chap. 5. page 55. Proposing this
Question, Whether Baptism does give formality to make a Member of a visible
Church? He answers negatively. His First reason is.

SECT. III. His First Argument, and the Answer to it.
IF there be a Church, and so Members, before Baptism; Then Baptism cannot give
the formality.

But the Church as to^um Essentiale is before Baptism; Ergo.

He proves his Minor, because Ministers are before Baptism; this he proves,
because there must be a Church of believers to choose a Minister lawfully, for
none but a Church can give a Call.

One Absurdity granted a Thousand follow; Consider which were first, Ministers
or Churches, and whether the Churches did choose their ^^rst Minister; Did the
Church, or Christ choose their first Ministers, the Apostles? Did Crete choose,
or St. Paul ordain Titus their Minister? In the second part he supposes all
true which he had discoursed in the first; in the first part he supposes all
true which he means to discourse of in the second, and indeed both grossly
false, Ministers were before Churches, and did constitute Churches, not they
them; but he gives an Instance page 56. Let it be supposed the coming of some
Godly man (I draw up his sense) amongst Pagans, and they are Converted by him;
may not these men choose him for their Pastor, etc. I answer, Instances upon
Extraordinary occasions cannot make general rules; but in particular, I deny
that (if he were not a Presbyter before) they could make him their Pastor, or
that he has power by any Call of theirs to administer the Seals; and I can
give Instances in particular passages of the same nature in Ecclesiastical
Story; but that which is an invincible reason against this, and the whole force
of this matter, is, that although people may have power to dispose of their own
obedience to whom they will give it, yet they cannot of Divine benedictions
which God shall give them; they must in that submit to Gods Ordinance; and they
who are not authorized by him cannot be chosen by them: and therefore they
cannot choose him a Pastor, where God does not make him his Officer for that
purpose; which, unless he is a Presbyter; he is not.

SECT. IV. His Second Argument answered.
HIS second Argument is, If Baptism gives the form to visible Membership, then
whiles that remains valid, the party is a visible Member.

But there is true Baptism resting in the party, who has no visible
Membership; Ergo.

He proves his Minor from short Instances; in an Excommunicate man, in him who
renounceth the Fellowship of the Church, or when the Church is absolutely
destroyed, then all Church Membership cease.

To understand the force of this Argument I must deviate a little, and
discourse of what it is to be a Member of the Church, of the force of Baptism
in this work. Know then that the Church is a body, and an org^nical body, which
has many members which have diverse Offices, an eye, a foot, etc. and as St.
Paul philosophyes 1 Cor. 12. and all this body is animated and informed by the
same soul, the holy Spirit, the head of this body is Christ, all this needs no
proof I think; but then, that men are made Members of this body by Baptism,
that I shall apply my self to. Consider therefore the 13. verse of that 12
Chap. of 1 Cor. By one Spirit we are baptized into one body, whether we be
Jews or Gentiles, etc. Having in the preceding verse showed that there are
many members, he shows here which way we are made members of it, that is,
Christ's body; to wit, being baptized by the same Spirit into Christ; the Spirit
which enlivens us makes Baptism effectual to the incorporating a man into the
body of Christ; For what else can that phrase be, into the body, as a work of
Baptism but into the body of Christ, his Church? Well then, Baptism is the Act,
the relict of Baptism, as before, is the Thing which makes us members and parts
of this body. Consider then next, Gal. 3. 26, 27. Ye are all the Children of
God by faith in Christ Jesus; for as many of you as have been baptized into
Christ, have put on Christ. Here you see phrases wonderfully expressing the
same thing. As God is considered in Oeconomicks so he is a father, so by
Baptism we are adopted the children of God; as Christ is the head of the body,
so we are baptized into him and engrassed (as the Spirit speaks elsewhere) into
the body. Suppose Christ to be an holy Garment, with which the Crimes and Sins
of his Servants are hid, by Baptism you cloth your selves with his
righteousness, and you put on Christ, under whom your unrighteousness shall
be hid, and your sins covered; or else, as others express it, Matters put on a
form, etc. But then if you will add the last verse, If ye be Christ, ye are
Abraham's seed, and heirs of the promise, you may see these 3. things, Children,
Members, Heirs, most heavenly united in the second Answer of our Catechism, In
my Baptism, wherein I was made a Member of Christ, a Child of God, and an
Inheritor of the kingdom of Heaven; which three in express Terms are put down
^y St. Paul: and what necessary Thing and Essential (as he calls it) of another
Covenant can add to a further union than this, matters not much; Well then, it
is proved that Baptism does constitute a Member. Now I will examine how this
may be justified against his Objection, which consists only of Instances
against this, and no proof of them; An Excommunicate man (says he) has no
Membership, He that renounceth the fellowship of the Church, or when a Church
is utterly dissolved, there is no Church Membership.

CHAP. XII. His Instances Examined and Confuted. The Dissolution of a Church
does not destroy Membership.
I Will take all these apart, and discourse the Evidence of them, and begin
with the last, of which I may justly say, posito quolibet sequitur quidlibet,
Let it be granted, that the Church should be dissolved and torn to pieces, that
being the entire body of Christ, Christ could have no body, and then there
would be no Members; but it is impossible, the Gates and powers of Hell shall
never have power to dissolve it; the winds shall bluster and the rain fall, but
not have force to beat down the City of the living God; It shall be in
persecution, and suffer many miseries; but the darkness shall not be able to
comprehend or suppress the light of it; it is true, one of their poor
particular Congregations may be and has been shaken and sc^ttered, and their
Union dissolved, because it is wrought by man, and man's hand guards it; but it
shall never be so with Christ's body, it shall be a pillar, a strong support of
all truth, yea the ground and foundation in which Truth is inherent, and by
which Truths are supported: that instance therefore falls of its self, the
foundation is cast down, and then the Castle hangs only in the Air.

SECT. II. How Excommunication does extirpate Baptism.
I Apply my self then to the first Instance of an Excommunicated man, in which
case I would have wished he had brought some reasons to have proved they were
not of the Church; but he not doing it, I will undertake the question against
such Opposition as I can find elsewhere. The Question is, whether an
Excommunicate man be a visible member of Christ's visible Church? I put the
Terms as strict as I can, because I will avoid all future Cavilling, and I
answer affirmatively, he is; he brings no proof to the contrary: So we are upon
even Terms, if I should say no more, only the difference will be in the
Authority of the Speaker, in which I think he will prevail; and therefore I
will examine it by reason, and as well as I can satisfy the Objections made by
some Jesuits against it.

To understand this: Consider that any part continues so long a member of its
body, as it is united to it, and so long it is united to it, as it can receive
influence from the head, and be active and operative in its proper works, by
the fountains and originals of those motions, assisted any way, by any outward
applications or inward medicines; the members of a man's body (as it haps out in
some Palsies) may be utterly unactive, so that they cannot stir or move, no
not feel or be sensible of any hurt, and yet these parts remain members of the
body still, and it may be by Physicians directions be restored to former
vivacity, and be quickened by spirits as before coming from the same fountain,
and this is a Sign it is a member still of this body. That which is a member of
another body, cannot by any Act be made a member of this, nor that which is an
entire body of it self; so that when physic can restore a member, though it
appear to our Senses never so dead, yet it is still a member.

Again, Consider for the other Term of distinction, That if a baptized man
though excommunicate be a member by his Baptism, he is likewise a visible
member by the same Baptism, for Baptism is a visible sign of the Effect it
produces, and is as visible in the Excommunicated man, as in him that
Communicates.

Thirdly, Consider that many parts of the body are by obstructions hindered from
that influence of blood and spirits which would enable them to do their duties,
which yet, that obstruction removed, hold the same Commerce and Society, with
giving and receiving mutual correspondence in their several offices again with
both head and members. These things premised, as I think apparent Truth, I now
address my self to the business.

SECT. III. Bellarmines Arguments answered.
THere is a great Dispute betwixt Cardinal Bellarmine and others, Whether an
Excommunicated person be a member of the Church? I must oppose Bellarmine; for
although the Conclusion seems the same in Thomas Hooker and him, yet Hooker
offers at no reason for it, Bellarmine does, lib. 3. de Ecclesia militante,
Cap. 6. And he says, Excommunicated persons are not in the Church; his first
Argument is drawn from Mat. 18. 17. If he will not hear the Church, let him be
as an heathen, etc. This (says he) is understood of Excommunication, I yield.
But, (says he) Heathens are not of the Church, I grant that likewise; but do
add, neither does the Text say they are Heathens, no more than Publicans, but
resembling, as, Sicut, being in that like them, that they are severed from the
Actual partaking of the Sacraments. He adds 1 Cor. 5. 2. as he reads it with
an Introduction, why rather have you not sorrow that he who has done this
might be taken away from among you? Then he s^ips to verse 6. A little leaven
leaveneth the whole Lump; and therefore in the last verse 13. Put away
therefore from among your selves that wicked person. In which words (says he)
the Apostle describes what Excommunication is.

I yield all this; but this does not prove, that this man was out of the
visible ^hu^ch; for although he be severed from actually participating many
blessed Covenants o^ God's, yet not severed from his membe^^^^p This is but
physicking the sick part, you shall ^ind vers^. 5. To deliver such an one to
Satan, for the destruction of the flesh, that the spirit may be saved in the
day of the Lord; like as a man who has (...) member exposes ^^to the
Surgeon, that he may be cured of his former malady, so that I observe two
ends of Excommunication in this Chap^er: the separation of the person from the
Conversation with (...) members, lest they should be corrupted by him, lest the
Lump should be leav^ned; and a punishment and chastisem^nt of the person, that
he may amend; Now if that Surgery does at any time produce (...) Effect of
Amendmen^, he then (...) where he was to the Actual enjoying and participating
of all ^ods mercies and Church-blessings: The ob^truction is removed but (...)
man ought to be excommunicated for Destruction, but for Amendment of his own
person; or the saving others from the con^agion of his (...); so that it is a
sign whilst he is ^xcommunicate that he is member, a sick one, only obstructed
from the par^icipation^ of many ^cclesi^stical felicities, but not taken away
from the Esse and being of a Christi^n.

His 2d. Argument is dr^^en from a Rule of the Canon Law; That violators of
Churches should be put out of the Communion of Christianity.

This is nothing but the participation of those Actual blessings that are
communicated to such in w^om there is no ob^truction; as suppose a mo^tified
and numbed member, it partakes not of that influence of spirits and blood which
others which ^re livelyer members are endued with, but yet it remains a member.

Thirdly, He argues from the Fathers, Hillary, St. Chrysostom, Theophylact,
who say, to be made as an Heathen is to be cast out of the people of God, cast
out of the Church: So likewis^ St. Austin, Every Christian qui a Sac^^dotibus
excommunicatur Sathanae tr^ditur, He who is ex^ommunicated by the ^acerdotes,
the Priests of God, (I render it) is delivered to Satan: Now, because out of
the Church the Devil is, as in the Church Christ, I grant all these phrases to
have their Truth: That the Excommunicated man is out of the Church, as I said
before, that is, out of the participation of all those heavenly Covenants and
mercies which are appropriated to them who in a more constant Conversation and
fellowship have Commerce with it, yet he loses not all union. Suppose then the
Church a Body Politic, a City, this Baptized person one of the Corporation,
for some fault by him committed he is by them expelled the City, until such
time as either he humble himself for his fault, or else give such satisfaction
as is enjoined; This man so long as he is out of the City loses all
privileges of a Citizen, yet not all union; when he satisfies, he is
readmitted upon his first Title: so that Excommunication is a kind of
suspension from the participation and execution of those Divine benedictions
which other members have; it is not a degradation from his Christian being;
like a Tree which is dead in the Winter, and brings forth neither fruit, nor
leaf, yet revives in the Spring; or else like a withered part, which by
Surgery is recovered to a lively being. Consider St. Paul's expression, Romans
11. 17. and the following part, we are said to be graffed into Christ; now that
Act which grafts us in is baptism: Now, as we may see some branch of a graft in
the Fruit season bearing neither fruit nor leaf, giving forth no expression of
livelihood; yet when we find by any Experience that there is any hope in it, or
a possibility of restoring it to a vivacity with care of Husbandry, we know
that branch is not dead, nor utterly has lost union, because his restitution
is by physic, not re-grafting: so it is with Baptized persons, which being
Grafts, not Sprouts, when any decay whatsoever is restored or repaired by
repentance and sorrow for Sins, not by re-grafting by Baptism, it is a certain
and undoubted sign that it retains still an union by the former Grafti^g: So
that this Act of Excommunication is nothing but his suspension from his Acting
many duties of a Christian, and an obstruction of the influences of many Graces
of God to him, but yet not a total destruction of either; for as he may pray,
repent in himself, and upon that justly require Absolution, and the Church is
bound to give it: so before these he may receive motions and incitements to
them, and upon the use of those Talents proceed from grace to grace, until he
obtain such a measure of humiliation and repentance as ought to be accepted of
the Church, and accepted upon humiliation, not Baptism again; which is a sign
the branch was not cut off, but sick only: so that now having spent (I hope not
wasted) so much time and paper in Explicating what Excommunication does,
Conceive my Answers to these pieces of Fathers thus; By Excommunication a man
is put out from many Actual privileges and blessings, which those who are not
excommunited enjoy, that they are put out of the Lap, the Bosom, the near
Caresses and Embraces of the Church; not out of the absolute being in or with
her: And lest any man should think this a forced Explication, take an Instance
in Mat. 27. 46. Our Savior complains, My God, my God why have thou forsaken
me? How can this be understood? Not that the Deity had taken away that
supe^natural hypostatical union; but that, for that while there was a suspense
of the influx of the fullness of those all-comforting graces, which were other
whiles constantly attending his humanity.

Lastly, Bellarmine disputes out of reason: First, Because Excommunication
deprives a man of all Spiritual Commerce; and he urges a piece out of
Tertullian for it, Cap. 39. of his Apology: But the sense of him and
Bellarmines Supposition is to be understood as I before Explained, he is
deprived of the Actual Conversation of ^he Church in many things, not the
union; and therefore Tertullian in that place says, summum futuri Judicii
praejudicium, the greatest prejudice in this World of the future Judgment, the
greatest Injury toward it that a man can have, to be barred from the
Communion, from the association of prayers; but it cannot exclude his own
praying, or the power of it by Jesus Christ to obtain Mercy, to whom he remains
knit by his Baptism.

Again he urges, It is the greatest punishment the Church can inflict. I
answer, The greatest Excommunication is the greatest punishment, but neither
man nor men have power to sever that member from ^hrists body which he has
joined.

Again Bellarmine, Excommunication cannot be to any but Contumaci^us and
Incorrigible Sinners, because they will not hear the Church.

I answer, what follows? but that they who now are Contumacious, anon at
another time will be humble.

^ast of all he urges, In Absolution the phrase is, Restituo te, I restore
thee to the unity of the Church, and participation of members. I answer, he
might have added what follows by way o^ Explication in their forms of
Absolution, and to the Communion of the faithful. A man is restored to the
full enjoying his union, his membership, by such a Communion which he had not
before, but only an union: So now I think it appears, if you apprehend the
Church as a body natural, Excommunication is an Obstruction which stops many
Influences with which both head and members Communicate, but not union. If you
apprehend the Church a political body, Excommunication is a Suspension from
City powers and privileges until some satisfaction, but Conditional, not an
absolute annihilation of his Charter, and this will appear out of that Phrase
of St. Paul in the Chapter urged by Bellarmine, 1 Cor. 5. 5. Deliver such a man
to Satan for the destruction of the Flesh, that the spirit may be saved in the
day of the Lord Jesus; so that it seems by this, Excommunication is a sharp
Physic for the good of that man, to make him ashamed, to humble him, for his
correction, not destruction; and it appears again by his restitution, which is
only an Absolution, not a new engra^^ing, or an Absolution by a new
readmission, not a new Incorporation; and this answers all the Objections that
I have read either in Bellarmine or in any other.

SECT. IV. Such as renounce the fellowship of the Church, are members.
I Must now address my self to Hookers second Objection, which is, That such
as renounce the fellowship of the Church, though they have true Baptism, yet
are not ^^embers of the Church. By this renouncing, I think he means professing
against it, or let it be what it will, turning Turk, renouncing Christ, he is
yet a member, he retains his true Baptism, for by Baptism a man is accepted a
Child of God; and no more than he who renounceth his Father does by that Act
make himself not his Son, no more can he unchild himself by any of these Actual
oppositions. Here in this he only sets down his Conclusion, but brings no
Argument for proof. I will hunt them out amongst the School and Jesuits, and
clear the Truth as perspicuously as I can*

Cardinal Bellarmine in his 3d. Book De Ecclesia militante, Cap. 4. handles
this Question under this Title, Whether Heretics and Apostates which are
baptized be parts and members of the Church? He denies it. His first Argument
against it is drawn from Scripture, 1 Timothy 1. 19. where it is said, That some
concerning faith have made shipwreck. Where (says he) by the metaphor of
shipwreck he understands Heretics; who, one part of the Ship being broken, is
fallen into the Sea. ^or Answer, I grant them to be Heretics and Apostates, I
grant the Church their Ship, I grant them in the Sea ready to perish, yet even
when they are there they belong to the Ship, and perhaps were principal members
of it, not in it, but of it; and therefore read the next verse, of whom were
Hymeneus and Alexander whom I have delivered unto Satan, that they may learn
not to blaspheme. This great Pilot took care of them, as members of his ship,
and endeavored their recovery, which was a sign they were still in union with
the Church.

But (says he) this is signified by the parable of our Savior, Luke 5. of the
Net which was broken by the multitude of Fishes; That word Parable slipped from
the Cardinal un^dvisedly. It was a real Story; but the learnedest man in the
world may let slip such an Expression. But why any such sense should be forced
on that Story, I know not, but only that such a Thing was done, and if such a
sense were granted, it yields no more, but that some men are slipped out of the
blessing of the Church, when they are ready to come to the shore, even to
Heaven.

But he urges further, Titus 3. 10. A man that is an Heretic after the first
and second Admonition, reject, Verse. 11. knowing that he that is such is
subverted, and sins, being condemned of himself; Now (says he) if this
Heretic were in the Church, Titus would not have been commanded to reject him,
but exhort him. I answer, Reject him for a time, for his Conviction to
amendment, as became a Careful ^astor, and a loving Father, who intends the
good of his Children by withholding Temporary favor for a season: that so his
Son may be ashamed, and shame breed an Amendment. Bellarmine adds out of St.
Hier^me, that he is not put out of the Church, but puts himself out* I grant
it, out of that glorious Communion and participation of Heavenly mysteries,
which belong to men of right faith and manners.

But he adds another place out of the 1 of John 2. 19. They went out from us,
but they were not of us; which he expounds out of St. Augustine, That they went
out of the Church, but if they had been of the Church by Election, they would
not have gone out from us I am sorry to read so learned a man forget himself* I
am sure in another Controversy he would not allow this Exposition, nor can I
allow it in this; for without doubt many Elect do go out of the visible Church,
understand Election in the most rigid way, they do go out and come in again;
that cannot be the right exposition therefore. If you would have my sense of
it, we may observe, that in the preceding verse the Apostle speaks of many
Antichrists, of these he says, that they went out of us, that is, out of the
Communion with us; now (says he) they were not of us; that is, when they went
out from us; it may be they had been before, but then they were grown to a
defiance of us; for if they had been of us, they would not have gone out from
us; if they had had the same Principles they would not have left us. This I
Conceive the sense of this Text; and indeed, I know not whether any man has
given it this Exposition. Those which I have looked in have given me no
satisfaction, of what Religion soever: Now let us see what concerns this Text;
and perhaps will serve to Illustrate other Doubts. The difficulty will be in
this phrase, to be of us, that is, our Society; that may be diverse ways, in
respect of that Inward Thing which unites us to Christ, either in a perfect
union, or in a remiss, or in the lowest degree: In a perfect union, that is,
by it which St. James phraseth a lively faith, a faith quickened and infl^enced
with Charity, that dare with Abraham forsake all Lands, Wife, Children, yea
offer his Son himself a sacrifice to the good pleasure of God; this the Church
of Rome calls an informed says, actuated and informed with Charity; this is
the highest union and communion. Then there is an union lower than this, which
is, the faith which believes aright, and makes a profession of it, but will not
bide the Test of a Confession, when it comes to the Touch, and these are by all
held so long to be in the Church, as they have this union with Christ, and so
long retains its Community, until some Temptation of fear, or hope, or perhaps
some Carnal Argument persuade otherwise, and then they fall into Heresy or
Apostasy, to have or g^in something; and these I think to be those of whom the
Apostle spoke, men who lived in a formal show of a right faith, by conversing
in a seeming manner with the Godly and the Church, but then went from them, (I
will not dispute the falling from Grace here.) But thus, when men had this
faith before spoken of, and professed it; or professed it, and had it not; they
had an union with the Church, at the least outward, if but by profession, but
inward likewise if they had that second sort of faith, yet they were not of us,
the number of those who had justifying faith then when these left us; but now
there is another union, and that is per Sacramentum fidei, by the Sacrament of
Faith, as Baptism is called, the which no man leaves; and this is an union by
which a wicked man after his repentance has a Title to claim mercy and
absolution, as likewise the Church owes it him: So that I dare say Bellarmine,
nor any Jesuit I have read against this Doctrine, can deny that there is such
a Title, or that that Title is not by this union: So then they went from us,
that is, the Communion with us, that showed they were not then of us, of that
dear union of a lively faith, for then they would not have left us; you see
this cannot be understood of lack of Election: The Elect may go out, and come
in again: It cannot be understood that they left union, but Communion; for the
Antichrist himself has a union with the Church, though he keeps a Communion
against it. I think this is enough to show, that although this departure which
St. John speaks of be by Heresy or Apostasy, as Bellarmine insinuates, yet it
is not a leaving all union of and with Christ, but only Communion, as I have
before expressed. Reader, be not hasty to Judge of this Conclusion, and then I
hope thou shall find it most agreeing to all principles of Religion.

Secondly, Bellarmine quotes the Council of Nice, Can. 8. and 19. Where, says
he, Heretics are said to be received into the Church, if they will return,
upon certain Conditions.

For Answer: It is worth our marking, that those two Canons are made for two
sorts of Heretics, the 8th Canon for the Cathari or Puri, as the Canon calls
them; or the Novatians, as Balsamon expounds it, for they were the same; these
the Canon receives into the Church upon repentance, with Imposition of hands
only, but they must express their profession in writing.

The other in the 19th Canon were the Pauliani, or Paulianites, who were
rebaptized upon their readmission; the first was a reception of such who had
gone out of the Communion of the Church, by denying readmission of Penitents,
who forsook their Religion, by sacrificing to Idols, and communication with the
Digami, such as had been twice married, whom they held unclean. These things
were their Heresies, and therefore were called Cathari, because they must by
these Things pro^esse themselves holyer than other men; but these being not
things which nulli^ed Baptism, although pertinaciously held, they could not be
rebaptized. But for the Paulinians, because they they denied the Trinity, they
could not baptize according to Christ's Institution, and therefore such as came
from them to the Church were rebaptized. You see now, how upon examination of
these Canons of that most sacred Council, the Case is stared for me, because it
seems the Cathari had but left the Communion, as is before expressed, and
therefore the removing the Obstruction with proper physic (...); but the
Paulinians had no union, and therefore to be grafted into the body.

I have insisted the longer upon this, because the Story of these several
Heresies is not perhaps apparent to every one, and that difference of Condition
upon the diversity of the Heresy, perhaps, by a negligent Reader would not
have been observed.

What he produces out of the Council of Lateran, That the Church is
Congregatio fidelium, I need not examine, I yield it; but he says, That
Heretics are not fideles, is denied by many of his own Religion; for although
that they have not a fullness of faith, which he cannot exact in a member, yet
they may have faith in many Articles, which may preserve them in the unity of
members, though sick members; but this serves not my turn, comes not home to my
business; I therefore say, that as homo is Animal rationale, which is one of
the compleatest Definitions given to any thing, and the most exemplar, yet
every part of man is not rationale; the hand cannot discourse, nor the feet: so
the Church is Congregatio fidelium; but it does not follow, that every part of
the Church is faithful* Infants are members of the Church, and such members as
are in a saving Condition, yet they have but Sacramentum Fidei, and Faith in
Potentia, they are not actually sideles, nay, perhaps not habitually, I am
certain as we know of, they have no habit of it. But it may be objected, that
these non ponunt Obicem, as the School speaks; as they reach not out their
hands of faith to lay hold on Christ, so they do not hinder or oppose it, but
these men do with violence thrust Christ from them: I answer, that violence
returns to their own Soul, in thrusting themselves out of the state of grace
and favor with God protempore, for that time they do so, and it hinders Grace
in its operari, in its great and noble Effects which it drives at, but does not
extinguish it in its first Act, which is to make a man a member; yea therefore
they are more sinful, than if done by an Heathen or any who had not knowledge
of Gods Law, nor been admitted into his membership: Therefore the Apostle
urges this Argument, Shall I take the members of God, and make them the
members of an Harlot? In a word therefore, the Church is the Congregation of
the faithful; the Essential and Constituting parts of it are such, yet many
parts of it are not such: which no man can deny if understood Actually, because
no man can have actual faith at all Times, nor is it necessary that faith
should be habitual in every member; for Infants cannot be proved to have it,
but only Sacramentum fidei, which is the first hand which gives an Interest in
Christ, and thus much these have of whom we dispute.

The Sentences which he alleges out of the Fathers, may be answered out of
what has been already delivered.

His only reason is, That because the Church is a multitude united, and this
union chiefly consists in the profession of the Faith, and in the observation
of the same laws and rights, no reason will permit that we should have any of
the body of the Church, which have no Conjunction with that body; he means in
these things, but he handles this Controversy negligently.

I answer: The perfection of the union consists in these things he names, such
are in the highest, and nearest and dearest way in the Church, but the absolute
union consists in Baptism.

I have perused many later Jesuits, but they are almost all Excerpta out of
him, scarce changing his words; but because in his Answer to one Argument which
is objected against him, he confesses in my Judgment what I require, I will
put down that, and so pass on.

It is Objected 3dly. (says he) That Heretics are in the Church, because they
are Judged by the Church. So says St. Paul, 1 Cor. 5. 12. What have I to do to
Judge them which are without? therefore they are in the Church. He answers,
That although Heretics are not of the Church, yet they ought to be. This is
poor hitherto, for then they ought not to be Judged until they are of the
Church; and yet he adds, Et proinde ad eam pertinent; How do they pertain to
it, if they are not of it? Yes (says he) as a stray Sheep belongs to the fold,
as we use to say, this Sheep belongs to this fold; This speech pleases me,
That fold has an Interest in that Sheep, and that Sheep in that fold; though
it have now no Communion with it, yet it has an union and interest in
Communion, whenever he shall legally lay Claim to it, to be sed with the
rest, and every way provided for as they are: Thus I think all stray Sheep
which are marked by Christ for his, belong to his fold, his Church, and by his
mark in Baptism may claim it, and the Church exact a Christian observance from
it, neither of which can be in another man.

Thus I apprehend Bellarmines Confession has assisted me in giving him
satisfaction; hut because this Question has been little pryed into by such
Writers as have come into my hands, I will for far farther Illustrations add
some Propositions which may clear it from some Oppositions, which arise out of
mine own understanding, rather than in the perusing any Adversaries Writing.

SECT. V Some difficulties cleared.
THe mighty difficulty which troubled my mind all this while I have been
discoursing of this union, was, how it may be said that the same person shall
be a member of Christ, and yet in the state of Damnation, as without doubt many
a baptized person is? Somewhat like this I read in Cardinal Cajetan, who in his
Treatise of the Pope and a Council, Chap. 22. having been pinched with an
Argument against the Popes Supremacy, and being the visible head of the visible
Church, that the Pope may be an Heretic, yea an Apostate, and so no member,
much less the head of the visible Church; He flies to my Conclusion for
refuge; (I will not meddle with the force of it against the Conclusion he
Treats of, but only as he handles it in its self) That the Pope must be a
baptized person, and that union of Baptism will retain him in his Membership;
Then (says he) if we will cast the eyes of our minds a little higher, we shall
see that he who has only the Character of faith, (which is a baptized man) is
at the same instant b^^h faithful and unfaithful, a Member of Christ and his
Church, and extra membra Christi, without the Members of Christ and his Church
in diverse respects, and therefore diverse and contrary things are affirmed of
such a man by the Doctors: In a word, he says, That such a Man, as much as is
in his own power, is out of the Church; but Christ by his power keeps him in.
This is his Sense, and he goes further, That he who has this Character is a
Member, though in Hell. But his Expressions and Explications of this Conclusion
are not so full as I could have desired; he says, he is aliqualiter membrum,
after a sort a Member, but sets not down clearly after what sort: Bannes in his
large Notes upon 2. 2dae Quest. 1. Art. 10. says, that in the Constitution of
the visible Church there are two Things Considerable, one visible, and the
other invisible; one Internal* and the other External: In respect of what is
visible a baptized man is a member of the Church; but if he be an Apostate or
an Heretic, he is not a Member internally. This is somewhat he says, but it
is not e^ough; for if there be no internal adhesion, it will be rather a show,
and outward appearance of a thing, than a reality of it. Other expressions made
by Jacohus Granado, or such later Writers as I have seen, scarce come up so
far; Secundum quid (says he) they are Members, and such phrases, which make a
man to know no more than if they had said nothing.

I shall therefore express my self in this manner;

First, If you take the proportion of this body, called the Church, from that
communion it has with a natural body, as St. Paul seems to do, we shall then
find a baptized man grafted into the stock, and whilst he clings to it by
faith, and brings forth fruit, by charity he is a lively member of this body,
as those branches in all bodies are which bring forth their fruit in due
season; the best branch brings not forth fruit in all seasons, not in winter,
and yet is a lively branch; if it bring forth its fruit in its proper time, and
so more or less excellent in its several kinds, as it enlarges its self in
bringing forth fruit; but if it bring not forth fruit when the season for fruit
requires it, then it is not a lively branch, but yet living, which we may know,
because many such a branch has afterward brought forth fruit again, by the
discipline of pruning and husbandry. The same may be said of the parts of a
man's body; and yet to express this fuller, it is likely that this branch is
then in the state of mortality, and would perish, were it not repaired by
husbandry. Here you perceive a baptized man ingrafted into Christ's body, you
see him bringing forth fruit, and lively, you see him not lively, but living,
and whilst he yet lives in the state of death and destruction, unless he be
pruned and disciplined by repentance. Now it is an invincible sign that that
branch is yet knit to the body, because its livelihood is repaired by pruning,
not grafting again, and this according to the Analogy betwixt a natural body
and its members, and the Church and her members.

Secondly, Draw the proportion from a Politic body, a Corporation. Suppose a
Corporation, with this fundamental clause in its Statutes, that whosoever is
once admitted, though he may be thrust out of it for such and such offenses,
though he thrust himself out, yet if he return again, making satisfaction,
although not of equality, yet such acknowledgement as being ordained by Law
shall be accepted, this man shall be admitted into his former community of the
privileges of that Corporation. This man by being once admitted loses not
this union, until he come unto that condition of never laying hold of the
privileges of that Charter; he keeps his union, though he enjoys not the
communion of that Corporation. This is the state of this apostatizing man, and
by the Laws of God granted by all he is upon these terms admitted again,
whether he thrust himself out of the communion, or be thrust out. Thus this man
(in Answer to the former Argument) is at the same time in the state of a man
that is damned, having put himself out of Noah's Ark, the Church, in which alone
is salvation, and without repentance; and until repentance, which is commonly
called, Secunda post naufragium tabula, he is in that state of damnation; and
yet if he lay hold on that planck after his shipwreck, he shall be saved, and
has title to a room in that Ship, a place in that Corporation; and this is the
union I labor for, and that which suffices to answer mine own Argument and
Hookers: the same member is at the same time a member of Christ's mystical
body, and in the state of damnation, a member though not lively, but only
living; and in the state of dead men, and without repentance must be in that
state for ever, yet by his Baptism has a foundation for that to work upon;
thus to my self, then to Mr. Hooker. This man who is baptized, is still by that
Covenant in the Church, Tanquam pars in toto, though not tanquam locatum in
loco; he is a member in the first act, though he by his sins and opposition
neither may nor can use any privilege of a member in the second act, to
receive blessings from or with them, like a dead branch; dead to the second
act, though alive in the union: he has not lost his membership by these acts,
but only communion in the second.

SECT. VI. Another Argument answered.
ANother Argument I can frame somewhat like this former out of Scripture;
First, from Romans 8. 1. (as it is urged after by such who draw Conclusions from
curtalled Scripture) There is no condemnation to them who are in Christ Jesus.
These Apostates who are baptized, by your Doctrine should be in Christ,
therefore there should be no condemnation to them, which is impossible to be;
for if there be none to them, then there is none to any.

This Argument may be blown away by the very air and breath of the following
words, rather than need any Answer; for the following words are, who walk not
after the flesh, but after the Spirit: But to such who are in Christ by
Baptism, and in their lives are far from him, their condemnation is more
abundantly just, and their very Baptism, by which they Covenanted to serve God,
will arise in judgment against them.

Again it may be Objected, John 10. That Christ's sheep hear his voice and
follow him; these run away from him, therefore not his sheep.

It may be Answered; His sheep who are in his fold do hear his voice, so long
as they keep in that blessed communion; but when they leave that, and go into
the wilderness with the stray sheep, then they listen not to it, nor follow
him, but go from him, as is in the parable of the lost sheep, Luke 11. But yet
it is evident that sheep belonged to his flock, by the shepherds search after
him, and that it was called his sheep, though a stray one, and gone cle^n from
the fold and communion with the rest of the flock; so that it owed obedience to
his voice, and to his steps, to follow him, though it ran from him: and this is
all I require, a bond of duty, the obligation of a Covenant, not the force of
any violent Tie.

SECT. VII. Romans 8. 17. Answered.
IT may be Objected once again, that the baptized are by that made the Sons of
God, and if Sons, then Heirs, as St. Paul disputes the Case, Romans 8. 17. But
these Apostates cannot be accounted Heirs of Heaven, therefore they lose their
filiation and their Sonship by such wickedness, and so may all those other
consequences of the Adoption of that Covenant.

This Question is fully handled by our Savior, Luke 15. in the Story of the
prodigal Son: there is no Apostate can do more than that dissolute young man
did, but only perseverance, and yet when he returned was not begot anew, that
cannot be, but admitted into his former estate of a Son. Take it therefore
logically, by way of Answer; He that is a Son, quatenus, as a Son, he is by
that title an Heir, but yet he may so dispose of himself, like the Prodigal,
like Esau, that he may aliene and sell his Birthright, and in that state he is
not Heir, though a Son: So that a Son, non ponenti obicem, if he alien not his
Birthright, in himself is an Heir, but if he do, he has no Inheritance, though
an Heir, he loses his Birthright. But how then, may one say, is St. Paul's
saying true, If a Son, then an Heir? Thus; because by being a Son, he has a
title to the reversion of his Fathers estate, but he may aliene it, which he
could not do, unless he had title to it: And yet we may say, that although he
is by his Adoption the right Heir, yet he is by his lewdness disinherited. So
that as the prodigal Son, so long as he lived in that dissolute and prodigal
estate, received no favor from his Father, nor any relief from his estate, yet
when he returned, he was restored to all again. So it is with a Christian; a
baptized Christian once adopted the Son of God, has Heaven so entayled, that
he cannot aliene it without a power of revocation, which power it then acted,
when with true repentance and humiliation he shall prostrate himself before the
Throne of grace for mercy, when he shall with the prodigal Son have a sense of
his misery, by living in that dissolute condition, and longing after the
blessings of his Fathers house, shall creep to him, confessing his sins and
begging his favor, with a, Father I have sinned against Heaven, and before
thee, etc. This is the state of every baptized man, who by that is adopted a
Son of God. I will not enter into those large and tedious discourses of Gods
hardening men's hearts, by dereliction of them, or of that which is termed the
sin against the holy Ghost, how these may divest a man of his Inheritance. It
is enough for my purpose that any baptized man has such an interest in God, as
when he repents he is sure of admission; and therefore though many Laws have
been severe in punishing Delinquents, as enjoining penances for many years,
sometimes more or less, as sins were adjudged greater or less, and of later
times, and at this present in the Church of Rome, there are Casus reservati,
reserved Cases not to be pardoned, some not by the Parochian, some not by the
Bishop of the Diocese, some reserved only for the Pope, yet in case of death
all these Ecclesiastic Constitutions are adjudged dissolvable by the best
Casuists, and the Parochian has power to absolve and remit them. So that, for
Answer to this Argument, I may justly say that these baptized Apostates are
still Heirs of Heaven, but such as have aliened their estate, with a power of
revocation upon certain conditions, which when they perform, the estate is
theirs again: and agreeing to this will the Answer be to another place, which
is much insisted upon by the Antinomians, and many others symbolizing with them.

SECT, VIII. The 1. of St. John 3. 9. expounded.
THat is, 1 John 3. 9. Whosoever is born of God, does not commit sin; from
which is deduced, That sinners are not Gods children, are not born of God, not
heirs, therefore have not title to him and his blessings: if not sinners, much
less so great sinners as Apostates.

To understand which Text, and farther to illustrate this truth, conceive with
me, First, That this phrase sins not, or commits not sin, (that will not
be material) cannot be understood of doing nothing that is sin, for our
Apostle in this very Epistle has declared the contrary, Chap. 1. 8. If we say
that we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us. Again,
Verse 10. If we say that we have not sinned, we make him (that is, God) a liar,
and his Word is not in us. Again, Chap. 2. verse 1, 2. If any man sin, we have
an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous, and he is the
propitiation for our sins. Then, they sinned, and in such manner, as they have
need of Christ for a propitiation.

Secondly, I cannot conceive these words so as Beza expounds them, in the 4th
verse, which he would have guide the whole sense of the phrase, throughout this
Chapter; he says, that (...) does differ from (...); to commit sin, differs
from sinning, because to commit sin, is to do it knowingly against his
conscience. To conclude, he makes it an high kind of sinning, and to sin with
reigning sin. I know no necessity to force any such exposition from the phrase,
and I am sure he chose a most unlucky verse to obtrude that exposition upon;
for in that place the Apostle says, He who commits sin transgresses the law,
for sin is the transgression of the law; phrases which are affirmed of him that
commits sin, but agree to all sins, for every sin is the transgression of
the law; and therefore (...), to commit, or do, or make sin, is no more than to
sin: and to this inconsideration in Beza, fuller, the Apostle in verse 6. uses
only (...), He who remains in him, sins not. There, because the sense is as
pregnant to show the inconsistence of the birth or being in Christ, and sin, as
before he refers the Reader to the fourth verse, so that there was a
distinction in the 4th verse betwixt sinning and committing sin, but here there
is none in the 6th verse; but to sin, must be to do it, as is expounded, with
an high hand. But I have showed, there could be no such sense in that verse,
and therefore much less in this, where was not the least phrase guiding to it.
I come now to the Text; I have tumbled over diverse Expositors, and he that
pleases me best is Cardinal Cajetan in his Comments upon the Text, who seems
to me to dive deeper into, and drive closer to the sense of the Text than
others. Vasques Comes in a word or two toward it likewise, and many touch upon
it; his sense is, that he who is born of God, and he who remains in him, sins
not, nor can sin: this must be taken (says he) formaliter, formally, quatenus,
say the Logicians, as he is born of God. This we may perceive to be the sense
of the Text, because throughout this Chapter the Apostle describes two sorts of
actions, good and evil, two principles from whence they came; the good from
God, whose sons we are called that do good, and are as^imilated to him by such
actions; the evil from the devil, verse 8. Now these two principles are in
every man; when he does well his actions come from God, and so far forth he is
from God; and when he does evil his actions are from the devil, and so far
forth he is from the devil: nay we may not only find these two principles
working their effects in the same man, but like Jacob and Esau, struggling at
the same time in the same womb, who shall come out first, and like fire and
water contending at the same time for pre-eminence, as St. Paul wonderfully
describes, Romans 7. insomuch that in the 24th verse it made him cry out like a
woman in labor of this birth, O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me
from the body of this death? So that these two principles are in the same man;
perhaps sometimes he sins, in that he sins, quatenus, as he sins, he is not
born of God; then he does righteousness, out of that regard as he does
righteously he is born of God. Now yet that you may farther see that this is
the sense, see that this thread, this clew, must lead ^ord^ to the exposition
of the pieces in this same business of this Chapter, verse 6. He who sins
has not seen God, nor known God. This must be understood, quatenus, in that
regard every man has sinned, then no man has seen or known God, no, but
quatenus, in that regard that he sins, he has not seen God, nor knows
him, he sets not God before his face, so that there is a necessity of this
exposition from the like speeches of the Apostle; so likewise from that phrase
in the 9th verse, He cannot sin. (Certainly he who cannot sin, cannot but do
righteously) because he is born of God, out of that cause and principle,
whilst he keeps himself close to that, quatenus, as he is born of God; as
likewise he sins not, because the seed remains in him: yet St. Paul,
whilst the seed was in him, did sin, but not quatenus. A man may have the seed
of God, and the seed of the Devil together; the seed of God brings forth good
fruit, the seed of the Devil that which is ill; as he works from the seed of
God he cannot sin: and A Lapide expresses in another phrase, much conducing to
the same purpose, in sensu composito, concerning a man working by that
principle he cannot sin, or working by the Devil he shall sin, but taking a man
in sensu diviso, as not knit to that principle, nor working by the divine seed,
he may sin.

Let us see then this Text applied to this business, He who is born of God by
Baptism, sins not, not quatenus, not so long as he works according to the
design and intent of Baptism, which is to forsake the Devil, and follow Christ;
and this seed of this Covenant remains in him, to produce sanctity and
holiness of life, which so long as it is watered and cherished, it will do: and
be sure when you do evil, you work from another principle; but this no whit
derogates from the constant union which such a person keeps as a member, or a
filiation.

SECT. IX. Another Argument against the Filiation wrought in Baptism, answered.
I Would willingly clear this from all seeming opposition, and therefore will
discuss whatsoever appears to me of any difficulty.

I seem to place the Adoption, the Filiation of a Son of God, in the Covenant
of Baptism, and because that remains firm, therefore this Filiation does so
likewise, and is not extirpate by these greater sins. But now if it appear that
this work is done by other things, and not by it, then the foundation of this
discourse perishes, and what is built upon it must fall to the ground; but the
Antecedent is true, Gal. 3. 26. Ye are all the Sons of God by faith in Christ
Jesus; there faith, not Baptism, is set down as the mean of our Filiation.

I do not find faith put there as a constituting cause of our Regeneration, but
may well be a motive to it, and have a proper influence in it, but not the
constitution of it. To understand which, consider, that this Filiation is an
Adoption, and so there is two things requird, the consent of the parties, and
the obligatory Covenant which they both enter into. This is in this Adoption;
Christ would have all men to be saved, to repent and come to him: they do
covenant with him by Baptism to serve him, as the children of Israel covenanted
in Circumcision, to serve God according to their Judaicall Laws, so do they
with him in Baptism, according to his Evangelicall Laws. Now as no man will
submit himself to any Father, by being adopted to him, unless he believe that
he will bless him, that his Covenants upon Adoption shall be made good to him;
so no man comes unto God, as St. Paul, Heb. 11. 6. He that comes to God must
believe that he is, and that he is a rewarder of them who seek him. This act of
faith must precede every access to God; no man would take this Covenant, no man
be baptized and adopted without it: and therefore although faith do not
constitute the child of God, yet it is the means of his constitution, but
without which no man would be constituted, and indeed not only sine qua non (as
the Logicians speak) but likewise a means moving, and inclining men to it.

There is commonly objected the case of Infants, that they can have no faith
preceding their Baptism. I must not entangle my self in all controversies of
these times, and here handle this Question otherwise than this Objection
exposes it self against this Conclusion; and therefore Answer, that as Infants
have not actual faith of their own that any man can know of, so they do not
come with their own feet to Christ, neither does Christ exact it of them, or
any other, more than they can do: and therefore we may observe in that famous
story recorded in our Baptism, Mat. 19. 13. Mark. 10. 13. Luke 18. 15. That
when they brought little Children, or Infants, (as St. Luke calls them) and the
Disciples rebuked them who brought them, our Savior rebuked the Disciples, and
said to them, Suffer little Children to come unto me. First, mark this here,
That these three Evangelists recording this fact, although they varied in other
phrases, yet all agree in these two, that these little ones were brought by
other men, and that our Savior said, Suffer little Children to come unto me;
whereas in things not substantial to a story, the Evangelists most often vary in
the relation: and we may observe so great difference both in the phrases by
which they are expressed, and likewise in the very matter, that men's wits are
much troubled to reconcile them. So in material points the matter is
constantly the same; but when the phrase is the same likewise, it is a most
assured Argument that things were so disposed in that very manner and words,
and some excellent thing of high note is delivered, which I conceive thus; If
the Disciples had here replied, we do not hinder them from coming, we forbid
only others to bring them, oru Saviors reply was couched in the very words.
Children, Infants, come with others feet when they bring them; now no men come
to God but believers; they come then with others feet, why not believe with
others faith as well? Nay there seems to be great reason for it, because faith
is necessary to coming, that is, personal in them that can have personal
faith, as their own feet in them that have feet, but other men's feet serve the
turn for them who have none of their own, and so other men's faith: and for my
part I wonder why we should be so shy to allow this faith, since there is
nothing more frequent in Scripture, than (as the Bishop spoke of St. Austin,
though a man of a loose life, and carried away with those wicked and horrid
Opinions of the Manichees, Filius tantarum lachrymarum non potest perire; He
who had a Mother so zealous for him with such showers of tears, would not
perish; her piety was powerful with God for his good.) That other men's faith
and prayers are prevalent with God for their Childrens or Friends good, I need
not repeat the story of the Centurion, Mat. 8. whose faith was powerful to the
curing of his Servant, verse 13. So likewise Mark 9. where Christ cured a man's
Son by the prayer of the ^ather, and did it upon the Fathers faith, as is
evident by verse 23. If thou can believe, all things are possible to him that
believes; all things, then for other men as well as for themselves. There are
many such stories, but men throw them off with this shift, that those things
are concerning their bodies, not their souls: Alas, what more reason is there
for one than the other? But see it more closely; read Mark 2. 3. There many men
bring one sick of the pulsie, who was carried of four, and let down from the
top of the house, verse 5. It is said, That Jesus seeing their faith, said to
the sick of the palsy, S^n, thy sins be forgiven thee. Observe* they were
diverse persons whose faith he saw, and but one to whom he spoke; and because
some avoid it, and say, that within this word (their) is involved his who was
sick, his faith as well as theirs who carried him: although this will appear a
forced explication to them who consider the Text, yet let it be granted; I hope
they will no^ say his faith alone, then theirs co-operated with him in the
work, then they could operate themselves, for no second causes do cooperate one
with another, but when each has the power, then they had force of themselves
toward the procuring of this blessing. Consider then the blessing, Son, thy
sins are forgiven thee; what this was appears by the Dispute which followed:
the Scribes said, He spoke blasphemy, none can forgive sins but God; and our
Savior proved immediately that he was God, in the 21. verse, by saying to the
sick of the palsy, arise, take up thy bed, and walk, and did the miracle: so
that it appears evidently, first, that faith precedes to induce Baptism, before
men can come to God, that the coming of Infants is by others feet, that the
faith pre-required in Children is other men's faith: for as it is with all
supernatu^all works, there is a passive faith in the object, necessary to make
it capable of that miracle, without which, miracles (in the course of Gods
ordinary doing them) are not wrought, and with which all things are possible,
both for our selves, or those which belong to us; and this faith in a Father is
powerful for his Son, in a Master for his Servant. So is it in B^ptism; faith
is necessary to this great work of Adoption, but faith of others in Children is
only necessary: and this is excellently expressed in the practice of the Civil
Law, which whether it received its rise from this, or Circumcision, or that the
same principles which direct one, are evident in the other, I dispute not, but
it is some comfort even in Religion to see it illustrated by the ways of
prudent nature, and the universal Axioms of it. This then is so illustrated,
although Adoption requrie the consent of both parties, yet personally that is
only done in such as are sui juris, grown to such years as they are masters of
themselves, and their own actions: but such as are of such weak years, as they
are governed, and under parents, they can be, and are adopted by their parents
to another; an adopting Father, and their Covenants for the behalf and in the
name of the Child, both oblige the Child to filial duties toward his new
Father, and likewise the Father to a fatherly care of the Son, both in life by
protecting him, and in death by estating him in his Inheritance. Thus did God
with the Children of the Jews at Circumcision; that act by the Parents made
the Child a debtor to that law, and God to his Covenant of mercy to him. So
here is the hand of God accepting this act of Parents for their Children, in
Nature, in the Law, and in all footsteps of Gods Government, the same
discipline is observed. I will conclude somewhat like that passage in Petrus
Claniacensis, a man famous for learning and piety as any of that Age, in the
Treatise of his against the Petro-brusians, whose Opinions agreed in the point
with our Anabaptists; You see multitudes of men in Scripture had a faith
prevalent for others, and those but single persons, or a few men that carried
the Paralytick; shall not the faith of the world of the whole Church be
effectual to these Infants? A Father begs for his Son, a Master for his
Servant, shall not Christian Parents, yea the Christian Church, be heard in
prayer for these Infants? God has Covenanted, Whatsoever ye shall ask the
Father in my name, he will give it you, John 16. 22. Ask (say Divines)
constantly, faithfully, for good things, according to Gods will, non ponenti
Obicem, either for himself or others, who do not stop by self-wickedness the
power of prayers; can then the constant prayers of the Church, with that
unshaken faith of hers, be denied its efficacy, in a thing so pleasing to God,
to such persons who actually can put no hinderance to the power and efficacy of
that prayer? These things in Christian men cannot be denied; and therefore in
brief to the Argument: Faith in all introduces this Covenant in Baptism, and
moves the receiver to be adopted to God; and therefore observe, that the
Apostle, as he, verse 26. Ye are all the Children of God by faith; so in the
27th verse he brings a reason, For as many as are baptized into Christ have put
on Christ. The reason why they are the Children of God by faith, is because
that such as have this faith are moved to be baptized, and they put on Christ.
The faith of him who is master of his own actions, makes him be baptized; the
faith of him who is master of his Child's actions, causes him to bring his
Child to this Adoption: and yet (methinks) it has not only power concerning
this blessing, before the act of Adoption, to bring men to it, but even in it
to accept it; for although there were all the affection in the world to it
before, yet if faith fail in the Act, that man would hold from accepting such a
Covenant, whereby he had no confidence to be blessed: but this faith does only
make him Covenant, but it self is not the Covenant.

Thus I suppose I have spoken abundantly to Mr. Hookers second Argument, and to
such Objections which I have thought upon, as most opposing this Doctrine I
have delivered: and although I could frame many more of this nature, yet what
is said to these will serve the turn for them likewise; and therefore I let
them pass.

SECT. X. Mr. Hookers third Argument answered.
THomas Hookers third Argument, page 54. is thus framed, This Tenent does
necessarily evidence the Church of Rome to be a true Church, which is thus
gathered.

Where all the members are true members, there the Church is a true Church.

But all the members in all the Congregations of Rome are true members, Ergo.

This Minor he proves, because they are baptized. I would first know, what is
the harm if we allow the Church of Rome to be a true Church; true in the
essentials of a Church, though sick, and full of corrupt Doctrines. I have
showed, and it is most true, that many men be in a Church, yea in the Catholic
Church, and not be saved; and perhaps there may be an whole Church, such as Mr.
Hooker would have, and scarce a man of them saved without the same means, as
many in the Church of Rome are saved by. And therefore by the way I add, that
the Church of Rome is not only a Church, but a saving Church, such as I doubt
not but multitudes are saved in; for they have not only a Doctrine of
essentially true Baptism, to admit men into the Church, but they have a
Doctrine essentially true of repentance, to let men out of it: and I am
confident, that those men which so die, with their repentance and contrition
for sins, and a desire of a new life, and a trust in Christ, that he has
satisfied for their sins, and have no wilful errors, but their other errors
are such as are invincible, and upon that ground beg, with David, the Lord to
forgive them their secret sins; I say, such a soul shall be saved,
notwithstanding multitudes of errors both in belief and practice. And this
Doctrine is taught in the Church of Rome, although mixed with many errors, for
which yet they have many such seeming reasons, as to such who are not allowed
to converse with men, or read Books of another belief, may be sufficient to
excuse them at the last day. So that although the errors taught in the Church
of Rome are not safe, yet the fundamentals taught among them, annexed to that
Doctrine of repentance, may be accepted by Almighty God, according to his
Covenant in Jesus Christ, to their salvation. This Controversy has been most
learnedly handled by Chillingworth, and others: I let it pass therefore, and
will examine his Major, which is extremely far from truth.

Where all the members are true members, there the Church is a true Church.
This Proposition is false: all the members of a dog are true members, all the
members of a man are true members; but there is no true Church where that Turk
is, or where that dog is. Thus as he sets it down, it is grossly false; nor can
I add any one term to mend it: the likeliest I can may be this;

That Church where every member is a true member, that Church is a true Church:
But yet this is false, according to themselves; for a Church as we dispute of,
it is totum Integrale, under that notion we conceive it to have members, but
many times there may be many hands and many feet which stick together, and yet
do not make a true totum Integrale, which consists of a perfect body, with all
its several parts, and yet these are true parts of their several bodies,
these hands of Richard, those of William: so there may be diverse Laymen
Congregated, or diverse Pastors, which are severally each of them true members
perhaps of other Congregations, yet in that body make not up a true Church,
which consists of all parts, Pastors, Teachers, etc.

Let me add one term more; In that Church where all the members are true
members of it, there that Church is a true Church. This is false likewise: for
in a representative Officer, each member is a true member of him; of a false or
counterfeit King, each member is a true member of him, but he is not a true
Officer, or true King; and for him to urge that he who is a false Officer is no
Officer, and that Congregation which is not a true Church is no Church, then he
by making these members of the Church of Rome, and calling it a Church of Rome,
makes it a true Church himself. So that either this Proposition means nothing,
or it is absolutely false.

This I speak, to show that although the Conclusion which he conceives of an
undeniable evidence, were true, (as I have proved it false) yet it would in no
means be deduced from that Major, no not with the addition of two or three the
most assisting terms I could add to it; and so I come to his fourth Argument,
which is thus framed.

SECT. XI. His fourth Argument answered.
THat which is a Seal of the Covenant, and our Incorporation into the Church
visible, that cannot be the form of it.

At primum verum, Ergo.

I put down his very words, which forces me to add his Minor, But Baptism is
the Seal, etc. Ergo, Baptism is not the form.

This Proposition he proves thus, Because the Seal comes after the thing
sealed, but the form goes before. These things are so grossly delivered, and so
without all illustration, that it is hard to speak to it, for this is all he
speaks in that place to this business: what he adds against Mr. Rutherford, I
am nothing concerned in, nor do I know what Mr. Rutherford replies to this, nor
can conceive it by him. In a word, I deny his Major. That (say I) which is the
Seal may be the form of the Covenant, in such cases where the Seal is made an
essential part of it, as in such deeds where Sealing is necessary, as in Law,
where signing, sealing, and delivering, altogether, make the form of that
Covenant where they are so required; and Baptism is all these: so that if he
had said, that which is a Seal alone cannot make the form, I would have denied
his Minor, and have said, that Baptism is not a bare Sign, as he will and does
confess, but signing and delivering on both sides.

Now to illustrate this Proposition; in such cases such Seals as I have
described, are the form of those Covenants. Consider, that the form of every
thing is that which gives it ability to work that which is its proper work;
this does signing, sealing, and delivering do: every Deed is like a dead body
before, but when sealed it receives a soul, and is able to work, which it could
not do before. Again, the form of every thing is the last addition to it; that
which he speaks, in his proof that a form goes before the thing sealed, or
rather informed or constituted, and a Seal comes after, is very vain and weak:
for it is true, as it being a constituting principle, and a cause of that it
produces, it is therefore, as the Logicians speak, prius natura, non effectu,
before it in nature, not in time. The Sun is in nature before its light,
because its light proceeds out of it; fire before heat, yet they are simul
tempore, children of the same birth, and one cannot be without both are. The
soul of man is before a man in nature, because it is a constituting cause; yet
by them that hold it created, Creando infunditur, and infundendo creatur; and
they that hold it ex Traduce, give it no prae-existence in time to the man; and
what he says of a Seal, it comes after: in such cases where Seals are
essential, they are before the Seal comes, and like a soul put into a body, it
gives it ability to work, and in that state is precedent in nature. So that you
see, Seals in such Deeds as well as forms, are before the vivacity of a
Covenant in nature, though both are simul in time; and therefore such Seals may
be forms, and indeed are forms, as is before expressed, being that which gives
the Covenant sealed its form and power to work, and likewise the last thing
which comes to actuate that thing in which it is: but because that when the
Seal is gone, yet the form of the Covenant remains, and forms having permanent
beings as Seals transient, it may be further doubted how Seals can be forms.
This I urge, though not a Book-Objection, (as indeed I do not find the Question
disputed in the School under this Notion) but only which started it self in my
thoughts whilst I was writing, and indeed may do so with others, for I am
unwilling to let any thing pass which may disturb a Readers assenting; and
therefore in Answer to this Objection do say, that although the Seal be gone,
yet its image, its likeness, when it is gone, remains in the Wax, which is as
valid to all its intentions, as it self, and is the Seal, effective, in its
moral existence, to all those moral effects which it produces: so it is in
Baptism; there is that the School calls the Character, which remains after the
act of Baptism is gone, and is powerful to all its effects. I did avoid to
speak of this intricate business, hoping I might have escaped it; but since I
cannot, do thus undertake it now, and define it thus.

CHAP. XIII. What the Character left in Baptism is; and this Character defined.
THe Character or Relict of Baptism, by which a Christian is constituted a
member of the Catholic Church, is a spiritual power, by which the baptized man
is interessed with right, both to receive and do what belongs to a member of
Christ's Church.

First, It is a power: Powers are either active, or passive; active, to do, as
fire to burn; passive, to suffer, or receive, as wood has a passive power to
receive the ignifying nature of fire, which gold has not. This relict of
Baptism does both these, both enable a man to demand and receive Confirmation;
to join with the Christian Congregation in devo^ions and prayers; to demand and
receive absolution, the Communion, with all other things which a Christian man
does in his several duties and occasions. But we must here distinguish betwixt
natural powers, and moral; the first are faculties in man, by which he is
enabled by that internal principle, to act what the power directs him to, and
no man obtains any such, but by a real change and alteration in himself to
some absolute quality, as a power to walk, to speak, or the like, that he had
not before. But in moral powers, as the right to an Estate or to an Office,
these may come to a man without any such alteration: As the father dies, the
son is immediately invested with the power of his fathers Estate, and yet the
son is the same in all absolute things, has no such change in himself. Again,
a man is chose a General, a King, he h^^h in himself no such change, no such
alteration, but is the same he was before in all absolute things. In moral
powers we are not to expect an alteration in the party who receives them, to
any absolute reality: so that although in a baptized person, who receives these
mighty powers, we can discover no alteration, yet these powers are in him, by
the force of this moral form, which enables him to act or receive such or such
things.

Next let us consider that it is a spiritual power: that Attribute is given it
in regard of its object, and end, because the power aims at spiritual
blessings, and is conversant about spiritual means, to obtain this end: for as
it is called moral, because it considers not natural actions, but such as
concern a man's manners, his doing well or ill in relation to God, and that
Christian Community in which he lives; so it is spiritual, in respect of the
spiritual conversation it has with God, and those men of whose society it is.

And now we seeing the genus in this definition, let us examine the difference,
a power by which he is interessed with right: here is apparent that which was
employed before, that it is not a natural but a moral power: natural powers
enable a man to do, as the power to move, to speak; but the moral power gives
him not ability, but authority and right to move or speak thus; or now he has
interest and right to do it, to receive and do (this power is both active and
passive, as before) what belongs to a member of Christ's Church. This gives him
interest in no civil right, nor Office in the Church, but only a right as a
member, that is, such a right as by Christ's Laws appertain to him: If a sinner,
in such a degree, he is shut out of the Communion; if a penitent, he may
require absolution, and by his being baptized, he is made capable of these,
which otherwise before, and without Baptism, he was not.

SECT. II In what Predicament this Character is.
THus this Definition being explained, there is a great Question, what manner
of thing, in what Predicament this relict power is] For my part, without
disparagement of my great Master in Philosophy, Aristotle, I think that these
spiritual and theological powers need not be tugged into any of his
Predicaments, nor was he to be blamed as insufficient in his number, because he
being acquainted only with natural things, found out names for them in his
Ten; but being ignorant of spiritual, must of necessity leave them, and such
as studied them, to shift for their room elsewhere: and we might therefore with
more ease invent another for them, than be forced with unjust violence to hale
them to these, which were only provided for natural things. But yet because
those old names would better please a Reader, I will keep my self to them.

And first, I opine that this relict is of a relative nature, in its proper
being, for it is that interest which a man has as before in Christ as his
head, and the rest of the Church as his fellow members, which is a relation,
for pars and totum, part and the whole are relates, so are head and member, in
such bodies as have heads; and in this consists the nature of this relict, and
therein are seated all the interests and powers which a baptized man has.

Aquinas, with that great Army of learned men who follow his colors, sight
against this Conclusion vehemently, with many Arguments seemingly powerful,
the nature of which consisting of such matter as is not usual in English
Authors, it may chance not be unpleasing to him who reads this, to study a
little that Christian Philosophy which will be opened in this discourse; and I
am confident, it will by drawing aside such curtains as are interposed, give
admittance to such light as will illustrate the business in hand to any easy
sight: and therefore I undertake them. The first Argument urged by Cabrera,
(for I will take them where I find them strongest maintained) Cabrera in 3.
Quest. 63. Art. 2. Disp. 1. Sect. 3. Conclus. 3. thus argues, There is no
motion to a bare relation, (ad relationem per se, is his phrase) for this he
produces Aristotle, 5. Phys. Text. 10. for says he, all change is to an
absolute form, but there is a motion to this Character, (as he and the whole
School call it; I term it the relict) for the Sacramental motion is terminated
in this Character, as is evident in him who should feignedly take this
Sacrament; he receives nothing but the mere Character, no grace, nor any other
supernatural quality, but only this Character. I may urge it further, because,
as I have showed, this relict may remain in a man who is void of all grace, and
full of all impiety, and therefore is something in it self, which is the
terminus, the bound, the effect of that motion.]

SECT. III. Motion is to Relation.
I Answer to this, that motion is to relation, and that relations may be the
effects of motions, that language which Scotus and his followers use in the
explication of this Conclusion, is not amiss; that it is true, such relations
which arise ab intrinseco, from some inward principle, cannot be produced
without a change in the subject, or fundamentum, or the object to which it is
referred; but such relations which arise ab extrins^co, from abroad, are terms
and proper effects of motions. His followers, Franciscus de Pitigianis, Ruiz,
Faber Faventinus, in Q. 4. Did. 6. Quest. 10. amongst the later: as likewise
the more ancient touching upon it, explain this distinction thus, These
relations arise from within, out of the very nature of both the relates, which
putting both the relates in actual being, that respect must needs arise out of
them, (and this indeed must show such relation to arise from an inward
principle, because it results from their being, like heat from ^ire, as soon as
it is. For instance, a son and a father are no sooner in the world both at the
same time, but there arises out of them that mutual relation of fatherhood
and filiation; so likewise no sooner is one paper dyed black, but there arises
that mutual similitude and likeness it has with another paper which was black
before: that relation comes from abroad, which does not naturally arise out of
the being of the relates, but requires something else to give it a proper
being. They illustrate it thus; an agent and patient have relation one to the
other, but the agent, as fire, and the patient, as wood, may both he in being,
yet not have their relation one to another: they may be at such a distance, as
the fire cannot work upon the wood; yea in a sit distance, and all things else
disposed, there may be some medium interposed, and the fire not be agent, nor
the wood patient, and without any new change in either of them, but the
removing the interposed body, they shall have instantly the relation of agent
and patient; and the motion only of the interposed body, without any new
absolute quality introduced into either, the fire or the wood, shall cause that
relation: thus they; but see it clearer in those moral relations which have a
nearer affinity with this of my business in hand; a man is chosen Mayor of a
Town, Judge in a Circuit, he is the same in all absolute things he was before,
can do no physical or natural act which he could not before, he was as wise
before, could before give sentence as well as after, but his sentence was not
definitive before this, only that relation which the power of the Magistrate
gave him of being a Judge or Mayor, enabled him with, and this was
extrinsecall, from abroad; for he was before, the Town or parties to be judged
were before, but only this outward investiture in his Office, (outward in
respect of both the relates) gave him this being. So it is with the business in
hand; the baptized man had all the absolute qualities before that he has
afterward; he could receive the Communion, he could pray with the
Congregation, he could be absolved, the same things he could do or suffer, but
he had right to none, he could not do or receive these blessings effectively
before he was baptized: he was before, Christ was before, the Church was
before, but his relations to neither were before, but this act of Baptism
introduced them. And thus relation we see may be the term and effect of such
motion, for mutation or change is whatsoever has novum, else a new thing is
something which it was not before, now that which has a new relation, is
something that it was not before: the Mayor is the Governor of his Town, the
Judge of his Circuit; so a baptized man, a Christian, which he was not before.
I think there needs no more be spoken to the first Argument; for the place in
Aristotle, the Scotists say, it is only to be understood of those relations
which have their being from an inward principle, not such as are from abroad,
that it is true of those which are in the predicament of relation, not of all
respects which are transcendent, or of which the six last predicaments are
constituted; for Suarez makes Angelical motion to be to the predicament of
ubi, which is one of those respects which constitute a Predicament of
themselves, but are not in the predicament of relation: And we may observe,
that our transposition of our body in our place to a new situs, is a motion to
a relation, which is another Predicament of the same nature. But Cabrera, where
before, says, that Dominicus Soto despises this Answer, in 4. Did. 1. Quest.
4. Art. 2. You may read it toward the later end of that Article; His Answer
is, That there is no such thing as a relation arising out of any outward cause,
for every relation arises immediately out of its foundation: The instances of
Scotus he seems to overthrow. First, That of fire, (says he) the foundation of
the relation, to the patient the wood, is the action of warming, not the heat;
but let that warming act to the wood have its being, presently the relation
results: and for the action to Vbi, he denies Vbi to be a relation, but the
esse in loco, to be in a place, which is a real thing. I will not dispute
these instances, although they are the only instances given by the Scotists,
and they do not observe this reply in this place; but my instances of a Mayor
or Judge can in no manner be excepted against, for there is the Mayor
absolutely the same way endowed with all qualities and defects as before, who
is the foundation of this relation, and he living in the same Town, conversing
with the same men, and yet has this new relation of being Mayor, arising from
the constitution of an outward power, and that motion from an outward cause
works no change in him to any real and absolute quality. But perhaps he will
say, that this Mayoralty is the foundation of that relation, and so the
relation immediately results out of it: Let him tell me then what that
Mayoralty is, but that relation he has to that Society of which he is Mayor;
for certainly he can make it nothing else, but that very Mayoralty must be that
relation.

SECT. IV. Relation may be the principle of Action.
I Come therefore to his second Argument, which is clean contrary to that
before: for as he said, Motion could not be terminated in relation; so now he
says, Relation cannot be the principl^ of any real action or passion: but
this relict or Character of Baptism is the principle of those receivings of
those blessings, before spoken of; therefore it cannot be a relation.

To this I answer, His Major has no foundation to build upon. Look upon all
moral relations, as I have before showed, yea upon moral powers in natural
relations; as you may see, a Father is no sooner a Father, but presently out of
that Fatherhood arises that moral power to have dominion over his Son, and
that duty of providing for him: so likewise from the relation of Mayoralty
arises that power of governing and ruling in the Corporation* So that although
perhaps natural relations are not principles of natural actions, nor do they
give men natural powers, as by being a Father, a man neither eats, nor drinks,
nor sleeps the better; yet relations are principles of moral actions and
passions, and give their moral powers interests and duties, which immediately
result out of those relations: and of this nature is this, they are moral
endowments, spiritually moral, as before explained, to act or receive the
blessings appertaining to such members.

SECT. V. One Relation may be the foundation of another.
A Third reason of his is, That one relation cannot be the foundation of
another; this is by some confirmed, That if it could be founded in another,
there would be relation upon relation, infinitely.

This is absolutely false likewise as well as the other Major. To prove this,
the instances of Scotus and his followers are such as abide dispute; I will
avoid that, and make it as clear as day: Two sheets of paper have the same
writings, or (if you will) but black spots in them, these two sheets have a
similitude or likeness in them; then take two sheets of parchment, and let them
have the same writings or spots in them; there the first relation is the
foundation immediately of the second similitude, as relations; yet clearer,
Fatherhood in Thomas is a relation, so is Fatherhood in Peter; from hence
results a likeness betwixt these two, Thomas and Peter, which is founded only
upon the former relation of Fatherhood.

It is in vain for men to say that similitude is only in qualities; for whether
it be equality in quantities, or identity in substance, or convenience in any
other Predicament, a relation results from one as well as the other. So then
although this relict of Baptism be a relation, yet it may found and support, be
the subjectum quo, the immediate subject, by reason of which other relations
are in the substance. Now that which was urged for confirmation, that then
relations might be multiplied infinitely, is of no force, for there is, as we
see in the former instances, a fixation, that there must be a bound beyond
which it cannot go: nor is the Argument of more force in relations, then
because there is a cause of a cause, therefore there should be infinite causes;
for we know there must be one fixed.

SECT. VI. Where is the Foundation of this Character.
I Leave Cabrera, and come to Didacus Nuguewin 8. Quest. 63. Art. 2. Difficult*
2. who enquireth, If this Character be a relation, ^ where is its foundation,
that must be either natural or supernatural; natural it cannot be, because it
is spiritual; and supernatural it cannot be, because it self is the first
spiritual thing in man: now, every relation must have some absolute thing to
found it on. This Argument I do not find obsorved by any of the School of
Scotus, and therefore must say somewhat to it, which to me seems not yet
delivered in the School in this Conclusion. I say therefore, that it is one
thing to speak of the foundation of a relation, another thing to speak of the
terminus, or subject, or correlate: as thus, the subject of a Fatherhood is the
man who is the Father, the correlate is his Son, the foundation is his power of
getting a Son, or his act, in that permanent being in which it remains. So in
two white sheets of paper, the relate or subject is the white sheet, the
correlate to which it is referred is the other white sheet, the foundation is
the whiteness. Thus it is in all these relations which are natural, because
their relations arise from within, their foundation must be internal; but in
moral relations, whose original is from abroad, there the foundation of this
relation must be abroad: as thus, What is the foundation of this man's
Mayoralty, but either the Charter by which it is supported, or else the will of
the Supreme, or both, or whatsoever from without gave him that being of that
relation. Now therefore in this case, I say, the foundation of this relation,
this relict, which is the membership of Christ, is the will of God, who has
thus constituted a baptized man a member of his Church; and this is a
supernatural thing, and that which alone can endow a man with this membership:
this he does by his sacred Word, which has confirmed this to us.

SECT. VII. Another Argument answered.
THere is one little Argument more, which is, That the disposition to every
form is reducible to that ^a^k and series of things in which the form it
disposes to is; but this Character is a disposition to Gods graces, which are
reduced to qualities; therefore.

The Major again is false, most eminently false, so that the contrary is almost
(...): see it so; heat is a disposition to ^^re, cold to water, yet they are
subst^nces: these accidents, most differing relations, are dispositions to many
great actions of piety in Parents, of duty in Clergymen, of governing well in
Magistrates, of obedience in all their Subjects, yet these things of diverse
natures. I conclude then resolutely, that this relict of Baptism is a relation.

Now, next, in a relation would be enquired, whether real or rational; whether
a real relation, or that of reason only.

CHAP. XIV. Whether the Relict be a real Relation, or of Reason.
DVr^nd^^, in 4. Did. 4. Quest. 1. prope finem, stands alone against all the
Schools of Thomas and Scotus, and Ocham, and whosoever: his opinion is, that
this Character is only Ens Rationis; I cannot approve of his Reasons, nor
altogether of his Conclusion, yet do think him unconfuted by all that I have
seen, and I have looked over forty I think at least. The principal Arguments
which are urged against him are Authorities, first, out of the Florentine
Council, in that Decree of union, which indeed might rather be called the
Decree of Eugenius the 4th; but howsoever that Decree has no more, but that
these three Sacraments, Baptism, Confirmation, and Orders, imprint an indelible
Character, which is a Sign, all which may be allowed Ens Rationis. Secondly,
out of the Council of Trent, Sess. 7. Cap. de Sacr. Ca^. 9. which says no
more than the other, that this Character is a spiritual indelible Sign, so
that were I of the Church of Rome, according to their own principles, even in
this Age, (for he is excused from heresy by them, writing before these
Decrees, but his opinion is condemned by most now after these Canons) yet I
say, even now amongst themselves he might be defended by these Canons, much
better than they who hold it to be a real absolute quality; for if it be a
Sign, a Sign is a relation: and that is but a shift to say this word Sign is
put for an explicatory term, not as the Genus, since in these two Councills it
enjoys the place of a Genus, as is evident in these Canons; and then Signs may
be Entia Rationis, as most be which are not natural Signs, but by Institution,
of which nature this is. The chief reason that I find may be that of
Pitigianus, in Theol. spec. and moral. Did. 6. Quest. 10. Art. 1. That if the
Characters of these Sacraments should be Entia Rationis only, then the
Priesthood of the new Testament should no othewise impress its Character, than
the Priesthood of the old Law. To this I answer, That I know no need that it
should: but yet Vasquez, Quest. 63. Art. 3. Disp. 134. Cap. 2. Number. 34. in 3.
says, That this Character differs from the other, because that was delible,
this not; but this is weak, because delibility or indelibility are extrinsecall
things to the nature of a Character, and both what is delible and what is
indelible may have their beings upon reason, or else be real.

Cabrera, in 3 Quest. 63. Art. 2. Disp. 1. Sec. 2. urges Arguments, as before
against relation, so here against this, Characters being Ens Rationis: first, a
real action has a real term; but this Character does terminate a real action,
therefore.

The Major is so extremely false, that indeed there is no Ens Rationis in the
world which does not terminate a real act: take the most fictitious Chymaera
that ever was, which is the most purely the work of humane reason; yet even
when I say it is the work of reason, I make it the effect and term of a real
act, which is man's reason.

Again, (says he) If a Character should be Relatio rationis, then the effect
of every Sacrament should be a Character, because there are relations of reason
in them all.

This has no consequence at all; for although a Character were a relation of
reason, yet it does not follow that every relation of reason should be a
Character.

Thus I conceive the Arguments opposed to Durand, answered, out of their own
principles who contend against him.

SECT. II. The constitution of Man, and likeness to God.
NOw to understand the truth of this Question; Paulo Majora Canamus, conceive,
as it is described in the first of Genesis, that God made all the world, and
the things that are in it; when he had done, he made man after his own image,
as it is described there; a little God to govern the world which he had made,
under God; and not so only, but this image did gloriously appear in the soul of
man, not only that as God made the creatures, so he gave man the authority to
give them their names, but likewise that he gave his soul a power to make
another world as he had done this: so that as God has made one world, so man,
in the power of his imagination, of his reasonable imagination, has made a
thousand more; and can imagine that the infinite power may, and has made so
many worlds, that this to that number should be but as a mote to this. He can
make a world in the Moon; and as wise men do concerning this, so such men can
and have philosophized what men do and ought to do in that: he can make nations
of Pigmies, Silves, Nymphs, and philosophize what their natures are, and what
their manners; yea some have told what their religion and duty to God is: he
can go further, and take in pieces this world, and join a man, an horse, and a
bird together; and his busy fancy can bring forth births monstrous, to all
the effects of God in nature; yea you may observe these expressions wonderful
in the Prophets. Now as the works of God which he made are such as we call
real things, both those absolute entities, and those which are relations, for
those relations which God has made by the hand of nature, (as smoke and fire,
father and son, and the like, are real relations; so those works which are
wrought by men's reason alone, those are Entia rationis, the things of reason,
all Chimaera's, all men in the Moon, all imagined things, which have no
existence in the world, out of man's head and intellect; these are things of
man's making, and attain not that excellency of Gods works to be real things,
but barely things of reason. Yet besides this, God has not only given man
power to make these strange beings, existing in man's own intellect, but
likewise to mix them, and join them with his own real things. So we may see
amongst men which are Gods creatures, and real things; men make by the power
of their intellect this man a master, that a servant: this humane power gives
the particular interests which several men have in these real estates; for
although the right of dominion which one has over another, or over any of the
creatures, is confirmed by God, and the duties belonging to those relations,
the real duties exacted by him, yet the particular way of interest is allowed
to humane institution. Thus have men power to add to divine works and beings,
their relations, which so far as they are of humane making, are things of
reason, nor real; and these are the works, Rationis ratiocinatae, which reason
finds some foundation in the things for, but not ratiocinantis only, which have
not being out of man's soul which made them. Now then to apply this to our
purpose; this relict of Baptism is a relation of Gods constituting barely,
where man has nothing to do, but merely as a moral instrument, to administer,
of himself giving no influence, making no constitution concerning it, and
therefore cannot be Ens rationis; all such things as exist without humane
power, without humane invention, are real, such is this: did no man in the
world contribute any thing to it, but only that isntrumental application; did
no man think upon it, yet God had a near particular interest in that baptized
person, and would exact his proper duties from him, which were not in a man
unbaptized: So then this being a work of Gods, must be a real relation, not
only of reason.

SECT. III. Baptism has all things necessary to a real Relation.
AGain, observe that it has all things requisite to a real relation: The first
requisite is, that it have Subjectum capax, a Subject capable of it; this I
mean to be man, as I intend to demonstrate anon. Secondly, That it have a fit
foundation, that is, the Will or Law of God. Thirdly, That it have its
Terminus, or Correlate co-existing, which is Christ as his head, and the rest
of the Church as his fellow members, both which are and shall be always
co-existing; and therefore this must be a real relation; and therefore now to
come to answer Durands Reasons, why it is Relatio rationis: The first of which
is,

As (says he) money receives its value and price from humane institution, so
(says he) do natural things receive the nature of a Sacrament from divine
institution: but money receives its price and value from a relation of humane
reason so appointing it; therefore, (says he) these things receive the nature
of a Sacrament from a relation of divine reason so appointing it: therefore
again (says he) since a Character is that by which in orders one man is
capable of giving the Sacraments, and another in Baptism to receive them, it is
nothing but a relation of reason by divine institution.

I consent so far as he says it is a relation, without any dispute; but it is
a relation of divine making and confirming, and therefore not barely a relation
of reason, which in its use of speaking is referred to the constitution of man's
soul, but it is a real relation, such as God makes; for if those are real
relations which naturally result out of the principles of nature, because that
is Gods Ordinance, much rather are those real which by the immediate hand and
power of God are ordained, as this: and therefore although I think he has
better explained the nature of this Character than others, yet he spoke too
diminishingly of such a most heavenly and divine work, to call it a relation of
reason; and therefore that learned man had very ill luck to boast of that
place, Ecclesiastic. 24. 31. as in the vulgar, Qui elucidant me vitam aeternam
habebunt, They who manifest, or make me (that is, wisd^me) clear and easy,
shall have everlasting life. This, as if he had done, he modestly glories in,
but, as I said, most unhappily, for this Text is only in the vulgar, not in the
most original Copy, which is the Greek, which is the most original language
that Book is delivered to us in. I must confess the sentence is heavenly; it is
a noble work to clear an obscure piece of wisdom, and free it from the
encumbrances of Scholastic discourses; and I am persuaded, as he was of
himself, he did it, only he gives it too poor a name, for by this way all the
great effects of Baptism are justified, of making us the Sons of God, members
of his body, the Church; and yet men need be troubled with none of these
nicityes which the School is perplexed with: as when a Covenant is made with
men, and their Seal set to it, they will be forced to make it good, though
their will be wicked, by the Justice of the Land; so God who is Justice it
self, will make good whatsoever promise he has made, and set his Seal to. We
need not seek for new entities in the soul, whether powers or habits; here is
this real relation stamped, which is most invisible, but yet most sure, and
therefore the safest way for any man to speak in this case.

SECT. IV. What is the Subject of this Relict.
IF any man shall enquire, in what Subject this relation is placed, I must
oppose all in that, as well as the former. Some put it in the soul immediately;
some in the understanding, which has most prevailed; some in the will; I in
neither, but the whole man, who is made a member of God; the very body is a
member of God; Shall I take the members of God, and make them the members of an
harlot? and therefore the whole man is the Subject of this relation, or rather
the relate, for relations whose nature is ad aliud, their beings do not so
properly exist In, as Ad: and because the man is the Subject of this blessed
Covenant, therefore this indelibility of the Covenant consists only in this
life, where the soul of man and his body are united; not with the soul in
heaven or hell, as is imagined in general by the School, for which I see no
Argument of strength objected: That which is said, That if a man baptized,
after his death with Lazarus should be raised again, or a Priest who had
received Orders; should that man be consecrated or baptized again? ^ answer,
no; for although there was a suspension of the personality of that man, yet he
is the same individual person he was, and has the same relations he had: If
he arise in the same flesh, he has the same fatherhood, and filiation to the
same persons; he has the same similitudes and dissimilitudes, the same
equalities and inequalities; and therefore likewise as in these, so in this, he
is the same. Thus the nature of this relict being explained, as I hope, so far
as is useful to the understanding of any man, we see which way to expound that
place before touched, Gal. 3. 27. As many as are baptized into Christ have put
on Christ. What, have they in the preterperfect Tense? have they renewed
themselves according to righteousness and true holiness? have they cast off the
polluted rags of their corrupted nature, and clothed themselves with the
glorious robe of Christ's righteousness? no, not in act, but in obligation, like
him who is admitted into any Corporation, or Office of Government, he presently
is a Governor, and we may say, has taken upon him, and put on the Government
of that place, when perhaps he never did, nor perhaps ever will do act of
justice, yet he has the bond and obligation to do it immediately, he is
responsible for his neglect; so is it with men baptized; when they are baptized
into Christ, they have taken this duty upon them, and they are by a new bond,
which is the relict of this Baptism, made debtors to Christian duties, whether
they pay them or no.

SECT. V. My Definition reconciled with this Discourse.
THere is yet one Objection left which I think my self bound to satisfy, which
is, That I defined this relict of Baptism by the Genus of a power; but in all
my Discourse I have made it a relation: for answer to this, I say, I defined it
by that which delivered the nature of it most clearly to our capacity, the
essence of powers being more easily discerned than that of relations. But
farther conceive, that these moral relations either are powers, or the
immediate foundations of them, as we may discern in those which are instanced
in before, as a King, a Judge, a Mayor, and the like: These either are those
powers, or have those powers most naturally flowing out of them; about which if
any will contend, I am weary of Dispute: Let him correct the Definition, and
say, It is a relation by which a man has a spiritual power, and it will come
all to the same effect.

I have done now with Mr. Hooker his third Argument, from page 69. to 75. of
the second Part; as also that which for confirmation of it was in many
Arguments produced, Part 1. Chap. 5. Page 55. to overthrow my Conclusion, That
Baptism does make a member of a visible Church.

CHAP. XV. How there may be Pastors of Pastors.
I Come therefore now to the satisfaction of his fourth and last Argument in
this cause, which is thus framed, page 75. of the second Part. Chap. 2. If the
essentials of a Pastor be communicated by the Eldership or Bishop merely, then
there will be Pastor of Pastors, and that in propriety of speech. He no way
illustrates this, or proves it, but only thus: for (says he) the Pastor that
is made by them has reference to them, and dependence upon them, as Pastors
only, for it is that which is contended for in the Question in hand, that it
should be appropriate to their places to make Officers.

For Answer, first, to this last; If this were it which is contended for, he
should have proved what he contended for: See his proof, how weak by a
retortion; if this consequence were true, That if the essentials of a Pastor
were communicated by the Elders, etc. then there will be Pastors of Pastors,
etc. Then the truth of this arises out of this, that because Elders give
Pastors their Office, therefore they should be their Pastors: then it holds by
the same Logic, that if the people give the Pastor his essentials, then the
people should be Pastors of their Pastors, then the flock should be Shepherds
of their Shepherds, which would have served well in the Play of the Antipodes,
and complete the Jest of that witty man, who said, that heretofore God led the
people like sheep by the hands of Moses and Aaron, but now they lead Moses and
Aaron like sheep by the hands of the people. And indeed thus it happens with
them in this Controversy, they give the people power of ordination and
correction of their Pastors, so that the Corporation judges their Mayor, the
Scholars whip their Masters, the Sheep have power to expel their Shepherd, the
Children to punish their spiritual Parents; than which nothing can be conceived
more abhorring to reason. But then leaving the examination of this rerortion,
let us consider the Argument it self; If Pastors should be made by Elders or
Bishops, then Pastors should be Pastors of Pastors: Does he mean, that these
inferior Pastors should be sheep to the superior? that follows not: see an
invincible instance; Suppose a superior Pastor-Shepherd should have power
given him to constitute all the inferior Shepherds or Officers, (which is the
Polity agreeing in the analogy to all States, and all great families which
resemble little States) in this case, it would not follow that the inferior
Pastors were sheep, but under-Shepherds, which he governs, not as sheep, but as
Officers, somewhat inferior to himself. Secondly, Let it be taken, that the
inferior Pastors are governed like inferiors, which are accountable to the
superior, this is so far from bringing any inconvenience with it, that it is
most consenting to all the Ecclesiastic and Politic Governments which are
settled by God in Church or State, and all those prudent Authorities which our
wise men, imitating God, have established in any Commonwealth. So that then
this Argument falls to the ground; and this being all that he has urged in
this case, he has said nothing to prove, that the election of the people gives
the essentials to an Officer. So I have now ended his third Question, viz. What
Ordination is. Secondly, His first Question, Whether Ordination precede
Election. Thirdly, His second Question, Whether Ordination gives all the
essentials to an Officer. Now I come to his fourth and last, Part. 2. page 74.
To whom the right of dispensing this Ordinance does appertain.

CHAP. XVI. To whom the right of dispensing this Ordinance does appertain.
IN the handling of this Question, he seems to me to discourse most wildly;
yet he proposes this method; 1. To state the Question, then to confirm his
Conclusion. In that which he calls stating the Question, he discourses upon
some Propositions: The first is, page 76. When the Churches are completed with
all the Officers of Christ, the right or rite of Ordination (the margent cannot
tell whether it be right or rite) belongs to the teaching Elders; the act
appertains to the Presbyters of ruling and teaching Elders, when an Officer is
invested in his place; for of these it is expressly spoken, 1 Timothy 4. 14. This
is all his proof, of which place I have spoken, I think, abundantly, in the
handdling the case of Episcopacy: but consider the Conclusion; 1. He supposes
a Church completed with all its Officers; then there is none lacking, then
there can be none elected or ordained by him, because in his Divinity Election
is Ordination. 2. He says, that the right of Ordination belongs to the
teaching Elders. Mark; here a man would think were a learned distinction, and
an heedless Reader would be beguiled by such a distinction of right and act:
but, consider, that the right of Ordination is nothing but the Jus, the
Authority to do it, for Ordination is an act; how can one have the right to
act, and yet the acting belong to others? That which follows is nothing but
great words against Bishops, which like froth vanishes of it self.

His second Proposition is; Though the act of Ordination belongs to the
Presbyters, yet the Jus and Potestas Ordinandi is conferred firstly upon the
Church by Christ, and resides in her; it is in them instrumentally, in her
originally.

The right of Ordination just now was in the teaching Elders, but the Jus and
Potestas is now in the Church; the Church has the Latin names, and they the
English; I, but the right is firstly in the Church: mark, the Jus, the right to
ordain, that is, to act, and then the ^lders do not ordain, but the Church; the
Elders, says he, instrumentally, she originally; this is not well said: The
Elders cannot be the Churches instruments, but Christ's; they cannot be guided
or directed by the Church, but are the guides and directors of the Church. Nay,
I will go further than these men, and say, the Elders are not physical
instruments of this Ordination, but only moral; it is Christ that works all in
all, and these only come in like moral instruments appointed by Christ to do
this great work, which Christ blesses; but, to say, they are instruments of
the Church, is a strange phrase: they are the Churches Ministers, objective,
busied about the Church; but they are Gods Ministers, as I may so speak,
subjective, subject only to his commands and directions. I should have wished
that he had endeavored to confirm these Propositions either out of Scripture,
reason, or antiquity; but I see neither; neither do I think that the matter
will afford either: he indeed names three or four late Writers, which never
trouble me to examine, but yet I could answer them if there were need; but the
Argument from them is of no force at all, and that the very quotations are of
no force, were the persons. See his collection from them, page 77. which
perhaps he means a third Proposition, because he says, Thirdly, In case the
face and form of all the Churches are generally corrupted, etc. I need add no
more, Posito quolibet sequitur quidlibet; suppose impossibilities, and you may
collect untruth enough. Christ has promised not to leave his Church destitute:
it is true, there is no promise to their particular Congregations, but to his
Church in general; and therefore to dispute upon an impossible ground, yields
little or no strength to that Argument; and so I desist from it.

His second Argument begins in the end of that page, and proceeds in the next.
It is thus urged:

If the Church can do the greater, then she may do the less; the acts
appertaining to the same thing, and being of the same kind.

But the Church can do the greater, namely, give the essentials to a Pastor, ut
supra; Ergo,

I put his words down verbatim; but now he should have named the less, which
must be, or he speaks nothing; dispense this Ordinance of Ordination, and then
I would know what that is, if not giving the essentials to this Officer: So
here is idem per idem, the Conclusion proved by it self, and therefore must be
denied upon the same grounds which I spoke of before; and this is all he puts
down for his second Argument.

His third Argument, page 78. is thus framed:

That which is not an act of power, but of order, the Church can do: he proves
this Proposition; for, (says he) the reason why it is conceived and concluded
that it is beyond the power of the people, is, because it is an act of supreme
jurisdiction:

But this is an act of order, not of power.

Suppose I should deny his Major; have the people power to do any thing that is
an act of order? Indeed, I know no Ecclesiastic power they have, or any
spiritual power of acting any thing, that concerns more than their particular
demeanor, and all the rest is obedience.

But then to his Minor: To dispense Ordination is an act of power; for although
the thing dispensed (as I have showed) is called an order, yet it is an act of
power that gives it, as in a Civil State, the precedence of place is merely an
order, but yet it is an act of power in the supreme Magistrate that gives it.
Now such is this; although we should conceive it merely an order, yet it must
be given by an act of power: but this besides that notion of order, has in it
self great powers which are conveyed by it, of which I have treated somewhat in
their distinct notions: and this Argument is absolutely unvalid.

He has another Argument which follows, but it concerns only the
Presbyterians; yet from thence he takes occasion to asperse Bishops thus:

It is as certain (says he) that it cannot firstly belong to a Bishop, which
by humane invention and consent is preferred before a Presbyter in dignity,
only, if they will hold themselves either to the precedent, (he writes, but I
think he means president) or pattern whence they raise their pedigree, and it
is from Hierom ad Evagrium, Vnum ex se electum in altiori gradu collocarunt.

How many (to speak modestly) weaknesses may be observed in this Discourse?
First, That it is imputed and obtruded upon the defenders of Episcopacy, that
they should consent that it is an humane invention, than which nothing is more
against their Discourses. Secondly, That they found their opinion only upon
this place of St. Hierome, which is as flat against apparent reason, as the
other, since this place is commonly objected against them; and although St.
Hierome has spoken enough otherwhere, yet in this Epistle being pressed
somewhat with the p^ide of De^cons, who were lifted up above Presbyters, by the
sloth and vanity of many, he somewhat passionately defended the cause of
Presbyters, and here of all other places speaks the least for Bishops, making
the name be used reciprocally in Scripture. But then lastly, he quotes the
place false, and by the change of a letter makes him speak what he meant not:
to whom it may be answered in this, as Bishop Andrews did to Bellarmine in the
like case, Verbum caret litera Cardinalis fide; he says, Vnum ex se electum in
altiori gradu colloc^runt, when it is, C^llocatum Episcopum nominaverunt; in
which sense there is a mighty difference: in the first, as if they had placed
and given their Bishop his authority which he had; in the other only, that they
called him Bishop, who was set over the other Presbyters; so that it intimates,
that the name grew distinct not from the first instant of the Office. I am sure
I have spoke of this place before, and let us consider it in its fullest and
most averse sense that it can abide: consider, that just there in the heat and
height of his Disputation against Deacons, and upon that ground his extolling
of Presbyters, to which only Order he was exalted, he proves that the
difference betwixt Bishops and Presbyters, and the exaltation of them, was
Apostolical, and from the Apostles derived to his age, from the Church of
Alexandria, which was founded by St. Mark, where to his time from St. Mark was
a succession of Bishops above Presbyters; and it is a derogation from the
reverence due to the Apostles, to call their institutions merely humane
inventions, in such things which concern Ecclesiastical Government, concerning
which they had that great Commission, As my Father sent me, etc. and in this
case it is most weak of all other, since concerning Ordination, St. Hierome in
this very Epistle, immediately after these words, says, Quid facit Episcopus
excepta Ordinatione, quod non faciat Presbyter? thus in English, What does a
Bishop except Ordination, which a Presbyter cannot do? Here then a Presbyter
cannot ordain; and yet to show the full sense of the words, understand that a
Presbyter may do any thing, (I upon a sudden can except nothing, not it may be
he when he wrote that Sentence) I say, he can do any thing that a Bishop does,
except ordain; but the affairs of ruling other Elders or judging them, he
cannot do by an original; or to use Hookers language, by an Authority firstly
^eated in him, or given to him, but by a delegated; but no delegation can serve
the turn in Ordination, because it was given to the Apostles by Christ, in
those words, As my Father sent me, so send I you, to give Authority to ordain;
and they, and they only who were so authorized by the Apostles, can do it. Thus
you see that place out of St. Hierome expounded; his Arguments deduced from
thence falls of its self:

If Presbyters elected and gave first being to a Bishop, then were they before
him, and could not receive Ordination from him. At primum ex concessis. Ergo,

I set down his words, and all his words; where has he showed that Presbyters
elected their Bishop? which yet may be true, and the consequence most weak: for
after their Ordination by Bishops, they may elect their Bishop, but not ordain
him. Elections may be, and are various, according to humane Constitutions,
assigning this or that Pastor to this or that particular Congregation;
sometimes the Parish, sometimes the Patron, sometimes a Bishop; but the
Ordination, and giving him power to Officiate, must be only by the Bishops: the
Bishop ordains and makes a man a Presbyter; a Bishop of the Catholic Church,
he may by humane Laws and his own consent be tied to Officiate and execute that
Pastoral duty in this particular place: nor can any man show me Authority from
Scripture, or the times near to the Scripture-Writers, where any man was
instituted and ordained to do these spiritual duties, by any other Authority
than Episcopal. Nay I think since the Apostles Age, no considerable Church, or
body of Men, did conceive Election to be of validity to do these duties, till
now.

Well then, all the premises considered, which have a full consent of
Scripture, and the practice of all Ages to confirm them, conceive with me, that
it must be a bold and impudent thing of such men, who dare Officiate in these
divine duties, without Authority granted from Christ, which he only gave to the
Apostles, and they to their Successors, Bishops; and it is a foolish rashness
in those men, who adventure to receive the Covenants of their eternal
Salvation from such men, who have no Atturnment from Christ to Seal them.

If the Case were dubious, which to me seems as clear as such a practick matter
can be, I should speak more; but it being clear, I need write no more in this
Theme. I intended to have spoken to Mr. Hobs; but lately there came to my hands
a Book of learned Dr. Hammond, entitled, A Letter of Resolution to six
Queries; in the fifth of which, which is about Imposition of hands, you may
find him most justly censured for that vain and un-scholastick Opinion, page
384. But the business is handled sufficiently in the beginning of that
Treatise, page 318. wherefore my pains were vain in this Cause.

An APPENDIX. etc.
CHAP. I. In which is an Introduction to the Discourse, and the Question stated.
SInce I came back to my Study, I found one conclusion delivered in this
Treatise, opposed by a learned Scotchman, one Doctor Forbes, in a Treatise
entitled Ironicam, and in it he has diverse Arguments not inserted in my
former Papers, against this proposition: That it is a proper and peculiar act
of Episcopacy to ordain Priests and Bishops, which he denies in his second
Book, Chap. 11. Proposition 13. in his Exposition, and proof of that
proposition, page 159. And I observing it whilst my Papers are with the
Printer, thought it ^it to interpose that which satisfied my self in his
Arguments. In the top of the page before named he begins thus. Gradus quidem
Episcopalis est juris divini. (here we agree;) Ita tamen ut Ecclesia esse non
desinit. Sed esse possit, and sit quandoque vera Ecclesia Christiana in qua non
reperitur hic gradus; Here we begin to differ; I say there neither is, nor ever
was a Christian Church without a Bishop: and I will now begin to distinguish,
there is the universal Church, and there are particular Churches. The
particular Churches we may, yea must conceive to be sometimes without Bishops,
yea without Presbiters, as by the death of their Bishops or Presbiters, or by
such persecutions, as may so scatter them, that they dare not show themselves
in their Churches. In such cases these places must needs be without these
Magistrates. And yet those Christians who are by such means defrauded of this
divine and blessed government, keeping their first faith continue members of
the Catholic Church, and of that universal Church, which have and ever shall
have Bishops as long as the World stands, so that if that proposition be meant
of particular Congregations; It is true they may be without a Bishop: But if
the universal, they shall never be by the promise of our Savior, (I will be
with you to the end of the World) without a Bishop. And those particular
Churches, which may by such means be without Bishops, may be without Presbiters
likewise, upon the same occasions. This I think is clear, I shall now examine
his Arguments, which oppose this which I have delivered.

His first Argument drawn from Scripture answered.
HE says, he will prove it before the Institution of Bishops and after. First,
before; I am persuaded he can show me no Church before the Institution, for
their Episcopal authority was given in its fullness to the Apostles in that
language of our Savior, As my father send me so send I you, as I have
explained. All the Commission was given to them, and they imparted all or part
of it as they pleased; they were the first and only Bishops, until they settled
Provincial Bishops; they were of the whole world, as those latter of particular
Diocesses; he proves that there were Churches before Bishops out of Scripture,
but it is ciphered Scripture first, Acts 8. 12. There Philip the Deacon (so he
terms him) converted Souls to Christ, where was no Bishop: And by his leave, if
Philip were but a Deacon, there was no Presbiter neither, and by the By, the
Independent Thomas Hooker of New England, and his fellows may take notice, that
a Deacon may preach and baptize; for so did Philip in Samaria in that verse.
But Reader take notice, that although men may be converted by Presbiters, yea
Laymen, any; and when they are converted and baptized, are members of the
Catholic Church, and parts of the mystical body of Christ, and have no Bishop
resident in that place; yet without a Bishop it cannot be; for the providence
of God over the Church is such, as that there shall always be such an authority
resident in the Church universal, whither men may in convenient time, such as
will be accepted of God, repair for Church Discipline. The next place be
vergeth is Acts 11. 20, 21. But there is nothing observable to any such
purpose, but only that they who were scattered upon the persecution of Stephen,
converted many Souls to the true faith. His third place is Acts 14. 20, 21, 22.
He should have added the 23, without the which all the former were imperfect to
his purpose, and in that verse are the words which he argues out of, that is,
they ordained Elders, (...). Now there was a Church he in^er^s, and no Bishop;
I will tell him there was a Church and no Presbyter, until the Apostles
ordained them, and the Apostles Barnabas and Paul ordained these Presbiters,
not a Presbitery, and they themselves ^ineran^^ throughout the World, visited
their Churches with letters and directions, sometimes when they could not
personally be present, until they settled Bishops amongst them. His next place
urged is Acts the 20. he leaves me to look the verse, but affirms that the
Church of Ephesus was governed first by Presbiters, only from that Chap.
afterward they had a Bishop, who was called, The Angel of the Church of
Ephesus, Apocalypse 2. That which has any color for this in this Chap. must be
deduced out of the 17th. verse, where it is said: That from Miletum Paul sent
to Ephesus for the Elders of the Church, Therefore it seems the Church was
governed by Elders at that time; but let the Reader consider whether St. Paul
did not Episcopize over them, conventing the Elders before him, and giving them
that most heavenly charge; And then consider that these men in the 28. verse
are called Bishops, Take heed to the flock over which the Holy Ghost has mad^
you Overseers, (we read it;) but it is Bishop in the Original indeed, as I have
showed in this Treatise. The words were not distinguished at the first, but
they were promiscuously used until the great increase of Christianity, when
the name of Apostles began to wear away, and they had more generally settled
Churches and planted Bishops over the other Presbiters in the chief Cities, and
then these were called Bishops; and indeed every Presbiter, who has a charge
of Souls, is a little Bishop in the Superintendency of his parish, though no^
in the nature of the office; he must look to his little fl^ck, as Bishop over
them; so that nominally every Presbiter with charge of Soals, is a little
Bishop superintend^ing them for their Souls good; But a Bishop is higher, over
them and their flocks to take care that he does his duty in these places of
Scripture. I see no manner of Argument to show that a Church may exist without
a Bishop, for they had Apostles, and then Bishops in their places.

CHAP. III. His Argument drawn from Panormitan answered.
HE then urges a Sentence out of Panormitan, Olim Presbyteri in communi
regebant Ecclesiam, and ordinabant sacerdotes, and consecrabant omnia
Sacramenta. Sed postmodum ad schismata sedanda fecerunt se^ ordinaverunt
Apostoli and crearentur Episcopi. Let me examine this bold assertion of
Panormitan, and of St. Hierom, who has much the same word (Olim) that was in
the first plantation of the Churches; I know no record of any authentic
authority in the case, but the Acts of the Apostles or their Epistles, in which
I can never find that any man or Company of men, who were barely Presbiters,
did ordain Priests, or did perform any Act of Jurisdiction in communi, as he
speaks, which would intimate a Sentorian Government; of which, as they urge
none, so I cannot imagine what words in these Acts or Epistles should tend
thereunto; but then his last Clause I in part yield to, that the Apostles did
ordain Bishops, and am confident they did it by divine Right, which was given
them by our Savior, saying: As my Father sent me, so send I you; but whether
only as they say, ad sedanda schismata, to appease schism, upon the occasion
of some that said they were Paul's, or else for the absolute better government
of the Church, (which I rather adhere to) I leave to the Readers Judgment; but
in general think it too great a boldness for men to limit Gods designs to
their weak measures, when God has not determined or expressed them; therefore
such a passage in Panormitan is of no vallidity.

CHAP. IV. His first Argument to prove their ordination after Bishops were
instituted, answered.
HE proceeds with the second Number of his distinction, to show that not only
this was done before Bishops were instituted, but after likewise the same was
done; and he gives this reason: for says the Doctor, Non enim ad esse, sed ad
melius esse Ecclesiae necessaria est haec oeconomia, This discipline is not
necessary to the being, but well-being of the Church; suppose I grant it, it is
true, no discipline is necessary to the being of a Christian but Baptism, by
which we are made members of that mystical body of Christ, of which he is the
head; political Laws, Civil or Ecclesiastical, are not necessary to our being
Men, or Englishmen of this Country; but to our happy being in it, we may be
Christians and members of Christ's Church, where is no Presbiter as well as no
Bishop; As suppose a Diocese and Kingdom conquered by a Pagan, as alas too
many have been, not a Bishop or a Priest left remaining, Those noble Christians
who remain without them have the being of Christians, but not the well-being of
Church Communion, enjoying the blessed Sacrament which requires sacerdotal
administration, and likewise Church Discipline, which conduce to the well-being
of a Church; but here we see the same necessity of one as the other, for
Bishops as Presbiters.

CHAP. V. An Argument out of Johannes Major answered.
BUt he proceeds and produces a place out of Johannes Major de gestis
Scotorum, that he should write that the Scots were governed by Priests and
Monks until Anno Domini (429.) from whence he collects, that they were two
hundred and thirty yens without Bishops, he might have urged other late Writers
likewise in it. But I answer to this, that the Registers of that illiterate age
were very ill preserved throughout Christendom, but worse in those parts
amongst the Picts and Scots, then almost any where, by reason that they were
miserably oppressed with the almost perpetual Wars they had with their
Neighbors, Britains and Romans, the Saxons, and scarce any eminent man for
learning, who recorded any thing, was acted amongst them; and in that Gap of
time in which they place this lack of Bishops, their troubles were at the
height; for as there was all that space Wars for dominion, so there was
persecution for destruction of Christianity, and the Scots in general were
banished that Country. The Christians fled every where for safety to the
adjacent Isles to Ireland, from whence they came, to Normandy, to Denmark, any
where for safety; which it may be, although unhappy to their wordly content,
yet advanced the propagation of the Gospel, as it was in the Apostles time upon
the persecution of St. Stephen. Well then, I think in this unhappy season, they
can find good Record for neither Bishops nor presbiters, but every Chri^^ian
shifting for himself, and especially those who were in authority, and in
Christian office, because they of all others were sought after, and therefore
were concerned to hide their heads; besides this, it being the custom of
Bishops to place themselves in some eminent Cities, whereby they might be the
more eminent, and the better oversee their Diocesses: There were few such in
Scotland then, but these Bishops which were then in the Kingdom were forced to
inhabit many obscure places. All which considered, it is not possible for any
man to expect a pedigree of their Bishops, as it has been preserved in more
eminent Churches, and yet in the best of them there are mighty difficulties to
make them certain, but yet they may know, that they might have Bishops in that
time and Presbiters ordained by them, although the Register's not apparent; for
it is evident out of such stories as we have, that King Lucius the first
Christian King we read of in our Nation, when he settled Christianity here, he
was to extirpate the former Pagan Religion, used by the Druids in these
Countries. Now they had here three Arch-flamins, besides diverse other Flamins
inferior, according to their Method: so he settled Christianity, he made three
Archbishops, York, London, Caerlyon; this last governed Wales and diverse
adj^cent Countries, London the Mediterranean part of this Island of Britain,
but York had the Northern part of England and Scotland for his government, and
this lasted until Anno (1470) or thereabouts, at which time there was erected
one Archbishop at St. Andrews; so that there was a place, to which in case of
necessity men might repair for Orders when they would, as we know by our late
sad experience in these last sad times; and no doubt but many did where they
knew were Bishops, as since the first plantation of Christianity there was in
Wales. But to come nearer to this, Crathling King of Scots in Dioclesians time,
which was in this Interim he mentions, entertained all Christians who fled out
of these parts of Britain, and g^ve them the Isle of Man to plant in, and
settled Amphibolus their Bishop there, and built a Church, and endowed it nobly,
who governed all the adjacent Isles, and had a succession of Bishops after him;
so that they could never lack Bishops either to give orders to Priests, or to
order any thing that were amiss. Beside this, in this time I read of Ninias,
who was Bishop of Candida Casa, and of Regulas amongst the Picts; and I think
it would be hard, if not impossible, for John Major or any of his followers, to
show me so many Presbiters men of Note as I have showed Bishops. It is true for
a while after Maximus had extirpated the Scots; upon the cruel, mercyless;
malicious; and indeed foolish instig^tion of the Picts, against the disposition
and manners of a Roman Conqueror, there was about forty years, in which there
was not seen in that territory so much as a Scotchman or Woman, but all forced
to ^ly their Country, and therefore Hollandsilde might well say that their
Bishops and Priests were forced to fly away, but that is a sign there they had
Bishops then; yet as soon as Fergusus that gallant person came with his
conquering Army thither, no doubt he brought all such persons with him as were
^it for the plantation fo the Church, as well as his Kingdom; and therefore I
may affirm that there were Bishops within this time, prefixed by Major before
the extirpation of the Scots in the time, and after by the Bishop of Man and
his successors. As likewise those which that gallant heroique King Fergusius
did bring with him; and certainly throughout the world where were Presbiters,
there were Bishops either in particular Diocesses or hard by, from whom men
might receive orders, or somewhere in Christendom where they might hunt them
out, if there were any number of Christians which might provoke that industry,
if particular persons, as heretofore have been, and may be cast away or cast in
a Pagan or impeopled Land, they may be without a Presbiter, although that may
be more easily purchased, yet they may be without him, or having one he may
die, and they still continue in a Christian condition, Man or Men, and all the
defects of these Officers may be supplied with soliloquies, and a holy
conversation with godly Prayers; but the same, though a greater misfortune, is
theirs, who cannot have so much as a Priest with them, who may be sufficient
for a ^ew Christians; but if many, the other is necess^ry both to ordain their
Priests, and to govern Priests, and them likewise; so that in answer to John
Major, Hector Boethius, Bacanan, and all others of that Crew, I answer, there
was never any time (I mean any considerable time) in which the Scots lacked
Bishops after there was a considerable conversion of them to Christ. But they
had Bishops to repair to at York or at Man, Candida Casa, or other where; and
then because Major says that they were governed by Priests only and not
Bishops, I think it will be a mighty hard thing for him to show any judicial
Act of Government performed by Presbiters, unless they were commissioned by
some Bishop, and therefore all he said is only said, and cannot be proved; I
have done with this.

CHAP. VI. Another Argument drawn from the Church of Rome, answered.
HIs next Argument begins page (165*) where he says: Ecclesiae etiam Romanae
sede vacant Presbiteri per undecem menses and quindecem dies post caedem
secundi Romani pontificis immanissima persecutione comitia pontificalia Romae
prohibente, Anno Domini (259.) I will yield all this, and perhaps that Sea may
be vacant a longer space at another time, or any other Sea; but what then, the
College of Presbiters may govern; but what can he show from Onuphrius or
Platina, Binius, or any other who write those stories, that they gave orders
which they set down constantly at the end of every Popes life? what orders they
gave? or can they show that they did confirm, which are proper to Episcopal
duties? or only order the pontifical affairs, which they might do; but not as
Bishops? they never say they did; his next Reason follows.

CHAP. VII. His Argument answered drawn from Deacons.
DE Iure divino est ut in Ecclesiis Diaconi sint Clerici Canonici per manuum
impositionem ordinati, and per totam vitam adstricti, here he ciphers two
places of Scripture, Acts 6. Tim. 1. 3. Now consider that he says that these
are Jure divino; then I have showed Bishops to be by Apostolical constitution;
I could trouble this speech, but I let it alone, only this must be questioned,
what he means by this, ut in Ecclesiis Diaconi sint Clerici; there is no
question but every Church throughout the world acknowledges, that Deacons are
an inferior sort of Clergy, which is all that these words imports; but I think
his meaning is ut sint in Ecclesiis, Diaconi Clerici, that there should be in
every Church such inferior Clergy as Deacons; and this the following words with
the force of his Argument will make good, and then I can reply to him that
there is no such divine Law, that there should be Deacons in every Parochial
Church; that he speaks of in the Acts was an occasional office set up for that
purpose, and that cannot be a Law, no not a president, but upon the like
occasion. That in Tim. has no one word of the ceremonies of ordaining in
particular Churches, but only what manner of persons they should be who are to
be ordained, this is his Major, now let us examine his Minor.

In nostra tamen Ecclesia reformata Scotanica id haberi nondum potuit propter
Ecclesiasticam pa^pertatem bonis Ecclesiasticis laicorum hominum sacrilegio
dir^ptis. The force of this Argument runs thus: Although Deacons be a divine
ordinance, yet the Scots by reason of their poverty, are not able to maintain
such an Officer, and there is the like reason for Bishops in such places where
the supreme authority will not allow them: so that necessity may excuse men,
even where the divine Laws requires any thing; I must confess that invincible
necessity excuses many Acts, but it will lie upon the Souls of these Churches
who live without Bishops to answer at the last day to Allmighty God, and make
it good before him that their Omission is such; but the difference betwixt
Bishops and Deacons is exceeding great; I do not find any one place so much as
directing that Deacons should be in every particular Church; in many there is
no need of them, where a small congregation of twenty or a hundred may well be
os^iciated in the meanest duty by a Presbiter only; but in Cathedral Churches,
where are many little offices, for which perhaps we cannot find Presbiters so
fit, or that it is not fit that we should take them from their greater
employments, to bestow their time upon those lesser duties, in such cases there
is a necessity for those lesser offices to be used; but if they shall think
their Deacons to be ordained for that employment mentioned in the sixth of the
Acts to minister to the poor, I may say that such an employment can hardly
complain of necessity by sacrilege, since that out of the collection for the
poor he may be allowed a stipend competent for such an office; but then to
consider that which he would have to parallel a Bishop, where is any such a
small congregation as I have before specified, all things may well be regulated
by a Presbiter, and he alone supply all the duties belonging to the Salvation
of Souls. But if there should be many such congregations, or that Presbiter who
did govern there die in that Government, it is necessary for him or them to
seek out some Bishop to authorize him or them for this duty. The upshot of all
this is, that Deacons are not instituted as necessary for all lesser
Congregations, that Bishops are authorized to give Orders, to dispose of such
affairs as are useful or necessary to the Government of little or great
Congregations, but especially in the latter, where are usually more, and more
dangerous exorbitancies. That which follows in that page is only a Discourse,
but no Proof, and so I pass to 161. page, where he labors to prove that the
Presbitery, as he calls it, or Company of Presbiters gathered together, may
give Orders thus.

CHAP 8. An Argument drawn from Scripture, answered.
APostolus Paulus manuum impositionem per quam ordinatus est Timotheus, modo
vocat impositionem manuum s^arum 2. Tim. 1. 6. Modo impositionem manuum
Presbiterii. 1. Tim. 4. 14. Idest concessus Presbiterorum, sic enim in Novo
testamento passim et apud antiquissimos Scriptores Ecclesiasticos. The effect
of which is, that St. Paul in those two places, terms the giving Orders to
Timothy in one place the laying on of his hands, and in another the Laying on
the hands of the Presbitery; which, says he, was the Company or College of
Presbiters, as that word is often used in the New Testament; and amongst the
most ancient Ecclesiastical Writers: I have expounded these two places already;
and though he say Presbitery is often used for a College, or Concessus of
Presbiters, I have showed it is no where so used in Scripture, and for the most
ancient Ecclesiastical Writers I would have been glad to have Read, where I
should seek them, for remember them I do not; I will trouble the Reader no
further with this Argument, it would be but a Repetition.

CHAP. 9. An Argument drawn from Saint Hierome, answered.
HE comes next to the formerly examined place of St. Hierome and Evagrinus, but
he puts it down more truly than Thomas Hooker does; and after adds one phrase,
which the New-England-man left out, which is, Sicut exercitus imperatorem
faciaet, quibus verbis, non abscure indicat Presbiteros Alexandrinos initio
ordinasse sibi Episcopum; by which words, as an Army makes an Emperor, he does
not obscurely intimate that they did ordain their Bishops. Thus Forbes, if
instead of Ordain he had said Elect, I should not have been offended; but to
take upon them the power to ordain was too much, unless they had the Armies to
maintain their Act by force, as they did; The Soldiers upon the death of the
Emperor proclaim and cry up commonly their General to be the Emperor, and
make it good with their sword; but would Doctor Forbes or Hierom think that
they did ordain or make him Emperor, or rather according to their power elect?
it was often seen even in the age about St. Hierom, that two or three Armies in
their several places chose so many Emperors: And it is not impossible that the
Presbiters in Alexandria might have the Election of their Bishop, as in most
places, but the Consecration of him was by others; and mark this place of St.
Hierom, the phrase he uses is Presbiteri not Presbiterium, which he calls the
ancient Language; howsoever there is nothing in these words which can instance
a Consecration from Presbiters, no not in the Simile of an Army, unless a
Rebellious Election might pass for a Consecration; I think I need not speak no
more to that at this time, but if there be any further need, I foresee that the
answering other Arguments will further illustrate this business.

CHAP. X. An Answer to the Argument drawn from the Consecration of Pelagius the
first Pope of that name; in which is discussed the Story of his Consecration;
as likewise that no Argument can be drawn from that Act, That Popes
Consecrations and Elections have been erroneous.
HE proceeds, page 162. Pellagium hujus nominis primum Romanum Episcopum
ordinarunt duo Episcopi and unus Presbiter Ostiensis nomine Andreas qui tanquam
Episcopus munus illud ordinationis obivit dum non invenientur tres Episcopi qui
secundum Canones Pelagium ordinarent. The sum is, that this Pope, when there
could not be three Bishop^ got, which according to Canons should join together
in the ordination of a Bishop, there being no more to be found, they took in a
Presbiter to officiate with them: and therefore he thinks Presbiters may
ordain; for answer, let no man think that I will undertake to defend the
Consecrations of Rome, it is a task too hard for me to manage, or I think any
other, and materially no doubt but this was irregular, yet it may be excused
and perhaps justified by what I shall say; take therefore the Story of these
times.

SECT. I. Where is the Story of the matter of fact in his Consecration.
THe first Bishops of Rome who succeeded St. Peter were chosen by the Clergy,
the Nobles and people, who were Christians, and durst assemble together for
such purpose; and indeed were men of such excellency that they accepted that
Bishopric with a design to be Martyrs, which they were, many, one after
another; afterward when it pleased God to bless the Church with Christian
Emperors, they proved Nursing-fathers to their Bishops, and under them the
Bishop grew great; which being discerned, the Emperors considering what a
great stroke the Bishop of Rome had in the management of all affairs of the
Empire, they put in for an Interest in their Election, and there was no Pope
elected but by their approbation, until the Emperor granted his Conge de
liere (as I may term it.) Now at this time Italy was full of Soldiers. Narses
that gallant General of Justinians lay then about Rome, whose favorite
Pelagius was; and Doctor Forbes must forgive me, if I think he is somewhat
mistaken in the Story, when in the next page he writes that Pelagius was but a
Deacon, when Binius calls him Archdeacon; and again where he says there, that
he was chosen by the Command of the Emperor Justinian, when it is recorded by
Platina that after the Election he sent to Justinian at Constantinople to
excuse the Consecration without his Approbation, which could not be had in
those busles; but Narses was as good as Justinian, and (...) doubt but by him
the will of Justinian might be intimated well (Rebus sic stantibus) Pelagius
must be the man, he lay under the scandal of being accessory to his
Predecessors death, upon this the generality of the Bishops refuse to be
present at his Consecration, only two, and these took a Presbiter to them, and
ordained Pelagius in that Act, rather complying with the Canon so much as in
them lay, than violating it in Contempt. It is a sure Rule, Silent Leges inter
Arma, so they are not Gods Laws. Now it is evident that there was the terror
of that Army upon them; for the story related both by Platina and by Binius,
and others, affirm, that a multitude of the Nobles as well as the People and
Clergy fled, because their Consciences would not allow them to be assistant.
And the terror of the Army would not permit them to oppose; that this
ordination was not questioned was, because the Pope purged himself of that
Scandal afterward, and so that which made them desert him at his Consecration
being removed, made them wink at small faults when he was Pope. Thus the Story
being cleared for matter of fact, I will examine this Argument logically; it
must run thus:

SECT. II. The Argument discussed, and his Major disproved.
HIs argument termed must be thus: That which was acted in the Consecration of
a Pope, that is lawful for us to do; but a Presbiter did Consecrate Pope
Pelagius, therefore he may Consecrate a Bishop or a Presbiter with us: for the
Major it must run so; for there can be no difference of Pope Pelagius from
other Popes of Rome; I deny the Major then, and I will disprove it by the
Predecessors of Pelagius, Vigillius: his Consecration cannot be lawful, for he
was intruded into the Papacy by Justinian the Emperor, and Belisarius his
other General, his Predecessors; Silverius being by violence forced from Rome,
cast into banishment, and so died in misery starved as Baronius. This Vigillius
was put into his Chair, and yet for all that Silverius being of a mighty
invincible Courage* got a few Bishops together, and excommunicated Vigillius;
from which he never released Vigillius; Silverius dies, Vigillius then
renounced his former Election, and by the interest of Bellisarius, Vigillius
was again Elected, being an Excommunicated Person, and abominated for that and
many other Crimes, as even Baronius confesses, who was his Friend in his story
as much as he could. Now then Doctor Forbes his Major fails, the instances in
the Church of Rome must not be ^residents, nor are they Arguments for us to
build upon: I but he will and does say this, If so, Pelagius would have been
punished by his successor, if it had beeen naught. I answer, that does not
follow; there is not that Law of God or Man which has not been violated
unquestioned: I remember Binius writes of it, that it had never been so before;
Baronius only tells the story, but passes not his Judgment upon it. They
mention the Scandal he lay under, it being that he was accessory to Vigillius
his death. They mention his purgation which he made, as does Platina, and in
that it is evident, that they who were scandalized at his imagined offense,
were satisfied with his purgation; and so we see that block of offense being
removed which made him unfit to be Chosen and Consecrated Pope, they never
questioned his Consecration its self; but this is sufficient for satisfaction
to his Major. Now let us come to his Minor; And here we must examine whether
this Presbiter did consecrate the Pope or no; And first we will undertake that
Question, whether it be essentially necessary to the being of a Bishop that he
should be Consecrated by three Bishops?

CHAP. XI. SECT. I. That Question entered upon, Whether three Bishops are
necessary to the Consecration of a Bishop.
GAbriel Vasques, a very learn Jesuit, and one that Doctor Forbes
acknowledges much to countenance his opinion, in his 243. disp. upon the third
of Thomas, Cap. 6. Page 706. justly complains, that Pauci ex nostra Schola,
few of our Schoolmen have handled this Question exactly, or delivered it
defined in their writings; I shall undertake him, and endeavor now to show a
more clear truth than I have observed delivered by others; for indeed, because
some Canons of Councels seem to make for it, and they have been swallowed
without chewing, and have not been ex mined, it has passed undoubtedly by a
general practice in all quietly settled Churches. But I much mistrust that
there is not an absolute necessity in persecuted and unsettled Churches; after
Vasques had produced Arguments against this necessity, he puts his own
determination fully, Mihi tamen probabilior visa est sententia; that opinion
seems to me to be more probable of them, who say, first, that to the right
ordination of a ^ishop three Bishops at the least are necessary by Divine Law,
as the ordinary Ministers but by commission (he means from the Pope) two may do
it, or one; thus far he. I will take it peicemeale; And first I say this Canon,
that three Bishops should Consecrate a Bishop has no Color to challeng^ a
Divine Right; for that can have a lawful claim to a Divine right, must either
draw it from God himself prescribing it, or else from such men who were
immediately authorized by God, as the Apostles; for if we will go further, we
must make all Humane Laws Divine; for if the next to the Apostles should have
their Dictator termed Divine, from their authority, the same reason will be for
the next to them, and so to the last, and so even the Prescriptions of the now
living Bishops should be Divine, than which nothing can be more abhorring to
reason. Well then, what I have said before, will serve likewise here, that is,
that what Divine Laws were established by the Apostles we may find in the Acts
and Epistles; now there is no such Decree observable any where in them; The
Commission given to the Apostles, by which they and their Successors were and
are authorized to send others, was not given to them conjunctim, as if they
should act only altogether, much less was there specified that three of them
should join in it; but without doubt separately every one had this power
given, to punish, to forgive Sins, to Baptize, give the Communion, Ordain; and
we find upon this foundation it is that St. Paul gave Commission to particular
persons, to Titus, to Timothy, and the like; But I need not trouble the
Scriptures about it; I do not find the Patrons of that opinion producing any;
And therefore I wonder that Vasques did term it a Divine Right, when he
attempts no where to prove it, nor his Predecessors or Followers, in this
Conclusion.

The Consecration of St. James to be Bishop of Jerusalem, discussed.
BUt they urge the Decretall Epistles of Anacletus, and out of him Amcetus,
that St. Peter, James, and John, (I mean James the Great, as the other is
called James the Less) that these three Apostles did Consecrate the other James
Bishop of Jerusalem: and St. Peter, by whom he says himself Anacletus was made
Priest, told him, that it should always be a Law hereafter that there should be
three Bishops to Consecrate one; I do wonder if this were so, how St. Peter's
pretended Successors should be bold to dispense with this Law of St. Peter's; of
which we shall see more hereafter; but it is well known by learned men how
unlike these Epistles are to be these men's writings upon whom they are
fathered: But I acknowledge the story so far as it affirms the Consecration of
St. James, for by better authority then theirs it is justified, which is by
Eusebius, lib. 1 cap. 1. But Eusebius says not that St. Peter gave it for a
Rule for the future, which this Anacletus seems to enforce; Nay Eusebius does
not name this Anacletus in his Relation, which if there had been any such
Epistle extant in his time, no doubt but he would have done as well as Clemens;
but I grant the story; and as Adam Tanner a learned Jesuit speaks, Tom. 4.
Scholasticae theologiae disputatione prima, Quest. 3. Dubio. 2. Numero 3. It
might be done ad quandem solemnitatem ordinis Episcopalis; I may say
Episcopatus ejus, than whom never man deserved more honor in his Consecration,
for he is esteemed the father of that Epistle which goes under his name, then
he was the Brother (that is the nearest kinsman) of our blessed Savior; then a
man so honored for virtue, that he was called James the just, and so esteemed
by Josephus a Jew, who attributes the great Judgment of God upon the Jews in
the destruction of Jerusalem to their iniquity of stoning that just man; so
that if ever there was a man to be honored with so glorious a Consecration, it
was he. But give me leave by the By to say, that from this I can add one strong
Scholastic reason to the excellent industry of Doctor Hammond, who in his
Preface to St. James the Apostle proves from antiquity that this Bishop of
Jerusalem was none of the Twelve, either the son of Zebedee or Alpheus; I can
add this, for if he had been any of them it is not reasonable to think, that he
had need of a new Consecration to a Bishopric, whom Christ himself had
ordained an Apostle, or our Savior made him only Bishop of Jerusalem, as many
affirm; let no man think that he could be Consecrated again by these three; for
Orders must not be given twice; and no man can think that either our Saviors
Ordination to make him an Apostle, or Bishop, was insufficient; but let it be
which you will, it is not needful to trouble the Reader with discussing the
truth of it, nor indeed in Actions so far remote, where are such great
Authorities of both sides. Is it possible to conclude any thing peremptorily? I
therefore let it pass, and for the present grant he was Consecrated by these
three. But what can follow but this, that so great a Person, of such an
extraordinary merit, was so honored by these Apostles, who (as Clemens says)
did not contend for the honor themselves, but pitched upon him to be the first
Bishop of that Sea, which without doubt was then the most glorious Episcopal
seat in the World; but is there any rule given that every Bishop should have
that honor done him, which was given to St. James?

SECT. II. The first of these are called Apostolical Canons, examined.
THe next thing in order to this dispute to be examined, will be the first of
those which are called Apostolical Canons; the words of which Canon are (Let a
Bishop be ordained by two or three Bishops;) this Canon comes next to be
examined, and by them who require three Bishops to the Consecration
necessarily; it is answered, that these two Bishops are required, but with an
addition of an Archbishop, two Bishops and an Archbishop. So Cardinal
Bellarmine in his fourth Book de Ecclesia militante, which is, de notis
Ecclesiae cap. 8. and from him the latter schoolmen with one consent. But let a
man consider whether this be not a violence to the Text, when the name of
Archbishop is not mentioned in these Canons, nor in the Scripture; for if these
Canons were of the Apostles Constitution* then they must be penned in the
language of Scripture Phrase, bearing the same date with them, and so not to
vary from their sense; for although Archbishops are of great necessity, and
antiquity, where there are many Bishops to keep them in peace and unity with
Ecclesiastical discipline, so a Patriarch over them; yet neither he, nor a
Patriarch, have any thing but jurisdiction, by Ecclesiastical authority,
nothing of Order by divine right more than a Bishop, and therefore no more
necessity of him than another Bishop, in the Consecrating of a Bishop, but
only by the Canons of the Church, and therefore it is a violence offered to
that Canon by them who have a veneration of it.

SECT. II. Some Canons of Councels examined.
THe next thing to be considered will be the fourth Canon of the first Council
of Nice; Episcopum apparet maxim quidem ab omnibus qui sint provincia
constituit, si autem hoc sit difficile, vel propter urgentem necessitatem, vel
viae longitudinem, tres omnino in eundem locum congregatos, absentibus quoque
suffragium ferentibus, scriptisque assentientibus tunc electionem fieri, eorum
autem quae conficiunt confirmationem in una quaque provincia, a metrapolitano
fieri. The meaning of the Canon is, that a Bishop ought to be constituted by
all the Bishops of that Province, if it be possible; but if that be difficult
to get the Bishops together, either by urgent occasions, or by reason of the
length of the Journey, yet three being together in the same place, and the
other which are absent, giving their suffrages in writing, then he shall be
chosen; This Council was held Anno Christi (325.) according to Baronius, when
it is not material to our business; There are diverse opinions, majus and minus,
non variant speciem, be it more or less; we see a Metropolitan, and they were
before certainly. Let us now examine the Canon, which indeed I cannot but
wonder how it should be arrested to such a sense, as if it did import a
necessity that three Bishops should consecrate every Bishop. To which purpose
here Belsarman; who was Patriarch of Antioch, and surely had great reasons to
understand the great Councels, better than Cardinal Bellarmine, Binius, or any
other of these latter learned men; he says in his Notes upon the word
(constituit) That the Council here provides against Popular Elections, which
indeed were very scandalous, and often bred tumults, as almost in all cases they
do; the Council therefore orders the Election of a Bishop to the Bishops of the
whole Province, which if that cannot be had, to three at the least of that
Province, and the Archbishop is to confirm the Election; But he referrs the
Reader to the 13th Canon of the Council at Carthage; the words of the Canon in
him are these.

Non licere Episcopum nisi a multis eligi; sin autem nec esse si^, etiam vel a
tribus eligatur; Aurelius Episcopus dixit, quod adhoc dic it vestra sanctitas,
ab omnibus Episcopis dictum est, quae ab iis qui nos Praecesserunt constituta
sunt, debent a nobis observari, quae quidem temere and inconsulte, qui in
quavis Provincia prima tum tenent, audent, negligere: Multi ergo Congregati
Episcopi Episcopum eligent, si autem necesse sit tres Episcopi in quccunque
loco fuerint primatis jussa eligent Episcopum: Et si quis in alique propriae
consessioni vel subscriptioni adversatus fuerit, ipse seipsum honor privabit.
I need not trouble the Reader with a Translation, his notes will clear all; his
observation here is, that the word which is here rendered Eligi in Latin, is in
the original Greek (...), and not (...), the first of which signifies Election,
by holding up the hands; the other ordination by imposition of hands; so then
according to his understanding of that word (which is the usual sense in almost
all Writers) these Canons are understood of Election, not of ordination. But
then observe his reasons, which he delivers afterward; you may find that it is
necessarily to be understood so in these Canons, both of Nice and this of
Carthage; the Nicene says, that all the Bishops shall send their Suffrages by
writing; what can they ordain by Suffrages? It is not possible but they may
Elect. It is as clear here, for says Belsarman, in the end of this Canon it is
showed, in which it is provided, that if any Bishop shall oppose his own
confession or subscription, he shall deprive himself of his honor, which
subscription is not to Ordination or Consecration, but to Election; for indeed
conceive if you can, how a man should be ordained by Subscription; a man may
Subscribe his consent to an Election, and give his voice, which may in many
cases pass in an Election; a man may Subscribe that such a man shall be
ordained, which indeed is Election, but a man cannot be ordained by
Subscriptions: so that here you have the authority of the learned Patriarch,
which persuades much with me you have the sense of the words, and his reason,
which may have the authority to persuade any reasonable man; and then I am sure
there is nothing in these Canons to enforce three Bishops to the Consecration
of a Bishop, but only to the Election: and here, as I cannot but wonder how
these men should deduce the necessity of three Bishops to the Consecration of a
Bishop, so I do admire that none of them, neither Bellarmine, Binius, Vasques,
Hurtado, Occhogamia, Occandus, nor multitudes of others, which have urged this
Canon at the fourth of the Council of Nice, have so much as taken any notice of
Balsamans exposition of it, to return any but pretended satisfaction to it. The
rest of authorities which are produced I slight, as not worthy the troubling
the Reader with the naming of them; but I shall meet with the Chief hereafter.

SECT. IV. The second part of Vasques his Proposition examined, that the Pope
may dispense with the triplicity of Bishops.
BUt now the second part of Vasques his Proposition, is, That although it be by
Divine right that three Bishops should Consecrate a Bishop, yet the Pope may
dispense with it, and allow two or one to do it; as in the case of Austin the
Monk, when he came into England, but afterward the first Archbishop of
Canterbury, Pope Gregory the first, say they, granted him a dispensation to
Consecrate Bishops alone, until there were a good number to join with him. How
can the Pope dispense with Divine Law? this is too much; but let us consider
the Story, as it is set down even by the Admirers of the Popes greatness;
Austin the Monk being made Archbishop of Canterbury, wrote to the then Pope
Gregory the first, a very learned man, and one whose Works are full of
devotion, and indeed by whom he was sent first hither, to satisfy him in
diverse Questions of which he doubted, how he should demean himself in his
Government in England; amongst which this was one, Peto si long inquitas it
ineris long a interiavit, ut Episcopi facile non possunt convenire, an debent
sine aliorum Episcoporum presentia Episcopos ordinare. In English thus; I
require if the great length of a Journey should interpose it self, that Bishops
cannot meet easily together; whether he ought without the presence of other
Bishops, ordain Bishops himself. Mark, here the Question is put somewhat after
the language of the former examined Canon, upon the difficulty of the Journey.
I need not put down the Popes answer verbatim, but it is to this effect; that
the having no Bishops in England but himself, might do it; but he should take
care to settle them near together, that hereafter there might be no excuse, and
when they were near, they should meet together, to Celebrate that Spiritual
Marriage of that Bishop; this is called a Decretall Epistle: but consider,
Reader, if there be a word like as Decree in this or any other Answer in that
Epistle, but only an Advice upon Reason. Thus the Popes Decrees having been
made Laws, his Councels come to be Decrees; in this Epistle there is not one
word like a Decree, but only an Advice to him; nothing like a Commission, as
Vasques, and diverse others phrase it, for then it should be mandamus, or
concedimus potestatem, we Command or grant you power; nor of dispensation, as
Cardinal Bellarmine, and others, for then it should be in that language, we
dispense with you, or non obstante, notwithstanding any Law to the contrary,
but here is no such thing; but sometimes he says, fraternibus vestra, your
brotherhood knows this or that, and the like, and here shows him the reason why
he should come by more Bishops to assist him, (although I think he was deceived
in his supposals, for there were Bishops in Britain at that time; howsoever
that reason was good to authorize Austin at that time, and the like may be good
for any man in the like Condition; for this triplicity of Bishops to
Consecrate, cannot be necessary to Consecration, according to any Divine
Constitution, but only Ecclesiastical, which cannot be understood to exact
impossibilities, or else to make a particular Church to lose all the benefit of
Episcopal Government; But then consider the language of all these men, and see
how inconsistent it is with their first principles, that there must be three
Bishops by Divine right, to the Consecration of a Bishop; can the Pope dispense
with what is due by Divine authority? or can he grant a Commission to act
against Divine Laws? I hope they will not say so, unless they will set
themselves against all that is called God, and make an earthly god above our
Father which is in ^eaven; then let us consider how it was possible that
Christian Religion could have been planted, unless the power essentially had
been in one Bishop to Consecrate: when Timothy, Titus, and St. John, who you
will, that went about with the power of Tongues into unknown Countries, to
plant Religion, and God blessing their industry, the Churches increased,
learned Men were Converted, fit to make Bishops of. Can you think that these
Itinerants would suffer them, like Austin here in England, to send to Rome for
advice in such a matter, or much less for a Commission, or dispensation, to use
their Language? it is not imaginable; nay when a Church is in persecution, (I
know a little what belongs to that) can they send to many Bishops in the same
Province, to send their votes in writing; or without that, there can be no
Consecration? It cannot be; I conclude thus, although in a settled Church there
is a great decency in practiseing, according to that Rule of having three
Bishops at a Consecration, yet in these Cases it is not necessary, and it may
be validly acted by one alone, and no Commission or dispensation is necessary.

And now Reader, having walked through this intricacy, I cannot think my self
nor the Reader satisfied, until I have applied another Question; which is,
what is it which so enables a Consecration, that we may say when that is done;
this man is a Bishop.

CHAP. XII. In which is discoursed what is essentially to the constitution of a
Bishop.
THe Question introduced. To understand which (that I may write distinctly,
take this for a Praecognitum, that since the power was given to the Apostles in
these words, As my Father sent me, so send I you: Therefore when this power is
given by Apostles and Apostolical men, then this dignity is conferred upon
Men, But again, because that it is necessary for the Church of Christians, not
only that they have the power, but that this power should be so administered,
as that other men who are to receive blessings from it, should be able to take
notice; (for else how is it possible to repair to the wells head, unless they
can know where it is) that there is such a blessing bestowed upon them;
therefore this power must be given by some such means as are visible, and that
men may discern when it is granted: for if it should be given by the Apostles,
without any outward sign, only with a vehitie, a kind of secret grant, it must
be most uncertain to other men, because each man may pretend to it, and there
is no confuting but by some outward sign, which being proper to this Action,
may be an infallible assurance that then and not till then it is given: and
here will be required a diligent and curious inquest; there are diverse things
pretended to, which are not right, and they being severed, we may then safely
pitch upon what is the truth; to do which, let us first consider that Ad^m
Tanner in his fourth Tome of Scholasticall Divinity, upon the third of Thomas,
and the supplement, Disp. 7. Quest. 2. Dubio. 4. handling the doubt, what is
the matter and form of a Priest and Bishop, at the last page (1900.) he names
as a Concessum, and things to be supposed, eight Actions at the consecration of
a Bishop: he quotes the Roman Pontifical for it; I will not set them down,
the writing them is too much pains; but what has grown in reputation amongst
Scholars, I shall examine. But yet I must make another pause.

SECT. II. A discourse of Petrus Arcadius illustrated and applied.
THere is a learned man, one Petrus Arcadius, who has writ a Book with a most
pious title, which is of the concord betwixt the occidentall Church, or the
Latin and oriental, under which head^ he reduces the African, and sometimes
the Rutherian, in the administration of the Sacraments, which controvercy he
has very industriously and happily handled in very many things in particular
in this business; having handled before the form used in both Churches, at the
ordination, title 6. de Sacramento ordinis, cap. 4. he comes to reconcile them,
and does it upon this found^tion I am now handling, that is, that they agree in
the essentialls, that is, the Doctrine of all the three Churches, and the
difference is only in Accidentalls; this says he, may be done, first, by
saying our Savior did so institute this Sacrament, that the Consecration of
Ministers should be by certain words and outward signs, by which it should
sufficiently appear to what part of Ministry; they were ordained but he left it
to the arbitrament of the Church, what these signs and words must be, this he
illustrates by the Council of Trent, wherein S^ssion 23. Canon 3. the Council
decrees the thing, that holy ordination should be made with signs and words,
but determines not what; so that it excludes not the Grecian or African
Ordination. Again he illustrates this by Marriage most rightly, (for they make
Matrimony a Sacrament, as well as ordination) there the word of God
establishes for men how they should live in holy wedlock, but never determines
what shall be the manner, with what words or signs they shall be married, but
leaves that to the determination of every Church, yea Commonwealth; thus you
may perceive his Conclusion how strengthened. I will set down my Judgments and
reasons, and so pass on: first then, that our Savior did institute many holy
offices in themselves, you may say (even his Sacraments) so as there may be
diverse Ceremonies, according to the prudence of diverse Churches, is app^rent;
for let us consider Baptism, the matter, as it is positively set down in the
Institution, is water, this must not be altered; and that which is called the
form, which is the words by which this Baptism is administered are in part set
down; it must be, In the name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost; but
now whether it should be, I Baptize thee, as the Latin Church; or, let the
Servant of God be Baptized; or he is Baptized, which are severally used in
other Churches, is not determined by our Savior, and the words of either do
fully express the meaning of Baptism; so that neither does the Latin Church
re-baptize those who are Baptized by the Graeci^ns, nor the Graecians such as
are Baptized by the Latins, although both are bitter enough one against
another; so that you may see, there may be variation in the administration of
these duties in their Circumstances, where there is a Communion in the
Substance; and truly for my part I think in such a man who lives in either of
these Churches, it would be a Schismatical Act for any of them to vary from
that usage, which is in the Churches wherein he lives; for although these
things are indifferent in themselves, yet when they are determined in the Gree^
Euthology, and the Roman Rituals, they are not indifferent to them which live
amongst them in their several Churches, but a varying from the Church wherein
they live makes a breach of Charity and violates the Band of peace.

SECT. III. Another Precognitum explained.
ANother Introduction may be, that whatsoever is instituted by Scripture, in
any of these holy performances, whether as form or matter must not be altered,
nor can lawfully by any man; for since the blessing which is bestowed, is only
Gods gift, and Man is only ministerial in it; he must act according to that
Method which God has prescribed, and that only having his Covenant, can bring
the blessing.

SECT. IV. Another Observation expounded.
ANother note may be that Additions explicatory, so they are certainly such,
and are not intruded for essentials, do not destroy the notion of that which
they explain; it is necessary, for otherwise why should men expound the
Scriptures in Sermons or otherwise; yea, our Savior expounded his own
Parables, and after his exposition to his Disciples, we write further Comments
our selves, but that there is in none of these an alteration but a dilatation
of the conceit of them; these things being premitted, I shall return where I
left at Tanner and the Roman ponti^ical.

SECT. V. Many mistakes about Ceremonies in the Church of Rome.
IT is an apparent truth that the Church of Rome does very of^ clog Divine
duties with so many Ceremonies, and its mischief is frequent in that mischance,
that even their learned writers do in a little time grow o such mistakes, as to
think that some of those which are Ecclesiastical Ceremonies, only instituted
by the authority of the Church: to be the essentials, and that which is
essential, to be but accidents; this particular business I have in hand will
demonstrate this conclusion.

SECT. VI. It is an Error to think that the Anointing the Bishops Hand, is a
necessary Essential.
THe third Ceremony by Tanner, out of the ponti^ical, is the Anointing of the
Bishops hand, which is to be Consecrated in these words, ungantur manus istae
oleo Consecrato; that is when he Anoints his hands, he says, let these hands
be anointed with holy oil: And Francis Silvius, I must say truly a learned man
and most perspicuous writer in his fortieth Quest. upon the supplement of
Thomas Art 5. in resp. ad 8m., says that the essential Consecration of a
Bishop consists in this unction, and the words pronounced with it; (for the
Church of Rome calls the o^tward sign the matter, and the words the form) and
this to be it, he proves by a very strong Argument against the Romanist:
because in the whole frame of Ordination, the Bishop Consecrated, is cal^ed in
the ponti^ical until then, Bishop Elect only; But then absolutely Bishop from
that time; and his Argument is as weakly answered by Tanner where before quoted
that, Neque obstat quod in pontisicali ordinandus Episcopus post unctionem
primum vocatur Consecratus, antea vero solum Electus id ^nim ad scriptorem
Rubrici and modum l^quendi pertinent, plus non significat quam ante unctionem
nondum esse plene Consecratum, That is that the Language of the Ponti^ical
ought to be attributed to the writer of the Rubric, and that there is no more
imported in it, but that before the Unction he is not fully Bishop: Truly I
think Silvius does desire no more, but if men can shift off such grave and
weighty observations with saying it was a fault in the Writer or Printer; there
can no authority be produced but may be so answered: But he is more to bl^me
who transcribed it false, but why has it not been amended, and that fault
corrected: The truth is, the Ponti^ical it self is to blame, there is no such
thing in that much more ancient Ponti^ic^i, I mean the fourth Council of
Carthage, Canon 2. I will put down the words, because I am likely to make use
of them hereafter; the words are these.

Episcopus quum ordinatur duo Episcopi ponant and teneant Evangeliorum codicem
super caput and cervicem ejus and uno fundente benedictionem reliqui omnes
Episcopi qui adsunt, manibus suis caput ejus tangant. That is, a Bishop when he
is ordained, two Bishops shall put and hold the Book of the Gospel over his
head and neck, and one giving him the blessing; the other Bishops shall put and
hold the Book of the Gospel over his head and neck, and one giving him the
blessing; the other ^ishops which are present shall touch his head with their
hands; here is not any word of anointing, and therefore according to this Canon
neither of these Unctions, I mean head and hand are necessary, for although the
Canon may name somethings which are not necessary, yet it is not to be imagined
that it should leave out any thing which is necessary.

SECT. VII. Another Error concerning the Book, confuted.
THere is therefore another opinion which has gained great Reputation with many
Schoolmen, and that is of some who place the essentials of a Bishops Ordination
in the first ^eremony named in the Pontifical, and that is the same with that
of the Council of Carthage; to wit the putting the Book upon the Head of the
Consecrated Bishop, and the laying on of Hands, and the Benediction; this
certainly is most conform to that Canon of Carthage, but as I said before, as
it is not reasonable to think that these Canons should omit any essential thing
by Divine Apostolical institution; so it is reasonable to conceive it may add
something Ecclesiastical to that which is Divine, so it be not destructive to
the foundation, of which nature I shall show there is somewhat in this Canon:
For the Book which was imposed on the head and shoulders of the Bishop to be
Consecrated, is the Book of the Gospel, or four Evangelists; Now it is
impossible that that Ceremony should be necessary, because what is necessary to
any thing must agree, to all of that kind which this cannot, because there were
Bishops when this Book was not written; yea when not one of the ^ospels were
written, this therefore cannot be essential to the Consecration of a Bishop,
which must needs follow his Consecration; this Argumenr is taken notice of by
diverse although not in this ^ase, but in that which concerns a Deacon, where
the Book of the Gospels is delivered at his Ordination to the Deacon, and by
most of the Church of Rome is made the matter essential to that Ordination as
they call it, or as we, the outward sign of it, you see this Argument which
they are pinched with: Let us consider how they shift from it, Vasques in his
(238) Disp. Cap. 4. Number 43. and Ochogamia in his Book of Sacraments in his
title of Orders Cap. 4. out of him affirmed that this Order of Deacons, (as
well as is evident of Bishops) was before the Gospels were written, and they
were then ordained without that Ceremony, but by a Dispensation of Christ, that
is Ochogamia's Phrase; but Vasques by a Commission of his, the Phrase does not
materially differ; with these kind of shifts any thing may be affirmed, can
they show any the least word in the New Testament intimating any such
probability, a dispensation must be upon a former Law, there could be no Law
made to ordain with giving Gospels before either all, or any of them were
written, and it is most evident that none of them were writ, when the first
Bishops were made, Gasper Hurtado goes therefore another way to work, and
although he grants that at first they were ordained only by the imposition of
Hands, yet he says that it is probable that afterward Christ instituted, that
when the Gospels were writ, they should be delivered to the ordained: it is an
easy thing to say, it is probable but he should give a reason why we should
think it reasonable; I have reason to think that when the Gospels do abundantly
deliver to us such things which are necessary for us to know concerning the
will of Christ, and there is no such thing in the Gospels, and they would be of
great ease to the satisfaction of such men as expect to receive Divine
blessings from some men in holy Orders; It is necessary that they should have
some means chalked out to them, by which they might be assured, that these are
such hands by which they expected those blessings are promised to be given
them; but above all others, I wonder at Henricus Henriques, who is so bold in
his sum of moral Divinity Lib. 1^. Cap. 8. Tit. 1. in his Comment to affirm,
that probabilius videtur quod in primitiva Ecclesia dabatur Diacono charta in
qua continebantur Mysteria fid^i quae habentur in Evang^lio, which is, that it
seems probable, that in the primitive Church there was given to the De^con some
paper in which were contrived written the Mysteries of Faith which are in the
Gospel: He says it seems so, I would ask to whom it seems so; certainly to no
man living fifteen hundred years after and upwards, nor did ever any man say,
he saw any such Scripture, nor heard of it before; It cannot therefore seem
probable to any man, for sure such a Scripture would have given a Glorious
light to many other Doctrines which now lie in darkness, I therefore love
occandus for a clear and ingenious con^ession in this point who in quartum
sententiarum ^ist. 24. Proposition 1. Page 83. says thus, Contra hoc est unum
Argumentum cujus solutionem fateor me nescire, and gaudenter and libentur
ignorabo. Against this Conclusion, which is that the delivery of the Book
should be essential to the Order of a Deacon; against this there is one
Argument whose answer I know not, and am cheerfully and willingly ignorant of.
And then he urges this Argument of mine, and shows that even St. Mathews
Gospel who was his tutelar Saint, was not writ when Deacons were instituted, he
calls him Pater meus Spiritualis, this ^s it was honest, so it was ingenious;
and then he quotes Durandus rightly in Quartum Did. 24. Quest 3. who agrees
with me much in my opinion conce^ning this matter, and says, that in the
Arician Diocese where he was Bishop; this Ceremony of the Book was never used,
so that there is neither Scripture for it, nor any universal Tra^ition, and
therefore has no strong ^ound^tion; the chiefest argument that ^ives me any
consideration, is that Canon of the fourt^ Council of Carthage, of which I
spoke before, where in express terms, the use of the Book of the Evangelists is
enjoined in the ordination of a Bishop; but does that follow, it is therefore
necess^ry essentially, I think I have writ before that it is reasonable to
think that Eminent Council consi^^ing of 200. and odd Bishops many of them as
eminent for learning and piety as the world h^d; we may justly think that such
a Council would omit no essentially mater^all circumstance, but that it should
add nothing to the Apostolical Canons is not reasonable, and this might now be,
because now that Book was extant which ^t the first in the Apostles time was
not, so that I am confident that such who lived in obedience to that Church
ought to observe it, there being no opposition to the essential part; but
indeeed rather an explication of it, and yet I may say that the Church of Rome
did not, does not observe the manner of using the ^ook there enjoined; for as
Hu^tado difficultate decima de ordine (olim) says he, heretofore the Book was
not imposed by Bishops as that Canon requires but by Deacons, and now by the
Bishops ^hapl^ines, for the use of the Book was impossible to be Apostolical as
it is before proved, it may be used, and ought to be when ordained in a well
governed and settled Church, but it is not essential to the Ordination or
Consecration*

CHAP. XIII. In which, what is essential to this Consecration, is set down.
THus having removed the principal Rubbige which might impede my structure. I
come now to lay my foundation concerning the Building, first then let us
conceive that what is essential must be Apostolical, and what is so, may
probably be thought to be essential, for although it is a most assented
Conclusion that the Sacraments which conveigh Grace, must be of Divine
Institution, of which Nature they make Orders; (I contend not about words) and
the Apostles were instituted with full authority to act since, after his
departure to the end of the world: It is necessary therefore for us to think
that such things as are delivered by them are Divine, for although Canons of
Councels general or particular, are excellent Guides for the establishing Peace
and Unity in the Church, and so may require obedience from their Subjects, yet
because they are but men without an annexed infallibility; without doubt they
may vary in their practice and Discipline, and their Dictates being introduced
upon occasions may be altered; and therefore cannot add essentials to any
thing, for the essences of things are always certain and necessary. This is my
Major: Now to search what is Apostolical in this business, we must examine the
Scriptures where first we find our Savior authorizing his Apostles, As my
Father sent me, so send I you to give power to others. We find him using no
Ceremony, but bre^thing upon them gave them the Holy Ghost, and truly that
Breathing was most significative of that blessing he bestowed upon them; but
from thence we find not the Apostles using that Ceremony, for they being
enabled with this plenarty of power to give others that blessing, they only
gave it, and for a sign that they did establish it laid their hands upon them;
so that as we conceive these two places 1 Timothy 1. 6. by the laying on of my
hands or the 1 Timothy 4. 14. with the laying on of the hands of the Presbytery to
be Ordination, so likewise we shall find this Ceremony taken for the whole
(...) or Ord^nation. Tim. 5. 22. Lay hands suddenly on no man. Now then without
doubt if any outward Act must be essential to this Heavenly work; this only
being Apostolical must be esteemed most essential; and there I think it most
proper for men to conceive that this is the only Ceremony essentially necessary
(if any be) to the performance of that duty, for the power originally being
given to the Apostles nakedly and absolutely without any qualification or mode,
in what manner they should use it to others; we are to receive the manner at
their acting it, for our best Rule and guidance which is only in Scripture
delivered to be imposition of Hands: Thus much for that which the Doctors of
the Church of Rome called the material part in the essence of Consecration, and
we may truly term, the outward sign. Let us now examine that which they call
the form, and we may term the words which express it; the words which our
Savior used John 20. 22. are, Receive ye the Holy Ghost; these words expressly
are used in the Roman Consecration and Ordination, but in the Grecian the
words are varied, but the sense reserved, not giving this blessing in the
Imperative-mood, (which is much stood upon by many Schoolmen and Casuists) but
in a more humble style, The Grace of God Creates or Promotes thee to this
Dignity of a Bishop, or Priest, or Deacon, where we find the truth more largly
expounded though materially the same, for certainly the Grace of God is that
which impowers men with these authorities are given, and men are only
Instrumental, but that they are, and therefore there is added how this is given
by the suffrage of the Bishops, which denotes them instrumental, for the
African Church you may discern in the Canon of Carthage before cited, that the
Consecration is expressed in a Language of such extent as may be applied to
them both, which is (uno fundente benedictionem) one of them pouring out the
benediction or blessing, but implying strongly the sense, such as is proper for
this work; to Confirm which, all the present Bishops lay on their hands; and
this universally so consented unto as agreeing to the Holy Scripture, that
although in the heat of disputation, I find men sometimes over peremptorily
asserting their own opinions, yet I do not find that either Church did refuse
such as were Consecrated in either, although in ways and modes differing from
their own, so that I may justly say that the whole Catholic Church Concenters
in this Conclusion, that when words importing the blessing are Delivered by a
Consecrating Bishop, and those words are sealed by imposition of Hands, then
these holy Orders are effectually given; I shall then need to do little more in
this Point than to answer such objections, which are commonly made against it,
or I can apprehend proper to be opposed to it.

SECT. II. The first Objection against the Truth, answered.
THe first is common in the School made against the ponti^ical, in this point,
because that in all that part of the Ponti^ical it is said only, Receive ye the
Holy Ghost, and that Language is the same in the Ordination of Priests; as
likewise the Imposition of Hands; so that by this no man can know what Order is
given; in the Church of Rome it is answered that the design which they are
about will show it, whether to one or to the other Order; and again the manner
of the Imposition of Hands, in the Consecration of a Bishop, diverse Bishops
Impose Hands, in the Ordination of a Priest one Bishop only with some
Presbyters, in the Ordination of a Deacon the Bishop alone, but in our Church
that scruple is clearly taken away by a great Prudence, where at the Ordination
of a Priest, the Consecrating words are, Receive the Holy Ghost, for the office
and work of a Priest, and at the Consecration of a Bishop the words are,
Receive the Holy Ghost for the office and work of a Bishop in the Church of
God; where we see that universal cause of all Spiritual blessings, (I mean the
Holy Ghost) applied to that particular duty, in which at that time he works,
and therefore the Consecration is free from that Exception.

SECT. III. Another Objection drawn from the Council of Carthage, answered.
ANother Ojection may be, that the Council of Carthage before cited; mentions
the laying on the Book by two Bishops upon the head and shoulders of the Bishop
to be Consecrated, and therefore that is necessary; I answer that I much
reverence that Council in which was St. Augustine, and diverse other Bishops
famous for learning and piety in their Generations; but yet as I have said
before, this was never practiced any remarkable time, as sundry Doctors in the
Church of Rome observe, and again it is impossible to be essential because not
Apostolical and that because the Holy Bible, and that highest part of it the
New Testament was not writ when Bishops and Priests were Ordained, it is
therefore worth our marking, that there is a difference in the decrees of
Councels concerning Doctrine and Discipline, or Ceremonies of the Church in a
point of Doctrine, they show in what sense they understand such and such a
Conclusion, but in the other they set down what is to be practiced to preserve
Orders and decency in those Churches where they have to do; and indeed there
can be no more required of obedience than in quiet and settled times, in which
times only Councels can be Congregated, and in other times as things necessary
by Divine right must always be kept close unto, so what is only humane may be
spared. it is not possible for humane power to add any thing of absolute
necessity to Divine justice which cannot be altered; now of this Nature in this
Ceremony of the Gospel as is most apparent. For first the Pontifical varyes
extremely much in this very point from the Council of Carthage, not only in
adding to it that the Book must be open which is not expresed in Carthage but
by Changing those few Circumstances which are particularized there, as first
where it is said in Carthage that two Bishops shall lay on the Gospel, the
Ponti^ical says, that it must be done by the Consecrator and the assisting
Bishop. Antonius is peremptory out of Hostiensis that it must be done by three
in the third part of his sums Tit. 14. Cap. 16. Sect. 9. toward the end of
that Section, secondly where the Council says that the Book shall be put upon
the head and the neck of the Consecrated Bishop. The Ponti^ical says super
scapulam and cervicem upon the shoulders and the neck, thirdly whereas the
Council says (uno fundente benedictionem) one pouring out the blessing; they
make them altogether to give it in these words, Receive the Holy Ghost,
Antonius where before is peremptory that three must do it; thus you see how in
the Doctrine of the Church of Rome the Compiler of that Book is preferred before
that ever to to be honored Council consisting of above two hundred Bishops;
amongst which were many most eminent men and indeed the Popes legates likewise,
although they could only keep up his pretensions to it, not prevail for his
universal superiority, besides this I observe in the Ceremoniale Romanum put
out by Pope Leo the tenth and licensed by him in the second Sect. litera Charta
(as the Printer calls it) or as we, fol. 11. the Ordinator and the rest put the
Book only upon the neck of the Elect Pope when he is made Bishop; so that here
in these Records of the Church of Rome, besides these other practices of
Chaplains or ^eacons before mentioned we find a great liberty taken in varying
from the Council of Carthage; and amongst themselves the Council appointing the
Book to be put upon the head and neck, the Pontifical upon the shoulders and
the neck, the Ceremonial names only the neck which evidently makes it appear
that this Clause has been looked upon only as an humane ordinance, subject to
Change and alteration, but the other of imposition of Hands, as Divine which no
humane power could abrogate or alter: Give me leave since I am in the canvasing
of the Canon to make one observation for the further illustration of a
Conclusion before treated of, that is the Phrase (uno fundente benedictionem,)
the blessing is given by one, when the Pontifical makes it to be given at the
same time by many, and so diverse Doctors in the Church of Rome, which certainly
may be very confused one beginning sooner and so ending, but to avoid that, the
Ceremonial before cited says, that the Consecrator with the rest of the
Bishops says, Accipe Spiritum Sanctum, receive the Holy Ghost, but he adds the
Consecrator alte, the rest submisse, he with a loud voice, the rest with a
soft; and now consider that one is called the Consecrator as surely he must be,
and the rest do but come into his assistance to lay on their Hands in token of
the assurance of it, and therefore they speak lowly and humbly, he that is the
Consecrator does Consecrate, the rest come in as assistants and to this purpose
they speak lowly and submissly, and to this purpose Vasques after a long
discourse about this Question concludes Disp. 240. Number 65. that it is enough
that one speaks the words and lays on his Hands likewise, where we may observe
by him that the Consecrators words are, that they call the form of
Consecration, we may say conveigh the Consecrating virtue, this being received
in all Christian Churches but the other unconstant amongst themselves. Another
Argument may be objected against us of the Church of England who use a giving
of the Bible to the Bishop who is to be Ordained in our Consecration.

SECT. IV. An Objection against our practice answered, and the force of the
Argument satisfied.
IT is true and it is according to the first Ceremony used in the Pontisical;
where it is said that the Consecrating Bishop takes the Book from the shoulders
of the Consecrated, and with the other assisting Bishops, gives it shut to the
Consecrated with these words Accipe Evangelium receive the Gospel, we use this,
and with it a godly exhortation to the Bishop, but it is after his
Consecration, for that is perfected in the first Act, Receive the Holy Ghost
for the office of a Bishop in the Churches of God now committed unto thee by
the imposition of our Hands. In the name of the Father, the Son and the Holy
Ghost; this only is essentially the Consecration, and if the Archbishop should
be struck dead immediately after the pronouncing these words; the Consecrated
Bishop should receive no other Consecration, we use likewise an examination
before the Consecration according to the first Canon in the fourth Council of
Carthage although not punctually the same yet virtually containing all
substantial matter in it; that reflected principally upon those Heresies which
afflicted that Church at that time, our examination as it included these, so it
particularizeth upon such as more nearly concerned the disturbance of our own,
but neither that proceeding, nor this subsequent exhortation are essentially
necessary ad esse to the Being of a Bishop, but conduce to the gravity and
decency of the Administration of so high a duty, as likewise for a memorial to
every Bishop to put him in mind of the been esse the well and good execution of
his Order, which is a most excellent office, and being no where forbid but
indeed in many places of the New Testament taught, yea commanded, no man can
think but that at such a Holy time as his Consecration, it is seasonable to put
the Bishop to be Consecrated in mind of such performances which the Holy Ghost
requires of him; this is all I hope is needful for the satisfaction of that
Argument; drawn from the Consecration of Pope Pelagius the first, who was
Consecrated by the imposition of Hands from two Bishops and one Presbyter,,
first it is evident that one particular act cannot satisfy a Right to do that
again which has been done once, because there is no rule or law against which
no man ever trespassed.

Secondly, that the Errors committed in elections and Consecrations of Popes
are no Presidents, because they have too often much transgressed in that kind.
Thirdly, that Consecration in necessary occasions when more cannot be had, may
be by two or one only Bishop, and yet be essentially good. Fourthly that
nothing is essential but giving the proper blessing with imposition of Hands:
for the addition of one Presbyter to the two Bishops is served only to fill a
gap, and to comply with an unnecessary received Ceremony; it added no virtue of
its self, no^ impeded the virtue of the Consecration.

CHAP. XIV. His Discourse examined, and an Argument from some Father, answered.
SECT. I. The Preface to his Argument examined
NOw we will enter upon another Argument being Page 164. toward the bottom, a
discourse unnecessary for me to write down at large, but I will set down what
is material in it, and so pass to his Argument; thus says he, Habent
Presbyteri Presbyters have by a Divine right the power of Ordaining (Sicut)
like as they have the power of Preaching and Baptizeing; he expounds this, that
where there is a Bishop there this should be done, sub regimine and inspectione
Episcopi under the government and eye of the Bishop, but in other places where
the Church is governed by the common Council of Presbyters, that Ordination is
valid and good which is made by the imposition of the Hands of the Presbytery;
Thus he, but I desire, and so do many more, to know where that Church was ever
in the Christian world that gave simple Presbyters power to Ordain others;
before these latter times; the practice whereof I think nothing can excuse in
some Reformed Churches, but a mere necessity in which Case the vote supplies
the Act; but I will proceed no further with this, all to the midst of the next
Page is only Discourse, his conclusion there, is, that Presbyters may Ordain, I
come with him and will consider his following Arguments.

SECT. II. His Argument from St. Ambrose and St. Augustine answered.
HE begins with St. Ambrose upon the Epistle to the Ephesians Cap. 4. the words
are truly cited by him which are apud Aegyptum Presbyteri consignant si
praesens non sit Episcopus, I will not disturb this, before I observe his
second Quotation, and make one answer serve both which is Augustinus sive
quicunque sit author in quaestionibus ex utroque testamento mixtum Quest. 10.
In Alexandria inquit Presbyter Consecrat, the force of this Argument is this,
that in Alexandria and throughout Egypt in the absence of a Bishop a Presbyter
or Presbyters do Consecrate, by these Fathers in the Citation of St. Augustine
he ingeniously says, sive quicunque author est illius operis, whether he or
whosoever is Author of that work, indeed it is evident that it is not his, and
he might have said as much of St. Ambrose as is app^ren^, because these
Comments are much suspected upon strong grounds, but indeed are thought to be
some Author of that age, and then though an Heretic or Schismatique in a
matter of Story which concerns not that business for which he is branded, I see
no reason why that matter of fact may not be credited, I therefore must allow
that authority neither will I quarrel at that word in him which is not
Consecrat (as in the counterseit Augustine) but Consignat which is of a
largersence; but ye because that word is often used for Consecration, I will
allow that likewise, yea I will add that, which some Schoolmen who incline to
Doctor Forbes his opinion have observed, which is that the word Consecrat
cannot here be taken for Consecrating the holy Eucharist of the Consecrating
the Lords Supper, for that was allowed lawful in any place, now this seems to
intimate a peculiar custom in Alexandria and Egypt for that, therefore know
that other things are in Ecclesiastical Story said to be Consecrated besides
these of Bishops or the Elements of the Communion, to wit, Holy houses,
Churches, Virgins and Utensils but some may object that this Cons^^ration may
be understood of Bishops; I answer no, out of a famous Story recorded by
Athanasius, which is in his second Apologue, and a letter writ by the Marcotici
Praesbyteri and Diaconi (as they style themselves) to Curiasus and Evagrius. It
is there Registered that one Colluthus counterfeiting himself to be a Bishop
when he was none, but only a Presbyter Ordained diverse persons amongst others,
one Ischyras for which he was condemned by Hosius and other Bishops in a
general Council, that he should leave off Episcopising and be reduced into his
former Order, and therefore says the letter, Ischyras could be no Priest, who
was Ordained only by him who was no Bishop: give me leave now to show the truth
of this Story; it has so great authority for it as Athanasius, who was Bishop
of Alexandria, in his Apology for himself writ to his adversaries, both Lay and
Ecclesiastical; if he had been a man of less Sanctity, yet out of policy he
durst not tell such an errant Lie; granting this, I say, that if the other
authorities were authentic which they are not, that word Consecration must be
understood of other, Consecrations not of Bishops or Priests, because in
Alexandria this act was condemned. And so I think that there is enough said to
that Argument drawn from the pretended Ambrose and Augustine.

CHAP. XV. SECT. I. His Argument drawn from the Council of Antioch answered..
ANd now I proceed to another Argument drawn from the Council of Antioch Canon
10. in which it is Ordained that Chori Episcopi (which says he, were only
Presbyters) might Ordain Readers, Subdeacons and Exorcists, but neither
Priests nor Deacons as Dionisius Eriquus translates it, p^aeter Civitatis
Episcopum we may render it besides the Bishop of the City. Gentianus Hervetus
renders it absque Vrbis Episcopo without the Bishop of the City, but he says
Hidorus Hispalensis has a third Reading which he favors above all that is
praeter* ^anscientiam Episcopi, as I may say without the Conscience of the
Bishop: here he puts down three various Translations or Readings, I can add a
fourth which is of another Isidore, Isidori Mercator, who put out the Councels
by the advice of Fourscore Bishops as he himself writes in his Epistle before
them, but indeed has no remarkable difference from the rest, although it
varyes from them; Now says Doctor Forbes, Pope Damasus in his first Epistle to
Purisper Bishop of the Prime Seat of Numidia and other Orthodox Bishops, he
condemns the Chori-Episcopi as an irregular Order being in themselves but
Praesbyteri, and taking upon them Episcopal power. To go methodically in the
examination of this Argument, I propose to my self three things, 1. The
Consideration of the authority of the Canons made in this Council; next the
examination of Pope Damasus his decree; and last the Nature of those
Chori-Episcopi or Country Bishops who are therein mentioned. And first I apply
my self to the Council which I am content to admit because the Canons thereof
were anciently received into the Code of the Universal Church, and mentioned
both in the Council of Chalcedon and the Council in Trullo, though Estius in
Quartum Distinct. 25. Sect. 2. is bold to reject the Canons of this Council
because there was an ill use made thereof against two eminent Fathers of the
Church St. Athanasius and St. John Chrysostom who suffered much trouble and
persecution upon the pretense of the IV. and XII. Canons thereof from their
Adversaries, and were sentenced by them before they well heard. But in
particular concerning the Canon of this Council about the power of the
Chori-Episcopi it is well observed by Estius (ubi supra) that the words thereof
are very intricate and perplexed, as we shall now declare in the Chapter
following.

CHAP. XV. The Argument to prove these Chori-Episcopi and their power to Ordain
Presbyters examined.
I Think the likelyest man in the world to expound this Canon is Balsamon who
was Patriarch of that Church, and although he lived a good while after this
Council, yet the sense and meaning of the decrees of his own Church is likelyer
to be preserved by him and them in that Church, than in any other places, and
men which lived further remote: Therefore in his Comment upon the Canon and
those particular words upon which the whole fo^ce of this Argumentis built,
Illud autem sine Episcopo qui est in Urbe non accipitur pro eo quod est sine
ejus mandato, sed pro eo quod est sine ejus Ordinatione, seu Consecratione; et
si enim fuerit Chori-Episcopo mandatum ut Praesbyterum ordinet, and hoc
fecerit, irrita erit Ordinatio, quia non sit data Praesbyteris ordinandi
potestas, than which words nothing can be more clear to show that these
Chori-Episcopi here spoken of could not Ordain, so now in answer to this
Argument of Doctor Forbes drawn from the tenth Canon of the Antiochian Council
it is not of any force, because the Council is of none, being made by
Heretics in a wicked Schism, conspiring against that ever to be honored
person Athanasius, and urged to the destruction of that incomparable person
John Chrysostom. Secondly granting it to be of force yet by the best expositor
in the world for that Council Balsamon expounds the dubious language of that
Canon against Doctor Forbes, now then the business of Pope Damasus his decree
falls of it self, which introduces a new work for me.

SECT. II. Pope Damasus his decree examined.
THis Epistle in Crabbs Edition of the Councels is the fourth, but in Binius
the fifth Epistle of Damasus, and it is sufficiently Pontifical, it destroys
all Chori-Episcopi, and says, that they were prohibited as well by that Seat
of Rome, as by all the Bishops in the world, this he says there, and we must
take his word for it only, for I find no such thing upon record before or
after, as will appear when I treat of the nature of them, but he inveighs
justly agaisnt the Laziness of Bishops, which says, he brought them into, like
Nurces to suckle their children for them, whilst they the Bishops might enjoy
their ease and pleasure. To conclude, the whole drift of that Epistle is to
prove that these Country Bishops are* but Presbyters and therefore have no
power to Ordain Priests, and Doctor Forbes says clean contrary, that although
they were but Presbyters, yet by that accursed Council of Antioch they might
Ordain Priests; The words of that Canon Damasus mentions, although he do not
name the Councels and truly these words seemed to me to be of great force,
quamquam impositionem Episcoporum perceperint, where he observes the Plural
number, imposition of Hands of Bishops, many in the Plural number, of which
more hereafter: now if they did, I know not what can hinder them by any Canon
from a remote power to Ordain, which may be acted by only leave from the Bishop
himself, but this is enough for the business of the decree of Damasus, it seems
he was angry with them, and disputes against them, and condemns them, but as
Doctor Forbes well observes this decree of his, was but little or not at all
obeyed; either because this was no true but a counterfeit Epistle, or whether
these decrees of Popes extra Cathedram were not valid, I know not, but do know
this, that it was not observed, so here we see a wicked Council condemned by a
Pope; and that Pope neglected by all men afterward; what he urges out of
Isidore Hispalensis is of no consideration; but only to mark that the Popes
decree was not observed in his time, for Isidore there which is Lib. 2. de
Ecclesiasticis officiis Cap. 6. sets down only the bare words of the two
Councels of Neocaesarea and this of Antioch, that of Neocaesarea only compares
the Chori-Episcopi to the Disciples, this of Antioch will prove a most
perplexed decree in its self, and such which may probably be objected against
Doctor Forbes, as well as expounded for him, for that out of Neocaesarea which
compares the Chori-Episcopi to the seventy Disciples, Damasus shows that they
Ordained, but only the Apostles, and Isidore has not one word of discourse
concerning this office, as he uses to have concerning all others, but only sets
down the words of the Canons; so that it remains for all him, just as it was,
which is most intricate, Damasus seems to conceive that the Records of this
Canon did allow them with leave of the Bishop to Ordain Deacons and Priests and
that the Laziness of Bishops connived at it, for which reason he condemns them,
not the fault only, but for the faults sake, the very office, this office we
find continued in Isidores time, after him in the Church, and in late times as
I shall show, so that as the Pope thought the Canon of that Council not
obliging, so the Christian world thought his decrees invalid, wherefore I might
well lay them both aside.

SECT. III. This Canon Reviewed.
BUt I will examine the Canon to see if it have any necessary construction that
way. There are two principal things which are disputeable in this Canon, first,
whether these Chori-Episcopi might give Orders to Presbyters with leave of the
Bishop of the City whereto they appertain; secondly, whether any of them were
Bishops by Episcopal Ordination, in both which we may find the Canon so
perplexed as it will be hard to collect a clear conclusion of it.

For the first, it is urged by Doctor Forbes that the words of the Canon in all
Editions, of which he quotes three, make for him, the first is of Dionysius
Exig^us a grave Author and he urges his words truly, Nec Praesbyterum nec
Diaconum audeant Ordinare praeter Civitatis Episcopum, speaking of
Chori-Episcopi, they should not Ordain a Priest or Deacon, praeter besides the
Bishop of the City, to whom he with his possession is subject; Is not this
rightly termed by Estius a perplexed Canon? then next take the Edition of
Gentianus Hervetus which reads it absque Vrbis Episcopo, he must not Ordain
these without the Bishop of the City, this I take to be in his Edition of
Balsamon, for so it is there, and then why Balsaman who was Patriarch of
Antioch, although a good while after, should not be thought ^itter to
understand the practice of that Church, than those who lived after him in other
Churches, I apprehend not: His Comment upon the Text is this Sine Vrbis
Episcopo without the Bishop of the City, is not to be understood without his
Command (as we term it his Fiat) but says he, his Ordination or Consecration,
for says he, if the Bishop Command the Chori-Episcopus to Ordain and he should
do it, that Ordination were void, so that by this learned Author this perplexed
Canon must be understood against Doctor Forbes, but he has a third Edition of
Isidore Hispalensis which reads it praeter conscientiam Episcopi without the
conscience of the Bishop, and here he magnifies this Edition and calls it
probatissima Versio the most approved version; but he does not set down by whom
this is approved, besides himself, neither do I think he can, nor does show any
reason why it should be so approved, but his own Authority; and let us see what
he has got by it, for certainly it seems not to me to enforce his
interpretation, which is that he may Ordain these offices with the leave of the
Bishop, for it is not praeter consensum; but conscientiam; now conscience is
not the same with consent, consent is most proper to another man's action,
Conscience to his own, the great actions of Conscience being to accuse or
excuse a man's self, or to judge of a man's own act, or whether they have been
done according to right science; but it meddles not with what concerns other
men either to judge, accuse, or excuse them, unless we are authorized in foro
publico, or privato in confession, and then it is an act of the Confessors
Conscience only out of this regard that he is bound in duty to apply his
knowledge to others; and therefore to understand this Phrase better, let us
conceive that Praeter or beside the Conscience of the Bishop, is nonsense, but
if he or any others are delighted with this word Conscience in this Canon, I
will show them a fourth reading where he may find it used most properly and
significantly, which is Cresperius his sum word Chori-Episcopus where he quotes
this Canon, and therein says that a Chori-Episcopus must not Ordain Priests or
Deacons propter Conscientiam Episcopi for the conscience he has of the Bishop
of his City, that is because his Conscience tells him that the Bishop is only
to Ordain such; thus I think that it is no way evident from the Canon that
these men did Ordain Priests or Deacons, we come next to the second, whether
any of these Chori-Episcopi had Episcopal Ordination, and so might in a case of
necessity Ordain.

SECT. IV. Doctor Forbes to blame for Censuring Bellarmine too sharply in this
point.
IN this Question Doctor Forbes falls soul upon Cardinal Bellarmine which I was
sorry to read, gives him ill language, calls his opinion ridiculous and
childish, and again Page 170. detestanda est Bellarmini impudentia, Bellarmines
impudence is to be abhorred or else miseranda imperitia, his Ignorance is to be
pityed; for although the Cardinal may seem to deserve such language himself,
after giving learned men who differ from himself in judgment, as bad or worse,
yet these Pen-Combates should in that resemble those with swords, where the
first engagers in the quarrel being high with animosities against each other
will give no Quarter, but after the experience of a continued war has taught,
that what happens to one, this day, may be the fortune of the other to morrow,
they manage the war more civilly in the future, so it should be with us now,
when the wars have continued a long time: and experience has taught us that
the most learned writer is a man, and subject to error; may be mistaken in his
judgment, may sometimes in Quotations miss the right conceit of them: we should
spare such reproachful languages, and deal with one another even our enemies
more courteously; but let us see why he is so severe against Bellarmine,
because says he, Bellarmine does oppose Damasus and all antiquity, in saying
that there are some Chori-Episcopi which had Episcopal Consecration, and some
which had only Presbyterial; to this I say, Bellarmine may be mistaken and so
may Vasques the Jesuit who opposes him in that conclusion; but I doubt it does
not clearly appear out of antiquity, Which is mistaken; Bellarmine de Clericis
in his seventeenth Cap. conceives that these Chori-Episcopi which he and all
writers make to be vicarii Episcoporum may be of two sorts, either such as are
mere Presbyters or else such as are suffragans or titular Bishops; the first
sort are they which Pope Damasus condemns, and will not suffer to encroach upon
the Episcopal office; the other he says which were suffragan Bishops or
titular might do it with leave from the Bishop of the City; the fault of this
saying appears not to me; for they being vicarii may be of either sort or both,
and I spoke it knowingly (as will appear presently in the next Cap.) if they
were such as are called suffragans (as is reasonable to think) then they were
Ordained Episcopally and might Ordain Priests, yea Bishops, and did do it, nor
does any thing in Vasques or Doctor Forbes necessarily confute it, first for
Cardinal Bellarmine, he seems to be of opinion, that this Canon does approve of
the Consecration of these Chori-Episcopi, and that they might give the Order of
Priesthood with leave from the chief Bishop, to avoid that, that they who were
presbyters might then do it, he puts down this distinction, that some had but
Presbyterian Ordination and some Episcopal and this he thinks this Canon
implies when it says speaking of the Chori-Episcopi, etiamsi manus
impositionem Episcoporum acceperint (...), mark it is in the Plural number,
they had the imposition of Hands of Bishops, not of one only, as Presbyters,
and then again it is said, and ut Episcopi consecrati fuerunt and are
Consecrated as Bishops, which words says Doctor Forbes were by the translator
added, and are not in the original Greek, it is probable Pope Damasus who lived
near that time, a thousand years and more nearer than he, and is reported to be
learned in the Greek as well as Latin, should know the words of the Council, as
well as he or any other, yet he puts down these words, and they are in both the
Lections of Peter Crabb I will not trouble my self to look further, but Pope
Damasus writing against them, and condemning them, would not have put down this
Argument against himself, if it had not been the Language used in that Canon*
what force his Arguments have I shall examine speedily, but now let us consider
the Argument which is only touched by Bellarmine, if they were a sort of
Chori-Episcopi which had the imposition of Hands from diverse Bishops, what
reason can be imagined why such should not Ordain Priests, Vasques in answer to
this says, that the imposition of the Hands of Bishops is not to be understood
of many Bishops laying on their Hands at the same time upon the same man, but
that several Bishops at several times laid their Hands upon several
Chori-Episcopi, but to this may be urged that word (quamvis) as one, or etiamsi
as another Edition, why should the Canon say, although he be Ordained by the
imposition of Hands of Bishops, and Consecrated as a Bishop, this although
would there signify nothing for he should not be by it distinguished from a
Presbyter, but because some were and some were not Ordained by Bishops, it
reaches even those who were so Ordained, Doctor Forbes is not content with
this answer of Vasques but adds another of his own at the bottom of Page 171.
and throughout 172, where before cited, the sense of which is that the
imposition of Hands here mentioned is not to be understood passively for the
imposition of Hands which they receive themselves, but actively for that
imposition of Hands which they had power of to give. I think I have set it down
as clearly as his words can be rendered, for indeed his Language is as obscure
as the Canon it self, but this is most forced, nor indeed can a man conceive
Canonically, how a Chori-Episcopus could receive that active which he mentions,
unless he had received it passively first, by the imposition of Hands of diverse
Bishops, nor can a man well imagine in that Language, and ut Episcopi
Ordinantur, what that (ut) should mean if it did not come to explain the former
Phrase of imposition of Hands of diverse Bishops; so that then for ought I see
Bellarmines exposition against both these adversaries is the most clear and
congruous to the Canon, let us now examine Pope Damasus's Arguments as they are
scholastically urged by Vasques and that is the marrow of all that is in this
Epistle.

SECT. V. Damasus his first Argument against the Chori-Episcopi answered.
Damasus seems to me, eitheir with Bellarmine to think there were two sorts of
Chori-Episcopi in the time of making the Canon which may be persuaded, because
although he begins with this Argument from the Plural number before urged, yet
he never endeavors an answer to it; or else believing them all but Presbyters,
he thinks that his other Argument may invalid this; and notwithstanding this,
being deficient in other things they are not Bishops by it. His first Argument
is drawn from the word (Chori) which signifies Country, they were but country
Bishops, when as all Bishops should be of a City: To this I answer that
although such Canons may be made for the establishment of the government of
Churches in a settled Kingdom, where are such Cities for the Decorum and honor
of the Episcopal Sea, yet it cannot be in unsettled States, as suppose the
Gospel should be preached in the barbarous places of the West Indies, where are
no such places to give Episcopacy that honor, yet the Church may and ought to
be planted and governors put into them to regulate their discipline o^ else
things will go backward faster than forward in the matters of Religion. Again
we may conceive if such Canons be insisted upon, that they should be understood
of prime and chief Bishops, not such as are Vicarii Episcoporum that is vicars
of the chief Bishops; Now it may happen that there be a necessity of such
vicars, and they may be of great use to the Bishop of the City whose Diocese is
large, as will appear shortly, and these Chori-Episcopi although they may be
impeded in the execution of their office by the superior authority of the
Bishop of the City, yet with his consent are empowered to Ordain in these cases,
which is most agreeing to the letter of the Canon according to any Edition,
either sine or praeter or whatsoever it is. This is enough I think for the
first Argument of Pope Damasus.

SECT. VI. His next Argument answered.
ANother is thus framed, there are but two Orders of Priesthood, Bishops and
Presbyters, this he enlarges and proves from the Church under the Law, where
were Aaron and his Sons only in the Priesthood, as likewise from our Savior
himself who had only Apostles and Disciples; so says he, it should be in the
present Church, now it seems these Chori-Episcopi are neither, they esteem
themselves greater than Presbyters and yet are not Bishops, wherefore nothing
in answer; what they esteem themselves I know not, but we have good reason to
think some were Bishops and some only Presbyters, and they who were Bishops
might act these great offices of Ordaining Priests and Deacons with leave of
the Bishop of the Diocese, those who were only Priests, could not; Thus Damasus
his Arguments are are of no force against that Canon of Antioch, and therefore
Vasques himself acknowledges in that 238. Disp. Cap. 7. That Damasus did
conceive that in the time of the Council of Antioch, some Chori-Episcopi were
Bishops, and he affirms that if they had Episcopal Consecration, although they
were but titular Bishops, and so had no place assigned at their Consecration
where they should officiate, yet they had that power granted them at their
Consecration, which might be reduced into act whenever a place was assigned
them, and yet Damasus condemns them for the future which was never obeyed.

SECT. VII. One word in the Canon more explained.
THere is one word more in the Canon which may abide a misinterpretation and is
somewhat insisted upon by Doctor Forbes; that is in the latter end of the
Canon, it is said that he the Chori-Episcopus must be Ordained by the Bishop to
whom he and his possession are subject; Now if he be Ordained by one Bishop
only, certainly he is but a Presbyter, for although as I have said in a case of
necessity, one Bishop has been allowed to Consecrate, and the power
Apostolical was to them Separative to every one to Ordain, yet when Laws were
substituted by Ecclesiastique authority, for the well government of the Church
and severe punishments inflicted upon the violation of them (as are in this
case) it is not reasonable to think that men living in obedience to that
Church, should dare ^o break them in public, and that constantly as it seems,
this is for answer to this, I say that this makes it evident, that this Canon
is delivered concerning a double sort of Chori-Episcopi, some that were made by
the imposition of Hands of diverse Bishops, and others that were ordained by one
only, which is all is required, and so I will pass to my last proposal to show
what these Chori-Episcopi were,

CHAP. XVI. What the Chori-Episcopi were.
IT is a hard task which I do not find clearly delivered by any, what I find
shall be set down and leave the determination to others; In general my conceit
of them is this, that as it happens in other Parisnes where Presbyters have the
charge, that where they are large and require Chapels of ease, the Parson
sometimes gets a Deacon to officiate in a Chapel and do all the lesser duties
for him: Reads the Prayers and Lessons, yea Baptize where he cannot be present
to act it himself; yet if he have a Chapel at which he cannot reside, (as it
is too often in my Diocese) he must have a complete Presbyter to do that work;
so it was in those greater Parishes of Bishops (which we call Diocesses, but
were heretofore called Parishes) when they are large and cannot well be
super-intended by a Bishops care; he had Chori-Episcopi, such as being
Presbyters only might do his work, of which they were capable by Commission:
But yet if they were very large; for which it would be troublesome for the
Diocese to receive the Episcopal duties which were beyond the Presbyterian
authority, there it was necessary to have such Chori-Episcopi which were
Bishops; And as that Country Parson may restrain his Curate in the exercise of
his authority, you shall not absolve such and such faults, nor give the
Communion at such and such times without my particular leave, because I mean to
be present at those times, so may be the case of those Chori-Episcopi, who were
Bishops, they might Ordain those lesser Orders, as they are called, Subdeacons
and Readers but not Priests or Deacons, which indeed are Orders, but by leave
from their superior Bishops. And this I think may fairly meet with the Council
of Antioch, and all that I can find any where in antiquity spoken of them; That
this may appear more clearly, consider first,

That this office is by some made as ancient as the Apostles times, they say
that Linus and Clemens were Chori-Episcopi to St. Peter at Rome, so Platina
with others, and there may appear some reasons for it, because when St. Peter
had pitched upon that place for his Diocese (if he did so) and was necessarily
to prosecute his great Apostolical design about the world in other places; as
well as Rome; it was necessary that he should have some men of eminent worth to
Episcopize for him in his absence, but then I find not that they in his life
time did Ordain any to these Orders (although perhaps they might do it) until
they came to be Bishops themselves at Rome.

SECT. II. The decrees of diverse Councils examined.
THe next piece I find concerning them is in Concilio Ancirano Canon 13 the
effect of which is, that Chori-Episcopi should not Ordain Priests or Deacons,
or Priests act any thing without leave from the Bishops letters, or under his
hand, here is nothing, whether they were Bishops or no: The next, the Council
of Neocaesarea in which it is thought were the same Bishops as in the other,
and did immediately follow that at Ancira Canon 13. where the Chori-Episcopi
are compared with the seventy which amounts to nothing; whether they were
Bishops appears not by that, but that they were assistants to the supreme
Bishops, as the seventy were to the Apostles: The n^xt, shall be the Council of
Laodicea, the two former are mentioned by Doctor Forbes, but not this, this
Council in the fifty seventh Canon decrees this Quod non oporteat in villis and
pagis Episcopos constitui sed visitatores, veruntamen jamdudum constituti nihil
facient praeter conscientiam Episcopi Civitatis, says one Edition, sine mente
Episcopi, says another; We may perceive in this Canon two things, first, that
it forbids these Chori-Episcopi or Country-Bishops, secondly, that although it
forbids them, yet it supposes, that of themselves they had authority to
Episcopize, and therefore restrains the Execution of that authority to the
leave from the Bishop of the City, and therefore from that time they were to be
regulated by him.

The next thing I meet with in Order, is the Eighth Canon of that great and
glorious Council of Nice the first where I find that upon the reconciliation of
the Novations which called themselves Catharei or Puri (as more holy than other
men) when these came into the Church and were received, if they had been
Ordained by the Novations as Bishops; before they were admitted upon repentance
into favor, they were admitted into the same Order in which they were before,
but if there were an Orthodox Bishop in that Diocese, he might allow him the
honor and name of a Bishop if he would, if not, he might allow him the place
of Presbyter or Country Bishop in his Diocese; but to avoid a clashing of
Competitors in the same City; he must have no power there in the City, where I
observe that Chori-Episcopus may be such, as his Episcopal Consecration would
have been good in a vacant Bishopric to entitle him to it although if he was,
where was a full Bishopric he would be, but a Chori-Episcopus.

That which follows next is that canvased Council of Antioch which occasioned
all this Discourse, and then comes in the decree of Damasus to which I have
spoken, and I may add the Epistle of St. Basil which is writ Chori-Episcopis,
and that contains a sharp reproof of their negligence in giving Orders, and a
prohibition that there should not any from thenceforth be admitted without his
examination, and that these unworthy persons who had been brought into the list
of the Clergy should be separated, with much more tending to that purpose;
where I observe that not the defect of power, but their abuse of their power
was it they were blamed for, that which Isidore Hispalensis or Hrabarus Maurus
delivers concerning it, is not more than was in the former Councils; Balsamon
says, they were almost worn out in his time, the Meldensian allows them to be,
but abridgeth their power, yet commands Bishops not to authorize them by their
own negligence or infirmities, so now although Pope Damasus his decree could
not prevail to extirpate them, yet this Council thought fit to restrain their
practice, this Council was Eight hundred years after Christ and more, I will
not write how Vasques remembers some in his time but come close to our own Age
and Country; if these men were the same with Suffragans, which I know no reason
to deny, then no doubt but they had Episcopal Ordination and did Consectate,
not Priests only, but Bishops also; To prove this let any man peruse that
excellent piece of Francis Mason de ministerio Anglicano he shall find that in
the days of Henry the Eighth, and Edward the Sixth, and Queen Elizabeth, the
Suffragans of Bedford, Chichester, Taunton, were Episcopally Consecrated and
did join in the Consecration of other Bishops. So now I have finished this
undertaking out of this debate concerning the 10. Canon of Antioch in which I
have showed that if the Council it self be admitted, yet that Particular Canon
to be most perplexed, but if it lean any way it is against Doctor Forbes, since
it is most reasonable to think by that story which I have set down concerning
them, that there were at the least diverse of the Chori-Episcopi, which had
Episcopal Consecration, although perhaps some, who had not; and I think there
is little of moment to be found in antiquity concerning them which is not
observed by me, there is an Epistle of John, the third Pope of that name but it
is rejected by Binius and so slighted by me,

And yet me thinks some may ask my opinion of those Churches where are no
Bishops, first I dare censure no man, much less such large Congregations
amongst which I know there are many learned men, and no doubt, but full of
Piety, I may be deceived and so may they, humanum est errare but certainly in
that acquaintance that I have with antiquity there seems to me no ground for
them there, nor in the Scripture; these few pieces which this learned Gentleman
had Collected are but old totered Rags, which cannot abide to be stitched to
this new Garment, they have nothing to excuse themselves but necessities which
whether they have sufficient or no, to excuse them, let their own Souls Judge,
God will, I dare not.

FINIS.
THE TABLE.
A
Apostles, their Election, and to what. 7. Their Number, whence their Name,
their Office. 8. To whom sent. 9. What to Preach. 10. The Apostles power
whence. 22. The Apostles truly had the Power of Preaching to all the world. 23.
24. The Apostles only commissioned to Baptize. 25. The Apostles only to
Administer the Communion. 27.
B
Baptism instituted by our Savior. 12. The Baptism of our Savior and St. John
not the same. 13. Whether our Sacramental Baptism be the same with that before
Christ's death. 14. 15. Not the same, the Objections answered. 16. 17. The
Baptism instituted by Christ not in force till after his death. 18. Whether
Baptism administered by Laymen be valid. 29. Of Bishops their distinction from
Presbyters. 94* First Argument from Scripture for their Points. 96. The
Argument examined. 97. And answered. 99. The Exception that Titus was an
Evangilist but not a Bishop answered* 99. Objection for their points from Acts
20. 28. answered. 101.
C
An outward Call necessary to a Minister. 129. This Call has a Moral, not a
Phys^cal influence. 130. The Character left after Ordination. 132. The
Communion instituted by our Savior. 18. The Apostles Ministers of it. 19. 20.
Instituted before our Saviors death. 20. 21. Mutual covenanting of the Saints
gives not the Being to a Visible Church. 157. What this Covenant is, Explicit,
or Implicit. 159. The Reasons for it answered. 159, etc. Other Arguments
answered. 165. 167, etc,
D
The Election of the Seventy Disciples. 11. The Differences betwixt them and
the Apostles. 96. Deacons, as afterward used in the Church not instituted.
Acts 6. 37, 38. Arguments proving this. 39. 40. The opposing Arguments
answered. 43. Some of the first Deacons Preachers. 40. What the Office of a
Deacon. 45.
E
Of Lay Elders. 59. What a Lay-Elder is in the Disciplinarian sense. 60. No
such Elders in Scripture. 61. Places of Scripture urged for them, answered.
ibid. Third Argument of Mr. Thomas Hooker for Lay Elders answered. 62, etc 69.
74. 75. St. ^auls Elder signifies but one Office. 66. St. Ambrose's words urged
for Lay Elders expounded. 86. etc. The design of making Lay Elders. 88. What
the word Especially imports. 1 Timothy 5. 17. 68. What an Evangelist is. 106.
G
Gifted men may Preach, if licenced by the Bishop, otherwise not. 84, 85.
H
What Double Honor signifies 1 Timothy 5. 17. 68. Mr. Thomas Hookers opinion
concerning Deacons examined. 45, 46. Romans 12. 8. expounded against him. 47, 48.
etc. His Deacon enforced from this place of Scripture Confuted. 53. The first
Confutation of Mr. Thomas Hooker out of this Text. 54, 55. His Second Argument
refuted. 56. His Third Argument refuted. 57. His First Argument from Reason
refuted. 57. His Second and Third Argument from Reason answered. 58. Another
Argument answered* 59. Mr. Thomas Hookers distinction of Pastors and Teachers
refuted. 90, etc.
I
Episcopal Jurisdiction proved. 115:
L
What Laboring in the Word imports, 1 Timothy 5. 17. 67. 86.
M
What the word Minister signifies. 1. The Definition of a Minister 2. The
Definition explained. 3. etc. The Power to be a Minister must come from God. 3.
6. Motion is to Relation. 208, 209.
O
Touching Ordination. 121. Mr. Thomas Hookers definition of Ordination
confuted. 122. What Ordination is. 123. Ordination not before Election. 224.
Men may be Ordained without the Election of the People. 125. Whether Ordination
gives all the Essentials to an Officer. 128. Of Pastoral Ordination. 140.
P
St. Peter had no greater power given him by Christ, than the other Apostles
28. The chief Arguments for his superiority answered: ibid. A vindication of
our Common Prayer Book in the number of the Sacraments. 131. A Digression
concerning Preaching. 76. What Preaching is. 78. To what Preaching every
Presbyter is bound* 80. The peculiar Interest a Presbyter has in Preaching.
82. Who is authorized to Preach. 83. What a true Presbyter is. 89. A Power is
left by Christ to some men, whereby they communicate Power to others. 156.
R
Relation may be the principle of Action. 211. One Relation may be the
Foundation of another. 242. What Ruling well imports. 1 Timothy 5. 17. 67.
A
The Apostles only entrusted with the power of the Keys 29, 30. Other Apostles
besides the Twelve. 31, 32, 33. The reason of it. 33. The Apostolical power
extended to all the world. 34. How the Apostolical power was Communicated. 35.
How the Apostolical power was communicated to particulars. 36.
B
Second Argument for Parity answered. 102. Third Argument for it answered. 104.
Fourth Argument concerning Jurisdiction answered. 106. An Argument from
Ordination by Presbyters answered. 107. An Argument out of St. Hierome
answered. 108. Bishops succeeded the Apostles in all that is Apostolical,
though not in their extraordinary endeavors. 142. Baptism not the Form which
constitutes a Churchmember, but no Visible Act by which he is made a Member.
171. Mr. Thomas Hookers Arguments against this Opinion answered 171, 172, etc.
Baptism has all things necessary to a real Relation. 219.
E
Episcopacy settled by the Apostles in the Church. 111. First Argument from
Scripture to prove Episcopacy. 113. A Second Argument to prove it. 114. The
Revelation of St. John assorts Episcopacy. 117. St. Cyprian urged as favoring.
The People having the power of Electing their Ministers explained, the
Objection answered. 126. Arguments from the Election of the Deacon, Acts 6.
examined. 127. Other Arguments answered. 133, etc. 149, etc. An Excommunicate
man is a Member of the Church. 175. Bellarmines Arguments against this Opinion
answered. 176, etc.
C
Scriptures written of the Catholic Church grossly misapplyed by Mr. Thomas
Hooker to particular Churches. 162, etc. What is meant by the Church, and our
Saviors saying, Tell the Church. 166. What makes a Church Visible. 169. Such
as renounce the fellowship of the Church are yet Members of the Church. 180.
The Arguments against this Opinion answered. 181, etc. 190, etc. Some
difficulties of this Opinion cleared. 187. What the Character left in Baptism
is, and the Definition of it. 205. In what Predicament this Chara^^er is 207.
The Foundation of this Character is the Will of God. 213. 218. Durandus holds
this Character to be Ens Rationis. 215. Is opposed by all the Schoolmen, but
their Arguments do not confute him. ibid. The Subject of this Character is the
whole man. 221.
THE TABLE OF THE Appendix.
A
The Apostles were Bishops, proved. 233. The first of the Apostolical Canons
examined. 249. The anointing the Bishops hand, no necessary essential to his
Constituion. 258. Sect. 6. Athanasius's testimony that mere Presbyteers could
not Ordain, even in Alexandria 27^. The Council of Antioch, Schismatical and
Illegal. 274.
B
Bishops have ever been in the Church. 231. Whether three Bishops be necessary
to the Consecration of a Bishop. 246. Sect. 1. Ans. Reg. The Consecration of
St. James Bishop of Jerusalem, objected and answered. 248. What is essential to
Constitute a Bishop? 263. 264. Baptism not void by different circumstances in
the Celebration of it. P. 256. Balsamon Patriarch of Antioch's interpretation
of the Canon of that Council approved. 274, and 277. Bellarmine too hardly
dealt withal by Dr. Forbes. 278. Not confuted by him. 279, 280. St. Basil's
Opinion of the Chori-Episcopi. 286.
C
The Church Universal never was nor can be without a Bishop. 231. The Church of
Ephesus not governed by mere Elders, but Bishops. 233. The Church was without
Elders, till the Apostles Ordained them. 232. Christianity may be continued,
but Church Communion and Ordinances cannot, without Bishops. 235. The
Consecration of St. James Bishop of Jerusalem, discussed. 247. Three Bishops
are not by Divine Right necessary to a Bishops Consecration. 246. The Canon
called the Apostles Canon, about the Consecration of Bishops examined. 249. The
Canon of the Council of Nice examined. 250, 251. And proved to concern the
Election, not the Consecration of Bishops. ibid. The second Canon of the
Council of Carthage concerning the Consecration of Bishops. 259. The Catholic
Church does concentre in this conclusion that when words importing the
Blessing, are delivered by a Consecrating Bishop, and those words are sealed by
an imposition of Hands, then those Holy Orders are effectually given. 265. in
the begin: No Church in the Christian world ever gave simple Presbyters power
to Ordain. 270. The Chori-Episcopi have not power to Ordain, proved. 274.
Unless they be Suffragans. 279. and 282. Cresperius's reading of the Canon of
Antioch alleged for the Chori-Episcopi, viz. not praeter but propter
Conscientiam Episcopi. 278. Chori-Episcopi were but Presbyters, because
Ordained by one Bishop alone. 282. S. 7. Two sorts of Chori-Episcopi. P. 283.
What they were. 284.
D
Dr. Forbes's arguments answered from P. 232, to 284. Deacons not necessary in
every Parochial Church. 240. Difference in the Form or words does not disanull
a Sacrament. 256. The distinction of Orders is known by the manner of the
laying on of Hands and the form of words (as in our Church) used in the
pronunciation of the Blessing. 265. Sect. 2. Damasus his reading upon the Canon
of Antioch 276. vid. 279. Which does sufficiently answer Dr. Forbes his
Arguments against all Chori-Episcopi having power of Ordination, answered. 281.
His second Argument answered. 282. Decrees of diverse Councils examined. 284,
285.
E
The Church of Ephesus not Governed by mere Elders, but Bishops. 233. (...)
translated Eligi to be Elected or chosen 251. lin. 13 Elders were not in the
Church, till the Apostles Ordained them. 232 What is essential to the
Constitution of a Bishop? 254. Explicatory additions do not destroy the notion
of that which they explain, 257. in the end. The only essential ceremony (if
any be) in the Consecration of Bishops is the laying on of Hands. 264. The
essence of Ordination chiefly consists in the pronouncing the Blessing with the
notes of distinction of the Orders then conferred. 265. vid. 268. S. 4. The
Errors committed in the Inauguration of Popes no President for reformed
Churches in the Consecration ^f Bishops. 269. The Church of England's Rites of
Consecration defended. Sect. 4. 268.
F
Dr. Forbes's first Argument from Scripture answered. 232. His first Argument
to prove their Ordination after Bishops were instituted, answered 235. His
Argument taken out of Johannes Major answered from 235. to 238. His Argument
from the Church of Rome answered. 239. His Argument from Deacons answered. 240.
His Argument from Scripture answered. ibid. His Argument out of St. Hierome
answered. 242. His Argument from Pelagius's Ordination answered. 244. 245. His
Argument from St. Ambrose and St. Augustine answered. 271. His Argument from
the council of Antioch. 274. to 284.
G
Gasper Hurtado's opinion about the Consecration of Bishops examined. 261. The
Gospel laid upon the Bishops Neck, not essential to his Consecration, because
there were Bishops before the Gospel was written. 260. vid. 266. to 268.
Gentianus Hervetus his reading of the Canon of Antioch. 277. the begin:
H
Henricus Henriques opinion that some papers wherein the Gospel was written
might be given to the primitive Bishops in their Consecrations; is found
invalid. 261.
I
Imposition of Hands the only necessary and essential ceremony (if any be) to
the Consecration of Bishops. 264. Inauguration of Popes no President for the
Consecration of reformed Bishops. P. 243. vid. 269. Imposition of the Hands of
Presbyters alone is not sufficient for ^rdination. 270. Ischyras was no Priest,
because Ordained by no Bishop. 272. the begin: Isidore Hispalensis his reading
of the Canon of Antioch makes nothing for Dr. Forbes. 277.
L
The laying on of Hands only essentially necessary to the constitution of a
Bishop. 264. Linus and Clemens were Chori-Episcopi to St. Peter. 284 about the
midst. Laodicean Canon forbids the Chori-Episcopi to act any thing without the
leave of their Diocesan. 285.
M
The manner of the imposition of Hands distinguishes what Orders are
conferred. 265. S. a. Moderation to be used toward every opponent though never
so much mistaken. 278. S. 4.
N
Necessity only can justify the Ordination of Presbyters. 270. No Church ever
gave mere Presbyters power to Ordain. ib. The Canon of Nice examined. 250, 251.
The Eighth Canon of the Council of Nice 285.
O
Objections against the Authors opinion concerning the Consecration of Bishops
answered. 265. The first Objection answered. ib. Objection from the Council of
Carthage answered, from 266. to 268. Objection against the Church of Englands
Rites of Consecration answered. 268. objection taken from the Council of
Antioch answered. From 272, to 274.
P
Panormitan's Argument answered. 234, Presbyters may Elect, not Ordain a
Bishop. 242. Pelagiu' s Ordination related. Sect. 1. P. 243. The Patriarch of
Antioch his interpretation of the Canon of the Council of Nice. 250. etc. The
Pope cannot dispense with Divine Laws. 253. Petrus Arcadius's discourse
illustrated and applied. Sect. 2. 255, etc. The Pontifical differs in many
things from the Canon of the Carthaginian Council in the rites of Consecration.
267. Presbyters alone could not Ordain in Alexandria. 272. the begin.
R
The Church of Rome does much differ in its rites of Consecration from all
other Churches and from the words of the Canon of the Council of Carthage 266.
to 268. The Church of Rome has various practices in those rites. ibid.
Reproaches not to be used in stead of Arguments. 278. S. 4.
S
Sacerdotal administration not to be enjoyed without Bish^ps. 235 Scotland
never without Bishops either in it, or near it. 235, 236. to 238. Scotland not
governed by Presbyters in the time of Johannes Major. ibid. Variation from the
customs of the Church, of which we are members, is Schism. 257
Suffragan-Bishops by the leave of the Bishop of the City may Ordain Priests or
Deacons. 279. Proved by example. 286:
V
Variation from the particular Church of which we are members is Schism. 257.
Vasques assertions that three Bishops are required jure divino to the
Consecration of a Bishop disproved. 246, 247. The second part of Vasques^s
Argument examined viz. that the Pope may dispense with the triplicity of
Bishops. 252, 253, etc. Vasques's plea for the laying the Book of the Gospel
upon the Bishop Neck to be necessary for his Conseration, examined. 201.
These Quotations out of the New Testament are directed to, by the several
Pages of this Book.
St. Matthew.
Chapter V. P. 3 2. 10 13. 12 7. 15. 153. 8 13. 198. 1^0^ 1.5.6. 9. 7. 10. 16. 19.
28. 18. 15. 165. 17. ^9* 176. 19. 28. 27. 17. 19. 13. 196. 26. 17. 19. 26. 18.
27. 46. 179. 28. 18. 19. 2 22. 25. 28. 141. 20. 24. 28. St. Mark*
Chapter V. P. 2. 3. 11 198. 3* 13. 7. 9. 9. 23. 198. 10. 15. 196. 14. 13. 16. 22.
18. 16. 14. 15. 22. St. Luke.
Chapter V. P. 6. 13. 7. 7. 30. 168. 9 1. 9. 2. 10. 10. 1. 11. 40. 1. 18. 15. 196.
8.10.20. 19. 22* 14. 11. 18. 32. 94. 24. 25. 15. St. John.
3 3. 5. 6. 12. 17. 26. 22. 12. 26. 16. 27. 4 4. 2. 12. 6. 48. 17. 10. 1. 4.
13. 16. 8. 16. 22. 200. 20. 21. 22. 22. 28. 31. 111. 23. 106. 21. 15. 16. 17.
28, Acts.
Chapter V. P. 1 8. 30. 13. 20. 25. 31. 17. 25. 2. 20. 102. 22. 7. 23. 32. 2. 4.
30. 3. 72. 4 34. 36. 36. 32. 5. 13. 168. 6 1. 32. 2. 42. 3. 57. 155. 5. 37.
127. 133. 17: 139. 7. 51. 40. 8. 5. 40. 9. 18. 31. 10. 28. 9. 13. 2. 3. 123.
139. 14 14. 23. 21. 156. 23. 134. 19 2. 4. 13. 13. 4. 20 77. 18. 118. 28. 101.
118. 142. 21. 8. 41. 100. 22. ^. 107. Romans:
6. 3. 4. 5. 15. 7. 24. 194. 8 1 190. 17. 191. 10. 4. 72. 11. 17. 178. 12 4.
62. 5. 7. 61. 8. 46. 47. 61. 92. 16. 7. 32. 1 Corinthians.
1. 14. 85* 4 1. 2. 3 6. 33. 9. 32. 5 2. 6. 13. 176. 5. 177. 180. 12. 186. 9.
16. 79: 10. 4. 28: 11. 25. 19: 12 4. 9. 10. 50: 27. 28. 163. 28. 69. 105. 29.
30. 64. 14. 3. 50. 15. 10. 85. 2 Corinthians.
3. 7. 8. 1* 11 5. 24. 23. 2. Galatians.
1 1. 31. 34. 9. 34. 19. 33 3. 26. 27. 173. 196. Ephesians.
2. 20. 28. 4 1. 92. 11. 100. 12. 13. 105. 13. 16. 163. Philippians.
2. 25. 32. 33. 3. 2. 153. 1 Timothy.
1: 19. 20. 181. 3 1. 33. 5. 80. 8. 44. 56. 58. 59. 15. 163. 4 13. 15. 18. 76.
14. 107. 136. 5. 17. 64. 65. 103. 19. 65. 115. 22. 114. 138. 2 Timothy.
1. 6. 108. 138. 4. 5. 100. 116. Titus:
1 4. 134. 5. 7. 96. 99. 113. 9. 80. 3. 10. 11. 181 Hebrews.
5. 4. 3. 9, 16. 15. 11. 6. 72. 196. 12. 22. 23. 162. 1 St. John.
1. 8. 10. 193. 2 1. 2. 6. 193. 19. 182. 3. 9. 193. Revelations.
1. 20. 117. 2 2. 4. 10. 24. 121. 13. 119. 16 22. 200. 20, 21. 22. 28. 31. 111.
21. 15, 16, ^7. 28. Chap. Acts. P. 1. 17. 25. 2. 20. 102. 22. 7. 23. 32. 6 1.
2. 17. 139. 9. 18. 31 10. 28. 9. 13. 2. 3. 123. 139. 14 14. 32. 23. 134. 19 2.
4. 13. 13. 4. 20 28. 101. 118. 142. 21. 8. 100. 22. 5. 107. Romans.
Chap. 7. 24. 194. 8 1. 190. 17. 191. 6* 3, 4, 5. 15. 4. 62. 12 5. 61. 7. 61.
8. 46, 47. 11. 61. 92. 10. 4. 72. 11. 17. 118. 16. 7. 32. 1 Corinthians.
Chap. 1 14. 85. 4. 1, 2, 3. 9. 32. 5 2. 6. 13. 176. 5. 177* 180. 12. 186. 10.
4. 28. 11. 25. 19. 12. 4. 9, 10. 50. 28. 63. 29, 30* ^4. 14. 3. 50. 15. 10. 85.
2 Corinthians.
Chap. Page 3. 7. 8. 1. 5. 34. 23, 2. 20. 22. 28. 23. 106. Acts.
1. 8. 30. 13. 20. 25. 31. 2. 4. 30. 37. 72. 4 34. 36. 36. 32. 5 13. 168. 6 2.
42. 5. 37. 127. 133. 3. 57. 133. 7. 51. 40. 8. 5. 40. 14. 21. 156. 20. 17. 18.
118. 218. 41. 1 Corinthians.
4. 6. 33. 9. 16. 79. 12. 163. 173. 12. 28. 105. 27, 28. 163. 1 Timothy.
3 5. 80. 4. 13. 15. 18. 76. 14. 107. 136. 3. 15. 163. 1. 19 20. 181. Galatians.
1. 1. 31. 34. 9. 34. 19. 33. 3. 26, 27. 173, 196. Ephesians.
2. 20. 28. 4 1. 92. 11. 100. 12, 13. 105. 13. 16. 163. Philippians.
^. 25. 32, 33. 3. 2. 153. 1 Timothy.
5. 1 86. 3 1. 33. 8. 44. 56. 58, 59. 5 1. 65. 17. 64, 65. 103. 19. 65. 115.
22. 114. 13. 2 Timothy.
1. 6. 108. 138. 4. 5. 100. 116. Titus.
1 4. 134. 9. 80. 5. 7. 96. 99. 113. 3. 10, 11. 181. Hebrews.
5. 4. 3. 9. 16. 15. 11. 6. 72. 196. 12. 22. 23. 162. 1 St. John.
1. 8. 10. 193. 2 12. 6. 193. 19. 182. 3. 9. 193. Revelation.
1. 20. 117. 2 2. 4. 10. 24. 121. 13. 119. St. John:
3. 3. 6. 17. 26. Deuteronomy. 16. 10, 43. Levit. 22. 18. 19. 43. St. Matthew.
3. 2. 10. 13. 12. 7. 15. 153. 8. 13. 198 10. 15. 6, 9. 7. 10. 16. 28 18 17.
29. 176. 19. 28 27. 17. 15. 165. 17. 176 19. 23. 196. 17. 18 19. 18. 26 26. 18.
21. 46. 179. 28 18. 19: 22. 25. 28. 141. 20. 24. 28. 22. St, Mark.
2. 3. 11. 198. 3. 13. 7. 9. 9. 23. 198. 10. 15. 196. 13. 10. 16. 18. 14. 22.
18. 16. 14, 15. 22. St. Luke.
6 13. 7. 7 30. 1^8. 9. 1. 9. 2. 10. 10. 40. 1. 1. 11. 18. 15. 196. 10. 19. 8.
19. 19. 18, 19: 20. 19* 32. 94. 24, 25. 15* St. John:
5. 12. 17. 26. 22. 12. 3. 27. 6. 26. 14: 4 2. 12. 6. 48. 17. 10. 1. 4. 13. 16.
8.

FINIS.

