GOOD NEVVS: OR, Wine and Oil, Poured into the Wounds of SINNING and
DISTRESSED JACOB. In some Meditations on Isa. 27.6, 7, 8, and 9, verses.

Directing to the Cause wherefore and the End for which The present Affliction
is come upon him.

Hinting at the Means by which his Deliverance will be wrought.

And Comforting him against the Extremity of Affliction, come and coming upon
him.

By PAIN LuMLE A WELSH christian.

Jer. 30.7. Alas! for that day is great, so that none is like it; it is even
the time of Jacob's Trouble: but he shall be saved out of it.

Lam. 2.1. and 3.18, 21, 22, 31, 32. How has the Lord covered the Daughter of
Sion with a Cloud in his Anger, and cast down from Heaven unto the Earth the
Beauty of Israel, and remembered not his footstool in the day of his Anger? I
said, My Strength and my Hope is perished from the Lord. It is of the Lord's
Mercy's that we are not consumed, because his Compassions fail not ^. for the
Lord will not cast off for ever: but though he cause grief, yet will be have
Compassion, according to the multitude of his Mercies.

Isa. 61.9. All that see them shall ACKNOWLEDGE THEM, that they are the SEED
which the Lord has BLESSED.

London, Printed in the Year, 1661.

TO Sinning and Distressed JACOB.
LEt not your Heart be troubled, says our Blessed Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ to his Disciples, when they were going (through the withdrawing of his
blessed bodily Presence) into a scattered, persecuted, desolate, helpless
Condition, full of Sorrows. Now, with what does he fortify their Heart against
Trouble? With his Gracious Ends in going away from them; which were, first, To
Prepare a Place for them in his Father's House: In my Father's House are many
Mansions; I go to prepare a Place for you. (there) a better State and Condition
than I can either fit you for, or bring you into, while I am present with you
here on Earth: and (then) I will come again and receive you unto my self; that
where I am, there ye may be also. And (secondly) after I am glorified, I will
pray the Father, and he shall (in the mean time) give you another Comforter,
even the Spirit of Truth; who will be a greater Comfort unto you, than either I
have been or can be, or you can be able to receive, [I have yet many things to
say unto you, but ye cannot bear them now] till I have carried your Nature (the
humane Nature) which I have assumed, into the Same Glory I had with the Father
before the World was: Therefore, it is Expedient for you, that I go away; for,
if I go not away, the Comforter will not come unto you; but, if I depart, I
will send him unto you; and he shall guide you into all Truth: He shall receive
of mine, and shall show it unto you: and all things that the Father has, are
mine, Joh. 17.5. and 16.7, 13, 14, 15. verses. Strongly inculcating not only
his Gracious Ends for their Eternal Good, but the Necessity of his going away
to accomplish those Ends, which would not, nor could not be effected except he
withdrew from them. Therefore, Let not your Heart be Troubled, but Believe in
Me, that I will do these things for you.

As the Lord Jesus had these Glorious Ends at Th^^ Time in his leaving, and
withdrawing from, his Disciples; So, he has Glorious Ends in all his Dealings
with his Chosen to the End of the World: the Consideration of which should
fortify the Hearts of the distressed and peeled People of Jacob against all
Heart-trouble.

What Is the Meaning of all that Chequer-work between Christ and his Spouse in
the Canticles ( a Prophecy that reaches through many various Dispensations, to
the coming of our Lord to work a Total Deliverance for his Chosen, as is
asserted by Persons of no mean repute in the Church of Christ for Piety and
Learning) Sometimes hiding himself from her, making her sick of Love; and
sometimes (in the strength of his affection toward his Spouse) He is Leaping
and Skipping toward her: Sometimes he Hides himself behind the Wall; and
again, shows himself forth at the Window, discovers himself through the Latess:
Sometimes, he quite withdraws himself and is gone; yet at last (after she had
undergone very hard usage from the hands of men, the Smitings and Woundings of
the Watchmen, and the Insulting Robberies of the Keepers of the Wall) he meets
her, and comforts her in his Garden among the beds of Spices? What is the
Reason of these various Becloudings, of his so often hiding and withdrawing
himself from his Beloved? Surely! it is to No other End ( as the whole current
of the Prophecy, and the Advantages the Spouse gains after every casting down,
will tell us, it is) but to carry her from Glory to Glory; from one Degree of
Glory unto another; until she be fitted for such a Total Deliverance and
Salvation, as shall never be clouded more: and then the cry is, Who! is this
that comes up from the Wilderness ( out of all her Trouble and
Wilderness-straits) leaning upon her Beloved?

And now, at this time! O thou Afflicted, tossed with Tempests, (the fury of
men) and not (yet) comforted! though the Cloud that is over thee grow darker
and darker; and this terrible Storm shake all the Pillars of thy fleshly
Building: yet let it not touch thy Heart with anxious trouble; only Believe thy
God is the same to thee that ever he was: if he withdraw himself, it is that he
may come again and show thee greater Mercy's, such as shall never be taken from
thee: if he hide his face from thee, it is that he may (fit thee for, and) show
thee more of his Glory than ever he did before: if thine Enemy weaken thee; it
is that by waiting upon the Lord (forsaking thy Idols) thou may renew thy
strength: if he Imprison thee in Holes and Corners, it is that the Lord may be
glorified in (fitting thee for it) hearing thy Groanings: if he appoint thee to
Death, it is that the Lord may be glorious (at the appointed time) in loosing
those that are appointed to death: Nay surely, the Lord has this Gracious End
in Afflicting thee at this time: viz. To fit thee for a Complete Salvation:
that Manifestation of the Sons of God; that Glorious Liberty of the Children of
God; which the Creature Earnestly Expects, and the whole Creation Groaneth and
Travelleth after; yea, which the Saints of God, who have received the first
fruits of the Spirit, Groan within themselves for, waiting for the Adoption, to
wit, the Redemption of our Bodies ( Romans 8.19, 21, 22, 23, v.) that being
fitted for that Work the Lord has purposed to do by thee, thou may go forth
to it, thrive and prosper in it, both in Soul and Body, and grow up to a
complete preparation to meet Our Lord when he shall come again without Sin unto
Salvation. All God's Ends toward thee in all his Dispensations, are full of
Glory to himself, and Salvation to thee.

Therefore, Nothing that Jacob meets withal in this World should trouble his
Heart, but his Sin; and that no further neither than is necessary to his
thorow-forsaking of it: it being only that which hinders the shining of the
face of his God upon him; and grieves the Spirit of the Lord, causing him to
withdraw his sweet Influences, and leave us to feed upon the Husks of our Gifts
and Parts, till we are become sensible of the want of that True Bread which is
to be enjoyed in our Father's House, by those who forsake their Sin, and this
World, with the things therein.

How! many strong Obligations does the Heart and Hand of God, working thus
graciously for us, lay upon us to be Examining and Trying our Ways, and
diligently searching out what that is, which stands as a Partition Wall,
between us and those Everlasting Kindnesses, that Glory which shall never be
removed, which the Lord is waiting a fit time to bestow upon us; and to wash
and cleanse our selves from it.

And now give me leave to take a little liberty to warn you of a few things,
which surely (if among us at this time) very much grieve the Holy Spirit of
God.

1. Take heed our Tongue of Profession run not beyond our Feet of Practice. Let
us not outbid our selves, lest when we come to perform, we have neither
Strength nor Heart to follow our Tongue; and so dishonor the Lord that bought
us with so great a Price, putting him to open-shame by whose Name we are
called, giving the world of Unbelievers occasion to think him not a sufficient
Savior, able to save us from the Power of Sin and Temptation. That Sin of the
Scribes and Pharisees, which our Lord (while on Earth) was so severe against
and Austeer in Reprehending, was of the like nature with this; speaking great
Words, but doing little: when it came to practice, it was but tything Mint and
Cummin (small things) and leaving the weightier things undone. The Sad and
woeful Effects this Sin has brought forth amongst us for many years past, are
too too evident.

2. Take heed, lest shunning that, you fall not into another Sinful Extreme
almost as bad; which is, Not making an Open Profession of the Truth we believe,
lest we should not be able to walk answerable to it. Knowing that which is
convenient and lawful for one man to do, is no way lawful nor convenient for
another, who makes a greater and higher Profession. Now, lest we should not
have strength to come up to that strict Circumspection such a Profession
requires to the honoring of it; we hide our Light, put not our hand to the
work our Light would lead us to, sit still out of a fear of our own weakness
and infirmities: this is a subtle Temptation, and refined Snare of the Evil
One. He that has had experience of this Evil can tell you, that it is of a
pernicious nature: it not only clearly speaks forth a secret liking of, and
unwillingness to part with, some Beloved Sin, that such a degree of owning
Truth would necessitate the mortifying of; but by this means, every Sin, that
Nature is propense to, gets a greater latitude to exercise it self in the whole
Man; Corruptions grow strong and stout, and the Man careless, by a mis-use of
that Word that tells him, That is Lawful and Convenient for him, which is Not
for another to do: and this hinders that Fellowship and Communion with the
Father and the Son, through the Spirit, which otherwise he might attain unto.
This is of the same nature with that Temptation Moses himself was troubled
with; a sinful sense of his own Weakness, and of that Failing of his (if it
may be so called) in the manner of putting his hand to the Work God had
ordained him to, when he slew the Egyptian: Send, I pray thee, (says he to the
Lord) by the hand of him whom thou will ( or should) send: as if he had
blamed the Wisdom of God in pitching upon such an unfit and unworthy an
Instrument as he was: which kindled the Anger of the Lord against him, (Exodus
4.13, 14.) and had it not been for the Riches of the Grace of God to him-ward,
it had lost him the Happiness and Glory he afterward enjoyed in doing the Will
and Work of God.

Our Sin should not hinder, but provoke us to honor the Lord more by our
Obedience, than we have dishonored him by our Disobedience: If any man Sin
(says the Apostle) we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the
Righteous; and this he writes unto us that we sin not, (1 John 2.1.) And may I
say, that we sin not a Sin of this nature; but looking upon, and considering
the Advocateship of Jesus Christ on our behalf, we take courage and run the
Race that is set before us, by the Command of God our Father.

3. Take heed, lest that you ( upon whom the Extremity of Affliction is not yet
come, after the measure it is fallen upon others, that you) do not add
Affliction to the Affliction of your Brethren, by your Slighting, Undervaluing,
and Brow-beating them. Look over all the Scriptures that relate the sad
Condition of Distressed Jacob, and see how unkindly God takes this kind of
dealing at the hands of any he finds thus exercising themselves; and how
Severely he threatens to deal with them: know of a Truth, that before the
Wheel of Affliction has turned round, it shall reach you also; and, it may
be, the heaviest Spoak may light on you. This Sin is of the same nature with
that, the Lord was so wroth with, Amos 6.1. (and so on to the 7th verse) VVo to
them (says God) that are at Ease in Sion, etc. -- But they are not grieved for
the Affliction of Joseph; Therefore now shall they go Captive with the first
that go Captive. How uncomly and unnatural a thing is it for him that professes
to participate of the New Nature, to make the Rule and Standard of his
Valuation of, and Respect to, his Brother (and so it is less or more,
according to) his Enjoyment of the Good things of this life! I am sure the
Apostle James abhorred this (Jam. 2.2, 3, 4, 5, 6.) and upon this account as
well as upon any other, he cries ( Chap. 5.1.) Go to now, ye Rich men, (Rich
Professors, for to such he writ) Weep and Howl for your Miseries that shall
come upon you.

I shall add no further; but entreat a serious Consideration of the following
Treatise: and if the Lord administer any Benefit or Comfort by it to any of
Jacob's Afflicted Children, or any Glory redound to the Name of God thereby; I
have my End, I proposed to my self, both in Writing and Printing this
Discourse. The good Lord make it fruitful to his Glory, and the Good and
Comfort of Distressed Jacob. Farewell.

READER,
AMong several other lesser Faults escaped the Press, thou art desired to take
notice of these more Material.

VIZ. Page 8. line 29. for, him, read them. P. 13. l. 17. r. is done. P. 15. l.
20. r. brought forth. P. 19. l. 6. r. this Same. P. 20. l. last. leave out,
that. P. 21. l. 4. leave out, But. P. 22. l. 12. r. his People; and l. 32. r.
lead them. P. 27. l. 15. r. One another; and l. 27. r. shall. P. 28. l. 6.
leave out, own. P. 32. l. 36, r. rebellious part. P. 34. l. 11. r. It is, that.
and l. 33. r. He shall. P. 36. l. 25. r. give thee. P. 37. l. 22. r. he may. P.
42, l. 30. r. yielded. P. 45. l. 10. leave out, will. P. 47. l. 40. r. this is.

GOOD NEVVS; OR, WINE and OIL Poured into the Wounds of SINNING and
DISTRESSED JACOB, etc.
Isa. 27.6, 7, 8, and 9. Verses. He shall cause them that come of Jacob to take
root: Israel shall blossom and bud, and fill the face of the world with Fruit.
Has he smitten him, as he smote those that smote him? or is he slain,
according to the slaughter of them that are slain by him? In measure when it
shoots forth thou will debate with it; he stays his rough wind, in the day
of the East wind. By this therefore shall the Iniquity of Jacob be purged; and
this is all the Fruit, to take away his sin.


THESE last days, this last part of the time of this old World, in the
beginning of which our Lot is fallen to Be, is that part of time, in which all
the Brophesies in Scripture (except those that particularly relate to the World
to come, the new Heavens and the new Earth) will have their complete
performance: it is the time in which they all meet, as the lines of the Globe in
the Center.

Hence it is, that the Lord does so complain of his Peoples Deafness and
Blindness, and checks them for it ( Isa. 42.18, 19, 20.) Hear ye DEAF, and look
ye BLIND, that ye may see. Who is BLIND but my Servant? or DEAF as my Messenger
that I sent? Who is BLIND as he that is perfect, and BLIND as the Lords
Servant? Seeing many things, but thou observest not: opening the Ears, but he
hears not. Notwithstanding the light of a multitude of Prophesies shining
round about him, Jacob is still Blind; notwithstanding the Voice of strange
Providence, performing Prophesies sounds in his ears, yet this Blind Servant
of the Lord is still Deaf; he opens his ears, but he hears not; notwithstanding
he sees the wonderful Works of God performing the Words of God, yet through
Blindness he observes not the Lords meaning in them; he observes not that which
the Lord would have him to observe, and does so plainly hint out to him by his
Word and Works: he sees not the Way the Lord would have him to Walk in; hears
not the Voice that cries, This is the Way, walk in it. Therefore does the Lord
complain with an Admiration; Who is BLIND but my Servant! DEAF as my Messenger!
Who is BLIND as he that is perfect, and BLIND as the Lords Servant!

To clear Jacob's Eyes, to take away those thick scales of darkness, that
(through various kinds of distempers and temptations) are grown upon them, that
they may See; and to open his deaf Ears that he may Hear: the Lord will deal
with Jacob according to the tenor of these words I have chosen to treat of.

It seems necessary before I come to the Words, that I mind two things; The
Time to which, and the Persons to whom, this Prophecy in a special manner
belongs.

In the 24, 25, 26, and 27. Chapters, is a continued uninterrupted Discourse,
of what great things the Lord will do for and among his People.

That it has a particular and peculiar Relation to the last times; and that
these days wherein we live, are those last times, I suppose will be readily
granted, and therefore I need not use words to prove it.

And that this Prophecy has Relation to the Gentiles, I suppose is as clear;
not only the Prophet's speaking of the Isles (of which the natural Seed of
Jacob had no possession) but the Work of God it self treated of, makes it
evident.

This- Earth which the Lord says he will Empty, in the 24. Chapt. some would
restrain to these Islands: but I would rather say, we are to understand by it,
the whole Antichristian Earth, Babylons Earth, the old Serpents Earth, in which
he is bruising the Heel of the Woman's Seed; Both, because we find the Prophet
speaking of the utmost parts of the Earth (in the 16. ver. of the 24. Chapter)
and because he positively says (in his 28. Chapt. which has Relation to this
time also) I have heard from the Lord God of Hosts, a Consumption even
determined upon the whole Earth.

But many particulars in these Chapters, tell me also; That this Work of God
here spoken of, shall have its beginning in the Islands; and from thence issue
forth to the other parts of the Earth: therefore says the Prophet, Israel
shall blossom and bud, and fill the face of the WORLD with Fruit.

Further, This People to whom this Prophecy does belong, are a People, that
having been afflicted formerly by their Enemies, the Serpents brood, have
encountered, Smitten those Enemies of theirs: Has he smitten him, as he SMOTE
those that smote him?

Again, They are a People, that at present are under the Smitings of their
former smitten Enemies: Has he SMITTEN him as he smote those that smote him?
And that which strengthens me in interpreting these smitings, to be the
smitings of these two Seeds against each other, is, what the latter part of the
Verse speaks: Or, is he slain according to the slaughter of them that are slain
by him? I can see no reason why these smitings, may not be the smiting of the
two Seeds of each other, as well as the slaying here mentioned; is their
slaying of each other.

Again, They are a People, that foreseeing the rising up of these their old
Enemies to smite them afresh, endeavor to prevent them, and bring them under,
(in the 26. Chap. 17, and 18. Verses) Like as a Woman with child, that draws
near the time of her delivery, is in pain, and cries out of her pangs; so have
we been in thy sight O Lord. We have been with child, we have been in pain, we
have as it were brought forth wind, we have not wrought any deliverance in the
Earth, neither have the Inhabitants of the world fallen. Out of a deep
apprehension of the evil approaching, great anxiety of Spirit, and pain of
Heart, puts them upon earnest endeavors, to bring down the Enemy that is
arising, to hinder the old smitings again: But all will not do, nothing is
brought forth but wind; no deliverance is wrought in the Earth; the Inhabitants
of the world fall not; but instead thereof, they fall themselves to the death;
Thy DEAD men shall live, etc.

So that now I suppose, I may without presumption say, This is our Scripture;
belongs to us, as a teaching Lesson, particularly appointed for us at this day
to learn.

The Words contain, the Work the Lord will perform upon Sion and Jerusalem;
till which is performed, he will not punish the stout heart of the King of
Assyria, nor burn the Rod with which he is scourging and correcting his People
for their unchild-like carriage toward him their Father.

In which there is,

1. A sore Affliction, Verse 7.

2. A Cordial to bear up the heart of Jacob, from sinking under the severity of
the Rod, V. 8.

3. The Cause of it, Sin; employed in Ver. 9.

4. The End of this Affliction; which is twofold.

1. To take this Sin away, expressed Ver. 9. And as the proper effect of this,

2. To cause Jacob to take root, and Israel to blossom and bud, Ver. 6.

1. It Is a sore and dreadful Dispensation; not only smiting, but smiting to
blood; not only drawing blood, letting out a little bad blood, but the very
Life blood, SLAYING.

Has he SMITTEN him, as he smote those that smote him? Or, is he SLAIN,
according to the slaughter of them that are slain by him? It Is the same manner
of smiting with which Jacob in former times smote his Enemies. It Is the same
manner of slaying, as Jacob shall (after he comes out of this cleansing
Dispensation) slay his Enemies withal. For, though the Prophet speaks here in
the Present tense, ARE SLAIN; yet of necessity we must refer it to the future;
for, we cannot rationally conceive, slain men can slay men: Therefore we must
look upon this, as one of those Scriptures, wherein the Lord is pleased to call
things that be not, as though they were, as the Apostle speaks; and that out of
a gracious design, to strengthen our Faith; signifying thereby, the certainty
of the thing; that it is as certain as if it were in present action.

Poor Jacob goes into by-ways, ways of his own invention, to save his Blood,
to save his Life, and behold he loses it; making good that saying of our Lord,
He that seeks to save his Life, shall lose it. Sinning Jacob (in his Laodicean
frame of Spirit) cries out with the sloathful person ( Prove. 26.13.) A Lion is
in the Way, a Lion is in the Street the Lord would have me pass through; and
fleeing from this Lion, a Bear meets him, and tears him and rends him, as Amos
speaks.

But lest the drooping Spirits of feeble Jacob should sink and dye, under this
trying and rending Dispensation, under these Bloody smitings his Sin has
brought upon him.

2. Here Is a Sovereign Cordial ready, to revive him, to support him.

In measure when it shoots forth, thou will debate with it; He stays his
Rough wind in the day of the East wind. The Lord has measured out the
Affliction of Jacob, and meted it in the measure of Grace and Love. The end of
all is, Grace and Love to Jacob, that he may be purged from his Iniquity, and
his Sin taken away; that he may be so far from being utterly destroyed, as that
he may fill the face of the World with Fruit. Yea, this very Affliction, (these
smitings and slayings that pass over him) shall have the Love of a Father
written upon it, he shall be able to read a Fathers Love in and through all. It
shall not be beyond measure, but in measure; God will not suffer Jacob to be
tempted beyond what he is able to bear; as the Apostle speaks.

But, fear thou not, O my servant Jacob, for I am with thee, says the Lord, to
save thee: though I make a full end of all Nations, yet will I not make a full
end of thee; but will correct thee in measure, and will not leave thee
altogether unpunished; and in the LATTER DAYS ye shall consider it ( Jer.
30.10,11, and 24. V.) When the Affliction has shot forth to such a measure, to
such a degree, to the working such an Effect (which is humbling for, and
purging from Sin) then will the Lord DEBATE with it. When the Lord has
finished his whole Work upon Sion, then will he Punish the stout heart of the
King of Assyria; when the Assyrian Rod would carry on the Affliction of Jacob
farther than the Lord has purposed it shall be, then will he Debate with it.

How will he Debate with it?

He stays his Rough Wind, in the day of the East Wind. By this Rough Wind, I
understand the same with the smitings and slayings before mentioned: only, by
this difference of expression, the Lord would have us to understand the purging
nature of the Affliction; that the Lord will by this Wind, by this Affliction,
as thoroughly purge and cleanse his People from their Sin, as the Husbandman
cleanses his Corn from its Chaff by winnowing it in the Wind. And this Rough
Wind, these smitings and slayings, this sore Affliction, will the Lord stay,
put a stop to.

But when, and how?

In the day of the East Wind. In that day in which the Lord has appointed the
East Wind to blow; which is, when the Rough VVind, the smitings and slayings,
the Affliction, has done its work for which it was sent, upon Jacob; then, in
that day, will the Lord stay this Rough VVind, put a stop to these smitings and
stayings, take away this Affliction: And that, by The East VVind.

We shall see what VVind this is (that taking place at its appointed time,
shall stay the preceding Rough VVind) if we look into the Type ( Exodus 14.21,
23.) Moses stretched out his hand over the Sea, and the Lord caused the Sea to
go back by a strong East wind all that Night, and made the Sea dry Land, and
the Waters were divided; and the Children of Israel went into the midst of the
Sea upon dry Ground; and the Waters were a Wall unto them, on their right
hand and on their left. This East VVind, is that which ( Isaiah says in his
51. Chapter) dried the Sea, the Waters of the great Deep; that made the depths
of the Sea (dividing it) a Way for the Ransomed to pass over; and that, when
the Waves thereof roared.

When the Rough VVind, the smitings and slayings, the present Affliction has
wrought its proper Effect upon Jacob, then is the time come, and a strong East
VVind from the presence of the Lord shall blow and stop the breath of the Rough
VVind. The Lord will so deal with this Sea of Jacob's trouble, the Waves
whereof are roaring upon poor Jacob, as that, a Way through the Sea, a Way
through the Rough VVind, a Way through the very smitings and slayings of the
Enemy, shall be made and found out, for Jacob to escape. And what then? The
Light of Israel shall be for a fire, and his holy One for a flame, and it shall
burn and devour his thorns and his briars (that are scratching and tearing the
flesh of distressed Jacob) in one day, Chap. 10.17. In ONE day: A day known to
the Lord; even that day, wherein he will (staying his Rough Wind by his East
Wind, putting a stop to the Enemie's smiting and slaying of his Jacob, healing
his VVounds) Punish the stout heart of the Assyrian, and the glory of his high
looks; consuming his glory, that they shall be (as feeble and weak) as when a
Standard Bearer faints.

To prevent Objections that might arise, I lay down this Position: That, this
smiting and slaying of these two Seeds of each other, has relation, not to
several Generations (Father and Son) but shall have its performance to the
full, in the space of the time of one Generation; And that upon these grounds.

1. Because the Prophet throughout this large Discourse, speaks of a particular
day; In that day, and that day, says he; and that in distinction from the
Worlds day. This is a day, wherein the Lord comes to empty the World, to empty
the Earth; and this Work of his upon Jacob, is but in order to it.

2. Because this Evil the Lord brings upon Jacob, is altogether outward and
temporal; it relates not to Eternal matters; it respects the Body, not the
Soul. It Is like unto that Affliction the Lord laid upon the Children of Israel
in the Wilderness; that, related to their Bodies death in the Wilderness,
that deprived them of an earthly Canaan: but it would be very uncharitable to
say, those that perished in the Wilderness (because of that Judgment) were
excluded the Heavenly Canaan, of which the Earthly was a Type.

3. Because otherwise, the Promise of restraining and measuring out the
Affliction, stopping it when it has brought forth such an Effect, would not
(nor could not) yield such strong comfort and consolation to poor Jacob, as it
seems to me the Lord intends it should: for what great comfort would it be, for
the Father to know, that his Son, his Child, shall upon such and such
conditions be delivered from the Evil that shall yet destroy him.

4. If so be that this measuring out the Affliction, here spoken of, were only
its ending in the destruction of the present Generation, upon whom it falls;
then, what difference is there between an Old Testament, and a New Testament
Measure? The Measure of the Old Testament, was the destruction of that
Generation of rebellious Jacobs, and saving their Children, their little Ones,
whom their unbelief said, would be destroyed together with themselves; and if
it be not otherwise now, wherein does Christ appear to be a better Mediator, of
a better Covenant, established upon better Promises; as is said, Heb. 8.6.

Lastly, The Lord in this very Scripture it self, does clearly hint thus much,
by speaking in the Present tense; Is he slain according to the slaughter of
them that are slain by him? that the SAME GENERATION of Jacobs Seed, who are
smitten, and part of whom are slain, by their Enemies, shall get up again and
slay them with a greater slaughter: limiting it to a short space of time for
performance of it.

3. The CAUSE that brings this Sore and Dreadful Dispensation upon the Seed of
Jacob, is, their SIN. This is strongly and closely employed in the 9. Verse; For
if the taking away of Sin and Iniquity be the End of its coming, then of
necessity Sin is the Cause of its coming.

This is a People ROBBED and SPOILED; they are all of them SNARED IN HOLES, and
they are hid in PRISON-HOUSES: they are for a PREY, and none delivers: for a
SPOIL, and none says, Restore. Who gave Jacob for a Spoil, and Israel to the
Robbers? did not the Lord, He, against whom we have SINNED? FOR they would NOT
WALK IN HIS Ways, neither WERE THEY OBEDIENT uNTO HIS LAW: Therefore he has
poured upon him the FuRY OF HIS ANGER; and it has set him on fire round about,
etc. Isa. 42.22, 24, 25. Ver.

It Is Jacobs Sin that Causes the Lord to visit him in ways of Affliction and
Correction; it is his Sin that Causes the Lord to lay upon him his Fatherly
Chastenings and Rebukes; and that in Love, that being cleansed from Sin, he
might be a partaker of his Holiness.

Consider Isa. 59.1, 2. Behold, the Lords hand is not shortened, that it cannot
save; neither his ear heavy, that it cannot hear: But YOUR INIQUITIES have
separated between you and your God; and YOuR SINS have hid his face from you,
that he will not hear. How nearly this Scripture does concern us, will appear,
if we consider it does not only speak of what God will do in the last days,
but to the Islands also, (V. 18.) We see here the Lord in a posture, ready to
save and to hear his People: His Hand is not shortened, it is ready prepared to
save; his Ear is not heavy, it is open to hear. There Is no such thing, as the
Time being not come, on the Lords part, to hinder him from saving Jacob: But
it is Jacob's Sin, that Causes the Separation between him and his God; It Is his
Sin, that Causes these Hidings of the face of his God from him: It Is his Sin,
that retards his Salvation.

It Is not any thing in the Enemy, it is not to ripen his Sin, that he may fill
his Measure, that so the Justice of God may fully seize upon him (as some
vainly conceit) that is the reason, why the Lord suffers this Affliction to
befall his People.

No, it is Jacob's own Iniquities [your Iniquities] it is Jacob's own Sins [your
Sins] that Causes God to separate himself, and hide his face from him. Was it,
think we, for the Assyrians sake, that the Lord might take an occasion against
him to destroy him, to be as a fire and a flame to him to burn him up? Or, for
Sion's and Jerusalem's sake, for the sake of that Work the Lord had to perform
there; that the Lord made him the Rod of his Anger against his People, and by
him sorely Afflicted him, suffering him to be as Briars and Thorns, tearing and
rending their flesh? Surely it was for his Peoples sake: Had not their Sins
made a Work for the Lord to perform upon them by a Rod of Correction, the
Assyrian had never exalted himself over them. No, the Lord loves his People
better than so; if he Correct and Afflict them, it is for their own sake; not
for the sake of any other, that through his Peoples Affliction, he might
destroy them. The Lord loves Jacob so, that he will give men for him, and
People for his Life: but we never find the Lord giving up his People for the
sake of any other under Heaven; either for their good, or for their hurt.
Nothing can bring Affliction upon Jacob but his own Sin.

And Jacob's Sin brings Affliction and Sorrow upon him; even then, when the
Lord is ready (his hand is open, prepared) to bestow Salvation upon him; when
the Lords time is come to hear and save him: yea, even then, when the Lord is
waiting to be gracious ( Isa. 30.18.) Therefore will the Lord wait that he may
be gracious unto you: That the Prophet here speaks of the same Time, and to the
same People, he speaks of and to, in his 27. Chap. will clearly appear, if the
whole Chapter be seriously considered. This waiting of God to be gracious, is
while Jacob is under sore rebuke and trouble, as the preceding (17.) Verse
manifests. The Lord waits that he may be gracious. Heaven is ready to Save, if
Earth were but as ready to be Saved. There Is no Obligation, no tie upon God to
shorten his hand, to hinder it from Saving, if Jacob were but prepared and
ready to receive Salvation. Therefore (says the Prophet) will he be exalted,
that he may have mercy upon you. How will the Lord exalt himself, that he may
have mercy? In Judgment; for the Lord is a God of Judgment. The Lord will
exalt himself and his Glory, by his judging of Jacob; and while this correcting
Judgment is working its natural Effect (by the help of the co-working of the
mighty Spirit of God) in the heart of Jacob; he waits to be gracious, waits to
Save: he waits the good hour, wherein (his Corrections having wrought the
desired Effect) he may be gracious; his Grace may abound above Jacob's Sin, in
delivering him out of the hands of all his Enemies, that he may serve him
without fear in Holiness and Righteousness before him all his days.

Thus was it with Jacob in the Wilderness of Old. The Lord was ready to give
him the Promised Land; the Time was come, for him to possess it; the Iniquity
of the Amorites was full, the Enemy was ripe for Judgment: yea, the Lord told
him so, by the mouth of his two faithful Witnesses, Caleb and Joshua ( Number.
14.8, 9.) They are bread for us, their defense is departed from them, and the
Lord is with us. But Jacob was not ready to receive it; his Sin hinders his
Possession.

This is our Case. It Is our own Sin, (and not another) that has hindered our
Salvation, and brought a sore Affliction upon us. And that too, at a Time, when
the Lord's hand was not (nor is not) shortened (by any Consideration of a Time,
or any thing else on his part) but is prepared, ready to Save.

It Is only our own Sin that stands in the way of our Salvation; it is that, that
Causes the present Hidings of the face of our God from us: by it we have as it
were Caused God to go out of that path of Salvation, he was graciously and
wonderfully going on in; and to steer another course, that he may take away our
Sin, that which hinders his saving of us; and to wait till this Let be taken
out of the way, that he may be gracious unto us, and Save us.

Q. It may be asked, What are those sins which have hindered our Salvation; by
which we have provoked the Lord our Father so severely to chastise us?

An. I had thoughts to have enlarged upon this Subject; but lest I should
grieve the Spirits of any; and hoping that a word, a hint, may prove
sufficient, I shall do no more.

This SIN, which has brought Affliction upon us, which has provoked the
Father of mercies to chastise us with bloody stripes to take it away, is that
which has made us, both unfit for God to use in, and unable to do the Work the
Lord has appointed to be done by his People. Any Sin less than such Sin, the
Lord would have born with, and the Intercession of our Mediator would have
prevailed for us; as the Children of Israel of old in the Wilderness, through
the Intercession of their Mediator, were many times born with, and found favor
and grace from God, till they came to sin that Sin which unfitted them, and put
them out of a capacity, to receive that great Gift of his Grace and favor he
was in a readiness to bestow upon them, and to do that Work the Lord had to do
by them.

Now I would only Query, whether some parts and parcels of this provoking Sin,
be not these?

First, Love of this Old World. This is a killing Sin, most pernicious to
Jacob's Happiness: while this remains, he cannot be a fit Instrument for the
Lord to use, and so not fit for Deliverance. See what the Apostle John says of
it, (1 John 2.15.) Love not the World, neither the things that are in the
World: If any man love the World, the Love of the Father is not in him. The
reason of this, the Apostle James tells us, ( Jam. 4.4.) The friendship of this
World is enmity with God: whosoever therefore will be a friend to the World,
is the Enemy of God. How much, and how powerful this Sin has prevailed amongst
us, and how far it has hurried us into other provoking Evils, every seeing eye
and discerning spirit, cannot but be sensible of. The reasons why I put it upon
the Query, whether this has not provoked the Lord to chastise us; are,

1. Because our Lord Christ does so severely warn us to take heed of it, (Luke
21.34.) Take heed to your selves, lest at any time your hearts be overcharged
with surfeiting, and drunkenness, and cares of this Life, and so that day come
upon you unawares. In these words, he has relation to the two extreme
conditions men are in in this World, Full or Empty; either in a full possession
of it, and so out of abundance of Love and Delight they have to it, and take in
it, they drown themselves therein: Or, being Empty, out of a Love to it, they
are carefully reaching after the possession of it. This he equally warns us of,
and commands us to watch and pray against, upon no less penalty, than being not
accounted worthy to escape the Judgments of God, and to stand before the Son
of man when he Comes; for when he Comes, he will neither have the surfeiting
drunken Lover, nor the careful Lover of this World, to be his Follower: This is
clearly employed in the 36. Verse.

2. Because our Lord Jesus, to express his hatred of this Sin, sets forth the
wickedness of the World at that Day when he comes in Judgment to it; by this,
Love of this World, (Luke 17. from the 26. to the 30. V.) As it was in the
days of Noah, so shall it be also in the days of the Son of man. They did
eat, they drank, they married Wives, they were given in Marriage, until the
day that Noah entered into the Ark, and the Flood came and destroyed them all.
Likewise also, as it was in the days of Lot; they did eat, they drank, they
bought, they sold, they planted, they builded; but the same day that Lot went
out of Sodom, it rained fire and brimstone from Heaven, and destroyed them all.
The bare being exercised about these things ( Christ here reckons up as the
sinful state of the World) cannot be his meaning; for all these things are
either necessary to our Being (as eating and drinking) or else to our
Well-Being in this Life: They are such things, as at his coming, he finds also
those exercising themselves about, whom yet he takes to himself to follow him,
leaving the rest to Judgment: They were all eating, and drinking, and
marrying, and at the Mill, and in the field together; as well those that he
takes to himself as his own Peculiars; as those that he leaves as the subjects
of his displeasure. Therefore the Evil must lie some where else, it must needs
lie more secret and inward; the Sin surely must lie in this, in the hearts
standng in, and sitting close to these things. And this seems to me to be
clearly hinted to us by Christ, while he commands us, though we be but on the
House top, and our stuff in the House, not to go down to it; and though we be
but in the field (near home) yet not to return to it. He blames us not for
having Houses and Stuff, but commands us not to be so in Love with, not to six
our hearts so upon our Possessions in this World, as to return to them, and be
solicitous in securing of them, when he Comes to take us, to call us from them,
to lead us in that Path and Way, to do that Work he would have us to walk in,
and to do; to enable us to walk in, and to do which, it is absolutely necessary
we forsake ALL of this World.

3. Because of Christ's severity against this Sin; Remember Lots Wife: Whosoever
shall seek to save his Life shall lose it. Our Lord is so severe against this
Sin, that that Love to the good things of this Life, which the World of
Professors call a Virtue, a Duty, he warns us to flee from, lest, with Lots
Wife, he make us examples of his Justice. It Is not dainty food, not dilicious
drinks, but eating and drinking; it is not cozening and cheating, but (that
which is at other times lawful) buying and selling; it is not planting curious
Gardens, nor building glorious Structures, but bare planting and building; it is
not wheredom nor adultery, but marrying of Wives; the Lord instances in, as the
sinful state of the World, in which when he Comes he shall find them to their
sorrow. So that it is not enough, that we can say, we can part with our
dainties, things for delight; but can we say, we can part with, forsake (and
love not) our meat and drink; that which maintains the very Being of our
Bodies; and with Elijah, live upon the pure Providence of God for our Life and
Being? If not, the Love of the Father is not in us, but the love of the World.
And this Christ will not bear with in his People. If at such a time as this,
when Christ is calling his People out of, and from the World, to his Work and
Service, there be but a dram of this Love, a bare looking back toward, a
hankering after this Worlds good things; but a little solicitousness after
them, a going but from the Housetop, a returning but back out of the field
(the backside as it were) into the House; a going but a little out of the way
Christ calls us into, though it be but to save our Stuff, yea, our Life; this
will set us in the path of Judgment, under his displeasure. Remember Lot's
Wife, says our Lord: if when I come, I find this temper in you, as sure as she
was, so shall ye become a Monument of my severity. A little love to this World,
but a looking back toward it has turned; and as little now, but a returning
back (a little way) toward it, shall again turn Living Monuments of Mercy,
into Standing Monuments of Justice.

Secondly, I fear upon a serious search, it will be found that our Love to our
Stuff, the good things of this Life, (to keep and maintain our possession of
these) has hurried us into such by-ways, such courses as have brought BLOOD
upon us. I shall only mention two Scriptures, and leave it to a serious
consideration.

1. If Baasha execute Justice upon the House of Jeroboam, according to the Word
of the Lord, and become like the House of Jeroboam, in Sin and Wickedness: that
piece of justice becomes BLOOD-GUILTINESSE to him; is imputed to him as Murder,
and he must dye for it, (1 King. 15.29. and 16.3, 7. V.) And it came to pass,
when he reigned, that he smote all the House of Jeroboam, he left not to
Jeroboam any that breathed, until he had destroyed him, according unto the
saying of the Lord, which he spoke by his Servant Ahijah the Shilonite. Behold,
I will take away the Posterity of Baasha, and the Posterity of his House, and
will make thy House like the House of Jeroboam the Son of Nebat. And also by
the hand of the Prophet Jehu, the Son of Hanani, came the Word of the Lord
against Baasha, and against his House, even for all the Evil that he did in the
sight of the Lord, in provoking him to anger with the work of his hands, in
being like the House of Jeroboam, and because he killed him. That Blood which
Baasha shed (in Obedience to the Command of God by his Servant the Prophet) in
a way of Justice, he walking in the same path of wickedness, is required at his
hand.

2. If Jehu execute Justice upon the House of Ahab, and do it so exactly too,
as that every piece of it is according to the Word of the Lord, (as the story
mentions, 2 King. 9. and 10. Chapters) Notwithstanding this piece of Justice,
if done so exactly according to the Rule, to the Word of the Lord; yet Jehu,
through the Love of this World, not departing from the Sins of Jeroboam, but
doing the Work of the Lord negligently, by halves, becomes GUILTY OF THIS
BLOOD; this act of Justice is imputed to him for Murder, and the Blood is
required at his hand, ( Hos. 1.4.) Call his Name Jezreel; for yet a little
while, and I will AVENGE THE BLOOD of Jezreel upon the House of Jehu. I need
not add further.

Thirdly, Another Branch of the present Afflicting Sin, that I would mention, I
conceive is, PRIDE; both NATURAL and SPIRITUAL PRIDE. How contrary this is to
the Lord in all Ages, at al times, I need not mention; the Scriptures are full
in expression of it: Therefore, much more at such a time as this, when his
design is, to be ALONE exalted; against which, no Sin sets it self so much in
opposition as this. This Sin so extremely unfits Jacob (were he otherwise
quallified) for the Work of God, that the Lord Prove. 6.16, 17. and 13.10. Psalm.
10.2. and 86.14. Deuteronomy. 17.20. Prove. 16.18. Hos. 5.5.
hates it, it is Abominable to him. This Sin is the source of wickedness; by it
comes contention, which brings forth persecution; and this proceeds to
violence, and causes Rulers in Israel to turn aside from the way of the Lord.
Therefore this Sin must needs bring down a Correcting Judgment. But

Fourthly, And the last I shall mention is, CARNAL Mindedness; Carnality of
Spirit: And this I would expatiate a little upon, because it is the most
Spiritual Evil, and so needs the greatest battery against it.

The Carnal mind of the Natural man, who is after the flesh, is enmity against
God; for it is not subject to the Law of God, neither indeed can be, (Romans 8.5,
7.) this brings Death to him, ( v. 6.) And the prevalent remainders of this
Carnal-mindedness, in the Lords own people, unfits them for the Lords work,
makes them incapable of doing it, or being used in it: for this keeps them from
being subject to the Law of God, the Rule of the Lord by which he will square
his work: which he has said, he will Magnify, and make Honorable, (Isa.
42.21.) By this we come to Dye, and to be Dead to the Work of God: If we would
live to the Work of the Lord, we must be Spiritually minded; to be spiritual
minded is Life and Peace, (ver. 6.) this is that must enable Jacob to take
root, and Israel to blossom, and bud, and fill the Face of the World with
fruit. Carnal-mindedness is Death to Jacob, by it he becomes as a withered
branch, bringing forth no fruit to the Lord: for while he is in that mind, he
is not, neither can he be subject to the Law of his Work.

This Carnality of spirit, respects either, Natural worldly flesh, as Paul
tells. us, Romans 8. minding the things of the flesh, this world, and the good
things thereof; which are not of the Father, but of the World; for all that is
in the World, The lust of the flesh, the lust of the Eyes, and the Pride of
Life, is not of the Father, but of the World: which whosoever loves, the love
of the Father is not in him, (1 John 2.15, 16.) of which, the Apostle Paul
says, the world is crucified to me, and I unto the world, (Gal. 6.14.)
otherwise he could not have been an Apostle of Christ. Or, it respects

Religious flesh; such a frame of Spirit in matters of Religion, and Worship,
as is Fleshly and Carnal; The more gross of this Sort, the Apostle Paul
complains of, as those that would make a fair show in the Flesh, that they
might glory in the Flesh; and that to this unworthy end, to avoid persecution
for the Cross of Christ, ( Gal. 6.12, 13.) But (says he) God forbid, that I
should Glory, save in the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom the world is
crucified unto me, and I unto the world, ver 14.) This was Paul's frame of
spirit, and such only are fit Christians for Christ's service: There are a more
refined sort of these Carnal-minded Christians; to cure whom, the Apostle Paul
takes a a great deal of pains, in his three first Chapters of his first Epistle
to the Corrinthians, to the 8th. verse of the fourth Chapter: These Corinthians
were Christians of such a high pitch, of such high seize, as the Apostle
says of them, In every thing ye are enriched, in all Utterance, and in all
Knowledge, so that ye come behind in no gift, waiting for the coming of our
Lord Jesus Christ: Notwithstanding all this, they are yet Carnal; I could not
(says he) speak unto you as unto Spiritual, but as unto Carnal, for ye are yet
Carnal.

See what Fruit this Carnal frame of Spirit brought forth in these Corinthians,
and then we shall know what it is to be Carnal; to be a Carnal Christian.

1. PRIDE: Proud boasting of their seize, a puffing up in the conceit of
their own Opinion, to be more truth, and higher truth than others; vainly
glorying in that wherein they differed from others, as if they received it not,
but had it of themselves, and from themselves; exalting themselves above their
Brethren, as full, and rich, reigning as Kings; looking upon themselves as
wise, as strong, as honorable; whilst others (yea Apostles themselves) are
accounted foolish, and weak, and are despised, and that by themselves; judged
of of them. This the Apostle tells them of, and rebukes them for (Chap. 4.3, 6,
7, 8, and 10. verses) A Spiritual mind would never have brought such Fruit, but
this was the fruit of their Carnallity: by this Carnal wisdom (the Apostle tells
them) they deceived themselves; if we will indeed become wise, we must deny our
selves in this, and become fools, that we may be wise: this is but the worlds
wisdom, which is vain and foolish with the Lord; therefore let none glory with
this glorying, Chapt. 3.18, 19, 20, 21. verses.

2. ENVY. I am for Paul, says one; I am for Appollo, says another; and he
envies him that is for Paul: I am for Caephas, says another; and he envies the
rest: I, But I am for Christ, says another, and he Envies all because, they
are more for men than for Christ; as he thinks: I am for this, says one, and I
am for that, says another, and he envies his Brother, because he differs from
him, because he is not of his Opinion, of his Judgment, of his way: not
considering, that what he has, is but received from another; and therefore he
has not whereof to glory, nor to exult over his Brother; much less should he
envy him: while ( enviously) one says, I am of Paul, and another, I am of
Apollo, are ye not Carnal?

3. STRIFE. These several parties, Strive against each other, for their
Opinions, those things wherein they differ from each other; which of them
should be most received, and honored as the ritchest truth, as the highest
attainment; Striving and contending about, whose Parts, and Gifts are most
deserving, and worthy of honor, to be followed after, and hearkened to.

4. DIVISIONS. (Chapt. 1.11, 12. and Chap. 3.3, 4. verses) It has been
declared unto me, of you my Brethren, by them which are of the house of Cloe,
that there are contentions among you: Now this I say, that every one of you
says, I am of Paul, and I of Apollo, and I of Caephas, and I of Christ; ye are
yet Carnal: for whereas there is among you, Envy, and Strife, and Division: are
ye not Carnal, and walk as Men? For while one says, I am of Paul, and another,
I am of Apollo; are ye not Carnal? The Apostle blames them not for being for
Paul, or for Apollo, or for Caephas, or for Christ; or for being for them all:
for says he, Let men so account of us, as of the Ministers of Christ, and
Stewards of the Mysteries of God (Chap. 4.1.) we are to be accounted of, you
ought to honor us as such. But in this they were blameworthy, in this they
transgressed, that they were Enviously, Dividingly, Factiously for one, against
another: and he that is thus for Christ, Sins, as well as he that is so for the
Ministers of Christ; his being for Christ, will not excuse him while he is in
this Frame and Temper of Spirit: Are not these things a knowing Men, and Christ
after the flesh; of which the Apostle tells these very Corinthians, they for
their parts (they Apostles) would not be guilty; Wherefore henceforth, know we
no man after the Flesh: yea, though we have known Christ after the Flesh, yet
now henceforth know we him no more, (2 Cor. 5.16.) The Flesh profits nothing,
Its the Spirit that quickneth, John. 16.63.

This Fruit a Carnal mind brings forth; those who are Spiritual (as Paul, and
others) brought forth better Fruit, giving every one their Due: Christ his Due,
and his Ministers their Due, and every member of the Body its Due,
notwithstanding the Differences wherein every Member Differed from another; by
this, keeping the Body perfectly joined together. Paul being Spiritual tells
them, he planted, and Apollo watered, but God gave the increase: and that,
neither he that planteth, nor he that waters is any thing, but God is all, he
is to have the honor of all ( Chap. 3.6, 7.) He tells them also, that Christ
cannot be Divided; he is not for those that are for Apollo, more than for them,
that are for Paul, nor for any party of them in contradiction to the rest;
though by this their Carnal Spirit, they would Divide him into Parts and
Parties. He tells them further, that they were to be only for him, who was
crucified for them, and into whose Name they were Baptized: This is the true
import of the words, Chap. 1.13, and 15. verses.

5. VVALKING LIKE MEN: Are ye not Carnal, and walk as Men? the works of the
Flesh, of the fleshly Man, of the Men of the World; are Hatred, Variance,
Emulation, Wrath, Strife, Sedition, Envy, and such like, (Gal. 5.19, 20, 21.)
Now while we walk thus Carnally, we walk like Men, such Men, the Men of the
world; not as Christians, as those that are Spiritual, that have the Spirit of
Christ in them: For they that are Christ's, have crucified the Flesh, with the
Affections, and Lusts thereof; if we live in the Spirit, let us also walk in
the Spirit; let us not be desirous of vainglory, provoking one another,
envying one another. 24, 25, 26. verses.

6. UNFITNESS to receive such Truths; a making them not able to bear such
discoveries of God and Christ, and his Glory, as Christ has given him from the
Father, to discover unto, and bestow upon his People. I could not speak unto
you, as unto Spiritual, but as unto Carnal, even as unto Babes in Christ: I
have fed you with Milk, and not with Meat, for hitherto ye were not able to
bear it; neither yet, now are ye able, for ye are yet Carnal, (Chap. 3.1, 2,
3.) These Corinthians, that were enriched in all utterance, and all knowledge,
that came behind in no gift, are yet Carnal; which hinders them, that they
cannot (as the Apostles did) with open face, behold, as in a Glass, the Glory
of the Lord; and be (as they were) changed into the same Image from Glory to
Glory, even as by the Spirit of the Lord (2 Cor. 3.18.) No, by this Carnality
of mind, they become as Babes, not able to bear strong meat, and so not fit for
strong work; that Work, which to enable his people to do, its absolutely
necessary, that the Lord give unto them such a full and large discovery of
himself, as this Carnality of spirit will not admit them to receive.

From these things, Obs. 1. This Carnality of Spirit, bringing forth these
Fruits, is such a Distemper, as the Highest Christians, Christians of the
Richest seize, that are enriched in every thing; yea, waiting for the
coming of the Lord; are too much, and too too often troubled with, to the great
unhappiness of their own Souls, hindering the Work of the Lord, that is to be
done in them, and by them: Of this Sort, were those, whom the Author to the
Hebrews rebukes; When for the time ye ought to be Teachers, ye need that one
teach you again, which be the first principles of the Oracles of God, and are
become such as have need of Milk, and not of strong meat, Heb. 5.12. Obs. 2.
This Carnality of Spirit, opposes not Gifts, but Grace. All Gifts, all
Utterance, all Knowledge may be in a Christian, together with this Carnality;
So that Christians may think themselves fully prepared to meet the Lord, be
waiting for his coming, and be yet Carnal: But it hinders receiving of Grace,
it keeps them from being of, and submitting to, such a frame of Spirit, as is
absolutely necessary to enable them, to grow from Glory to Glory, to follow
Christ whithersoever he will please to lead them.


Therefore says the Apostle unto these Corinthians, (Chapt. 1.10.) I beseech
you Brethren, by the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye all speak the same
thing, and that there be no divisions among you; but that ye be perfectly
Joined together, in the same mind, and in the same Judgment. This Same thing,
this Sameness of mind, and this Sameness of Judgment, which the Apostle
exhorts, and beseeches them to, cannot be that, nor in that, which any one of
these Parties strove for, against the other, that wherein any of them Differed
from the other: for he rebukes them all for their Striving for, and their vain
glorying in that wherein they Differed: He takes not Part with any One of their
Opinions, nor Ways, but keeps close to his own Way, and his own Judgment;
which was indeed that, which he had Planted them in, and upon; from the
Simplicity of which, they through Carnality had strayed; and that was Jesus
Christ, the only true foundation: Therefore says he, ( Chap. 2.2. I determined
not to know any thing among you, save Jesus Christ, and him crucified; for
other Foundation can no man lay, than that is laid, which is Jesus Christ,
(Chap. 3.11.) Paul had planted them in this Foundation: this is that Same
thing, he would have them all to speak of; and toward which he would have them
all joined together in the same mind, and of this, he would have them all of
the Same Judgment. It Is impossible he could mean by this Same thing, this
Sameness of mind and Sameness of Judgment in it, any One of the Parties they
were Divided into: for he rebukes them all a like; as well he that was for
Christ (who its the most probable was the best, and surely was of the best
side) as he that was for any of the other: and it is as irrational to conclude,
he was for any particular Opinion of any of the Parties, wherein they differed
from each other, and so beseeches them all, to be of the Same mind and
Judgment with them: For as the Differences were not such as were inconsistant
with the Foundation; so he seems to give them all an equal Allowance, as being
such things as they had received from the same Fountain, from God: But (says
he) If any man build on this Foundation, Gold, Silver, Precious Stones, Wood,
Hay, Stubble, every man's work shall be made manifest, for the Day (the further
revelation of the Lord) shall declare it is because it shall be revealed by
Fire, and the Fire shall try every man's work, of what sort it is; and that
which is right shall abide, and that which is wrong shall be burnt: therefore
Judge nothing before the time (verse. 12, 13, 14, 15. with the 5th. verse of the
4th. Chapt.) Look to the Foundation whereon ye are planted, Jesus Christ, him
that was Crucified for you, him into whose name ye were Baptized, speak all the
Same thing, be ye all in this, in the Same mind, and in the Same Judgment; but
judge nothing before the time; neither the Gold, nor the Silver, nor the Wood,
nor the Hay, nor the Stubble; but be ye Perfectly joined together in waiting
upon the Lord, till his Day come, wherein he will declare what he Allows, and
what he allows not of, what he will have to abide, and what is to vanish away
and perish. Upon this Same Principle it is, that this Same Apostle tells the
Philippians, I press toward the Mark for the price of the high calling of God
in Christ Jesus: let us therefore, as many as be perfect, be thus minded; and
if in any thing ye be otherwise minded, God shall reveal even this unto you:
Nevertheless, whereto we have already attained, let us walk by the Same Rule,
let us mind the Same Thing. This Same Thing, is even Pressing toward the Mark,
waiting patiently and tenderly, when God shall reveal even this, to those, who
in any thing are otherwise minded.

This evil of Carnality, is that of which the Lord so Affectionately complains
in tenderness and pity toward his poor Flock; and for which he so sharply
deals with, and Judges the guilty, Ezekiel. 34.17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22. verses. And
as for you, O my Flock, thus says the Lord God, Behold, I judge between Cattle
and Cattle, between the Rams, and the He-goats. Seems it a small thing unto
you, to have eaten up the good Pasture, but ye must tread down with your feet
the residue of your Pastures? And to have drunk of the deep waters, but you
must foul the residue with your feet? And as for my Flock, they eat that which
ye have trodden with your Feet; and they drink that which you have fouled with
your Feet: Therefore thus says the Lord God unto them, Behold I, even I will
judge between the fat Cattle, and between the lean Cattle; because you have
thrust with side, and with shoulder, and pusht all the diseased with your
Horns, till ye have scattered them abroad: Therefore will I save my Flock, and
they shall no more be a prey; and I will judge between Cattle and Cattle. How
nearly this Scripture concerns us, a due consideration of the whole of it, will
quickly make us sensible. Here are such proud tramplings of the Pastures, such
envious Pudling in the Waters; that though the Pastures of Gods house are good
Pastures, yet they are made as not so; though the Waters of the Sanctuary are
deep Waters, yet they are fouled, that the poor Lean of the Flock (those who
are hungring and thirsting after the fat things of Gods house) are forced if
they will have any food, any relief to satisfy their weary and thirsty Souls,
to feed upon that, which the fat Cattle (those who are full and rich in Gifts
and Parts, and High seize, as these Corinthians were) have trodden down,
and drink that which they have fouled with their feet; their Carnal, uncomely,
unbrotherly walkings. Here are such wrathful strivings, and Pushings of the
strong Cattle against the poor diseased Cattle, and the poor weak Lambs of the
Flock, that they are scattered abroad: This the Lord takes very much to heart:
Seems this a small thing unto you, says he? I have given you good Pastures,
enough to feed my whole Flock; and I have given you deep Waters, sufficient for
my whole Flock to drink of: And now, through Pride, do you think them not
worthy to eat in my Pastures, and to drink of my Waters, (which I have provided
for them, as well as for you) and so, what your selves cannot eat, you tread
down, and what you cannot drink, you foul with your Feet: If you cannot keep
them from it, yet by your Carnal uncomly Walking, you cause their Souls even to
loath my good Pastures, and my deep Waters: and I have Lambs, and Lean, and
Sick and Broken Cattle in my Flock; and do you proudly and enviously strive
against these, to keep them out of my good Pastures, and from my deep Waters,
that I have given them to feed upon and drink of, as well as you? Do you thrust
with Side and Shoulder, and push with your Horns, these poor needy ones, till
ye have scattered them abroad, as if they were not of my Flock, did not belong
to my Fold? Know, says the Lord, if this seem a small thing unto you, it does
not so unto me: I will judge of these matters, I will seek that which was lost
by you, by your proud disesteem of them, not looking after them; and bring
again that which was driven away by you, by your Envious striving against them;
and bind up that which was Broken, by your thrusting with Side and with
Shoulder, and the Pushes of your Horns; and that which is sick, will I
strengthen: Thus will I deal with them whom you despise; but you, the F at and
the strong, that work this mischief in my Flock, I will destroy, I will feed
you with Judgment, ver. 16.

By this time (I suppose) it plainly appears, how dangerous and Pernicious this
Evil is to a Christian; yea, that its so subtle, so curious a resined Spirit,
that it many times enters into, and dwells in the Richest Christians, Christians
of the highest seize in Gifts and Parts. These Corinthians were enriched
in every thing, in all Utterance, and all Knowledge, coming behind in no Gift;
and that which adds to all, they were waiting for the coming of the Lord Jesus
Christ: yet these kept not themselves free from this evil frame of Spirit. It Is
only the conformity to a crucified Jesus, that can expel this Evil spirit, that
can Cure this dangerous distemper, that can kill this Soul-canker: But we must
know, and be conformable to him, as he is a Crucified Jesus, before we can
become Spiritual Christians indeed: This the Apostle strongly hints to us,
while he tells the Corinthians; I determined not to know any thing among you,
save Jesus Christ, and him Crucified. Also the great displeasure of the Lord,
against this Sin, this Carnality of Spirit, which brings forth Proud-boastings,
vain-gloryings, which brings forth Envy, which brings forth Strife, which
brings forth Divisions, which causes to walk as men, and which so unfits for
higher Communion and fellowship with the Lord, than at present is attained, and
for higher and more Noble work, than at present the Christian is exercised in;
causing an inability to feed upon strong Meat, and so to do strong work; that
till Christians are cured of this Distemper, they cannot become a fit
Instrument in the hand of God, to do his great Work.

How far Christians (poor sinning Jacob) at this day, have been and are (with
these Corinthians) guilty of this pernicious Evil, CARNALITY OF MIND: and how
far we have been, and are yet, from that Sweet, Heavenly, Thriving,
Strengthening frame of Spirit; that Spiritual mind, that Paul, and the rest of
the Apostles and complete Christians were in, in their Day, the Day of the
Gentiles (our) Espousals, let every seeing Eye and sensible Heart judge; how
far we have been guilty of making a fair show in the Flesh, glorying in it; how
far we have been glorying in the Flesh, our Gifts and Parts, our Differences,
our Opinions, ways of Worship, wherein we Differ from our Brethren, that yet
are Planted upon the same Foundation of a crucified Jesus, Carnally dividing
from each other, upon such Differences, upon such things wherein we Differ from
others, as yet are but received, and received from the same Fountain, that
gives to One, as well as to the other, what he has, even the Lord Jesus
Christ; Carnally envying of, Striving against, and Smiting each other, Proudly
exalting our selves above, and Despising our Brethren, Thrusting and Pushing
the Lambs, and Lean and Sick, and Broken of the Flock to the scattering them
abroad: In these things walking like Men, the Men of the World; and not like
the Children of the Heavenly Father; whose Conversation (as Paul's was) is in
Heaven, above these things: And how far we come short of the Spiritnal mind,
that was in the Apostle, and those who were Perfect in that Day, and the Lord
expects should be in us at this day, the reflection of but a Dim Eye will
clearly Discern. Now that this Evil is a piece of that Sin; for which the Lord
is Judging his People, will appear plainly, if we seriously consider, what the
Lord says, Mal. 4.5, 6.

Behold I will send you Elijah the Prophet, before the coming of the great and
dreadful Day of the Lord, and he shall turn the heart of the Fathers to the
Children, and the heart of the Children to their Fathers; lest I come and smite
the Earth with a Curse. What great and dreadful Day of the Lord is this here
spoken of? Surely, its none other, than that Day of God's coming to his People;
the Day of the Lords Executing his Judgments, and pouring out his Vengeance
upon the wicked World; wherein the wicked shall be burnt up, leaving them
neither root nor branch; wherein this People shall tread down the wicked; and
they shall be as Ashes under the solas of their Feet, 1 and 3. verses. Before
this Day come; before the Lord will bring his People from under the Mal. 3.1,
2. Isai. 10.5.12. and 27.7. Cant. 6.4.13. Isai. 4.5, 6. Zach. 9.14.15,
Refiners fire, and Fullers Soap: Take the Assyrians Rod (the Rod of his Anger)
from off their back; deliver them from under the present smitings and slayings
of their Enemies, make them terrible as an Army with Banners, as the Company of
two Armies; and create a defense upon them, from the Heat, Storm, and Rain, all
the rage and malice of their Enemies, that they may go on with Might and
irresistible Power, as the Lightning, in the work of the Lord, devouring and
subduing, treading down the wicked as Ashes under their Feet; slaying their
enemies with a greater slaughter, than ever they were able to slay them with;
so that neither Root nor Branch shall be left them. Before this day of God
comes, the Lord Will send Elijah the Prophet.

Either by his Messengers, or by his Providence, or by both coworking
together; beget such a frame and temper of Spirit in his People, as shall lead
them to Horeb, to the Mount of the Lord, where God himself at first revealed
his Will to his Chosen; led them into that State and Condition, wherein the
Lord met with them, and was with them, and manisested himself unto them at the
first, in the Day of their Espousals, that Day of Love, in the glory of which
the Lord so much delights, that he remembers it, and forgets it not: Isaiah
also strongly hints this, whilst he tells us, The remnant shall return, even
the remnant of Jacob, unto the mighty God, (Chapt. 10.21.) as they shall no
more crouch and bend the knee to their Smiters, for their favor; so they shall
no more run Carnally after Apollo, nor Paul, not Caephas; after this or that
Opinion, or Way, or Party, or Man, but they shall return from these things,
from being led Captive by the Pessions and Lusts such courses hurry them into,
to the Lord, the Might^y God alone, to Jesus Christ the true Foundaton: they
shall come into such a Spiritual Christ-like frame of Spirit, as shall Turn the
Heart of the Fathers to the Children, and the Heart of the Children to their
Fathers.

Who are these Fathers, and who are these Children, that being at a distance
need a Reconciler? Surely these Fathers and Children, are not only of the True
Seed of Jacob, but of that part of the True Seed too, who shall be used in the
Work of the great Day of God, spoken of before: the Stress, the absolnte
Necessity, the Lord lays upon their reconciling and uniting, strongly implies
so much. The Apostle John tells us, there are little Children, Fathers, and
young men in Christ, (1 John 2.12, 13, 14.) I write unto you little Children,
because your sins are forgiven you for his Namesake; I write unto you Fathers,
because ye have known him that is from the beginning; I have written unto you,
young men, because ye are strong, and the Word of God abides in you, and ye
have overcome the wicked one. These are the strong and the weak Christians,
Christians of several measures, of several Degrees, of a several Pitch, in
Grace and Knowledge, these through weakness and imperfection, having strayed
from the Simplicity that is in Christ, run into Variance and Strife, and
Envyings, and Divisions, biting and devouring one another; Walk like the Men of
the World, and not as the Children of one Father, the Father of Mercies, the
Heavenly Father: Now this unchild-like temper must be taken away, by a
Reconciliation wrought between these Fathers, and Children, turning the Hearts
of these several sorts of Christians toward each other, that they may walk as
becomes the Children of one Father, of such a Father, as the God and Father of
our Lord Jesus Christ is.

Turn the Heart of the Fathers to the Children, etc. They shall be of one
Heart, serve the Lord with one consent; there shall be such a Heart-love,
begotten in them toward each other, as, that all Variance, all Division, all
Distance, shall be swallowed up; there shall be no Thrusting, nor Pushing, nor
Trampling upon, nor despising one another; being by a reconciling spiritual
frame of Spirit, brought to see themselves the Children of one Father; they
shall sit at one Table, eat in one Pasture, drink of the same Water together,
because the Lord provided the same for all his Children; then we shall not hear
them quarrelling with, and judging of one another; but then, this shall be the
voice, Come, all ye that love the Lord Jesus Christ, Come, feed in his good
Pastures, Come, drink of his deep Waters, that he has provided for you; all ye
Children of our Heavenly Father, who bear his Image upon you. And this must be,
says the Lord, Lest I come and smite the Earth with a Curse.

There is such an absolute Necessity, that this Reconciliation be wrought in
and among the Lords own People, whom he has ordained to be his Instrument, by
which he will do the great Work of his terrible Day; that, except this be done,
that cannot be done; a Curse will come upon the Earth instead of a Blessing.

Quest. What Curse is this, the Earth must be Smitten with, in case this
Reconciliation between the Fathers and the Children be not wrought?

Answ. It cannot be those Judgments of God, which he will pour down upon the
World by the hand of his People in this terrible day; for though that day Begin
with Jndgement, it Ends with Blessing. Now a Curse is pure Judgment, without
mixture of Blessing, pure wrath, without mixture of Mercy; and this Curse being
put in Opposition to those Blessings, which these people reconciled shall
obtain; it is as much as if the Lord had said, If these Fathers and Children
will be Reconciled, and Turn their Hearts to each other, I will Bless them, to
the enabling them to go forth, and grow up as Calves of the Stall, in treading
down the wicked, that they shall be as Ashes under the Soals of their Feet: But
if not, I will Smite all with a Curse, not only the Wicked but they themselves
too: all shall be Cursed and Perish together, as that Generation that Sinned
against me in the Wilderness, were Cursed and Perished. Mount Ebal shall be
their portion, not Mount Garizim. The Lord will Turn the Heart of the Fathers
to the Children, and the Heart of the Children to their Fathers.

As at the first, he took away the Partition Wall between Jew, and Gentile;
between those sheep of his Fold: So now he will again take away the
Partition Wall, that Carnal Dividing Spirit, that is among the Sheep of his
Fold at this Day. As then he made of Twain, One New man; so now of many, he
will make One Rev. 14.1. Ps. 2.6. Isa. 24.23. Mic. 4.7. Isa. 18.7. and 8 18.
and 31.4. Obed. 17, 21. Psalm. 48.2. Heb. 12, 22.
Hill, One Mount for Christ to stand upon, and sit on as King, and Reign, and
that for ever: this is the Place of the Name of the Lord of Hosts; the Place
where he dwells: it is when his People come into this state, that the Lord will
fight for them; it is upon the People of God in this state, that Deliverance
shall be; upon this State (upon Mount Sion) shall come Saviors; it is this
state of Jacob that makes him the Joy of the whole Earth, the Joy of the whole
Earth is Mount Sion; and, this is that state, the People of God in this Gospel
Day, are to come unto.

By this we see, what fruit the Lord expects his present Afflicting hand upon
us, should bring forth in us; what it is he expects from us, before he will
judge us fit for Deliverance, and Bestow it upon us. A forsaking our Carnal
Envying, and Striving and Dividing, and the Turning of our Hearts to each
other, in a true sincere Love, uniting upon the One True Foundation Jesus
Christ: Other than which, no man can lay.

Abundance more might be said, to prove this, both from the Old and New
Testament: Paul's Epistles yield plentiful proof, that this frame of Spirit, is
the Only true Gospel frame. But I forbear.

If it be objected, That we are Commanded in several Scriptures, in the Old and
New Testament, to be separate and not touch the unclean thing, and to come out
of Babylon, upon the penalty of being partaker of her Sins, and so of her
Plagues: therefore how can this union pleaded for, be according to the mind of
God?

I Answer. Its a certain truth; that touching the unclean thing, and abiding in
Babylon, are inconfistant with this Union pleaded for. A Holy Separation from
the unclean thing, and coming out of Babylon, of necessity must precede this
Union, otherwise it cannot be; for in a Defiled house the Lord will not dwell.
But yet we must be careful lest we call that unclean, which the Lord does not
account so; and so cast away that which the Lord will gather up as his; and
call that Babylon which the Lord looks upon as belonging to his Sion, though
weak and infirm: Therefore, it is necessary, to resolve this Case, that we
consider what is to be understood by this unclean thing, and by coming out of
Babylon.

1. By coming out of Babylon, we must of necessity understand, coming out of
whole Babylon; her Civil Tyrannical State, and her Religious Idolatrous State:
otherwise, we shall neither be fit for, nor can we come unto this Union. To
prove this, a multitude of Arguments and Scriptures might be brought; but
taking it for granted, I would only caution this: There are Tyrrannies and
Idolatries, which are not Properly here is (for every thing that is like Babylon
is not Babylon) and we must be careful lest we mistake one for the other, by
which many Erring Inconveniences may follow.

2. By the unclean thing; I conceive we are to understand,

1. What soever is inconsistant with the only true Foundation, Jesus Christ,
laid by the Apostles; That we must not touch with, have any fellowship with, or
be united unto: for, what fellowship has righteousness with unrighteonsness?
what concord has Christ with Belial? (2 Cor. 6.14, 15.) Now those Petty
Differences (I call them Petty, because they cannot so much as move the
Spiritual Man; he sees them, what they are, and lives above them; they are
only great and powerful, to the disturbance only of the Weak and Carnal
Christian. I say those Petty Differences) that are among the People of God (who
are planted in, and built upon this true Foundation) are so far from being to
be cast off (as not agreeing with the Foundation) as that they are not to be
Judged, ( Judge nothing before the time, says the Apostle) but to be let
alone, to be born with, till the Day declare of what sort they are. The Apostle
reckons up many several sorts; Gold, Silver, Precious Stone, Wood, Hay, Stubble
(1 Cor. 3.12.) the Carnal Christian looking upon these, as very Heterogenious
matter; such an Impure mixture as is not to be suffered; would burn up the
Wood, the Hay and the Stubble in the Fire of his own Spirit (not considering,
that thereby he would rob the Gold and Silver, and the Precious Stone, of some
part of their Glory, by the smutting smoke of his wrathful Fire: by this
manifesting himself, to be one Spirit with that combustible matter, which yet
he would destroy, seeing he is so easily set on fire) but, says the Apostle,
the Spiritual man; Judge nothing before the time: let them alone, till the Day
declares and tryes of what sort every man's work is; till the Lord clearly
manifests to the sincere in heart (who are yet otherwise minded, who yet Differ
about, and are not able to Distinguish between these things) what he will have
to Abide, and what he will have to be Burnt. 13. and 15. verses, compared with
Phil. 3.15.

2. The mere Natural Man, who has never passed through the New Birth: the Son
of Old Adam, with all his fleshly and Dead Works; Those Carnal uncleanness
under the Law; several Diseases, the Menstruous Corruptions of Nature, the Dead
Man, etc. which were then made unclean in that day, as to that worship, were
Types of this. This is clearly the scope of the Apostle (2 Cor. 6.14, 15, 16,
17.) be ye not unequally yoked with unbelievers; for what fellowship has
righteousness with unrighteousness? or what part has he that believes with an
Infidel? wherefore come out from among them, and be ye separate says the
Lord, and touch not the unclean thing, etc. Believers, and Unbelievers
Believers and Infidels, are not to unite together, are not to be Cemented
together in one building: The Unbeliever, the Natural man, the Son of Old Adam,
is that unclean thing, which the Believer, the Spiritual man, the Son of the
New Adam, Jesus Christ, is to come out from, to be separated from, and not to
touch with, if he will be the Temple of the living God, for him to Dwell in,
and walk in.

3. IDOLS: What agreement has the Temple of God with Idols? Wherefore come out
from among them, and be ye separate, etc. Idols, are a part of that unclean
thing, which those who will be the Temple of the living God, must be separate
from, and not touch with. Babylon and her Idols, All will grant, yea, the
Carnal fry of Christians will grant, that they are to be separated from; even
while in the mean time, they are hugging a more Refined sort of Idols in their
hearts, crying out against another, as guilty of Idolatry and Will Worship,
while yet they mind not the Idols in their own Hearts: Dividing, withdrawing
communion from each other (looking upon each other, as not the Sheep of Christ's
Fold) for their Opinion, their waies-sake, for the sake of those things wherein
they Differ; notwithstanding they all are by the mighty working of the Spirit
of God, planted in the true Foundation, Jesus Christ, putting their Opinions,
their Ways, their Differences, in the Room and Place of the Foundation Jesus
Christ; making them the Standard and Boundary of their Communion and
Separation, by which they become their Idols; from which the Lord in his due
time, will separate them; induing them with such a Spiritual frame of Spirit,
as should abolish their Idols; the Idols he shall utterly abolish, See
Tillinghurst, upon this Scripture.
Isa. 2.18.

These things of a Religious Nature, may be, and too too often are, as really
the Heart Idols of Carnal Christians, as the Silver and the Gold of this World,
are either unto such, or unto the men of the World. Of these Heart Idols, the
Lord expresses exstream detestation, Ezekiel. 14.3, 4, 5. Son of man, these men
have set up their Idols in their Hearts, and should I be inquired of at all by
them? Therefore speak unto them, and say unto them, thus says the Lord God,
Every man of the house of Israel, that sets up his Idols in his heart; the
Lord will answer him according to the multitude of his Idols.

And these Religious Heart Idols, when we are joined to them, make us so
tenatious, so obstinate, so perverse, that there is no dealing with us: God
himself thinks not fit to deal with us while in this Condition, (except in a
way of Correction, to scourge them out of us) but says, Ephraim is joined to
Idols, let him alone (Hosea 4.17.) when men have Idolatrous hearts, adoring
either the Idols of this World, the Silver and the Gold, the good things of
this Life; or those more curious Idols, those Religious things; wherewith a
world of Professors cheat their own poor Souls (while they hug their Form for
the Power, while they make their Opinion, and Way, the Measure and Standard of
their Religion) there is so little hope of them, that says God, He is joined to
Idols, let him alone; as Solomon says of his Conceited man, (Pro. 26.12.)
See thou a man wise in his own conceit? there is more hope of a Fool than of
him: So it is as true, there is more hope of a mere Natural man, that never knew
what belongs to making a Profession of the Name and worship of God; than of
such a one, whose Opinion, or Way, or Judgment, are his Heart Idols; Let him
alone, says God, I will answer him (deal with him) by my self, and that so, as
ye shall know that I am the Lord, (Ezekiel. 14.7, 8.) None can deal with such, but
the Lord, and he deals with such a People by terrible things, utterly
abolishing the Idols, that the Lord alone may be exalted, See Isa. 2.17, 18,
19. verses.

4. Covetousness, which is Idolatry, (Col. 3.15) This is another part of the
unclean thing, which must be separated from, and not touched with. This Sin was
then, of such an unclean Nature, that it caused the Lord, (who was among them,
and in the midst of them) to withdraw from Israel, upon which they fell before
their Enemies; neither would the Lord be with them, till they had cleansed
themselves by separating from it, ( Joshua 7.1. and 12. verses) It was
Covetousness made Achan put forth his hand to the accursed thing, and to steal
from the Lord part of his due, that he had consecrated to his use (as appears
by ver. 11. compared with Chapter 6.18.) And the same that the Lord Consecrated
to himself in that day, he has said, he will again consecrate to himself in
these last days, when Sion shall arise and thresh, and beat in pieces many
People, (Mich. 4.13.) and he will as little bear with it, in his People now as
then; for this is One of Babylons Sins, for which the Lord Judges her, (Jer.
51.13.) and it is for the Iniquity of our Covetousness, that the Lord is wroth
with us, and smites us, (Isa. 57.17.)

Now it is worth our searching into, whether Achans sin, has not been one great
cause of that Stop put to the Work of God, and of that great Affliction which
is fallen, and is yet falling upon poor sinning Jacob, at this Day? Instead of
Consecrating the gain unto the Lord; have we not taken it to our selves, and
put it among our own Stuff? From this Sin will the Lord separate his People,
making them his Redeemed from the Earth, (Rev. 14.3.) Notwithstanding this, and
that the Apostle tells us, ( Ephesians. 5.3.) that Covetousness ought not to be so
mnch as named amongst us, as becomes Saints: Yet, how partial have poor Carnal
Christians been in this day! a small difference, an Opinion, has caused them
to Divide, to Separate and Flce from each other, as from Monsters; while in the
mean time, this pernicious, Idolatrous Evil, is not so much as taken notice of:
Nay, looked on as a Virtue, or at least past over as an Infirmity: For this (as
well as for other Evils) the Lord is Judging his People.

Let these things be Separated from, and I think I may safely without
presumption say, the People of the Lord will quickly come into such an
undesiled united State, that all that see it, will praise and bless it, as the
Daughters, the Queens, and the Concubines did, Cant. 6.9. such a Light will
shine round about it, and such a Glory will arise upon it, that there shall be
such a Confluence unto it, of those who being in Love with its Glory, are
converted into it; that we shall cry out with Isaiah, Who are these that flee
as the Clouds, and as the Doves to their Windows, Isa. 60.1, 5, 6, 7, and 8.
verses.

I shall conclude this part of this Discourse, with the words of the 133.
Psalm, Behold! how good and pleasant a thing it is, for Brethren to dwell
together in (this pure) unity? It Is like the precious Ointment upon the Head,
(this Ointment was made of the most sweet and Odoriferous Spices, ( Exodus
30.23, 24.) so that when it was poured out, it made a most fragrant savor, in
the Nostrils of all those that were near unto it) that run down upon the Beard,
even Aarons Beard, that went down to the skirts of his garments; it is the very
Image of the holiness of God, stamped upon the Royal Priesthood of the Lord, his
Holy Nation and Peculiar People, that must show forth the praises of him, that
has called them out of darkness, into his mavelous Light, (1 Pet. 2.9.) And
that wrought by the mighty working, and Anointing, of his Holy Spirit) It is
as the Dew of Herman, and as the Dew that descended upon the Mountains of Sion,
which made them both pleasant and fruitful, for there the Lord commanded the
Blessing, even Life for evermore.

This is the State and Condition of his People, which the Lord will Bless with
an Everlasting Blessing, LIFE FOR EVERMORE: which State shall suffer no
alteration nor Change, so long as the Son and Moon endure, till the time of the
Fabric of this World ceases to be: For upon the dwelling places of Sion, and
upon her Assemblies, (come into this State and frame of Spirit) will the Lord
create a Cloud, and Smoke by Day, and the shining of a flaming Fire by Night
(he will work as wonderfully as ever he did of Old) to defend this Glory: And
there shall be a Tabernacle, for a shadow in the day time from the heat, and
for a place of refuge, and for a covert from Storm and from Rain; even from
ALL that their Enemies, can (by the help of the Powers of Darkness) be able to
do against them.

We come now to consider the END of the Lord, in Correcting and Afflicting his
People; which is, 1. To take this Sin away. This is fully expressed, By this
therefore shall the INIQUITY of Jacob be PURGED; and this is all the Fruit, to
take away his Sin.

This Verse gathers up the preceding verses into it.

By this! by what? By the means forementioned; by the Smitings, and the
Slayings of the Enemy.

By this therefore! wherefore? Why will God make use of those means to purge
Jacob? First, because the Lord will measure out the Affliction, that it shall
continue no longer then this effect is wrought in Jacob. Secondly, because he
has in a readiness wherewithal to stop the Current and Stream of this
Affliction, to stay this rough-wind, as soon as ever it has wrought its
effect. If the Lord did not take care of this, these means would not do the
work, to which the Lord appoints them; instead of purging only, they would
destroy Jacob; instead of taking away his Sin only, they would take away his
Being in this World.

By this therefore, shall the iniquity of Jacob be Purged; and this is all the
fruit, to take away his Sin.

The End of God in this Affliction, is to Cleanse, and Purify Jacob from his
Sin; yea, from those sins already hinted at: From hence we may lay down this
Position.

It Is not SINNING-DEFILED Jacob God will DELIVER; but it is CLEANSED and
PURIFIED Jacob; whose iniquity is Purged, and whose sin is taken away, the Lord
will bestow his salvation upon. Therefore it is, that the Lord will wait to be
gracious; he is waiting upon Jacob, till the means he has appointed (the
Affliction) has wrought its effect (Washed and Cleansed Jacob from his Sin,
and the Daughtets of Sion from their Filth, and Jerusalem from her Blood) that
he may Deliver and Save him; that he may bless Jacob, that he may Take root,
and Israel may blossom and Bud, and fill the Face of the World with Fruit.

The Lord will put a Glory upon Sion; and then create a defense upon all that
Glory: but first he will Wash and Purge her from her Filth, and from her Blood,
(Esa. 4.) and that by the great and terrible work mentioned in the second and
third Chapters; Christ will make his Spouse, Terrible as an Army with Banners,
yea, as the company of two Armies: But first he will make her sick of Love,
exercising her under sore Afflictions, the Smitings, and Woundings of the
Watchmen, and the Robery of the Keepers of the Wall; till she become undefiled,
looking forth as the morning, fair as the Moon, and clear as the Son, ( Cant.
5. and 6. Chapters) God will enable his People to tread down the wicked like
Ashes under the Soles of their Feet: But first he will sit as a Refiner and
Purifier of Silver, Purifying them, and Purging them as Gold and Silver is
Purged in the Fire; Purging away their dross, and taking away all their Tin
(Mal. 3. and 4. Chapters, compared with Isa. 1.15.) The Lord Christ, has a
great and glorious work to lead forth his people to do in the World: but first
he writes his Fathers Name in their Forehead; he redeems them from the Earth,
from among men; makes them Pure Virgins, having no Guile at all in them,
without fault before the Throne of God, and then they follow the Lamb
whithersoever he leads them, into what Path, or whatsoever work he pleases, (
Rev. 14.) Yea, Christ has Vials full of wrath, to pour out upon the Earth: But
he will pour them out, by Angels clothed in pure and White linen, having their
Breasts girded about with Golden Girdles ( Rev. 16.) The Lord will destroy
Babylon; but he will do it by his Sanctified ones, such as rejoice in his
Highness, ( Esa. 13.3.) Christ has a People that shall Reign with him; but
they must first suffer with him, (2 Timothy 2.12.) If Christ's Witnesses will
ascend up to Heaven, as Christ did, they must first be conformable to his
Death, (Rev. 11.) If it were necessary that Christ himself, though he were a
Son, should learn obedience by the things which he suffered, (Heb. 5.8.) much
more will it appear necessary, that we should through suffering learn to obey
those commands, which God in these last days has laid upon his people, as his
will they should do, which are so contrary to flesh and blood, and hard for it
to bear. And if it Became the Captain of our Salvation, to be made Perfect
through Suffering, (Heb. 2.10.) how much more Becoming is it, that his
Followers, his Members, should go on to Perfection through the same Path of
Sufferings? hence it is, that the Apostle Paul makes this the Path, through
which he expected to attain that Perfection, he so earnestly pressed after, (
Phil. 3.10, 11, etc.) That I may know him, and the fellowship of his
Sufferings, being made conformable unto his Death: If by any means, I might
attain to the Resurrection of the Dead; not as though I had already attained,
either were already Perfect, etc. So here in this Prophesy, Jacob must take
root, and Israel must blossom and bud; but, that he may be thus Blessed, the
Lord will first Purge him from his Iniquity, and take away his Sin, and that by
a Sore and Sharp Affliction, a Smiting, and Slaying Affliction.

I have Enumerated these Instances, to hint these two things.

1. The Agreement that there is between the Old and New Testament, in holding
forth to us, the Manner of Gods proceeding with his People, in order to fit
them for his Salvation, and so for that Work he has to do by them.

2. That God will not have his Work done with Defiled, but with Pure hands,
according to that word, ( Job 22.30. ( He shall deliliver the Island of the
Innocent: and it is delivered by the Pureness of thine hands, or (as it is in
the Margent of some Bibles) The Innocent shall Deliver the Islands. Impure,
foul and dirty hands, will so sully and Besmear the Work of God, that it will
appear more like Man's Work, than Gods Work; and so the Lord loses the Glory of
his Works: now because he will not lose this Glory, nor suffer it to be given
to Another; he therefore comes to his People with Smarting and Bloody Strokes,
with Fire, and with Soap, to Purge and Cleanse them, that they may do his Work
so, that it may Evidently appear to be Gods Work, had not Man's.

How far what has been done, and befaln us in our days, does confirm this;
let the Seeing Eye, and understanding Heart judge. I shall give but one
Instance more to confirm the Position, and that is, Number. 23.21. and 23. verses.
He has not beheld Iniquity in Jacob, neither has he seen Perverseness in
Israel; the Lord his God is with him, and the shout of a King is among them:
Surely there is no enchantment against Jacob, neither is there any Divination
against Israel; according to THIS TIME, it shall be said of Jacob, and of
Israel; What has God wrought? the Sinning rebellions of Jacob was Judged, Died
in the Wilderness; but this Judgment of God upon him, having Purged Jacob from
his Iniquity, and taken away his Sin; that the Lord, beholds not iniquty in
Jacob, neither sees perverseness in Israel: but they are brought into a
Purified, humble, Obedient State; According to THIS TIME it shall be said of
Jacob, and of Israel, what has God wrought? This is the Time, wherein they
shall be Blessed with Blessings that men cannot reverse, verse 20. and no
Enchantment nor Divination shall prevail against them: wherein God will Bless
him that Blesses them, and Curse him, that Curses them, Chapter 24.19. From this
Time it is, that such Blessings shall attend Jacob, such great things the Lord
will do for him, and by him, that those who believe the Works of God, shall
with great Admiration cry out, What has God wrought! while Jacobs Sin was upon
him, he could not Possess the Promise, but is Smitten by his Enemies: But when
the Corrections of the Lord upon him, had Cleansed, and Purged him from his
Sin, and taken away his Iniquity; then the Promise was his Portion, he entered
the Good Land, and none could hinder.

So it stands firm, both upon Old and New Testament grounds; that the Cause
that brings Correcting Afflictions upon Jacob, is his Own Sins, and his Own
Iniquities: and the End of the Lord in Afflicting, and Correcting of him, is to
take his Iniquity away, and to Purge him from his Sin.

2. But the GREAT END of all this is, that he may Cause them that come of Jacob
to take Root, and Israel to blossom and Bud; and fill the face of the world
with fruit. The Lord Loves Jacob, and all his ways toward him are paths of
Love: Love is in the Bottom and End of all his Dealings with Jacob. If he
Correct and Afflict him; it is in Love, in Measure, to Purge him from his
Iniquity, that he may become Precious in his sight; and then in the same Love
that he Corrects him, he will give men for him, and People for his Life, (Isa.
43.4.) God will deal in wrath with the Nations, I will make a full End of all
the Nations, (Jer. 46.28.) but he loves Jacob; though he Frowns, it is in Love;
though he strike it is in Love; though he visits so sorely, that the Rod even
threatens the Destruction of Jacob, yet it is Still in Love; for though Jacob
provokes the Lord to Command his Enemies, to go upon his Walls and Destroy; yet
this Love gives them a Check, their Measure, but make not a full End, (Jer.
5.10.) yea, though Jacob's Sins provoke the Lord to make a Desolation in the
Land, his Love will not suffer him to make a full End; yet will I not make a
full End, says Jacobs Father, ( Jer. 4.27.) No, the Lord Loves Jacob with an
Everlasting Love. If he Correct, if he Smite, and that to the drawing of his
Blood; yet, it is not to destroy, but it is only in Love, to Save him from his
Sin, and so from that Destiuction his Sin would bring upon him. If the Lord be
Wrath, so that he Hides his Face, it is not with Jacob, but with his Sin: The
Lord Loves Jacob still: In a little wrath, I hid my face from thee, for a
moment, but with Everlasting kindness will I have mercy upon thee, says the
Lord thy Redeemer, Isa. 54.8.

So that here is the Great End of God in his Dealings with Jacob, that he may
Fit him for, and so Bestow upon him Everlasting kindness, Everlasting Mercy.

Though the Lord in a little wrath against our sins, Afflict so Sorely, Smite
so Smartingly, that he seems as if he watched over us, to Pluck up, and to
Break down, and to Throw down, and to Destroy, as he did his People of Old,
(Jer. 31.28.) yet, it is in Much Mercy, Everlasting Love. If that he may Cause
them that come of Jacob to take Root.

Though he seems to Pluck us up by the Roots, it is but to Transplant us into a
Better Soil; To cause Jacob to take Root: Hitherto Jacobs Seed have had little
or no Rooting, have only spread a little over the surface of the Earth; but now
when the Lord has Purged and Cleansed, Lopped and Pruned Jacobs Plant, it
shall take Root; He will cause them that come of Jacob to take Root; and such
Root too, as that all our Enemies shall never be able to Pluck us up any more,
for the Lord will watch over us to Root us and to Plant us. The same Mighty
Arm, that has Plucked up all our Defenses; even then, when we could not
believe it possible (being lifted up and set on high) because ( Isa. 1, 2, 3.
Ch.) the Cedars of Lebanon and the Oaks of Bashan, were the Stakes in our Hedge;
and the high Mountains and Hills, and High Towers, and fenced Walls were our
Defenses; and Pleasant Pictures, Gold and Silver were our Ornaments, and we
were strengthened by the Mighty Man, and the Man of War, the Judge and the
Prophet, and the Prudent, and the Ancient, and the Honorable man, and the
Counselor, and the cunning Artificer, and the Eloquent Orator. The same Mighty
Arm of the Lord of Hosts, that has been, and still is upon all these in the
midst of us, Plucking them up, and Beating them down with the Rod of his Anger,
shall put forth its Almighty Power, in Rooting and Planting them that come of
Jacob; I shall cause them that come of Jacob to take root; and not only so, But
Israel shall Blossom and Bud.

It Is not a Bare taking Root, but such a Rooting as shall bring forth a
Blooming, Budding, Flourishing State; though this Winter night of Affliction,
may cause Israel in appearance to be as a Withered Dead Tree, yet his Life
shall appear in its Season, he shall Blossom and Bud; spring forth into a
Flourishing State.

And fill the Face of the World with fruit. Isreal's Tree shall so flourish, so
spread forth its Boughs, as that the Beasts of the field shall have shadow
under them, and the Fowls of the Heaven shall dwell in them; the fruit of the
Tree shall be much, yea so much as it shall be meat for all, all flesh shall be
fed of it, the whole World shall be filled with its fruit. The Isa. 27.4. and
Mal. 4.1.
Briars and the Thorns ( the worldly Professors in the midst of Jacob, in his
fallen State) shall be burned up, and Israel the true Seed shall fill THEIR place
with fruit: the Proud and the Wicked of the world shall be burnt up as stubble,
and Israel shall fill THEIR place with fruit: Though through our Sin and
Stubborness in it, we provoke the Lord to suffer us to be slain, to be as Dead;
yet when our Sin is done away, and our Iniquities purged, we shall Arise;
though we be brought to dwell in the Dust, yet, we shall Awake and Sing, our
Dew shall be as the Dew of Herbs, (Isa. 26.19.) such Influences from Heaven
shall descend down upon us, as that we shall Spring again, and Live and
Flourish, and fill the Face of the world with fruit.

What Fruit this is, would require a large discourse to tell; and it not being
my work at this time to treat of, therefore I leave it.

I shall only say this, That it is such Fruit, such excellent Fruit, of such a
Divine Nature, that it causes glorious effects, that men shall fear the Name of
the Lord from the West, and his glory from the Rising of the Sun; the Spirit of
the Lord by his mighty working, brings forth this fruit, Isa. 59.19.

It Is to this People, who are put into a capacity (by the means appointed of
the Father) to bring forth such fruit, that the Redeemer comes; It Is this
People, who are brought into this Light, upon whom the Glory of the Lord is
thus Risen, that must Arise and Shine; upon whom the Lord shall Arise, and upon
whom his Glory shall be Seen, (Isa. 59.20, and 60.1, 2.) These are the People
to whom the Great gathering shall be, mentioned, Isa. 60.

Having Fixed the Prophesy, and Opened it, and showed the Cause and End of the
Present Affliction: I would now draw a few Conclusions from the whole.

1. That in the Last Days, at this Day, the Lord will use the same means to
Purge, and Cleanse, and Purify his People, that he makes use of to Destroy his
and their Enemies, Outward and Sore Afflictions, Smiting and Slaying, Death it
self. Jacob the true Seed, Smites the Enemy to Destruction, and the Lord
permits the Same Enemy to Smite Jacob to Blood, to Pnrge him from his Iniquity,
and take away his Sin.

2. That this Sore Affliction, the Lord makes use of as the means, whereby he
will Purge and Cleanse his People; Ends not in Smiting only, but Proceeds to
Slaying, to Blood; slain according to the slaughter of them, that are slain by
him. It seems Jacobs Disease is so highly Pluretick, as the skilfullest
Physician in Heaven and Earth, can find no way to cure Jacob of his Distemper,
but by letting out his Blood.

3. The sharpness of the Affliction, clearly shows to Jacob, the Hainousness
of his Sin. The tender Fathers of our flesh, will not lay sharp and Sore
Corrections upon their Children, but for exceeding great Faultiness: If we see
a tender Father, whipping a beloved Child till the Blood run down his back; we
say, surely that Child has committed some exceeding great fault; Much more may
we say Jacob has Sinned a Great Sin, when we see the God of Jacob, (who is the
Father of Mercies, whose thoughts of Mercy are as far above our thoughts, as
the Heavens are Higher than the Earth, ( Isa. 55.9.) when we see him) Smiting
Jacob, and Smiting him to Blood, that he even faints under his Correcting hand;
yea, so Sorely Afflicting Jacob, that were it not measured out in measures of
mercy; did not the Lord in tenderness (as it were) stand upon his watch, to put
a stop to it when it comes to such a pitch, it would deprive poor Jacob of
Being: This surely is an open Declaration of the Greatness of Jacob's Sin. In a
case like this, we have the Lord mourning over him, ( Hosea 11.8.) How shall I
give up Ephraim! How shall I deliver thee Israel! How shall I make thee as
Admath! How shall I set thee as Zeboim! mine heart is turned within me, my
repentings are kindled together.

4. The continuance of this Sore and sharp Dispensation, will be either
Lengthned or Shortened, according as Jacob behaves himself under it; as he is
Obedient or Disobedient to the voice of the Rod, (Isa. 1.19, 20.) If ye be
willing and obedient, ye shall eat the good of the Land; but if you refuse and
rebel, ye shall be devoured with the Sword. Jacob's willingly doing the will of
God, may prevent this devouring Sword's passing over him; but if Jacob will
not, it must have its course, says the Lord of Hosts. This Affliction must
abide till it has wrought its Effect, Purged Jacob of his Iniquity, and taken
away his Sin: So that the sooner Jacob departs from his Sin, the sooner will
the Rod of Gods displeasure be taken off his back. Consider again, that place
we have already discanted upon, ( Isa. 59.1, 2.) Behold the Lords hand is not
shortened, that it cannot save; but your Iniquities have separaed between you
and your God; and your Sins have hid his Face from you that he will not hear.
The Lord is now as Able, so Ready to bestow Salvation; it is only our own Sin,
that hinders his hand from Saving, and his ear from Hearing our cry: If we
would but turn from our Sin (which brought the Rod upon us) the Lord would Hear
and Save us immediately. The Lord is so ready to save, that he is waiting (upon
his watch) to see when we will return to him, that he may save us. Deliverance
is fixed to no Time, but only to the Time of our Turning from our Sin; the
sooner we Turn from it, the sooner we shall be Saved; till we turn from it, we
shall not be Saved; for the Rod is brought upon our back to Turn us from it;
till which is done, it will not be taken off; and as soon as ever we Turn from
our Sin, the Lord will take that opportunity, that Time to show forth his
Almighty power, and get him self a Name, and a Praise in the Earth, in Saving
of his People.

5. From hence we may behold, The Exceeding Riches of the Grace and Love of God
to his People. Though Jacob Sin, and Sin at such a rate, that compels the
Father of Mercies (who had rather be giving men for him, and people for his
life, giving them as the dust to his sword, and as the driven Stubble to his
Bow; for precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of his Saints:
notwithstanding this Father of Mercies, is so highly provoked, as that he is
compelled) to give up Jacob into the hand of his Enemies; that so, (by such a
sever Correction) we may be brought to return to the Rock of his Salvation,
which he has lightly esteemed; then the remnant shall return, even the remnant
of Jacob, unto the Mighty God, (Isa. 10.21.) yet through this dark cloud of
displeasure, he manifests a Fathers Love, to uphold the drooping Spirits of
Sinning Jacob; In measure when it shoots forth, thou will debate with it,
etc. as if the Lord had said, Fear not Jacob, though I deal thus sharply with
thee; know it is only to Purge, and Cleanse thee from thine Iniquities and Sin;
to Cut out the remainders of that rotten Core of Iniquity that is in thee; to
Lance those Boils of Corruption, that are yet in thy flesh unbroken; this
Smiting and Cutting Dispensation, shall proceed no farther. My Rough Wind shall
only blow away thy Chaff, and then will I debate with it, put a Stop to its
rigorous proceedings. I have an East Wind in my hand ready (as soon as ever
this potion I have given thee, has done its work, for which I intend it) to
send forth, to Turn this Rough Wind backward, and make a way for thee to
escape; for this is all the fruit, to take away thy Sin. Thou would not give
me that Praise, which was my due, and I expected from thee, for former
kindnesses; therefore thou have compelled me to gain that Praise, by making use
of the Wrath of Man to Correct thee; but the Remainder of wrath will I
restrain, (Psalm. 76.10.) They are only the Briars and the Thorns in the midst
of thee, that set themselves against me in Battle, that oppose my Work, and my
Intendments, that I would bring to pass to get my self a Name and a Glory in
the Earth: it is only these, that I would Destroy and Burn together; but my End
in all this, is to fit thee for (that I may bestow upon thee) Salvation;
therefore take hold of my strength, and make peace with me; and thou shall make
peace with me, as it is in the 4th. and 5th. verses.

6. Though the Immediate Minute of the Time of Jacobs Comfort is not yet come;
the Time wherein Jerusalem can say her warfare is accomplished, Isa. 40.1, 2.
Mal. 3.2. Isa. 27. compared with Cant. 5.7.
she has received of the Lords hand double for all her Sins; notwithstanding
this terrible trial may be as Hot as the Refiners Fire, and as sharp as the
Fullers Soap; this Smiting may be to Wounding and Blood; yet do not despond,
let not thy heart sink under it, for the Lord has not only said he will
measure it out for thy good; but he has also said, there is Hope in thine End.

This Affliction though it may be Sore and Terrible, Smarting and Bloody, yet
it shall not make an End of Jacob.

Jer. 31.16, 17, and 30.10, 11. and 46.27, 28, and 4.27. and 5.10, 18.
Fear thou not O my Servant Jacob, says the Lord, neither be dismayed O Israel;
for lo I will save thee, for I am with thee, says the Lord to save thee;
though I make a full End of all Nations, yet will I not make a full End of
thee; though I leave thee not wholly unpunished, yet will I Correct thee but in
measure; though the whole Land be desolate, yet will I not make a full end;
though I command the Enemy to go upon thy Walls and destroy, yet not to make a
full End: yea, in those days says the Lord, I will not make a full End with
you. Though these Scriptures speak but Colaterally to us, yet they speak as
fully, and as strongly to us, as they did to them in the same Condition: For if
the Lord under the Old Testament Administration, bore so much Love to his
Servant Jacob, as not to suffer the punishment of his Sin to make a full End of
him in that day; much more will he not suffer the punishment of our Iniquities
to make a full End of us, in this day of the punishment of our transgressions,
under the New Testament Adminstration.

Therefore let not our Hearts sinck under our Affliction, but let us lift up
our heads, for our Redemption draws nigh; there is Hope in our End: the Lord
will yet Cause them that come of Jacob to take Root, Israel shall Blossom and
Bud, and fill the face of the World with fruit; though to Cause us to Isa.
10.21. Deu. 32.15, 36. compared with Isa. 59.16.
return to the mighty God, the Rock of our Salvation, which we have lightly
esteemed, to bring us quite home to himself: the Lord may fuffer the Afflictton
to arise so high, that it may be even ready to overwhelm us, that there is no
man left to stand up for us, no Intercessor to plead on our behalf, No Savior;
our power is gone, and there is none shut up or left; then will the Lord repent
himself for his Servants, and his own Arm shall bring Salvation.

7. As the Great End of the Lord in all, is GOOD to Jacob; all things, ( the
Smitings, the Woundings, the Slayings of his Enemies) work together for good to
Jacob: So the Lord has engaged to debate with, and stay his Rough-wind; the
Smitings and Slayings of the Enemy, the Present Affliction, when it has shot
forth to that measure, to that degree, to the bringing forth of that Good he
intends to Jacob by it; it shall proceed no further: if the Enemy of Jacobs
Happiness offer to carry it on further (to Jacobs hurt) the Lord will by his
East Wind (that he has in readiness for that purpose) put a stop to it. He
stays his Rongh-wind in the Day of the East Wind: Though our Sin and
Perverseness in it, compel the Lord (for our Good) to suffer the Isa. 10.24, 25,
26. Deuteronomy. 32.37, 41, 42, 43. verses.
Assyrian to Smite us with a Rod, and to lift up his Staff against us after the
manner of Egypt; yet says the Lord, O my People be not afraid of the Assyrian;
for yet a very little while, and the Indignation shall cease, and mine anger in
their Destruction: The Lord of Hosts shall stir up a Scourge for him, according
to the Slaughter of Midian, at the Rock of Oreb; and as his Rod was upon the
Sea, so shall he lift it up after the manner of Egypt. Though we by our
Stubborness force the Lord to afflict us after the manner of Egypt, to Purge
us; and Cleanse us from that which keeps us from him, and him from us; to do
which, his Glory engages him: yet when that is done, as our Affliction is, so
shall our Deliverance be, after the manner of Egypt; a stronger hand shall come
to Deliver us than came to Afflict us. What though the Assrrian our Enemy think
not so, but exalt himself saying, where are their Gods? their Rock in whom they
trusted? The Lord says, If I whet my glittering Sword, and mine hand take hold
of Judgment; I will render vengeance to my Enemies, and will reward them that
hate me; I will make mine Arrows drunk with Blood, (and my Sword shall devour
flesh) and that with the blood of the slain, and of the captives from the
beginning of revenges upon the Enemy: Rejoice O ye Nations with his People, for
he will avenge the blood of his Servants, and will render vengeance to his
adversaries, and will be merciful to his People.

8. Let us not say with Gideon ( Judge. 6.13.) If the Lord be with us, why then
is all this befaln us? Now the Lord has forsaken us, and delivered us into the
hand of the Midianites. But as our Lord Jesus Christ said of himself to his
Disciples, ( Luke 24.26.) Ought not Christ to have suffered these things, and
so to enter into his Glory? So Consider all the Prophesies in the Old and
New Testament, that concern these last Days, and then judge whether the body
of Christ, his Members, Distressed Jacob, at this Day, ought not to suffer
these things, to undergo this Trial, the Refiners Fire, the Fullers Soap, the
Smitings and Slayings of their Enemies now at last, to fit them for Glory. If
this be the way through which Christ entered into his Glory, surely his Members,
his Followers, must enter the same way into their Glory. Yea this is the Great
End wherefore the Lord is Afflicting Jacob, that he may become glorious, with
such a Glory, as may Deserve, and upon which he will Create a Defense, such a
Defense, as shall never be taken away, as all their Enemies shall never be able
to rob them of. And the Lord is Waiting the Time, wherein he may be thus
Gracious; he desires only our Acknowledgement of our Sins, and then he will
work his Great Work, ( Jer. 3.13, 14, 15.) Return thon Backsliding Israel,
says the Lord, and I will not cause mine Anger to fall upon you; for I am
merciful says the Lord, and I will not keep Anger for ever; only ACKNOWLEDGE
thine Iniquity, that thou have transgressed against the Lord thy God, and have
scattered thy ways to the Strangers, under every green Tree; and ye have not
obeyed my voice, says the Lord. Turn O backsliding Children, says the Lord,
for I am married unto you; and I will take you, one of a City, and two of a
Family, and I will bring you to Sion, and I will give you Pastors according to
my heart, which shall feed you with knowledge and understanding.

Lastly, this Prophecy, and what has been drawn from it; does Earnestly Call
upon Sinning and distressed Jacob, to Isa. 1.19, Za. 8.12. Isa. 10.21, and
37.32. and 66.19. and 24.15. Joel 2.32. Isa. 1.20. Mal. 4.6.
wash and Cleanse himself from all these Evils laid down before him; If thou
do hearken and do, thou shall live, and eat the good of the land; partake of
those Blessings the Lord has in store for the Remnant; that by a true and
through Repentance, shall escape the Evil of the Day, returning from their
Idols unto the Mighty God, shall again take root down-ward, and bear fruit
upward, declare the Glory of the Lord, glorify the Name of the Lord God of
Israel, in or among whom shall be Salvation. But if thou will not, but do
resuse and rebel; know of a truth this present Affliction, shall devour thee:
If the Hearts of the Fathers, and Children in Jacob, will be still stubborn
against, and not be turned to each other; the Lord will Curse instead of Bless,
the mouth of the Lord has spoken it; the Glory of the Lord is engaged in it.
Know of a truth, that till you come into your Cleansed, Undefiled, United Sat,
you will not be a fit Instrument for the Lords Work. Surely, Jesus Christ had
much of this in his Eye, when he prayed so earnestly to his Father, that they
all might be Joh. 17.20.21, 22, 23. verses
One; not only his then Disciples, but those also that should Believe on him,
through their word; and that he would give so great a price for it, as the
Glory which the Father gave him: and that he should lay so much Stress upon
this, as that which is Necessary, to make it manifest to the World, that he was
Sent of God, and that God bears the Same Love to his People that he does to Him.

I shall conclude this Discourse, with this Word.

As an Afflicting Wilderness State, is that into which the Lord will bring his
People, to Plead with them face to face, as he Pleaded with them in the
Wilderness of Old; causing them to pass under the Rod, to Purge out from among
them the Rebbels, and the Transgressors, Ezekiel. 20.35, 36, 37, 38. verses.

So, it is that State, into which he will bring them (in the last Days) and
give them as a DOOR OF HOPE. I will give her the valley of Achor, for a Door of
Hope. The valley of Achor, this Day of Trouble, this State of Lowness and
Affliction, which Achans Sin has brought upon us, is given to us as a Door of
Hope (under the New Covenant in these last Days of Jacobs Affliction, in
New Testament Times) a Ground to Hope the Lord has Smiles for us after these
Strokes; the fruits and tokens of a Fathers Love, after these Stripes of his
Fatherly Displeasure; a morning of Joy after this evening of Trouble; he only
waits till we have done Justice upon Achan, that Sin that has Troubled Israel;
and then I will allure her, and bring her into the Wilderness.

Into the Wilderness of this Wilderness State: He will Allure us by the
Glorious manifestations of himself, by the Mighty Workings of his Spirit, into
such through forsakings of all things, of all of this World, for himself, and
for his Sake, that this State shall be unto us, as the Holy of Holies
comparatively; wherein he will speak Comfortably unto us.

And speak Comfortably unto her. Better words than ever we heard before from
him; such as shall make us forget all our Trouble and Sorrow. And he will not
only give Good Words, but Gracious Gifts too.

And it shall be at that day, says the Lord, that thou shall call me Ishi, (my
Husband) and shall call me no more Baali, (my Lord.)

Behold he has been a Gracious Lord, but now he will be a Tender Loving
Husband unto us: he will bring us into more Near and Intimate Converse, and
Communion, and Fellowship with himself, than ever we enjoyed all our Days
before. And this Grace extends, not only to our Inward Man, but to our Outward
Man also.

I will give her Vineyards from thence. Whatsoever we forsake for his Sake, to
follow him, and keep close to him, he will not suffer us to be losers by it; if
we lose a Vineyard, any possession in this world, to follow him, to keep him
company in the Wilderness, he will give it us again there with advantage,
according to the Promise of our Lord Jesus: Every one that has forsaken
houses, or Brethren, or Sisters, or Father, or Mother, or Wife, or Children, or
Lands, for my Names sake, shall receive an hundred fold, and shall inherit
Everlasting life, Mat. 19.29. Yea, so great shall be the manifestation of the
Love of God, and so abundant shall be the Gifts of God, to us there, as shall
Cause our Exceeding Rejoicing.

She shall sing there, as in the Days of her youth, and as in the Day when she
came up out of the Land of Egypt.

Though this Day of Wilderness-Troubles, and Straits, brings Sorrows hard to
be undergone; yet, such shall be the Gracious dealings of the Lord with us, as
that we shall be made to forget all our Sorrows; there is no Day, that ever we
yet enjoyed, yielding so much cause of Joy, as this shall do; the Lord will
make us Sing for Joy.

And now who would not rather choose the Trouble of this Day, the very
Wilderness of this Wilderness State, than the Serenity and Glory which the
Children of this world are drowned in; which shall be consumed by the burning,
like the burning of a fire, which the Lord of Hosts, the Light of the Holy one
of Israel, shall kindle under it.

POSTSCRIPT.
NO thing can Provoke the God of Jacob (the God and Father of Mercies) to throw
him into the Furnace of Affliction, and to pour down his Fury upon him, but
such a degree of Sin, as will either (being let alone) Destroy Jacob, separate
him from his God; or Deprive God of his Glory, even the Glory of those Great
and Wonderful things he has done for his Jacob; and even then, when he is thus
provoked to deal with him in wrath and anger, his Eternal Love, is at the
Bottom of all, to draw Jacob Nearer to himself, and to make him the People of
his Praise and Glory: I have Refined thee, but not with Silver; I have Chosen
thee in the Furnace of Affliction, for mine own sake, even for mine own sake
will I do it: For how should my Name be Polluted? and I will not give my Glory
to another, (Isa. 48.10, 11.) Therefore it is, that when these Effects are
wrought; the Lord so often speaks of Burning the Rod wherewith he Corrects
them, and punishing their Persecutors, and Afflictors.

Now that the Dealings of the Lord with us, may not seem too hard nor
discouraging, but just and righteous, and full of Grace and Love. I would mind
you of two Scriptures; the first is, Number. 14. from 20. to 26.

And the Lord said, I have pardoned according to thy word; But as truly as I
live, all the Earth shall be filled with the Glory of the Lord; because all
those men which have seen my Glory, and my Miracles, which I did in Egypt, and
in the Wilderness, and have tempted me now these ten times, and have not
hearkened to my voice; surely they shall not see the Land, which I swear unto
their Fathers; neither shall any of them which provoked me see it, but my
servant Caleb; because he had another Spirit with him (and has followed me
fully,) him will I bring into the Land, whereinto he went, and his Seed shall
possess it. (Now the Amalekites, and the Canaanites dwelt in the Valley.) To
morrow turn you, and get you into the Wilderness, by the way of the Red Sea.

We find these Children of Israel in the Wilderness, very near Canaan, very
near their journies End, when these words were spoken unto them. They were very
near going out of their Wandering Wilderness State, into Canaan a settled happy
Condition, settled upon the Lords Foundation; but their unbelief brought forth
Rebellion against the Lord and his Messengers (Caleb and Joshuah) which hurryed
them back into their Wilderness State, by the way of the Red Sea; the same way,
by which they came out of Bondage, that must be the way now, by which they
return into Misery. These words are the Lords answer to Moses, upon his
Intercession on behalf of Provoking Israel. God had said in his Wrath he would
Smite this People, and Disinherit them, and make of Moses a greater and a
mightier Nation than they; but upon Moses his Earnest Intercession (who was the
Mediator of that outward Covenant, that was between the Lord and this People,
as a Nation) the Lord is Pacified, he grants him his request as far as would
stand with his Glory; says the Lord, I have pardoned according to thy word;
but as truly as I live, all the earth shall be filled with the glory of the
Lord, etc. as if he should have said, to spare all this People, the Rebbels, as
well as the Innocent, will not stand with the Glory of my Name, thou so much
pleadest to me; but I will do so, and so, and by this means will I glorify my
Name, this Evil Congregation have Despised.

I would but take notice of a few things in the words, which I conceive are
worth your observing.

1. The SIN which thus provokes the Lord. It Is no Common Ordinary Sin, (for
such Moses their Mediator would have prevailed for pardon; this People had
Sinned against the Lord nine times before, and all that was pardoned) but this
Sin, is such a Sin, as touches the Lords Glory, the Glory of his Name, that he
had gotten to himself, by all those Woundrous Works he had done for them. It
was Unbelief (to such a Degree as was) Despising the voice of the Lord, in the
mouth of his faithful Witnesses; and running back toward Egypt, toward that
State and Condition, to Deliver them out of which, the Lord had wrought so
wonderfully; thereby despising that Blessed State and Condition, the Lord had
Promised, and was Ready to bring them into. This touches the Eyes of Gods Glory
to the quick, and brings down Devouring Judgments upon their head.

2. See their SAD CONDITION, their Sin brought them into. They cannot stand
before their Enemies; the Nation Cursed from the Lord, (to be rooted out from
having a being upon the face of the Earth) Amaleck drives them back into the
Wilderness, and they must return by the way of the Red Sea, back toward Egypt;
they would needs return to Egypt, wickedly saying, It were better for us to
return to Egypt, than to run through those Straits, Dificulties and Dangers we
must pass through and overcome, if we get Canaan: Therefore says the Lord, get
you into the wilderness, by the way of the Red Sea; you have seen a little of
Canaan, at a distance; now go look upon Egypt, see the Difference; that FEARED
DEATH you would Run from, through your own Inventions, shall seize you in the
Wilderness, in your returning toward Egypt; that Condition, to Deliver you
out of which, I have done such Great things. Says the Lord, you will not
Believe me, though I confirmed my Promise to your Fathers with an Oath; and to
persuade you to Believe me, I showed you my Glory, the Glory of my Power, and
the Glory of my Faithfulness, in working Miracles in Egypt, for your
Deliverance, and bearing with you these nine times in this Wilderness, still
doing Woundrous Works before your Eyes, to convince you of the Folly of your
unbelief, and of the Stability of my Promise: yet, you are still Tempting of
me, and this Temptation of yours does so far Cloud my Glory, that I will not
bear with it; but I will swear unto you, as truly as I live (says the Lord) as
ye have spoken in mine Ears, so will I do to you, (verse. 28.) Will you Believe
me now? you say, you shall dye, and I will not Perform my Promise in giving you
the Good Land, for there are so many Dangers, and great Straits, in the way to
the possession of it, that neither you nor I, are able to remove them, (this
was the purport of their language,) well! says God, it shall be so, you shall
be in the truth, though I be counted the liar; but before I have done with you,
I will make you know my breach of promise, (verse. 34.) in bearing your
Iniquities, tasting the fruit of your sin; you shall know that it is You that
have broken the Covenant, not I; and that it is your Sin grown up to such a
height, that it will not consist with the Glory of my Name (that Glory which I
have gotten to my self by all those Woundrous Works and Miracles, I wrought for
your deliverance, and among you, while I have been leading you through this
Wilderness) to spare you at this time, which is the Cause of your falling short
of the Promise into Misery.

3. Gods END in all this severity toward his Israel, is, The vindication of
his Name, of his Glory: As truly as I live, all the Earth shall be filled with
the Glory of the Lord: Glory, is the Great End the Lord proposes to himself, in
all his Works: Therefore it is no wonder he is so highly provoked when he sees
any about to Rob him of his Glory. The Lord had gotten himself a Glorious Name
among the Heathen, by those Great things, those Wondrous Works, he had done for
this People, and upon their Enemies for their sake; and these Unbelieving
Provoking Children, would make him lose all that Glory by their unbelief, and
their going about to return to Egypt, that State and Condition, out of which
the Lord had Delivered them by a Mighty Outstretched Arm: This Provokes the
Eyes of Gods Glory; their Tongue, and their doings, were against the Lord, to
the Provoking the Eyes of his Glory, ( Isa. 3.8.) and he shows himself a
Jealous God, (for so he will be at such a time,) I will be Jealous for my Holy
Name, (Ezekiel. 39.25.) and this Glory the Lord will not part with; I will not
give my Glory unto another, (Isa. 42.8.) This Chosen People, by their
Rebellion, and Great Unbelief, would not suffer God to reap this Glory of his
Name from them, nor by them; says the Lord, I will not lose it, for the Same
Glory of my Name, these deny to give unto me, will I have (and fill the Earth
with it, all the Earth shall be filled with my Glory) and that by their
Destruction, performing my Promise to my faithful followers, and their Little
Ones, whom their unbelief says, shall become a Prey.

The Lord is so Jealous of his Glory, least it should be given to any other;
that, as he will be prevailed with, to pardon every Sin, but such a Sin as
Clouds his Glory, rather than destroy his Chosen; so he will destroy all
things, yea, part with his Chosen People, and destroy them (as to their being
in this life) rather than part with his Glory; that Great Fruit, he expects to
reap from all his Great Works, both of Correction and Salvation.

Now all these things happened unto them for ensamples, and they are written
for our Admonition, upon whom the Ends of the world are come: as the Apostle
speaks, (1 Cor. 10, 11.) not only for the Corinthians, but for ours also, upon
whom the Ends of the world are come.

The other Scripture I would put you in remembrance of, is, the 102 Psalm, but
especially, the 13, and 14. verses.

Thou shall arise, and have mercy upon Sion, for the time to favor her, yea,
the set time is come: for thy servants take pleasure in her Stones, and favor
the Dust thereof.

That this Psalm treats of a very sore Afflicting Day, that shall befall the
people of God, the whole of it evidently demonstrates: And that it concerns us
in these last Days, the Generations (of Sion then) to come, and the People
(then) not created (not then brought within the compass of the Walls of Sion,
to praise the Lord) the 18. verse sufficiently evidences. If we take a View of
the troubles of it, we shall find it so full of Terrors, that well may Jeremy
cry our of it, Alas for that day is Great, so that none is like it, it is even
the time of Jacobs Trouble. This DAY:

It Is the Day wherein God hides his sace from his Chosen, and seems (though he
be a God hearing Prayer) to be deaf unto his cry: employed in the 1. and 2.
verses. It Is the day of Gods Indignation and Wrath; wherein the Lord in Wrath
casts him down, who formerly in Mercy and Loving Kindness he had lifted up,
(verse 10.) And the wrath of God waxes so hot against this Afflicted, that it
burns bis Bones as an hearth, and by it his days are consumed like Smoke, (
ver. 3.) The strokes of Gods wrath are such, that they make him groan sorely,
and weep with a bitter weeping, (verse. 5.9.) to the withering and breaking of
his heart, verse. 4.

It deprives him of all his Outward Comforts, drives him into the Wilderness,
into the Deserts (employed in the 9. and 6. verses) and as to his friends and
acquaintance, he is quite become Desolate, left alone, forfaken of all (employed
in the 6. and 7. verses) And add to this, the Reproaches of the enemy ( ver.
8.) which is a very sore affliction.

It Is a Day wherein enemies not only Reproach, but are Mad against the
Afflicted, through hatred and malice, having lost the right use of their
reason, they become Mad against him; and these are Sworn against him, to the
taking away his life, ( v. 8. comp. with v. 20.)

It Is a Day of the Groaning of Prisoners, a Day wherein Prisons are filled with
the Afflicted, verse. 20.

It Is a Day wherein some of the Afflicted are Appointed to Death; or become the
Children of Death, (as the margent of some Bibles has it, ver. 20.) Yea, It Is
the Day, wherein Sion shall become so Desolate, that her Buildings, (her
Assemblies and Societies) shall be broken to Pieces; her Stones scattered here
and there; and her Cement Crumbled into dust, (this is strongly employed, verse.
14.) of all her Buildings, there is only the Stones and the Dust left.

Agreeable to this, is that of Isaiah, ( Isa. 1, 2, and 4. verses) speaking to
the City where David dwelt, ( that City which the Lord did Choose out of all the
Tribes of Israel, to put his Name there, 1 Kings 14.21.) A Professing People
that Kill Sacrisices, are full of Right Outward Performances, in matters of
worship (which yet the Lord hared, they were a trouble to him, and he was weary
to bear them, because of their Pollution in Morrals; as the complaint is
throughout the first Chapter) yet (says God) I will Distress Ariel, and there
shall be Heaviness and Sorrow; and it shall be unto me, as Ariel. And thou
shall be brought down, and shall speak out of the Ground, and thy speech shall
be low out of the Dust, and thy voice shall be as of one that has a familiar
Spirit, out of the Ground; and thy speech shall whisper out of the Dust. This
City is brought into this State of Heavines, and Sorrow, of Lowness and
Distress, by reason of her Hypocrisy (complainned of verse. 13.) but
immediately before the Day of her visitation, wherein the Lord will turn his
hand upon her Enemies, that fight against, and Distress her, and Destroying
them Deliver her; by his Thunder and Earth quakes, and great Noise, with Storm,
and Tempest, and the flame of Devouring Fire. Thus much surely, the 6, 7, and
8. verses, tell us; How far this may, or does concern us, I leave it to
serious Consideration.

Lastly, It Is the Day wherein the Afflicted are (in this sad Desolate
condition) quite Destitute of any help, from any under Heaven; employed in the
17. verse.

Yet, This the Time! the set Time! for God to Arise, and to have Mercy upon
Sion: For by this Time, Sion is so Purged and Purified, that she can offer up
an Offering of Righteousness, which is Pleasant unto the Lord, as Malachy
speaks; she is enabled to Pray such a Prayer, as the Lord will Reward, and not
despise; and hearing her cry, he Arises to have Mercy upon Sion, he appears in
his Glory and Saves her out of all her Troubles; so that the Heathens fear the
Name of the Lord, all the Kings of the Earth his Glory, 15, 16, 17. verses. So
that as the Sin of Jacob may sometimes be so Circumstantiated, that it engages
the Lord for his Gloriessake, (nor to pass it by, but) to Deal with him in
wrath and Displeasure; and as the stubborness of Jacob in his Sin, may
sometimes make his Affliction Long and Great; So when the Affliction has
wrought its desired Effect, humbled him, and brought him to Gods soot; though
it bring him never so low, (and make him never so destitute) even to the Dust
(that to the Eye of Reason, he can never rise again) yet then is the Time for
God to arise, and to have Mercy upon his Chosen. The Lord having broken the
Impure Buildings of Sion, and separated the precious stones from the Vile, and
Winnowed its Dust, by the rough wind of his sury, from the defiling attoms
among it; now is the Set Time come, for God to arise to have Mercy upon Sion,
and hear their cry, and the groanings of the Prisoners, and to lose those that
are appointed to death; now will the Lord appear in his Glory to Build up Sion;
for, this is that State of Sion, which the servants of the Lord will take
Pleasure in, and Favor.

Such is Gods Love to Jacob, that when he seems to Cast him off in wrath and
displeafure, hiding his face from him; yet then, he Chooses him afresh, as it
were: I have chosen thee in the Furnace of Affliction; when the fire of
affliction has Refined Jacob, (burnt up his Dross and his Tin) then (in this
refining furnace) the Lord Chooses him to be his. For mine own sake, even for my
own sake, will I do it; for how should my Name be polluted? and I will not give
my Glory unto another. As the Lord will not Save nor Deliver Jacob, but at such
a Time, and in such a Way, wherein he may save his Glory too; so his Glory is
as much, (and more) engaged to Save and Exalt Jacob, as ever it was to Afflict
him, and cast him down; I will not give my Glory to another; nor suffer my name
(which is called upon by thee) to be polluted; therefore will I not suffer thee
to be cut off, but choose thee in this thy Low Estate, Deliver thee and save
thee, Isa. 48.9, 10, 11. compared with the 14. verse.

Wherefore, seeing we have such evidences of the Love of God, in all his
dispensations toward his Jacob; let u^ not be discouraged, let nor our
Spirits, droop, and faint under our Burdens; but let us lay aside every Weight,
and the sin that does so easily beset us; and let us run with patience the Race
(of suffering) that is set before us; looking unto Jesus the author and
finisher of our faith; who for the Joy that was set before him, endured the
Cross, despising the shame, and is set down at the ight hand of the Throne of
God.

For the Day of Deliverance is at hand, nothing hinders it but our own Sin. The
Lord is fully ready prepared to save Jacob, to deliver the Captives of the
M^ghty, and the Prey of the Terrible; to contend with him, that now contends
with thee, and Save thy Children ( Isa. 49.25.) he is only waiting till Jacob
is ready prepared to be Delivered, the Time wherein Deliverance may be a
th^rrow Salvation indeed; that he may nor be put to an after-work of Refining
J^c^b, and sweeping his house with the Beesoms of his wrath; but that he may
bestow Peace and Glory upon him, and set a Defense upon it, that may never be
raken away again

For a sinall moment have I forsaken thee, but with Great M^ci^s will I gather
thee In a little Wrath I hid my Face from thee, for a Moment, but with
EVERLAST^NG KINDNESS will I have mercy on thee, says the Lord thy Redeemer.
For this is as the waters of Noah unto me, for as I have sworn that the waters
of Noah should no more go over the Earth; So have I sworn that I would not be
wrath with thee nor rebuk thee. For the Mountains shall ep^rt, and the Hills be
removed; but my KINDNESS SHALL NOT DEPART from thee, neither shall the COVENANT
OF MY PEACE BE REMOVED, says the Lord, that has Mercy on thee. Isa. 54.7, 8,
9, 10. verses.

THE END.

