THE SPEECH OF Richard Langhorn Esquire At his Execution July 14. 1679. Being left
in writing by him under his own hand.
IN regard I could not foresee whether I should be permitted to speak at my
Death, so as to make a public Declaration of my Innocence and Loyalty, as a
Christian ought to do; considering likewise, that if it should be permitted
unto me, it would be more advisable for me rather to prepare beforehand, and
set down in writing the very words in which I should make my Declaration, than
to trust my memory with them; to the end that the same may be well considered
of, and digested by me, and that all mistakes might be prevented, as far as may
be: I say, in regard of this, I have in the present Paper reduced what I have
to declare, as to my Innocence and Loyalty. And it is in these following words.

I Do solemnly and sincerely, in the presence of Almighty God, profess,
testify and declare, as follows: That is to say,

1. That I do with my heart and soul, believe and own my most Gracious
Sovereign Lord, the Kings Majesty, King Charles the Second, to be my true and
lawful Sovereign, Prince and King, in the same sense and latitude, to all
intents and purposes, as in the Oath commonly called, The Oath of Allegiance,
His said Majesty is expressed to be King of this Realm of England.

2. That I do in my soul believe, That neither the Pope, nor any Prince,
Potentate, or Foreign Authority, nor the People of England, nor any Authority
out of this Kingdom, or within the same, has or have any Right to dispossess
His said Majesty of the Crown or Government of England, or to depose him
therefrom, for any Cause or pretended Cause whatsoever, or to give license to
me, or to any other of His said Majesty's Subjects whatsoever, to bear Arms
against His said Majesty, or to take away his Life, or to do him any bodily
harm, or to disturb the Government of this Kingdom, as the same is now
established by Law, or to alter, or go about to alter the said Government, or
the Religion now established in England, by any way of force.

3. That I neither am, nor ever was, at any time or times, guilty, so much as
in my most secret thoughts, of any Treason, or misprision of Treason whatsoever.

4. That I did not in the Month of November, or at any other time or times
whatsoever, say unto Mr. Oats, or unto any other person or persons whatsoever,
in relation to my Sons in Spain, or either of them, or in relation to any other
person or persons whatsoever, That if they did continue in the World, (as
Secular Priests, or otherwise) they should suddenly have great Promotions in
England, for that things would not last long in the posture wherein they then
were; nor did I ever say any words to that or the like effect to any person or
persons whatsoever.

5. That I did never in all my lifetime write any Letter, or other thing
whatsoever, unto, or receive any Letter or other thing, from Father Le Cheese,
or any French Jesuit whatsoever, or from Father Anderton, or Cardinal
Barbarino, or any other Cardinal; nor did I ever see any Letter, or the Copy of
any Letter, or other Paper, or other thing, written or purporting to be written
unto the said Le Cheese, or unto the said Father Anderton, or the said Cardinal
Barbarino, by any person or persons whatsoever, other than the printed Letters,
printed in the Narrative of the Trial of Mr. Edward Coleman, lately executed,
which I never saw otherwise than in the said printed Narrative; nor did I ever
hear any mention made by any person whatsoever of the Name of Le Cheese, or
Father Le Cheese, before I read the said printed Narrative.

6. That I did never in all my lifetime make any Entry or Entries, into any
Book or Books, or take, or make, or write, or cause to be written into any Book
or Books, or otherwise any Letter or Letters, or any Copy or Copies of any
Letter or Letters, written by the said Edward Coleman, to any person or persons
whatsoever.

7. That I did never in all my lifetime enter or register into any Book or
Books, Paper or Papers whatsoever, or take, or make, or write, or cause to be
written, any Copy or Copies, of any Act or Acts, Consult or Consults,
Determination or Determinations, Order or Orders, Resolve or Resolves, or other
matter or thing, at any time made, determined, resolved, passed, decreed or
agitated, at any Congregation or Congregations, Consult or Consults, Chapter or
Chapters, Assembly or Assemblies, of the Society or Order of the Jesuits, or of
any other Religious Order whatsoever; nor did I ever see, read, or heard read,
nor did any person or persons, at any time whatsoever, ever communicate unto
me, any such Act, Consult, Determination, Order, Resolve, Matter or Thing
whatsoever.

8. That I did never in all my lifetime, to my knowledge, belief or
remembrance, see or speak with Mr. Bedloe, who gave Evidence against me at my
Trial, until I saw him in that Court wherein he gave Evidence against me.

9. That after the month of November, which was in the year of our Lord 1677. I
did never see or speak with Mr. Titus Oats before named, until I saw him in
the same Court where he gave Evidence against me at my Trial.

10. That I did never see in all my lifetime, to my knowledge, belief or
remembrance, any Commission or Commissions, Patent or Patents, Grant or Grants,
Order or Orders, Instrument or Instruments, Writing or Writings, or other
matter or thing whatsoever, under, or pretended to be under the Hand and Seal,
or the Hand or the Seal of Johannes Paulus de Oliva, or any other General of
the Jesuits whatsoever, other then the Paper or Instrument produced and showed
unto me in the said Court at my Trial, which whether it was signed or sealed by
the said de Oliva, I do not know.

11. That I did never in all my lifetime write, or cause or procure to be
written, any Treasonable Letter or Letters whatsoever, or any thing which was
or is Treason or Treasonable, in any Letter or Letters, Book or Books, Paper or
Papers, or otherwise howsoever.

12. That I believe, that if I did know, or should know of any Treason or
Treasonable Design, that was or is intended, or should be intended against His
said Majesty, or the Government of this His Majesty's Kingdom, or for the
Alteration by force, advice or otherwise, of the said Government, or of the
Religion now established in this Kingdom, and should conceal and not discover
the same unto His said Majesty, or His said Majesty's Council or Ministers, or
some of them; that such concealment would be in me a sin unto Death, and
Eternal Damnation.

13. That I do believe, that it is no ways lawful for me to lie, or speak any
thing which I know to be untrue; or to commit any sin, or do any Evil, that
Good may come of it. And that it is not in the Power of any Priest, or of the
Pope, or of God himself, to give me a License to Lie, or to speak any thing
which I know to be untrue, because every such Lie would be a sin against Truth:
And Almighty God, who is perfect Truth, cannot give me a License to commit a
sin against his own Essence.

And I do solemnly in the presence of God, Profess, Testify and Declare, That
as I hope for Salvation, and expect any benefit by the Blood and Passion of my
dearest Savior Jesus Christ, I do make this Declaration and Protestation and
every part thereof in the Plain and Ordinary Sense, wherein the same stands
Written, as they are commonly understood by English Protestants and the Courts
of Justice of England without any Evasion, or Equivocation, or Delusion, or
Mental Reservation whatsoever. And without any Dispensation or Pardon, or
Absolution already granted to me, for this or any other purpose by the Pope or
any other Power, Authority or Person whatsoever, Or, without any hope,
expectation or desire of any such Dispensation; and without thinking or
believing that I am or can be acquitted before God or Man, or absolved of this
Declaration or any part thereof, although the Pope or any other Person or
Persons, or Power or Authority whatsoever should dispense with, Or take upon
him or them to dispense with, or Annull the same, Or declare that it was, or
is, or ought to be Null or Void in part, or in the whole, from the beginning,
or otherwise howsoever.

Having made this Declaration and Protestation in the most plain Terms that I
can possibly imagine to express my sincere Loyalty and Innocence, and the clear
intention of my Soul, I leave it to the Judgments of all Good and Charitable
persons whether they will belive what is here in this manner affirmed and sworn
by me in my present Circumstances, or what is sworn by my Accusers.

I do now farther declare, That I die a Member (though an unworthy one) of that
Holy Catholic and Apostolic Church of Christ, mentioned in the Three Holy and
Public Creeds, of which Church our Lord Jesus Christ is the Invisible Head of
Influence, to illuminate, guide, protect and govern it by his Holy Spirit and
Grace, and of which Church, the Bishop of Rome, as the Successor of St. Peter,
the Prince of the Apostles, is the visible Head of Government and Unity.

I take it to be clear, That my Religion is the sole cause, which moved my
Accusers to charge me with the Crime, for which upon their Evidence I am
adjudged to die, and that my being of that Religion, which I here profess, was
the only ground which could give them any hope to be believed, or which could
move my Jury to believe the Evidence of such men.

I have had not only a Pardon, but also great Advantages, as to Preferments,
and Estates offered unto me, since this Judgment was against me, in case I
would have forsaken my Religion, and owned my self guilty of the Crime charged
against me, and charged the same Crimes upon others: But blessed be my God, who
by his Grace has preserved me from yielding to those Temptations, and
strengthened me rather to choose this death, than to stain my Soul with sin,
and to charge others, against truth, with Crimes, of which I do not know that
any person is guilty.

Having said what concerns me to say as to my self, I now humbly beseech God to
bless the Kings Majesty with all temporal and eternal Blessings, and to
preserve Him and His Government from all Treasons and Traitors whasoever, and
that His Majesty may never fall into such hands, as His Royal Father of
Glorious Memory fell into.

I also humbly beseech thee (O God) to give true Repentance and Pardon to all
my Enemies, and most particularly to the said Mr. Oats and Mr. Bedloe, and to
all who have been any ways accessory to the taking away of my Life, and the
shedding of my innocent Blood, or to the preventing the King's Mercy from being
extended unto me; and likewise to all those who rejoiced at the Judgment given
against me, or at the execution of the said Judgment; and to all those who are
or shall be so unchristianly uncharitable, as to disbelieve, and to refuse to
give credit unto my now Protestations.

And I beseech thee (O my God) to bless this whole Nation, and not to lay the
guilt of my Blood unto the charge of this Nation, or of any other particular
person or persons of this Nation. Unite all (O my God) unto thee and thy
Church, by true Faith, Hope and Charity, for thy mercies sake.

And for all those who have showed Charity to me, I humbly beg (O my Jesus)
that thou will reward them with all Blessings both temporal and eternal.

13 July, 1679. R. Langhorn.


