THE Lyn Persecution: Being the Case of our Brother the Baptist Minister there
JAMES MARHAM, WHOSE Goods have been seized, and himself harrased in Law (and is
now prosecuted in Chancery) for holding a Baptist Meeting in that Town,
notwithstanding his and the Houses legal Qualification.

Here is also, A brief Relation of his former Service and Sufferings in
promoting the great, though much despised Doctrine of Believers Baptism.

Well approved and advised by the general Elder deceased Thomas Grantham.

Attested by the adjacent Churches, and directed to the Churches at London and
the Country.

Printed to be read only by the Lovers of Believers Baptism, because it is
sitted only for their Use. 1692/3.

Christian Brethren, holding the Doctrine of Believers Baptism.
It Is known to some, that much of this Case was moved to our Brethren and
Churches at London, (that being our Center) about September, 1692. and then it
was advised to give a more particular Relation: Therefore, and because the Case
is grown more heavy, is now a Relation given, and given in Print, that it may
be effectually intelligible to all our Baptized Brethren, which otherwise we
could not propose how to easily make it so. And to do this credibly, we have
composed ^his Narrative of those parts whereof you see it does ^nsist, viz. The
brief Account of Matter of Fact which our Brother Marham left under his own
Hand, at London, September, 1692. and also the Testimonial from the Brethren at
Lyn, and Parts adacent. Also, the Testimonials of Brother Nicholas Knowles,
Elder of the baptized Church at Whitelsey. And as Circumstantials to his
present Case, here are prefixed several remarkable Services done by Brother
Marham for the Baptist Interest; and are, therefore, cogent Arguments for our
reason to work upon.

Brethren, the Circumstances of our Brother James Marham, which preceded his
present Troubles, being very remarkable, are Tokens of a good and great desire
to promote, what in him lay, the great, though much despised, Doctrine of
Believers Baptism; and, therefore, we think it proper to let you know them, as
well as his present Troubles, that it may appear that his present Trouble is
not a light single Trouble upon him, neither a Trouble fallen upon a Brother of
a slothful Spirit; but it is an unsupportable Trouble come upon the back of
several preceding Troubles, through which he has strugled with great Charge,
Loss and Pains, and yet his Love to Truth has not declined its Promotion;
this, I think, is a Wonder. But it is native for a Christian to do Wonders in
Perseverance, and therefore is a great Demonstration of Christianity, or a Work
of Grace upon the Soul, the consideration of which, together with the public
Interest of Christ, must needs move in us that Love, that as an instinct is in
every true Christian to the Brethren: And I assure you, my Brethren, this is
that that has wrought in me (he having hardly any other Acquaintance in
London) to thus appear in behalf of his and our Interests, or rather, Christ's
Interest; for otherwise, I have my own worldly Business to mind as other
Brethren have, and could as gladly rest from this. But when I see a Brother
(engaged in our public Cause) on the Frontiers, made War upon by our common
Enemy, I cannot be silent, but must publish it to Brethren, that their Strength
may be called in to his Relief, before, by the violence of Storms, he is
utterly ruined, and the Cause there lost, and our selves made the next Spoil to
the Enemy. Pray, my Brethren, let it not be with us, as it was with the Priest
and Levite that passed by their Brother that fell among Thieves and was
wounded, lest it lies as a Reproach upon us, as it does upon the Priest and
Levite unto this day. God does mind our labor of Love; and Christ says, That
forasmuch as you did it not to them that believe on me, you did it not to me.
And (...) this Relief Brother Knowles has spoken very essen^ially, Bis dat,
qui cito dat, He that gives quickly, ^ves twice: For it will be too late to
take a Man out of (...) Water when he is drowned; Pro's and Con's about whose
right and duty, are dangerous Delays; even as when we see a Man a sinking, it is
then no time to contend about the price, and whose right it is to pay the
charge of a Boat going out to to take him up. Now or never is the time, as you
may also perceive by this pressing, for great Strains are for great Reasons;
and we thus strain because the Burden upon our Brother Marham is now to him
intolerable, having always readily expended his Substance for the public
Interest of Believers Baptism: And this heavy Loss to come upon the back of all
the rest at last, is unsupportable to him, as it would have been to many of us,
though we had not, as he, so liberally bore the Charges of diverse former
Occasions; for a Man cannot always hold out, Money has an end; all Men have not
abundance, tho they may have enough for their own support, could they enjoy
that peaceably.

Methinks, my Brethren, we should not know how to let Neglect charge,
dreadfully charge our Consciences with so great a sin, as neglect in this case
will do; are we willing, or shall we choose to save our help and lose the
Gospel, or at least run the venture? Or, shall we think that a Brother, such a
Brother, does not oblige us, nearly concern us? Methinks, our Savior's saying
reaches this Matter, Whosoever hates his Brother without a Cause is guilty --
And so, Whosoever neglects his Brother without a Cause, nay, when there is
meritorious Cause to relieve him, is also guilty.

It Is more Justice than Charity.
And now more directly to our Brethren, of the particular Point, I say, That
this Case, as it comes from the Enemy, is not upon the Account of the general
or the particular Points, but against Baptism it self* for the Enemy being much
of the general Point themselves, the enmity must needs be as they have
declared, purely against Believers Baptism only, and not the Person; and
therefore, this Case does also concern our particular Brethren, the
Consideration of which has so affected our Brother Elder Rix of Wisbich, that
he has sent a brief Relation thereof, not only to me, but alse to Brother
Keach; for he finds the Lord has a People in that Town, having discoursed with
some, on whom a work of Grace has been wrought.

And I think I may note that many Ministers of different Professions have of
late united, because they would promote their School-Fellows, etc. and shall
not we Baptists, that both of us, of an humble Spirit, slighted the
superstitious World's Reproach and Contempt, by submitting to Baptism for the
sake of its being a great Gospel Ordinance; I say, shall not we, also, unite to
defend that Gospel Ordinance, for which we in obedience exposed our selves, and
ought still to suffer for, when called thereto? May our two Sticks also become
one for the real furtherance of the Gospel.

And to me it appears, that the Cost and Charges that have attended our single
Brother Marham, would have strained three Country Churches to have paid; and
therefore he is a singular Brother, and now ought to be relieved.

But, my Brethren, I am ready to believe all these argumentive Notes are
already impressed upon your Consideration, and that, therefore, they are
rather* superfluous than instructive, because the Merit of the Cause appearing,
you will readily espouse it, and give your effectual Supplies; putting the
management of the Matter into their Hands that will carefully discharge these
my Concerns herein. Pardon my this piece of Service for the public Interest of
our Religion, that I may rest, as I use to do, and remain your Christian
Brother,

Land. Feb. 25. 1692/3. C. Do.

A brief Relation of the remarkable Services and Troubles that went before the
present Trouble of our Brother James Marham.
ABout three years before King Charles II. died, Brother Marham lived in the
Town of Holbich in Lincolnshire, and then the Persecution was so great, that
the Enemy made a Levy upon him for several score Pounds, and was driven from
one Justice to another for 4 days of the Week together, and from one Court to
another, until he was driven from both Trade and Habitation, notwithstanding
which, he seeing the Cause required it, did appear there in the defense of our
Brethren Ministers, Brother William Rix, now Elder of the Church at Wisbich,
and Brother Samuel Phillips, until the Justices had set them at Liberty, and
yet revenged their Quarrel upon Brother Marham, for speaking properly and
legally in their behalf; so that the Justice could not satisfy his
unreasonable desires, without Imprisonment of Brother Marham, saying, That the
People of the Town were all of one Religion until Brother Marham had Meetings
in his House, he being the first Baptist in Holbich; so that there is now a
Church computed at about 30 baptized Persons, whose Minister is Brother James
Phillips.

After this, they still took away his Goods, insomuch that he was forced to
board himself and Wife for about a year and an half, tho to his much Damage*
but the Enemy seeing that he often appeared in the behalf of persecuted
Brethren, to instruct and defend them, threatened to knock him on the Head.

And after all this, in King James's Reign, Brother Marham living in a Town
called, Wapool-bell in Norfolk, where the People were so much Strangers to the
name of Baptist, that they said he was an outlandish Professor, for they never
before heard of such a name as Baptist: So that when he had lived there three
Weeks, the Officers of the Town were sent to Command him to frequent the Parish
Church, or else to make his Appearance before Justice Con -- and Mr. Harbe the
Parson of the Parish, which Brother Marham did, and was discoursed by them four
Hours, several Gentlemen being present; and yet the Parson professing
dissatisfaction, appointed another time for a further Debate; but then came
Liberty of Consci^nce by Proclamation, and then the Parson declined the further
Debate, and Brother Marham, the same Week, set up a Meeting in Wapool, where
several People did resort, and it pleased God so to prosper his Undertaking,
that now there is a baptized People or Church settled there, the Minister
thereof is Brother Robert Booth.

And upon the Death of our Brother Marham's then Wife, he removed from Wapool
to his now Habitation in Lyn-regis in Norfolk, and then, by the great Advice of
our Brother, and famed general Elder, Thomas Grantham deceased, our Brother
Marham has undertaken to raise a Meeting in this great Town of Lyn also
(though there was not another Baptist in this Town neither) which he has done
by hiring the Place, and furnishing it, and entertaining Brother Grantham, and
after that, Brother Long, our London Brethren's Messenger, several Months at
Board, etc. without Money. And since that, Brother Audly of Fenestanton
Communion; and since Brother Audly's departure, our Brother Marham, to support
nhe Meeting, has himself Preached, and so continues to do, accepting of, and
entertaining that help that comes to Lyn, from adjacent Churches; whereby it
has pleased God to bless these Endeavors with the success of Conversion of
several Persons that are also baptized.

And this Lyn Meeting is that that occasioned his present very great Troubles,
and is, by the Enemy, endeavored to be broken in pieces; upon which occasion
we thus move for Relief.

The following Brief Brother Marne -- signified to Goswel-street Brethren; and
I, to our Barbekin Brethren, October. 1692.

These, to the Baptized Congregations in London.
Does show,

THAT James Marham, with other of Their Majesty's loyal Subjects, dissenting
Protestants, under the Denomination of Baptists, holding their Meeting, for the
exercise of Religion, in Lyn-regis in the County of Norfolk, in a place there
Licensed according to the late Act of Parliament, in that Case provided; have,
notwithstanding, been Prosecuted as Offenders for so doing, by (...) and (...)
of Lyn aforesaid, upon a Statute made in the Reign of King Charles the Second,
Entitled, An Act to prevent and suppress Seditious Conventicles; and the Goods
of the abovesaid have been seized by a Levy, granted against him July, 1691. so
that he petitioned the Judge Sir E -- N --, September. 1691. at Norwich, and was
after that, forced to communicate the same to some of the great Council the
last Sessions of Parliament, but after the Parliament was risen, he was
prosecuted for the same, and is yet in great Trouble threatening his Ruin (if
God prevent not) being commanded several times to appear before them, for the
dismissing of the Meeting, but as it pleased the Lord it is continued.

Land. Sept. 28. 1692. James Marham.

Note, that about a fortnight after the Informers, by Bonds, had made an
amicable end with Brother Marham, under pretense of great trouble of
Conscience, whereby they got from him a Discharge from their false Information,
they then came and actually seized his Goods, according to the former Levy;
which plainly discovered their design of agreement was but to have a safer
Advantage against him; and by seizing, to ruin him; and therefore 'twas that he
was advised to sue the Bonds.

The followng Testimonial I received of Brother Wright of Barbekin.

Lyn Regis, Nov. 7th 1692. To all Baptized Believers, in London and Country,
where these may come, greeting, (upon the account of our Lord) to communicate
unto them, and their Christian Consideration, the great Troubles that have
attended James Marham since it has pleased God to put it into the Hearts of
the King and Parliament to grant Liberty, etc.
This does show,

THat James Marham in Lyn Regis, being one of his Majesty's loyal Subjects
Dissenting Protestants, under the Denomination of a Baptist, holding Meeting
for the Exercise of Religion, in the place aforesaid, in the County of Norfolk,
in a Place there Licensed according to the late Acts of Parliament in that Case
provided, has notwithstanding been prosecuted as an Offender, for so doing,
from Sessions to the Assizes, and from thence to London, and other several
Places, by (...) and (...) aforesaid, upon Statute made in the Reign of King
Charles II. entitled, An Act to Prevent and Suppress Seditious Conventicles:
And the Goods of the above seized, and he himself in great Danger, to the great
disturbance of his Peace, and hindrance of his Trade, with great Expenses of
Money and loss of Time, to defend himself at this Time of Day, of Liberty,
notwithstanding in the worst of Times he has suffered greatly, etc.

He does therefore most humbly beseech the Baptized Churches, as aforesaid, to
inspect his Affair, which is a Precedent the like not found in England, and to
commiserate his condition, who desires nothing but to enjoy his Liberty
according to Law, and as other Dissenting Protestants do enjoy the same,
without any Molestation in the same Town, where it is denied him with great
Rigor, and many Threatenings to be routed out of the Town.

John Gregory, Will. Harper, Samuel Philips, John Shipley, John Poyed, George
Robson, Richard Robins, Joseph Marham, Richard Cousons.


The Case of our Brother James Marham of King's Lyn in the County of Norfolk,
humbly offered to the Christian Consideration of all the Baptized Churches and
Brethren, who look upon themselves concerned to strive together for the
Promotion of the Gospel of Truth, in this Day of Liberty.
THat there is a Meeting of Baptized Believers at Lyn, abovesaid, we suppose is
already knowm to many, not only in the Country but in London also, together
with the Hard Things that have hitherto befallen them through the inveterate
Malice of some great Adversaries of Truth, therefore both Substance and
Circumstance is as follows, viz.

Our deceased Brother and Elder, Thomas Grantham, heretofore, about three Years
since, came to Lyn, and Brother Marham, the now Minister, being always a very
forward Promoter of Truth, though to his great Cost and worldly Damage,
heretofore, in the Times of great Persecution, yet still by God's Providence of
Grace, bearing an inward Love to the same upon Brother Grantham's offering to
preach there at Lyn, Brother Marham did procure the Town Hall, which at that
time was so well replenished with attentive Auditors, like hungry and thirsty
Souls, so that Brother Grantham being exceedingly pleased, put the said Brother
Marham upon hiring and licensing some convenient Place that a Meeting might be
continued in the said Town; which being cheerfully consented to by Brother
Marham, he did it accordingly, and fitted the same at his own proper Charge,
without help of any. Which Place, so fitted, was managed and supplied sometimes
by Brother Grantham, and sometimes by the Baptized Churches at Whitelsey, and
other Places, as Brethren had occasion to travel that way, which Brother
Grantham, observing and receiving the greater Kindness from the Brethren from
London, to have Brother Will. Long sent to Norwich as a help to him, he very
freely, Jan. 8. 1690. sent Brother William Long to reside at Lyn for a Time,
that that new Place of young Converts might taste the Kindness of the London
Brethren; by which means the Meeting grew great and numerous, which Satan
envying, stirred up some Adversaries, but by what Means or Persons soever the
great Enemies were stirred up to espouse this unjust Cause under Pretense of
the House not being licensed, nor qualified according to the Direction of the
late Act for Liberty, although the House was licensed, with all the Formalities
directed by the said Act, and did therefore procure and encourage Robert
Whitehead and Hen. Oseingcraft to become Informers, who coming to the Meeting,
entered their Information before the Justices, who forthwith issued out their
Levy, 20 l the House, 20 l. the Preacher, and 5 s a piece the Hearers, by
virtue of the Act against Conventiclcs: Our Brethren, all this while being
ignorant of their Proceedings, till the Justices, not knowing upon whom to
charge the 20 l. for the House, sent for Brother Marham, and asked him, If
there was not a Meeting kept in such a Place? he answered yes; and then they
demanded, Who hired the House? He told them himself had; they then said, He
must pay 20 l for that Meeting in the House, and said that it was a new
Religion, and they would not suffer the Meeting to continue, but break it up,
or force him out of Town. He then showed his License or Qualification of the
House, and alleged the Privilege by the late Act for Liberty; which they would
by no means allow, but caused their Levy to be executed both upon him and
others; which causes Consternation to many young Beginners, who gladly
received the Gospel. After all this the Informers threatened to make a Rogue of
Brother Marham, because he still kept up the Meeting, so that last March, on
the twenty sixth or thereabout, they pretended a very hard Thing against him,
demanding Security of him; but he refused, and then they swore one Witness
against him, thinking to have committed Brother Marham to Prison, but they
could not bring their Purpose about: then Brother James Marham getting a Copy
of their Levy, found they had sworn against one John Marham, to be then
Preaching, though it was really Brother Long, who was only at Prayer, and not
Preaching. And also that the Informers had sworn, That one Francis Robbinson
was at the said Meeting, who was not there: We having this Advantage, advised
with diverse, and particularly with the London Brethren what was best to be done
in this Case, the Country Friends thought it best to lay it before the King and
Queen, by way of Petition; but the Brethren at London, that were conversed
with, did not think that advisable, but rather advised our Brother Marham to go
to Common Law, and take Relief there. Which Advice was acco^dingly followed,
and the two Informers were put into the Crown Office; and our Brother had that
way effectually done the Business, had not the greater Enemies espoused the
Business, and encouraged the Informers, when they should have been proceeded
against in order to a Trial, then discharging Mr. Bur -- our Brother Marham's
Attorney in London from any further Prosecution, as he would answer it in the
Hands or Custody of a Messenger; so that (...) said Attorney, by this great
Threat, desisting his Proceedings for a Time; the Informers took the Advantage
to remove it from the Common Law into the Court of Chancery; and there is
already a Subpoena served at Lyn upon Brother Marham, to answer their Bill of
Complaint: Which Bill being now received by Brother Marham, which I my self did
peruse, contains 31 Sheets, by their way of drawing, though the very Substance
of the same, will be proved utterly False; notwithstanding which it will cost
more Money by far than Brother Marham is able to disburse, without evident Ruin,
it having cost him a great deal at present to vindicate their Meeting.
Brethren, It is not questioned but that our Country Friends will not be
wanting; pray therefore hold not back your Christian Duty at this Time, but to
all the good things you have heretofore been exemplary in, add this friendly
Kindness also, and pray do it as speedily and as well as you can, remember the
ancient and true Proverb, Bis dat qui cito dat.

Written at Lyn Regis, Norfork, Feb. 6. 1692. Your Brother in the Lord,
Nicholas Knowles, Whitelsey.
If you desire further Confirmation of the Premises, they will be signed and
attested by the Brethren in Norwich, Yarmouth and Lincolnshire.
Wisbich, Feb. 16. 1692/3. Brother Do,
ACording to your Request, I shall give you some short account of what
Sufferings Mr. Marham formerly underwent, upon the account of my keeping a
Meeting at his House. One Mr. Bur --, a Justice of the Peace, granted out a
Warrant to break up the Meeting; and the Warrant ran to take one John Thorp, or
one that came from or near Wisbich whose Name they knew not: There was
abundance of People raised, with all sorts of Weapons, the Doors broke open,
and I was taken, and kept Prisoner till next Day, and then had before the
Justice: Mr. Marham resolving not to leave me, went thither with me. They sent
5 Informers, but I took great Notice of the goodness of God in that thing, for
4 of them were poor Laborers, and had no Living but under their Master that
sent them, yet said they would starve sooner than swear to do me wrong; then
they had but one. After the Justice saw he wanted Witness, said, The Parliament
was very short in making that Act, that they did not make a Corporal Punishment
as well as a Purse. But said he, Marham, I will send you to the Goal, and I
will ruin the Anabaptist meetings in this Country, or they shall ruin me out of
my House. So Mr. Marham was sent to the Goal, to his great loss and Charge
before he came out. His Sufferings are so many and so great, that without a
considerable Time I cannot give account; He has had his Goods seized, and
several other Persons had been ruined if he had not been, for he stood like a
Man resolved for God, to what he knew. He saved many poor Persons from being
ruined, (nay some of the Officers that seized his Goods) and defended all the
Professors at his own Cost and Charge, that came to the Meetings. His Acts in
entertaining and relieving such Ministers as were in want has not been
wanting: I speak not as to my self, for I never had any thing of him, nor
blessed be God wanted it not; I say, If the baptized Congregations suffer this
ruin to befall him and his F^ily, there is no Congregation safe by this Act; for
where shall we find any single Person able to vie such Suits with great Men;
and notwithstanding God has a People there, yet no Man must go to Preach but
he must be ruined. I need say no more at present, you having some knowledge of
Things; but I desire the Lord would touch the Hearts of his People with a
fellow-feeling of his now Sufferings; and consider how far the honor of God is
s^ruck at, and the Liberty of the King's loving Subjects. This with my Love,
from your unworthy Brother in the Bands of the Gospel,

William Rix.
Pray give the enclosed to Brother Keach; seal it or not, as you see occasion:
The Lo^d, of his Mercy move the Hearts of the People to show Bowels of
Compassion to this Person and Cause. But if there be hardness of Heart, and no
fellow-feeling, I shall fear greater Judgments coming on, for I took ^otice it
was so before the Persecution broke out so violent; for some Persons they first
begun upon were in a way to have freed all the rest; but no person would
contribute a Penny, their Purses not being big enough, the Cause fell; and some
that denied a small Contribution, that were very able, at last came to the loss
of some hundred Pounds; this I took notice of, and know to be true.
Since this Narrative was put to the Printers, Brother Marham came to London,
on purpose to put in his Answer in Chancery, and did it; and then several
Brethren discoursed him. Feb. 27, 1692.

FINIS.

