The Hunter.

A DISCOVRSE of HORSEMANSHIP: Directing The right way to breed, keep, and train
a HORSE, for ordinary Hunting and Plates.

OXFORD, Printed by L. Lichfield, Printer to the University, for Nicholas Cox.
1685.

The HUNTER.
CHAP. I. Of Hunting-Horses in general, their Excellency, and the necessity and
benefit of the Art of Keeping.
I Shall omit to speak in praise of Hunting in general, since I would avoid (as
much as might be) Repetitions, and that it is already done at the Beginning of
the foregoing Book, with more Address than I am Master of. But since that
Author has spoken nothing of the Hunting-Horse, which is a principal
Instrument of that Excellent Recreation, I desire leave to speak a word in his
Behalf. In Behalf, I say, of this noble Creature, to whom all that are
Followers of Hunting are obliged: since it is by his Strength and Vigor that
we grati^ie at ease our Eyes and Ears with all the Pleasures that Hunting
affords; and without whose Assistance, a great part of us could enjoy it a
little more than in Imagination.

But it is not to us only, that are Huntsmen, but to all M^nkind, that the Hunter
is (or may be) serviceable. Has our Prince, or Country occasion for our Service
in the Field: on what Horse can we venture our Lives more sec^rely, than on the
Hunter? His Readiness to obey the Hand and Heel, equals him to the Managed
Horse. His being used to gallop on all sorts of Grounds, as well steep places
as deep Earths, has so steeled his Courage, that he declines no Military
service you can put him on. Are there Ambuscado's to be laid, Discoveries to be
made, speedy and long Marches to be performed; or any other Service, wherein
Strength of Body, Purity of Wind, or Swiftness, are requir'd^ The General may
in any of these cases rely on the Hunter, with as much Con^idence, as on the
Horse that is dressed in the Manage.

In times of Peace he is equally Useful, not only for Pleasure, but also for
Necessity, and Profit. How diverting to the Eyes, is a Beautiful Horse after a
Pack of Dogs? and with how much ease to our Bodies, and delight to our Minds,
are we carried up to them; with so much Vigor and Pride to be discerned in his
Countenance, as if he emulated the Hounds in their Speed, and was desirous to
excel them, in his Obedience to their common Lord.

How Necessary is the Hunter beyond all other Horses, if his Masters urgent
Affairs (where either Life or Fortune are in hazard,) exact the performance of
a long Journey in a short Time. If his Master, in hopes of Advantage, has
matched him against any other Horse; how ready and willing is he, to perform
the Utmost that Nature is capable of, or his Master can reasonably expect from
Him^ and having Art joined to his natural Abilities, will not only excel all
other Horses, but accomplish things beyond his Masters Hopes, or Expectations;
for without its Assistance in Dieting and Exercise, no Horse can follow the
Hounds, or indeed undergo any other extreme Labor, without hazarding the
melting his Grease, the breaking of his Wind, or foundring him either in Feet,
or Body: all which are consequences of immoderate Labor, and Ignorance in this
Art.

That I may therefore give you some Light into its Mysteries, I shall first
direct you how to breed such Horses that may be for Training; or else instruct
you, how otherwise to procure them. Secondly, how to know by Shapes, Marks, and
other Tokens, what Horse may be most convenient for your purpose. Thirdly, how
to diet him so, that he may perform all things within his Power, without
Danger. Lastly, what manner of Exercise is most conducive to this Design: and
on these Heads I intend to enlarge in my following Discourse.

But before I enter upon my Subject proposed, I think it necessary to answer
Four Objections, that may be made against this Art of Dieting and Training
Horses, that I may remove all prejudice from the minds of those, who think they
may have Reason to oppose it; and that I may vindicate (with Truth) this Art,
and clear it from all Aspersions.

The first Objection I shall mention, is made by de Gray in his Epistle to the
Reader, ( Edit. 4 th.) where under the Vmbrage of his Love to Horses and in
pity of the Hardships they undergo in Hunting, he extremely inveighs against
it, as the Sourse of all their Miseries. But that I may not be taxed of
Prevarication by my Reader, and for his satisfaction I shall set down his
Words, which are these.

If the Nobility and Gentry of this our Isle of Great Britain, did truly know
how honorable, and how commendable Horsemanship were, and how much they are
esteem^d and admired, who are the true Professors thereof, they would labor
more than they now do, to breed and to have good Horses; but it much troubles
me to see, how little Esteem Gentlemen have thereof. Some Horses they have,
though not for Manage, yet for Hunting: but what manner of Hunting?
Fox-hunting forsooth, or Harriers, which ^e as fleet as petty Greyhounds,
wherewith they do so much over-strain the strength of these poor Horses,
(forcing them over deep Fallows, tough Clays, and wet and rough Sands,) that
albeit those Horses be strong and able, yet are they so toiled out therewith,
as that when they come home at night they would pity the Heart of him that
loves an Horse to see them so bemired, blooded, spurred, lamentably spent, and
tired out; whereas if such Horses had been ridden to the Great-Saddle and
Cannon, they would infinitely have delighted all men that should have beheld
them.

To this I answer, that for my own part I am not very fond of Fox hunting; but
I can see no Reason why Persons of Honor should not gratify their Fancies
with this Recreation, since from the beginning Horses were made for the service
of Man; and doubtless for their Recreation, as well as more necessary Uses. And
I am very confident, that if Horses be trained, dieted, and ridden according to
Art, there will be left no ground for this Objection. For by good Feeding
Faintness would be prevented; and by Airing, and due Exercise, the Horses Wind
would be so improved, that no moderate Labor would hurt him; nay, though a
Horse by immoderate Riding, were reduced to such Tragical Exigencies, as De
Gray mentions, yet by the Assistance of Art Nature may be in Twenty ^our hou^^s
space so relieved, that all those dangerous Symptoms shall be removed, and all
the Natural Faculties act as ^ormerly.

Now as to the last part of his Argument, I appeal to all the greatest Masters
of Academi^s here, or in Foreign Parts; whether in the Manage, the Spurs are
not as much used, (not to say more,) as in Hunting; and the Duke of Newcastle
in his Method Nouvelle in 80. p. 85. says, il n'y a point d' Exercise si
violent pour l^s Chevaux que celuy de Manege; that is, There is no Exercise so
violent for Horses as the Manage; so that you see Hunting is not the only
violent Exercise: and Solomon de la Brove goes further in his Cavalarise
Fran^oise, telling us, that Managed Horses should sometimes be used to the
Chase, since hunting assists his wind, and brings him to a civil Acquaintance
with other Horses: inferring from hence, that hunting procures to an Horse two
Benefits, viz. Speed and Strength, and reforms in him two Vices, Salvageness
and Restiveness.

Secondly, there are others, that though they may approve of keeping their
Horses clean, yet are not reconciled to hunting; but being either Admirers of
Coursing, or else keeping Horses only for the benefit of their health, and the
taking the Air; will not be persuaded, but that they can bring their Horses to
the same Perfection without hunting, as with it.

To answer the first of these, I mean Coursers; I affirm, it is impossible to
attain the end of this Art by that Means: for being obliged in search of their
Game to toil their Horses all day, over deep Fallows, in a foot-pace only, they
are likelier to bring their Horses to Weariness than Perfection.

And the same Answer may serve the Others likewise: for Riding a Horse up and
down the Field after nothing, brings a Weariness and Dislike to an Horse in his
Exercise, through his Ignorance of the Time, when his Labor shall cease;
whether, or to what End he is so labored. Whereas on the contrary, an Horse
naturally takes delight in following the Dogs, and seems pleased with their
Music, as is evident by his pricking up his Ears, gazing on them, and pressing
to gallop toward them, when ever he hears them in full cry, (though at a
distance.) Nay further, I have been Master of a Stonehorse, that so entirely
loved the Hounds, that when at any time (through eagerness of Sport, and desire
to save the Hare from being eaten) I have rid in amongst the Dogs, he would so
carefully avoid treading on them, that he has more than once hazarded my Limbs
(by making a false step) to save theirs. From hence I infer, that doubtless
Horses extremely delight in hunting, and consequently, that it is a fit
Exercise for them.

Thirdly, Others Object, That what soever Pleasure there may be in Hunting,
they had rather deny themselves that satisfaction than hazard the Laming their
Horses, which, (as they are told) few, or no Hunters escape.

That Hunters are sometimes Lame, I do not deny: but cannot allow, that it
proceeds always from this Exercise. For it is the Indiscretion of the Riders,
in overstraining their Horses at Leaps; and by that means, sometimes clapping
them on the back-sinews, catching in their shoos, and such like, and not the
Sport, that is the cause of Lameness. But on the contrary, I will undertake to
show any man Twenty other Horses lame (which never knew what belonged to
Hunting) for One Hunter. There are several other Reasons be^ides Hunting to be
given for Lameness; as for Instance. Much Travel though but moderate, if care
be wanting) will produce Wind-galls, and Splints, which are the forerunners of
Lameness. Want of Exercise will straiten the Hoofs, and dry up the sinews; and
too much negligence in Travail occa^ions Surbating, Foundring, and Gravailing.
Horses on the Road oftentimes stumble, and now and then fall, and so become
Lame. Na^, a Slip, or an Overreach are as incident to the Pad, as to the
Hunter. And to conclude, the Horse that is Dress^d, is more liable to a Strain
in the Back, and ^illets, than the Hunter; by means of his short^t^rns: so
that you may perceive that Lameness is Epidemical, and therefore no more to be
objected against Hunting-Horses, than the rest of that Species.

Fourthly, Some again are Enemies to this Art of Dyeting Horses in particular:
affirming, that such exact Diet makes them tender, sickly, and takes them off
their Stomach: and that the Charges are not only great, but likewise
unnecessary.

To the First part of this Objection, I answer, that an Horse is so far from
being made tender, or losing his Appetite, by such extreme and several
Feedings, if he have proportionate Exercise, that it rather inures him to
hardship. For much Labor (if not too violent) either in Man or Beast, instead
of weakening the Stomach, and causing Sickness, does rather advance the Appetite
and preserve his Health; and it may be observed, that it does oftener heighten
than decay the Stomach. In like manner moderate Airings purify his Wind, and
both together render him Healthy, and fit for Service.

As to the several sorts of Food, we shall prove in the sequel, that every part
of it is both nourishing, and natural to all Horses Constitutions; so that
consequently, it is not only allowable, but necessary: And to prove this, needs
no more; than to ride an ordinary Horse drawn clean, a days Hunting or three
Hea^s, and a Course, against the best of those Horses, which are kept by such
Persons who think that half a Peck a Day, and fetching his water at the next
Spring is Horsemanship sufficient; and they will find by keeping and Exercise,
the Ordinary Horse will become long winded, and stick at Mark^ when the other
that is Foul-fed, and fat, will soon give out, for want of Wind; ^r otherwise
if he be hardy will die under the Spur; whereas if the untrained Horse had been
rightly ordered he would have worsted Twenty such Horses.

Now to the Charges of Keeping, Fifty Shillings a Y^ar disburs'd for Bread,
besides Hay, Straw, Corn and Physic, (which all Horses of Value must be
allowed) is all that will be requisite, to keep an Horse in as good State for
Ordinary Hunting, as any Horse whatsoever. Lastly by being Skilful in the Art
of Keeping, this Advantage will ensue; that no Dist^mper relating either to the
Head or Body can conceal themselves from his keepers knowledge, whose Skill
will inform him, how to put a stop to them, before they have made any
considerable Advances to the Horses Prejudice. And he that grudges so small an
Expense on so noble and useful a Creature as an Horse is, deserves never to
come on the back of one.

CHAP. II. Of Breeding, the Choice of a Stallion, and Mares, with some general
Remarks on Marks and Colors.
SInce Creation and Generation preceeded the Art of Riding, and that the first
thing which is of Course to be treated of, is the Choice of an Horse ^it for
this exercise of Hunting. I shall speak something cursorily of the Art of
Breeding, before I treat of the Hunter ready for service. To them therefore
that have grounds convenient for Breed, I shall direct this part of my
discourse: and lay them down some few Rules that may be serviceable to them,
though I shall be as brief as possible, and refer them to Markham, de Gray,
Morgan, Almond, and Farring Completed, (which is collected from the
forementioned Authors Markham and de Gray) all which have treated of the Art of
Breeding more at large.

First therefore I wonld advise you to buy either an Arabian Horse (if you can
procure him,) a Spaniard, a Turk, or a Barb, for your Stallion, that is well
shaped, of a good Color to beautify your Race, and well marked, to agree with
most men's Opinions; though otherwise they are not so significative as Mr.
Blundevile, and his Italian Author Frederigo Grissone, would have us believe.

To begin with the Arabian; Merchants, and other Gentlemen that have traveled
those parts, report, that the right Arabians are valued at an incredible, as
well as an intolerable Rate; being prized at Five hundred, others say at one,
two, and three thousand Pounds an Horse; that the Arabs are as careful of
keeping the Genealogies of their Horses, as Princes in keeping their Pedigrees;
that they keep them with Medals; and that each Son's Portion is usually two
Suits of Arms, two Cymeters, and one of these Horses. The Arabs boast, that
they will ride fourscore miles a day, without drawing Bitt: which has been
performed by several of our English Horses. But much more was achieved by an
High^way-man's Horse; who having taken a B^oty, on the same day rode him from
London to York, being One hundred and Fifty Miles. Notwithstanding their great
value, and the difficulty in bringing them from Scanderoon to England by Sea;
yet by the care, and at the charge of some Breeders in the North, the Arabian
Horse is no st^anger to those parts; where Persons who have the curiosity, may
(as I presume) at this Day see some of the Race, if not a true Arabian Stallion.

The Spanish Horse (according to the Duke of Newcastle) is the Noblest Horse in
the world, and the most Beautiful that can be; no Horse is so curiously shaped
all over from H ^ad to Croup, and he ^s absolutely the best Stallion in the
world, whether you design your Breed for the Manage, the War, the Pad,
Hunting, or for Running Horses. But as he is excellent, so he wants not for
price, Three or Four hundred Pistol^ being a common Rate for a Spanish Horse.
Several have been sold for Seven hundred, Eight hundred, and a Thousand Pistols
a piece; and One particular Horse, called el Bravo, that was sent to the
Archduke Leopold, was held worth as much as a Manor of a Thousand Crowns a
year. The best Spanish Horses are bred in Andalouzia, and particularly at
Cordova, where the King has many Studds of Mares, and so have several of the
Spanish Nobility and Gentry. Now besides the great price at first, the Charges
of the Journey from Spain to England will be very considerable: for first, he
must travel from Andalouzia to Bilbo, or St Sebastien, the nearest Ports to
England, and is at least Four hundred Miles: and in that hot Country you cannot
with safety travel your Horse above twenty Miles a day, then there is the
Expense of your Groom and Farrier, besides the casualty of Lameness, Sickness,
and Death: so that though he do prove an Extraordinary good Horse, by that time
he arrives at your own home he will likewise be an Extraordinary dear one.

The Turk is little inferior to the Spanish Horse in Beauty, but somewhat
odd-shap'd, his head being somewhat like that of a Camel: He has excellent
Eyes, a thin Neck excellently risen, and somewhat large of body: his Croup is
like that of a Mule; his Legs not so underlimb'd as those of the Barb, but very
sinewy, good Pasterns, and good Hoofs: They never amble, but trot very well:
and are accounted at this present better Stallions for Gallopers than Barbs, as
^when I com^ to speak of them) I shall show.

Some Merchants affirm, that there cannot be a more noble and divertive sight
to a Lover of Horses, than to walk into the Pastures near Constantinople, about
Soyling-time, where he may see many hundred gallant Horses tethred, and every
Hor^e has his Attendant or Keeper, with his little Tent (placed near him) to
lie in, that he may look to him, and take care to shift him to fresh Grass, as
occasion requires.

The Price of a Turk is commonly One hundred or One hundred and Fifty Pounds a
Horse, and when bought it is difficult to get a Pass; the Grand Segnior being so
very strict, that He seldom (but upon extraordinary occasions) permits any of
his Horses to be exported his Dominions. But if (when obtained) you travel by
Land, without a Turk or two for your Convoy, you will be sure to have them
seized on by the way. Then, as in the former, so here, you will find the same
difficulties of a long Journey, (for you must come through Germany, which is a
long way,) and the same charges attending it, I mean your Groom and Farrier^
who must be careful that they entrust no Persons whatsoever with the care of
him, but themselves, especially in shooing of him: For it is the common practice
beyond Sea, (as well as here) where they discover a fine Horse, to hire a
Farrier to prick him, that they may buy him for a Stallion.

But some People choose to buy Horses at Smyrna in Anatolia, and from thence, as
likewise from Constantinople, transport them to England by Sea; which, if the
Wind serve right, arrive in England in a month, though generally the Merchants
make their Voyages little less than a Quarter of a year.

The Barb is little inferior to any of the former in beauty, only he is
accounted by our Modern Breeders too slender and Lady-like to breed on: and
therefore in the North, at th^s instant, they prefer the Spanish Horse and Turk
before him. He is so lazy and negligent in his walk, that he will stumble on
Carpetground. His Trot is like that of a Cow, his Gallop low, and with much
ease to himself. But he is for the most part sinewy, and nervous, excellently
winded, and good for a Course, i^ he be not over-weighted.

The Mountain-Barbs are accounted the best, because they are the strongest and
largest. They belong to the Allarbes, who value them as much themselves, as
they are prized by any other Nations, and therefore they will not part with
them to any Persons except to the Prince of the Band to which they belong; who
can at any time, at his pleasure, command them for his own use. But for the
other more ordinary sort, they are to be met with pretty common, in the hands
of several of our Nobility and Gentry; or if you send into Languedoc and
Provence in France, they may be there bought for forty or fifty Pistols a
Horse. Or if you will send into Barbary, you may have one for Thirty Pounds, or
thereabouts^ But here too the charges and journey will be great; for though
from Tunis to Marselles in France be no great Voyage, yet from Marselles to
Callais by Land measures the length of all France, and from thence they are
shipped for England.

The next thing of course to be treated of, is the choice of your Mares, and
the fittest Mare to breed out of, according to the Duke of Newcastle's opinion,
is one that has been bred of an English Mare, and a Stallion of either of these
Races; but if such a Mare be not to be got, then make choice of a right bred
English Mare by Sire and Dam, that is well fore-handed, well underlaid, and
strong put together in general; and in particular, see that she have a lean
Head, wide Nostrils, open Chaul, a big Weasand, and the Windpipe straight and
loose, and choose her about five or six year old, and be sure that the Stallion
be not too old.

Now for the Food of the Stallion, I would have you keep him as high as
possible for four or five months before the time of Covering, with old clean
Oats, and split Beans, well hull'd^ to which you may add, if you please, Bread,
(such as in this Book shall be hereafter directed) and now and then, for
variety, you may give him an handful of clean Wheat, or Oats washed in strong
Ale; but as for Bay Salt, and Anniseeds, which Mr. Morgan, in his Perfection of
Horsemanship, advises should be scattered amongst his Provender, I hold them
superfluous whilst the Horse is in health, but be sure let him have plenty of
good old sweet Hay, well cleansed from Dust, and good Wheat-straw to ^se on;
and let him be watered twice every day at some fair running Spring, or else a
clear standing Pond-water (where the other is not to be had) near some Meadow
or level piece of Ground, where you may gallop him after he has drunk. When
you have brought him to the water, do not suffer him to drink his Fill at the
first, but after he has taken his first draught, gallop and scope him up and
down a little to warm it, and then bring him to the water ag^in, and let him
drink what he please, and after that gallop him as you did before, never
leaving the Water till you find he will drink no more. By this means you will
prevent raw Crudities, which the Coldness of the Water would produce to the
detrimen^ of the Stomach, if you had permitted him to drink his fill at first;
whereas you allowing him his fill^ (though by degrees) at last, you keep his
Body from drying too fast. And this I take to be much better for your Horses
than (according to the forecited Morgan) to encourage his Water with Whitewine,
to qualify the cold quality thereof: for Nature it self is the best Directress
for the expulsion of her Enemies, especially in Brutes, where usually she can
command the Appetite: and therefore I esteem his own natural heat, for warming
his water, to be better than that which proceeds from any other. Now as to
Morgan's Direction of Sweating him every day early in the Morning, which he
says will not only perfect disgestion, and exhaust the moisture from his Seed,
but also strengthen and cleanse his Blood and Body from all raw and imperfect
humors; I am of opinion twill both dry up the radical Moisture too fast, and
likewise instead of heightning his Pride and Lust, (which he alleges, weaken
him too much. Other Rules might be given as to the ordering of them after
Water, and the Hours of Feeding, with the quantity etc. but these will be
fitter to be handled in another place, and therefore no more of them here.

Now when your Stallion is in Lust, and the Time for Covering is come, which is
best to be in May, that the Foles may fall in April following, otherwise they
will have little or no Grass, if they should be put together (according to
Markham's opinion) in the middle of March, tho he holds that one Fool falling
in March is worth two falling in May, because (says he) he possesses, as it
were, two Winters in a year, and is thereby so hardened, that nothing can
almost after impair him. The time I say being come to put your Stallion and
Mares together, pull off his hinder Shoes, and lead him to the place where the
Stud of Mares are, which you intend for covering, which place ought to be
close, well fenced, and in it a little ^^utt for a Man to lie in, and a larger
Shed with a Manger to feed your Stallion with Bread and Corn, during his Abode
with the Mares, and to shelter him in the heat of the Day and in Rainy weather,
and this Close ought to be of sufficient largeness to keep your Mares well for
two months.

Before you pull off his Bridle, let him cover a Mare or two in hand, then turn
him loose amongst them, and put all your Mares to him, as well those which are
with Foale, as those which are not, for there is no danger in it; and by that
means they will all be served in their height of Lust, and according to the
intention of Nature. When your Stallion has covered them once, he tries them
all over again, and those which will admit him he serves; and when his business
is finished, he beats the Pale, and attempts to be at Liberty; which when your
Man finds, (who is Night and Day to observe them, and to take care that no
other Mares are put to your Horse, and to give you an Account, which take the
horse, and which not, etc.) let him be taken up, and let him be well kept as
before; only you may at the first give him a good Mash or two, to help to
restore Nature, for you will find him nothing but Skin and Bones, and his Ma^e
and Tail will rot off. Be sure give him never above Ten or Twelve Mares in a
Season, at most; otherwise you will scarce recover him against the next Years
Covering-time.

When your Stallion is past this use, then buy ano^ther; but be sure never make
use of a Horse of your own Breed, for by so doing the Best Kind would in time
degenerate: but you cannot do better (the Duke of Newcastle says) than to let
your own Mares be covered by their Sire, for (according to his own words and
opinion) there is no Incest in Horses: and by this means they are nearer one
degree to the Purity and H ead of the Fountain, from which they are derived,
since a fine Horse got them, and the same fine Horse covers them again.

Now though the Duke of Newcastle affirms this to be the true way for covering
Mares, alleging that Nature is wiser than Art in the Act of Generation, and
that by this way, of a dozen Mares he dare affirm that two shall not fail: yet
it may not correspond with the Interest of some private Gentlemen who turn
Breeders for Profit as well as Pleasure; for a good Stallion bearing such an
extraordinary rate, and they having but One, have reason to be cautions, to
avoid as much as can be all hazardous Experiments; which (with submission to
the Duke's Judgment) this in some cases may prove. For first, there have been
Horses of great spirit, that have killed themselves through excess of Lust,
being left to range at their liberty; and those that have been confined to an
Enclosure, and a select number of Mares, have yet in one Weeks space so
weakened Nature, that not above half the Mares have held. Secondly, some Mares
are of so hot a constitution of Nature, and their Lust so violent, that if they
are permitted to run long with the Horse, after they have conceived, will (if
they be high in flesh and lusty) desire the Horse again, which generally
hazards the Loss of the Embrio they go with.

To prevent therefore these Inconveniences, I shall lay you down an other
Method (as briefly as may be,) which is called covering in hand, as the former
is generally termed out of hand, and the way is this: viz. when you have
brought both your Horse and Mare to as proper condition for Breed by Art and
good feeding, then set some ordinary Ston'd-Nag by her for a day or two to woo
her, and by that means she will be so prone to Lust, that she will readily
receive your Stallion; which you should present to her either early in a
Morning, or late in an Evening, for a day or two together, and let him cover
her in hand once, or twice if you please, at each time, observing always to
give the Horse the advantage of Ground, and that you have some one ready with a
Pucket of cold water to throw on the Mare's Shape, immediately on the
dismounting of the Horse, which will make her retain the Seed received the
better, especially if you get on her back, and trot her about a quarter of an
Hours space, but in any case have a ^are of heating, or straining her: and it
will not be amiss, if after every such act you let them fast two Ho^rs, and
then give each of them a warm Mash; and it is odds but this way your Mares may be
as well served as the other, and yet your Stallion will last you much longer.

I shall say no more as to the keeping the Mares during the time of their being
with Foale, nor of their foaling; only this, that if you take care to house
them all the Winter, and to keep them well, their Colts will prove the better.
When they are foaled, let them run with their Dams till Martin-mass, then wean
them, and keep them in a convenient House, with a low Rack and Manger on
purpose; litter them well, and feed them with good Hay, and Oats and Wheat-bran
mixed, which will make them drink, and belly well. The first year you may put
them all together, but afterward they must be separated, the Stone-Colts from
the Fillies; and if you have choice of Houses, you may put Yearings together,
Two years old together, and so Three years old together, for their better
satisfaction and agreement; as little Children best agree together.

In a warm fair Day you may grant them liberty to run and scope in some
enclosed Court or Back-^ide, but be sure to take care to put them up again
carefully, that they be not hurt. When Summer is come, and there is plenty of
Grass, put them out in some dry Ground, that has convenient watring, and so
let them run till Mar^inmass again: then house them as before, and order them
in all points as older Horses, till they are full Five years old, then take
them up for good and all, and let your Groom back them if he have skill, or
else some skilful Rider. You may if you please just break your Fillies at Two
years and half old, and let them be covered at Three; and by that means they
will be so tame and gentle, as not to injure themselves or their Foals. But in
case of sickness, or any accidental calamity, as Lameness, etc. you must then
commit them to the Farrier's Care.

The reason why I propose the Housing of them every Winter, with dry Feeding
and Lodging, is, that they may be the liker their Sire in Beauty and Shape. For
the primary Cause of the fineness of Shape and Beauty in Horses is Heat, and
dry Feeding. And this is proved from the several Races we have already
mentioned, viz. the Spanish Horse, Barb, and Turkish Horse, all which Countries
are under an Hot Climate, and by consequence afford little Grass: Therefore in
our more moderate and cold Countries we are to assist Nature by Art, and to
supply the want of Heat by warm Housing, and dry Feeding. This is easily made
evident by Example. For take two Colts begot by the same Sire, on Mares of
equal Beauty, and house the one every Winter, and feed him as directed, and
expose the Other, till they are Four years old, and fit to be backed; and you
shall find the former like his Sire in all respects, and the other fitter for
the Cart than Hunting, as being a dull, heavy, flabby, scarce animated ^lod;
and all this proceeds from the Humidity of the Air and Earth. From hence you
may infer, that it is not only Generation, but, as I may term it, Education, that
makes a complete Horse; and such yours will be, if you order them according to
the former Directions; for yon may with ease break the Colt that is by such
good management made gentle, and half-back'd to your hand.

But I have dwelt longer on this Subject than I intended, my business being
chiefly to inform the Groom (not the Master) what belonged to his Office; and
therefore I will wander no further from my purpose, but leave it to the Rider
to follow his own Method in rendering Colts fit for his Masters Service: whilst
I give some few Directions to those Gentlemen who will not bestow either
trouble or charges on Breeding^ or have the Will but not the Convenience to do
it, how to elect an Horse fit for this Exercise.

The way for a Gentleman to furnish himself with an Horse, that may be worth
training for Hunting, is e^ther to enquire out some noted Breeder (of which
there are many in the North,) or else to go to some famous Fair, as Malton and
Rippon Fairs in Yorkshire, the former held on the 23. day of September yearly,
and the latter on May day: Or to Richmonds in the same Shire, (which, as I am
informed, does now of late years exceed both the forementioned, being situate
in the middle of the most celebrated part of the breeding Country;) its Fairs
are held in Easter week, and at Rood tide. Northampton has several Fairs in the
year likewise, as on the 23. day of April, the 8 th. of September, 17 th. of
November, with several others. There are several other Fairs, as Lenton-Fair in
Notinghamshire, Pank ridg-Fair in Staffordshire, etc. which for brevities sake
I omit. At any of these places he may make choice of a Horse, which as near as
can be ought to have these following Shapes: viz.

His Head ought to be lean, large, and long; his Chaul thin, and open; his Ears
small, and pricked, or if they be somewhat long, provided they stand upright
like those of a Fox, it is usually a sign of Mettle and Toughness His Forehead
long and broad, not flat, and as we term it Mare-fac'd, but rising in the midst
like that of a Hare, the Feather being placed above the Top of his Eye, the
contrary being thought by some to betoken blindness. His Eyes full, large, and
bright; his Nostrils wide, and red within, for an open Nostril betokens a good
Win^; his Mouth large, deep in the ^^kes, and hairy; His Thropple, Weasand, or
Windpipe, big, loose, and straight when he is rein'd in by the Bridle; for if,
when he bridles, it bends in like a Bow (which is called Cock-throppled^ it
very much hinders the free passage of his Wind. His Head must be so set on to
his Neck, that there must be a space felt between his Neck and his ^haul; for
to be Bull-neck'd is uncomely to sight, and prejudicial to the Horses wind, as
aforesaid. His Crest should be firm, thin, and well risen; his Neck long, and
straight, yet not loose, and pliant, which the Northern-men term Withy-cragg'd;
his Breast strong, and broad; his Chest deep, his Chine short, his Body large,
and close shut up to the ^^cklebone; his Ribbs round like a Barrel, his Belly
being hid within them. His Fillets large, his Buttocks rather oval than broad
being well let down to the Gascoins. His Cambrels upright, and not bending,
which is called by some sickle-hough'd, though some hold it a sign of Toughness
and Speed. His Legs clean, flat, and straight. His Joints short, well knit, and
upright, especially betwixt the Past-^orns and the Hoof, having but little Hair
on his Fetlocks. His Hoofs black, strong, and hollow, and rather long and
narrow, than big and flat. And lastly, his Main and Tail should be long, and
thin rather than thick, which is counted by some a mark of Dullness.

As to his Color and Marks, I rather incline to believe them grateful to the
Eye, than any infallible Indexes of Goodness; for as the Goodness or Badness of
a Man does not consist in his Complexion, but in his inward Virtues, so neither
do Color or Marks certainly demonstrate the Goodness or Badness of an Horse,
because his Qualifications proceed from his inward Disposition. But yet I
wholly dissent from the opinion of Mr. Morgan, p. 31; who holds, That Color
and Marks are no more assurance of a good Horse; than the having a Feather in a
Man's Hat does prove him a good Man or a bad; inferring that inherent Colors
are of no greater Eminency or Value, than those external ones are which may be
taken or laid aside at a man's own will and pleasure.

Now I say, that although Marks and Color do not absolutely give testimony unto
us of a Horses goodness, yet they as well as his shape do intimate to us in
some part his Disposition and Qualities. For Nature, not being defective,
frames every part of the same matter whereof the whole is formed, and therefore
the Foe^^^ being formed of the copulative Seed of its Sire and Dam, does from
them derive as well the accidental as the more essential Qualities of its
temperament and composition. And for this Reason Hair it self may often times
receive the variation of its Color from the different temperature of the
Subject out of which it is produced. And to confirm this, I dare pass my word,
that wherever you shall meet with an Horse that has no White about him,
especially in his Forehead, though he be otherwise of the best reputed
Colors, as Bay, Black, Sorrel etc. That Horse I dare affirm to be of a dogged
and sullen disposition; especially if he have a small pink Eye, and a narrow
Face, with a Nose bending like a Hawks Bill.

But yet I am not positive, that Horses even of the most celebrated Colors,
and Marks answerable, do always prove the best; because I have seen those
Horses worsted by Others, whose Marks and Color have been esteemed the worst;
as bright Sorrel, and Mouse-black with bald Faces, and all the Legs white
above the ^nee. But I rather attribute the ^ause thereof ^o the Ignorance of
the Rider, that had the training of those best marked Horses, than to any
defec^ in Nature; for Nature is no Counterfeit, as Ar^ often is, to make a
thing show to the Eye, contrary to what it is in reality. And therefore as I
would not have men put too great Confidence in Marks and Colors; so I would
not have them esteemed of so lightly, as the former comparison of Mr. Morgans
would make them; for it is a constant and inseparable quality for Horses to
produce Hair, which is given them by Nature as a Tegument and Defense against
the Cold: and if it be shaved off, galled, or any ways else removed or taken
away, yet it will grow again^ but a Feather may be put to, or taken from a Man's
Hat at his pleasure.

Therefore since Color seems to set forth the Beauty of an Horse, you may
for Ornament sake and to please your Eye, make choice of an Horse that is
either a Brown-Bay, Dapple-Bay, Black, Sad-Chessnut with Flaxen Main and Tail,
so that they have either a White Star, Blaze, or Snip, with a White Foot;
Dapple-Grey, or White Lyard with Black Muzzle, Eye, and Ear. Any of these are
reputed by most men to give a Grace to shape; tho in themselves they are no
perfect signs of Goodness.

But for his internal Endowments, they are more material, and therefore take
care that he by Nature be of a Gentle Disposition, to his Keeper tractable and
docile free from those ill Qualities o^ Biting, Striking, Restiffness, Lying
down in the Water, Starting, Running away with his Rider, Plunging, Leaping,
etc. Not but that most, if not all these ill habits may be rectified by Art;
For Experience has shown us, that Horses which h^^e ^ot been of such a perfect
Natural Composition, as might be desired, have yet been tempered by Art, and
have not only been reclaimed from their vicious Habits, but have been likewise
brought to great performance in Heats, as well as Hunting, as I could Instance
in several if it were necessary.

And therefore since Art was invented to perfect Nature; if (notwithstanding
your care) you have met with a Horse subject to any of these ill Qualities
aforesaid, you must search into the causes of it, which Art will help you to
discover and remove: and then the Cause being taken away, the Effect will
cease. So that probably, contrary to most peoples Opinions a Vicious Horse, by
good management and Government may be brought to excel an Horse that has a
better Reputation and Fame in the judgment of the generality of Hors^men.

CHAP. III. Of the Age a Hunter should be of before he be put to Hunting; of
the Stable, and Groom, and of the Horse's first taking up from Grass, in order
to his further Dieting.
HAving gotten a Horse answerable either to the former Descriptions, or your
own Satisfaction at least, I am to suppose that by a skilful Rider he is
already grounded in the Fundamentals of this Art^ by being taught such
Obedience, as that he will readily answer to the Horseman's Helps and
Corrections both of the Bridle, the Hand, the Voice, the calf of the Leg, and
the Spur; that he can tell how to take his way forward, and has gained a true
temper of Mouth, and a right placing of his Head, and that he has learned to
stop and turn readily; for without these things are perfectly taught, and as it
were laid for a Foundation, he can never proceed effectually.

I had thoughts of enlarging upon this particular Subject, but I find my
Discourse is like to swell beyond its bounds, so that I am forced to omit it,
and therefore I shall refer you to the Directions and Prudence of your Rider,
and only tell you that it is convenient, your Horse should be Five years old, and
well way'd before you begin to Hunt him. For though it be a general Custom
amongst noted Horsemen to train their Horses up to Hunting at Four years old,
and some sooner, yet at that Age his Joints not being full k^it, nor he come to
his best strength and courage, he is disabled from performing any matter of
speed and toughness: and indeed being put to sore Labor and Toil ^o young, he
runs a very great hazard of strains, and the putting out of Splents, Spavins,
Curbs and Windgalls, besides the daunting of his Spirit, and abating his
natural Courage, insomuch that he will become melancholy, stiff, and
rheumatick, and have all the distempers of old Age, when it might be expected
he should be in his Prime.

Your Horse then being full Five, you may if you please put him to grass from
the middle of May till Bartholmew-tide, or at least from the middle of Summer
till that time; for then the Season being so violently hot, it will not be
convenient to work him: where whilst he is sporting himself at liberty in his
Past^re, we will if you please take care to provide a good Stable for his
Reception at his taking up, and a good Groom to look after him; both which are
more essentially necessary to the Hunter than to other Horses, which require
not that exact care in keeping.

First then as to the Stable, I could wish every Gentleman would be careful to
situate it in a good Air, and upon hard dry and firm ground, that in the
Winter the Horse may go and come clean in and out: and if possible let it be
seated on an Ascent, that the Urine, Foul Water, or any Wet, may be conveyed
away by Trenches, or Sinks cut out for that purpose. Be sure to suffer no
Hen-houses, Hog-styes, or Houses of Easment, or any other filthy Smells to be
near it; for Hen-dung, or Feathers swallowed, oftentimes prove mortal, and the
ill Air of a Jakes as often is the cause of Blindness: likewise the very smell
of Swine will frequently breed the Far^y, and no Animal whatsoever more
delights in cleanliness, or is more offended at unwholesome savours than the
Horse.

Let ^our Stable be built of Brick, rather than Stone, since the latter is
subject to sweating in wet weather: which Dampness and Moisture is the Original
of Rheums, and Catarrhs. Let your Wall be of a good convenient thickness, as
about Eighteen or Twenty Inches thick, both for safety and warmth in Winter,
and to keep the Sun from annoying him in Summer, which would hinder Concoction.
You may (if you please) make Windows both on the East and North sides, that you
may have the benefit of the Air during Summer, from the North, and of the
Morning Sun during Winter from the East. And I would advise you to Glaze your
Windows, and make them with Sashes, to let in Air at pleasure, and to keep out
Poultry, for the reasons before recited; and likewise to make close Wooden
shutters, that during the middle time of the Day the Stable may be dark, which
will cause him to take his Rest as well in the Day as the Night. Let your
Floor, (I mean that part on which he is always to stand, or lie down on, be
made of Oaken Planks, and not pitched, for it is easier and warmer for the Horse
to ly on Boards than Stones. be sure to lay them level; for if they are laid
higher before than behind (as they generally are in Inns and Horse-coursers
Stables, that their Horses may appear to more advantage in Stature,) his
hinder-leggs will swell, and he can never lie at ease, because his Hinder parts
will be still slipping down. Lay your Planks cross-way, and not at length; and
underneath them sink a good Trench, which receiving the Urine through holes bored
on purpose in the Planks, may convey it into some common receptacle. Let the
ground behind him be raised even with the Planks, that he may continually stand
on a L^vell. Let the Floor behind him be pitched with small Pebble: and be sure
let that part of your Stable where the Rack stands be well Wainscoted. I would
have two Rings placed at each side of his Stall, for his Halter to run through;
which must have a light wooden Logger at the bottom of it, to pois^ it
perpendicularly; but not so heavy as to tire the Horse, or to hinder him from
eating. Instead of a fixed Manger, I would have you have a Locker, or Drawer,
made in the Wainscote partition, for him to eat his Corn out of, which you may
take in and out to cleanse at pleasure. And whereas some may object the
narrowness of the Room, you may remedy that at your pleasure, by allowing it to
be the Larger: tho considering the small Quantity of Provender, you are to put
in at a time, (as you see hereafter) you need not make it very large. I would
not advise you to make any Rack, but instead thereof (according to the Italian
fashion) to give your Horse his Hay on the ground, upon the Litter; or else you
may (if you please) nail some Boards in the form of a Trough, in which you may
put his Hay, and the Boards will prevent him from trampling and spoiling it.

Some possibly may object, that this way of Feeding him, may spoil his Crest,
and that the blowing upon his Hay will soon make it nauseous to his Palate. For
the spoiling his Crest, it rather strengthens it, and makes it firm, whereas,
on the contrary, to lift up his Head high to the Rack will make him
withy-cragged: but the way forementioned, he will ^eed as he lies, which will
be for his ease and satisfaction. As to the quantity of his Hay, you are to
give it him in such small Proportions, (tho the oft^ner) that it may be eaten
before his Preath can in the least have tainted it. But the chief^ Reason why I
advise you to this way is this, because the receiving his Hay down upon the
Ground, will help to cleanse his Head from any Rheum or Dose, which he may have
gotten by negligence and over-exercise, and induce him by sn^^zing to throw out
all manner of watery humors that may annoy his Head. If your Stable will allow,
you may build several Partitions of Boards, and at the Head toward the Manger
let them be advanced to that height that one Horse may not molest or smell to
another; and so divide the Whole into as many equal Stands or Staulls as it
will admit of; allowing to each, Room enough to turn about in, and lie down at
pleasure. You may make one of your Staulls close, which may serve for your
Groom to lie in, in case of a Match, Sickness, etc. and where he may burn
Candle without the Horse's discerning of it. Behind the Horses I would have a
Range of Presses made with Peggs in them to hang up Saddles, Bridles,
Housing-cloaths, etc. as likewise Shelves to place your Curry-combs, Brushes,
Dusting-cloaths, Ointments, Waters, or any other Necessaries upon.

Now that you may not cumber your Stable with Oat-Binns, I think it necessary
to tell you, that the best way is to make use of the Invention of Mr. Farmer of
Tusmore in Oxfordshire. Which is done (according as it is described by the
Ingenuous Dr. Plot, in his Natural History of Oxfordshire) by letting the Oats
down from a Loft above, out of a Vessel like the Hopper of a Mill, whence they
fall into a square Pipe let into the wall, of about four Inches Diagonal, which
comes down into a Cupboard also set into the wall, but with its end so near the
bottom that there shall never be above a Gallon, or other desirable Quantity
in the Cupboard at a time, which being taken away and given to the Horses,
another Gallon presently succ^eds; so that in the lower part of the Stable,
where the Horses stand, there is not one Inch of room taken up for the whole
provision of Oats: which Contrivance has also this further Convenience, that
by this Motion the Oats are kept constantly sweet, (the taking away one Gallon
moving the whole Mass above,) which laid up any otherwise in great quantities,
grow frequently musty.

Now I would have you have two made, the one for the Oats, the other for your
split Beans, and both let into your Range of Presses; the Partitions may easily
be made over head, to separate your Oats from your Beans. Or if you like not
this way, you may convert it into an Hay-loft, or Chambers for your Grooms,
which you fancy; but whatever you make choice of, let the Floor overhead be
seil'd, that no Dust from above fall upon your Horses. But if you have the
convenience of a Rick-yard, so that you keep your Hay abroad, it is the opinion
of some knowing Horsemen, that to tuck it out of the Rick by little and little,
as you have occasion to use it, makes it spend much better than it would
otherwise do out of the Hay-Tallet.

As to the rest of its Perquisites, a Dung^yard, a Pump, or a Conduit, are
necessary; and if yo^ can have that convenience, some Pond or running River
near hand. But be sure, never let the Front of your Stable be without Litter,
that by frequent practice your Horse may learn to empty his Bladder when he is
come from Airing, which will be both healthful for your Horse, and profitable
for your Land

Having thus laid down a Model for a Stable, my next business is to tell the
Groom his Duty; I mean not those which generally appertain to all Servants,
such as are Obedience, Fidelity, Patience, Diligence etc. but those more
^ssentially belonging to this Office. First then he must love his Horse in the
next degree to his Master, and to endeavor by fair Usage to acquire a
reciprocal Love from him again, and an exact Obedience, which if he know how to
pay it to his Master, he will the better be able to teach it his Horse; and
both the one and the other are to be obtained by fair means, rather than by
Passion and Outrage. For those who are so irrational themselves, as not to be
able to command their own Passions, are not fit to undertake the reclaiming of
an Horse, (who by nature is an irrational Creature) from his.

He must then put in practice that Patience, which I would have him Master of,
at all times, and by that and fair means he shall attain his End: For nothing
is more tractable than an Horse, if you make use of Kindness to win him. Next,
Neatness is requisite in a Groom, to keep his Stable clean swept and in order;
his Saddles, Housing-cloaths, Stirr^ps, Leathers, and Girths, clean, and above
all his Horse clean dressed and rubbed. Diligence in the last place is
requisite both in a daily practice of his Duty, and in observing any the
smallest Alteration whether casual or accidental, either in his Countenance, as
Symptoms of Sickness, or in his Limbs and Gate, as Lameness, or in his
Appetite, as forsaking his Meat, and immediately upon any such Discovery to
seek out for Remedy. This is the substance of the Groom's Duty in general, and
which I shall treat of more at large as Occasion shall offer it self.

In the mean time since Bartholomew-tide is now come, and the pride and
strength of the Grass nipp'd by the severe Frosts, and cold Dews which
accompany this Season, so that the Nourishment thereof turns into raw
Crudities, and the Coldness of the Night (which is an Enemy to the Horse)
abates as much Flesh and Lust as he gets in the Day, we will now take him up
from Grass whilst his Coat lies smooth and sleek.

Having brought him home, let your Groom so that Night set him up in some
secure and spacious House, where he may evacuate his Body, and so be brought to
warmer keeping by Degrees; the next day stable him. But, tho it be held as a
general Rule amongst the generality of Grooms, not to cloth or dress their
Horses, till Two or Three days after their stabling, I can find no Reason but
Custom to persuade one to it; But it being little conducive either to the
advantage or prejudice of the Horse, I shall leave it to their own Fancies: But
as to the giving of Wheatstraw, to take up his Belly, (a custom used by Grooms
generally at the Horse's first Housing,) I am utterly averse from it. For the
Nature of a Horse being hot and dry, if he should feed on Straw, which is so
likewise, it would straighten his Guts, and cause an Inflammation of the Liver,
and by that means distemper the Blood; and besides it would make his Body so
costive, that it would cause a Retention of Nature, and make him dung with
great pain and difficulty; whereas full Feeding would expel the Excrements,
according to the true Intention and Inclination of Nature. Therefore let
moderate Airing, warm Clothing, good old Hay, and old Corn, s^pply the place
of Wheat-straw.

To begin then methodically, that your Groom may not be to see^ in any part of
his Duty, I shall acquaint him, that his first business is, a^^er he has
brought his Horse into the Stable, in the morning to water him, and then to rub
over his Body with a hard Wisp a little moistened, and then with a woollen
cloth; then to cleanse his Sheath with his w^t hand from all the Dust it had
contracted during his Running, and to wash his Yard either with White Wind, or
Water. Then he may trim him according to the manner that othor Horses are
trimmed, except the ins^de of his Ears, which (though some still continue that
fashion) ought not to be meddled with, for fear of making him catch cold.

When this is done, let him have him to the Farrier, and there get a Set of
Shoos answerable to the shape of his Foot, and not to pare his Foot that it may
fit his Shoo, as too many Farriers do, not only in Brabant and Flanders, but
here likewise. Be sure let his Feet be well opened betwixt the Quarters and the
Thrush, to prevent Hoof-binding; and let them be opened straight, and not
side-ways, for by that means in two or three Shooings, his Heels (which are the
strength of his Feet) will be cut quite away. Pare his Foot as hollow as you
can, and then the Shoo will not press upon it. The Shoo must come near to the
Heel, yet not be set so close as to bruise it; nor yet so open as to catch in
his Shoos, if at any time he happen to overreach, and so hazard the pulling
them off, the breaking of his Hoof, or the bruising of his Heel. The Webbs of
the Shoos must be neither too broad, nor too narrow, but of a middle size,
about the breadth of an inch, with slop'd Spunges, and even with his Foot; for
though it would be for the advantage of the Traveling Horse's Heel, to have
the Shoo sit a little wider than the Hoof, on both sides, that the Shoo might
bear his Weight, and not his Foot touch the ground; yet the Hunter being often
forced to gallop on rotten spungy Earth, to have them larger would hazard
Laming, and pulling off his Shoos, as has been shown before.

There is an Old Proverb, Before behind, and Behind before; that is, in the
Fore-^eet the Veins lie behind, and in the Hinder-seet they lie before.
Therefore let the Farrier take care that he prick him not, but leave a space at
the Heel of the Forefeet, and a space between the Nails at the Toe. When your
Shoo is set on according to this Direction, you will find a great deal of his
Hoof left to be cut off at his Toe. When that is cut off^ and his Feet smoothed
with a File, you will find him to stand so firm, and his Feet will be so
strong, that he will tread as boldly on Stones as on Carpet-ground.

By that time he is shod, I presume 'twill be time to water him, therefore rake
him to the River, and let him, after he has drank, stand some time in the
Water, which will close up the holes (according to the opinion of some
Horsemen) which the driving of the Nails made. Then have him gently home^ and
having tied him up to the Rack, rub him all over Body and Legs with dry Straw;
then stop his Feet with Cow Dung, sift him a Quarter of a Peck of clean old
Oats, and give them to him; then litter him, and leave him a sufficient
Quantity of old Hay to serve him all Night, and so leave him till the next
Morning.

CHAP. IV. How to order the Hunter for the first Fortnight.
I presume by this your Horse will have evacuated all his Grass, and his Shoes
will be so well settled to his Feet, that he may be fit to be rid abroad to Air
without danger of surbating. Therefore it is now necessary that I begin in a
more particular manner to direct our unexperienced Groom how he ought to
proceed to order his Horse according to Art.

First then you are to visit your Horse early in the Morning, to wit, by Five a
Clock if in Summer, or Six, if in Winter, and having put up his Litter under
his Stall, and made clean your Stable, you shall then feel his Ribs, his Chaule
and his Flank, for those are the chief signs by which you must learn to judge
of the good, or evil state of your Horses body, as I shall now show you.

Lay your Hands on the lower part of his short-ribs, near the Flank, and if you
feel his Fat to be exceeding soft and tender, and to yield as it were under
your hand, than you may be confident it is unsound, and that the least violent
Labor, or Travail will dissolve it: which being dissolved, e're it be hardened
by good Diet, if it be not then removed by scouring, the Fat or grease
b^longing to the outward parts of the Body will fall down into his Heels, and
so cause gowtiness and swelling. I need not trouble you with the outward signs
of this Distemper, they are evident to the Eye: but tho every Groom can inform
you when a Horse is said to have the grease fallen into his Heels, yet may be
he cannot instruct you in the cause why Travail disperseth it for a time, and
when the Horse is cold it returns with more violence than before. The reason
therefore is this: The Grease which by indiscreet Exercise, and negligence in
keeping is melted and fallen into his Legs, standing still in the Stable cools
and congeals, and so unites it self with other ill Humors, which flow to the
affected part, so that they stop the natural Circulation of the Blood, and
cause inflammations, and swellings as aforesaid^ but Travail producing warmth in
his Limbs thaws as it were the congealed Humors, and disperses them throughout
the Body in general; till Rest gives them opportunity to unite and settle
again. Now tho most Grooms are of opinion that this Distemper is not to be
prevented by care or caution, that when it has once seaz'd a horse it remains
incureable; yet they are mistaken in both, for by Art it may be prevented, and
by Art cured: although the cure is so difficult to be wrought, that a Groom cannot
be too careful to prevent it.

As for the ^nward Grease which is in his Stomach, Bag, and Guts, if when once
melted it be not removed by Art, Medicine and good Keeping, it putrifies, and
breeds those mortal Diseases, which inevitably destroy the Horse, tho it be
half a year, or three quarters of a year after. And this is generally the
source of most Fevers, Surfeits, Consumptions, etc. and such other Distempers
which carry off infinite numbers of horses, for want of the Farriers knowledge
in the first Causes of the Distemper: which to prevent you shall follow the
ensuing Directions.

After by ^eeling on his Ribs you have found his Fat soft and unsound, you
shall feel his Chaule, and if you find any fleshy substance, or great round
Kirnells or Knots, you may be assured^ that, as his outward Fat is unsouud, so
inwardly he is full of glut, and pursive, by means of gross and tough Humors
cleaving to the hollow places of the Lungs stopping so his Windpipe that his
Wind cannot find free passage, nor his Body be capable of much Labor.
Therefore the chief end and Intention of Art is by good sound Food to enseame
and harden his Fat, and by moderate Exercise, warm clothing, and gentle
Physic to cleanse away his inward Glut, that his Wind, and other parts being
freed from all grossness, his courage and activity in any labor or service may
appear to be more than redoubled.

The same Observations you must make from his Flank, which you will find
always to correspond, with the Ribs and Chaule, for till he is drawn clean it
will feel thick to your gripe, but when he is enseam'd, you will perceive
nothing but two thin skins; and by these three Observations of the Ribs, Flank,
and Chaps, you may, at any time pass an indifferent Judgment of your Horses
being in a good condition or a bad.

When you have made these Remarks^ you shall sift your Horse a handful or two
(and no more) of good old sound Oats, and give them to him, to preserve his
Stomach from cold Humors that might oppress it by drinking fasting, and
likewise to make him drink the better. When he has eaten them, pull off his
Collar, and rub his Head, Face, Ears, and Nape of the Neck with a clean Rubbing
Cloth made of ^emp, for it is sovereign for the Head, and dissolveth all gross
and ^ilthy Humors. Then take a small Snaffle, and wash it in fair water, and
put it on his head, drawing the Reins through the Headstall, to prevent his
slipping it over his head, and so tie him up to the Rack, and dress him thus;

First in your Right Hand take a Curry-Comb suitable to your Horses skin, (as
if your horses coat be short and smooth, then must the Curry-Comb be blunt, but
if long and rough, then m^st the Teeth be long and and sharp, standing with
your Face opposite to the Horses, hold the Left cheek of the Headstall in your
Left Hand, and Curry him with a good hard hand from the Root of his Ears, all a
long his Neck to his Shoulders: then go over all his Body with a more moderate
hand, then Curry his Buttocks down to the hinder Cambrell with an hard hand
again: then change your hand, and laying your Right Arm over his Back, join
your right side to his left, and so Curry him gently from the top of his
Withers, to the lower part of his shoulder, ever now and then fetching your
stroke over the left side of his breast, and so Curry him down to Knee, but no
further: Then Curry him all under his Belly, near his Fore-bowels, and in a
word all over very well, his Legs under the Knees and Cambrels only excepted.
And as you dressed the left side, so must you the right likewise.

Now by the way take notice, whether your Horse keeps a riggling up and down,
biting the Rackslaves, and now and then offering to snap at you, or lifting up
his Leg to strike at you, when you are Currying him: if he do it is an apparent
sign of his displeasure by reason of the sharpness of the Comb, and therefore
you must file the Teeth thereof more blunt: but if you perceive that he plays
these, or such like Tricks through Wantonness and the Pleasure he takes in the
Friction, then you shall ever now and then correct him with your Whip gently
for his Waggishness.

This Currying is only to raise the Dust, and therefore after you have thus
curried him, you must take either a Horse-tail^ nailed to an Handle) or a clean
dusting-Cloath of Cotton, and with it strike off the loose Dust raised by your
Curry-comb. Then dress him all over with the French-Brush, both Head, Body, and
Legs to the very Fet-locks, observing always to cleanse the Brush from the
filth it gathers from the bottom of the Hair, by rubbing it on the curry-comb.
Then dust him the second time. Then with your Hand wet in water rub his body
all over, and as near as you can leave no loose hairs behind you; and with your
wet hands pick and cleanse his Eyes, Ears, Nostrils, Sheath, Cods, and Tuel, and
so rub him till he be as dry as at first. Then take an Hair-patch, and rub his
Body all over, but especially his Fore-bowels under his Belly, his Flank, and
between his hinder Thighs. Lastly, wipe him over with a fine white linen
Rubber.

When you have thus dressed him, take a large Saddle-cloath (made on purpose,)
that may reach down to the Spurring-place, and lap it about his Body; t^en clap
on his Saddle, and throw a cloth over him for fear of catching cold. Then take
two Ropes of Straw twisted extreme hard together^ and with them rub and chase
his Legs from the Knees and Cambre^s downwards to the Ground, picking his
^^tl^ck-joynts with your hands from Dust, Filth, and Scabs. Then take another
Hair-patch kept on purpose for his Legs, (for you must have two) and with it
rub and dress his Legs also.

Now by the way let me give you this necessary, Caution, be sure whilst you are
dressing your Horse let him not stand naked, his Body being exposed to the
penetration of the Air, whilst you are telling a Banbury-story to some
Comrades, that accidentally come into the Stable, as I have seen some Grooms,
that would stand lolling over their Horses, when they were unclothed; and
trifle away their time by listening to some idle Discourse; but when you have
stripped him fall to your Business roundly, without any intermission till you
have sadled him, and thrown his Cloth over him.

And the reason why I advise you to throw a Cloth over him, whilst you are
dressing his Legs is this; that although it is a general Rule amongst Grooms,
that an Horse cannot take cold whilst he is dressing, yet is that Saying to be
understood only of his Body, not of his Legs; for the rubbing of his Legs will
not prevent catching cold in his Body.

When this is done, you shall with an Iron Picker pick his Feet clean, (that
the stopping of his Feet may not be a means of his taking up Stones in them,)
comb down his Main and Tail with a wet Main-comb, then spirt some Beer into his
Mouth, and so draw him out of the Stable.

Being mounted, rak^ or walk him to some Running River, or fresh clear Spring,
distant a Mile or two from your Stable, (which will refine his Mouth which he
may have lost, during his Summers Running, and will likewise settle his Body
upon his Rake,) and there let him drink about half his draught at first, to
prevent raw Crudities arising in his Stomach. After he has drunk bring him
calmly out of the Water, and so ride him gently for a while; for nothing is
more unbeseeming a Horseman, than to thrust his Horse into a swift Gall^p, as
soon as he comes out of the Water, for these three Causes. First, it is not
only hazards the breaking of his Wind, but also assuredly endanges the
incording, or bursting of him. Secondly, it begets in him an ill habit of
running away, as soon as he has done drinking. Lastly, the foresight he has
of such violent Exercise, makes him oftentimes refuse to quench his Thirst: and
therefore (as I said) first walk him a little way, and then put him into a
gentle Gallop for 5 or 6 score, then give him wind: and after he has been
raked a pretty space, then show him the Water again, and let him drink what he
pleases, and then gallop him again; and thus do till he will drink no more, but
be sure to observe always that you gallop him not so much as either to chafe,
or sweat him.

Now by the way observe, that in his galloping after water, (after the first
weeks enseaming,) if sometimes you give him a watering Course sharply, of
twelve or twenty score, (as you find your Horse,) it will quicken his spirits,
and cause him to gallop more pleasantly, and teach him to manage his Limbs
more nimbly, and to stretch forth his Body largely.

When your Horse has done drinking, then rake him to the Top of the next Hill,
(if there be any near your Watring-place, for there in the morning the Air is
purest, or else to some such place, as he may gain best advantage both of Sun
and Air, and there air him a foot-pace an hour, or so long as you (in your
discretion) shall think sufficient for the state of his Body, and then ride him
home.

During the time of your Horses Airing, you will easily perceive several marks
of your Horses satisfaction, and the pleasure which he takes in this Exercise.
For he will gape, yawn, and as it were shrug his Body. If he offer to stand
still, to dung, or stale, which his Airing will provoke, be sure give him
leave, as likewise to stare about, neigh, or listen after any noise.

Now Airing brings several Advantages to the Horse. First, it purifies the
Blood, (if the Air be clean and pure,) it purges the Body from many gross and
suffocating Humors, and so hardens and enseams the Horses Fat, that it is not
near so liable to be dissolved by ordinary Exercise. Secondly, it teaches him
how to let his Wind rake equally and keep time with the other Actions or
Motions of his Body. Thirdly, it sharpens the Appetite, and provokes the
Stomach, (which is of great advantage both to Hunters and Gallopers, who are
apt to loose their Stomach through excess or want of Exercise): for the
sharpness of the Air will drive the Horses natural Heat from the exterior to
the interior parts, which Heat by furthering Concoction creates an Appetite.
Lastly, it increases Lust and Courage in him, provided he not too early air'd.

But whereas Mr. Markam, in his Way to get wealth, 40. page 44. directs, if
your Horse be very fat to air him before Sunrise, and after Sunset; and that
the Author of the Gentleman's Iockey, 80. page 14. says, that nothing is more
wholesome than early and late Airings; I think the contrary may be made out from
Experience. For in this Art, all things that any ways hinder the strength and
vigor of Nature, are to be avoided; now, that extremity of Cold, and being out
early and late do so, is evidently seen by Horses that run abroad all Winter,
which however hardily bred, and kept with the best care and Fodder, yet cannot
by any means be advanced to so good case in Winter as an indifferent Pasture
will raise them to in Summer. And this holding true of the Nocturnal Colds,
must needs be verified in some proportionate measure of the Morning and Evening
Dews, and that piercing Cold which is observed to be more intense at the
opening and close of the Day, than any part of the Night. Besides that, the
D^ws and moist Rimes do as much Injury to a Horse, as the sharpest Colds or
Frosts: since (as I have found by experience) a Horse any ways inclinable to
Catarrhs, Rheums or any other cold Distempers, is apt to have the Humors
augmented, and the disease most senbsily increasd by these early and late
Airings.

But if he be not had forth to air till the Sun be risen, (as you must cast to
have him dressed, and ready to lead forth against that time) his spirits will
be cheered and comforted by that universal Comforter of all living Creatures;
and indeed all Horses naturally desire to enjoy the Sun's warmth, as you may
observe by those Horses which lie out all Night, who as soon as the Sun is
risen, will repair to those places where they may have the most benefit of his
Beams, and by them be in part relieved from the coldness of the foregoing
Night. And besides the benefit of the Sun, the Air will be so mild and
temperate, as it will rather invigorate than prey upon his spirits, and more
increase his Strength than impair it

Neither, tho we disallow of Early and Late airings, need we be at a loss to
bring down our Horses fat, and from being pursive, and too high in Flesh, to
reduce him to cleanness, and a more moderate state of Body: For if you do but
observe this one Rule of keeping a fat Horse so much longer out at a time both
Morning and Evening, you will undoubtedly obtain your end by such long Airing,
joined with true sound Heats, which you may expect indeed, but will never find
from those that are shorter, how early and late soever: for this Method joined
with good feeding is the best Prescription can be given in this case, and it is
from the length of your Airings only, that you must hope to bring your Horse to
a perfect Wind, and true Courage. And therefore a Horse that is (...) in Flesh,
is a sitter subject to work on, than One that is low, because he is better able
to endure Labor, whereas the other must of necessity be so favored in
training, to improve his Strength and Flesh, that he is in danger (without he
be under the care of a very Skilful keeper) of proving thick winded for want of
true Exercise in Training.

When you are returned from Airing, and are dismounted, lead your Horse on the
Straw, which (as I told you before) should always lie before the Stable door;
and there by Whistling and stirring up the Litter under his Belly will provoke
him to Stale, which a little practice will bring him to, and is advantageous
for the Horses Health, and the keeping of your Stable clean; Then lead him into
his Staul (which ought likewise to be well littered) and having tied up his
head to the empty Rack, take off his Saddle, rubb his Body and Legs all over
with the French-brush, then with the Hair-patch, and last of all with the
Woollen cloth.

Then you shall cloth him with a Linen cloth next to his Body, and over that
a Canvas cloth, and both made so fit as to cover his Breast and to come pretty
low down to his Legs, which is the Turkish way of Clothing, who are the most
curious People (says the Duke of Newcastle) in keeping their Horses, and
esteem them the most of any Nation. Over the forementioned put a Body-cloath of
six, or eight Straps, which is better than a Sircingl^ and Pad stuffed with
wisps, because this keeps his Belly in Shape, and is not so subject to hurt him.

Now these Clothes will be sufficient for him at his first Stabling, because
being inured to the cool Air he will not be so apt to take cold, the weather
likewise at that season being indifferently warm^ but when sharp weather
approaches, and that you find his Hair rise about his outward parts that are
uncloathed, as Neck, Gascoins, etc. then add another Cloth, which ought to be
of Woolen, and for any Horse bred under this Climate, and kept only for
ordinary Hunting, this is clothing sufficient.

Now the design of cloathings is only by their help joined to the warmth of the
Stable, and the Litter (which must always lie under the Horse) to keep his
Body in such a moderate Natural Heat, as shall be sufficient to assist Nature,
that skilful Physician in expelling her Enemies, by dissolving those raw and
gross Humors which are subject to annoy the Horse, and which would very much
prejudice him if they were not removed; which warm clothing does in a great
measure by dispersing them into the outward parts, and expelling them by
sweating as he sleeps and lies down, which will be a means to purge his Body,
and keep it clean from glut, and redundant Humors.

But yet (as in all things the golden mean is best) there is a mean to be
observed too here: for as too few Clothes will not assist Nature sufficiently
in the expulsion of her Enemies, so too many will force her too much, and cause
weakness in your Horse by too violent sweatings. Therefore you must have a care
of following the Example of some ignorant Grooms, who because they have
acquired a false Reputation by livi^g in some Noblemans or Gentleman's Service,
that are noted Sportsmen, think they are able to give Laws to all their
Fraternity, and therefore without any reason heap Multiplicity of Clothes on
the Horse as if they meant to bury him in Woolen. You must know, that both the
temperature of the Weather and the State of his Body are to be observed; and
that all Horses are not to be clothed alike. Your fine-Skined Horses, as the
Barb, Turk, Spanish horse etc. require more^ clothes then our English common
Horses, that are bred in a colder climate, and have naturally thicker skin's,
and a longer Coat. But that you may not err I have told you already how you
are to cloth your Horse, and therefore shall only add this one General Rule,
That a Rough Coat shows want of Clothes, and a Smooth Coat Clothing
sufficient: ever observing, that by his Countenance, his Dung, and other
outward Characters (which I shall by and by give you more at large) you
perceive your Horse to to be in health, and yet notwithstanding your Horses
Coat still stares, you must add more clothes till it lie; as on the other hand
if it will lie with the assist^of a single Linen Cloth it is su^^icient.

But if when he has been in keeping some time, you perceive him apt to sweat in
the Night, it is a sign that he is over-fed, and wants exercise: but if he sweat
at his first coming from Grass, you must know that there is cause rather to
increase, than diminish the Clothes I have alloted at his first Housing; for
it proceeds from the foul humors which oppress Nature, and when by exercise
they are evacuated, Nature will cease working, and he will con^tinue in a
temperate state of Body all the year after.

When he is clothed up, pick his Feet clean with an Iron Picker, and wash his
Hoofs clean with a Spung dipped in fair wate^, and then dry them with Straw or a
Linen cloth, and if there be occasion and that you find your Horses Legs
durty, you may bathe them likewise, only you must be sure to rub them dry
before you go out of your Stable, then leave him on his Snaffle for an hour, or
more, which will assist his Appetite.

When an Hour is expired. you shall come to him again, and having tucked an
hardful of Hay, and dusted it, you shall let your Horse tease it out of your
hand till he has eaten it; then pull off his Bridle, and having rubbed his Head
and Neck clean, with the Hempen-cloth, as before, pull his Ears, and stop his
Nostrils to make him snore, which will help to bring away the moist Humors
which oppress his Brain, and then put on his Collar, and give him a Quarter of
Oats clean dressed, in a Sive, having first made his Locker, or Manger clean with
a Wispe of Straw, and a C^oth.

Whilst he is eating his Corn^ you shall sweep out your Stable, and see that
all things are neat about him, and turning up his Clothes, you shall rub his
F^llets, Buttocks, and Gascoins over with the hairpatch, and after that with a
Woolen-cloth; then spread a clean Flannel Fillet-cloth over his Fillets and
Buttocks (which will make his Coat lie smooth) and turn down his
Housing-cloaths upon it. Then anoint his Hoofs round from the Cronet to the Toe
with this Ointment, viz.

Take Four Ounces of Venice Turpentine, Three Ounces of Bees wax, Two Ounces of
the best Rosin, One pound of Dogs-grease, Half a Pint of Train Oil, Melt all
these Ingredients (except the Turpentine) together, being melted remove them
from the Fire, and then put in the Turpentine, and keep it stirring, till all
be well incorporated, then put it in a Gally pot, and when it is cold cover it
close from dust, and reser^e it for use.

After this pick his Feet with an Iron Picker, and stop them with Cow Dung; and
by this time your Horse (if he be not a very slow Feeder) will have eaten his
Oats, which if you find he does with a good Stomach, sift him another Quart,
and throw them to feed him by little and little, whilst he eats with an
Appetite; but if he fumbles with his Corn, then give him no more at that time.

And this I think a better Direction than to prescribe a set quantity of
Provender, as all Authors I have yet met with have done. For without doubt no
certain Quantity of Meat can be allotted for all sorts of Horses, any more than
for all sorts of Men; and therefore proportion the quantity to the Horses
Appetite: but be sure at all times give him his full feeding, for that will
keep his Body in better state and temper, and increase his strength and vigor.
Whereas on the contrary, to keep your Horse always sharp-set, is the ready way
to procure a Surfeit, if at any time he can come at his fill of Provender;
according to the common Proverb, Two hungry Meals make the third a Glutton.
But tho you perceive he gather Flesh too fast upon such home-feeding; yet be
sure not to stint him for it, but only increase his Labor, and that will
assist both his Strength and Wind.

When these things are done, you shall dust a pretty quantity of Hay, and throw
it down to him on his Litter, after you have taken it up under him; and then
shutting up the Windows and Stable door, leave him till One a Clock in the
Afternoon; at which time you shall come to him, and having rubbed over his
Head, Neck, Fillets, Buttocks, and Legs, as before, with the Hair-patch and
Woollen-cloath, you shall feed him as before. and then leave him till the time
of his Evening watring, (which should be about three of the clock in Winter,
and four in Summer;) and then having put back his foul Litter, and swept away
that and his Dung, you shall dress and saddle him as before, and mounting him
you shall rake him to the water, and after drinking and galloping you shall air
him along by the River side, till you think it time to go home; then order him
in all points, as to rubbing, feeding, stopping his Feet, etc. as you did in
the morning; and having fed him at six a clock, be sure feed him again about
Nine; and having litter'd him well, and thrown him Hay enough to serve him for
all Night, you shall leave him till the next Morning. And as you have spent
this day, so you must order him in all respects for a fortnight together, and
by that time his Flesh will be so hardened, and his Wind so improved; his Mouth
will be so quickened, and his Gallop brought to so good a stroke, that he will
be fit to be put to moderate Hunting.

Now during this Fortnights keeping you are to make several Observations, as to
the Nature and Disposition of your Horse, the temper of his Body, the course of
his Digestion, etc. and order him accordingly. As first, if he be of a churlish
Disposition, you must reclaim him by Severity; if of a loving temper, you must
win him by Kindness. Secondly, you must observe whether he be a foul Feeder, or
of a nice Stomach; if he be quick at his Meat, and retain a good Stomach, then
four times of full Feeding, in a Day and a Nights space, is sufficient; but if
he be a slender Feeder, and slow at his Meat, then you must give but a little
at once, and often, as about every two hours, for fresh Meat will draw on his
Appetite; and you must always leave a little Meat in his Locker for him to eat
at his own leisure betwixt the times of his Feeding; and when at any time you
find any left, you shall swe^p it away, and give him fresh, and expose that to
the Sun and Air, which will prevent mustiness and reduce it to its first
sweetness, before it was blown upon.

Now as to the manner of Feeding, you may sharpen his Stomach by change of
Meat, as giving one Meal clean Oats, another Oats and split-Beans, and (when
you have brought him to eat Bread) you may give him another meal of Bread,
always observing to give him oftenest that which he likes best; or if you
please you may give him both Corn and Bread at the same time, provided you give
him that last which he eats best, and which has the best Digestion.

It Is observed of some Horses, that they are of so hot a Constitution, that
without they may drink at every bit they cannot eat, and those Horses usually
carry no Belly; in this case therefore you must let a Pale of Water stand
continually before them, or at least offer them Water at Noon, besides what
they fetch abroad at their ordinary times.

Next you are to observe the nature of his Digestion, that is, whether he
retains his Food long, which is the sign of a bad Digestion; or whether Nature
does expel the Dung more frequently; which if he do, and that his Dung be loose
and bright^ it is a sign of a good habit of Body; but if he dung hard, and
seldom, then on the contrary it is a sign of a dry Body; and therefore to remedy
this, you shall once in a day give him a handful or two of Oats, well washed in
good strong Ale, for this will loosen his Body, and keep it moist, and you will
sind it also good for his Wind, notwithstand- the opinion of some to the
contrary.

CHAP V. Of the Second Fortnights Diet, and of his first Hunting, and what
Chases are most proper to Train him.
BY that time you have spent this Fortnight, according to the foregoing Rules,
your Horse will be in a pretty good state of Body; for the gross Humors will be
dried in his Body, and his Flesh will begin to be hardened, which you will
perceive (as I told you at first) by his Chaul, his short Ribs, and his Flank;
for the Kernels under his Chaps will not feel so gross as at first they did,
his flesh on his short Ribs will not feel so soft and loose, nor the thin part
of his Flank so thick as at his first housing; so that now you may without
hazard adventure to hunt him moderately.

But before I proceed, I think it necessary to clear one point, which I have
heard much discussed amongst Horsemen, which is, What sort of Chase is most
proper for the training of a young Horse? some being of one Opinion, some of
another. For some would have a Horse, which is design^d either for a
Buck-hunter or Fox-hunter, used from the beginning to the Chase which they are
designed for. Others think those Chases too violent for a young Horse, and
therefore choose to train him after Harriers; and of this Opinion I must own my
self to be, since Experience has fully shown me the Advantages of the one, and
the Inconveniences of the other. Now to prove this Assertion, let us take a
slight view of the several Cbases which are commonly used by our Nobility and
Gentry, where the Horse is made a Companion and Member of the Sport, and they
are these; the Stag, Buck, Hind, Fox, Otter, and Hare.

As for the three first here mentioned, as there is not much difference in the
hunting of them, so the Inconveniences from each Chase are in a manner the same
also. For which soever you hunt, it is either in Covert, or at force. Now if Deer
be hunted in a Park, they usually choose the most woody parts of it, as a Refuge
from the pursuits of their Enemies, which is both unpleasant to the Rider, and
troublesome to the Horse, to follow the Dogs through the thick Bushes; and
besides, usually the Ground in Parks is full of Mole banks, Trenches, etc.
which is dangerous for a young Horse to gallop on, till he has attained to some
perfection in his Stroke. But if they be turned out of the Park, and be hunted
at force, you will find, that as soon as you have unharbour'd or roused them,
they will immediately make out end ways before the Hounds five or six, nay
sometimes ten Miles, they following in full Cry so swiftly, that a Horse must
be compelled to run up and down hill without any intermission; leaping Hedge,
Ditch, and Dale, nay often crossing Rivers, to the great danger of the Rider,
as well as of the Horse. So that in my opinion it is altogether improper to put a
young Horse to such violent labor at the first, till by practice and degrees
he has been made acquainted with hard service.

Now besides the swiftness and violence of this Chase, and the danger of
cracking his Wind, and bursting his Belly; besides the straining of his Limbs
by such desperate Riding, and the creating in a young Horse a loathsomness to
his Labor, by undergoing such violent and unusual service; the seasons for
these Chases beginning about Midsummer, and ending about Holy-Rood-tide, which
is that part of the year in which the Sun's heat is excessive, and so scorches
the Earth, that a violent Chase would hazard the melting his Grease, and the
weight of the Rider, by reason of the hardness of the Ground, would occasion
Foundring, Splents, and Windgalls, insomuch that in short time the Horse would
prove altogether useless.

But here I cannot but desire to be rightly understood, since tho I object
against these Chases as impro^per for young Horses, yet I do not mean that
Horses should be excluded this Recreation; but I would have those which are
employed herein, to be Horses of stayed years, and by long practice and
experience have been rightly trained to Hunting. Young Horses (as the Duke of
New Castle says) being as subject to Diseases as young Children, and therefore
he advises any man that would buy a Horse for use in his ordinary occasions, as
for Iourneys, Hawking or Hunting, never to buy a Horse until the Mark be out
of his Mouth, and if he be sound of Wind, Limb, and Sight, he will last you
Eight or Nine years with good keeping^ and never ^ail you; and therefore
(pursues he) I am always ready to buy for such purposes an old Nag, of some
Huntsman, or Falconer, that is ^ound, and that is the useful Nag, for he
gallop^ on all Grounds, leaps over Hedges and Ditches; and this will not fail
you in your Journey, nor any where, and is the only Nag of use for Pleasure or
Jou^ney Thus far the Duke. And if it may be perm^tted ^o add to his Advice, I
would have them strait-bod^ed clean-timbred Nags, such as may be light, nimble,
and of middle stature, for those Horses are not near so subject ^o Lamness as
those of bulk and strength, the causes whereof have been already declared.

The next Chase proposed was that of the Fox, which although it be a Recreation
much in use, and highly applauded by the generality of the Nobility and Gentry;
yet with submission to their judgment I never could find that pleasure in it
which has been represented to me by some of its Admirers: and I am sure it is
inconvenient for the training of a young Horse, since it is swift without
respite, and of long continuance, both which, as I have already showed, are
distastful to him; but the greatest Inconvenience that happens to a Horse in
this Chase is this; that when a Fox is unkennel'd, he seldom or never betakes
himself to a champion Country, but remains in the strongest Coverts, and in
the thickest Woods; so that a Horse can but seldom enjoy the pleasure of
accompanying the Hounds, without hazarding being stubb'd^, or other as
dangerous Accidents. The fittest Horses for this Chase are Horses of great
strength and ability, since this Chase begins at Christmas, which is the worst
time of Riding, and ends at our Lady Day, when the Ground is best for it.

The next Chase to be spoken of is the Otters, which although it may seem
delightful to some, yet I cannot by any means think it convenient for a Horse:
for he that will truly pursue this Amphibious sport, must often swim his Horse
to the equal hazard both of the Rider and the Horse.

But to conclude with the last, and the best of Chases, and that is the Hare.
It is in my opinion the most pleasant and delightful Chase of any whatsoever,
and the most beneficial for training a young Horse. It is swift, and of some
indurance, like that of the Fox, but far more pleasant to the Horse, because
Hares commonly run the Champion Country; and the scent not being so hot as the
Foxes, the Dogs are oftener at default, and by that means the Horse has many
Sobbs, whereby he recovers Wind, and regains new strength. This Chase begins at
Michaelmass, and lasts till the End of February^

Now the best Dogs, to bring your Horse to perfection of Wind and Speed, are
your fleet Northern Hounds; for they, by means of their hard-running, will draw
him up to that extraordinary speed, that he will not have time to loiter, and
by continual practice will be so inured and habituated to the violence of their
Speed, that in a short time he will be able to ride on all sorts of Ground, and
be at such command upon the hand, that he will strike at what rate you please,
and three-quarters speed will be less troublesome to him than a
Canterbury-gallop.

I have often thought this one of the Reasons why your Northern Breeders for
the generality excel those of the South; since certainly the speed of their
Hounds contributes much to the Excellence of their Horses, and makes them
endure a four mile Course without Sobbs, which some Horsemen call
Whole-Running: but of this more in another place.

The time being now come that he may be hunted, you shall order him on his days
of Rest in all points, as to his Dr^ssing, hours of Feeding, Watring, etc. as
in the first Fortnight before directed; only since his Labor is now to be
increased, you must endeavor to increase his Strength and Courage likewise;
and this will be effected by adding to his Oats a third part of clean old Beans
spelted on a Mill, and as an overplus to allow him Bread made after this manner.

Take four Pecks of clean old Beans, and two Pecks of Wheat, and grind them
together, and sift the meal through a Meal-sieve of an indifferent fineness, and
knead it with warm water and good store of Barm, and let it lie an hour or more
to swell, for by that means the Bread will be the lighter, and have the easier
and quicker Digestion; after which being with a Brake or any other way
exceedingly well-kneaded, make it up into great Household Peck-loaves, which
will be a means to avoid Crust, and prevent its drying too soon; bake them
thoroughly, and let them stand a good while in the Oven to soke, then draw
them, and turning the bottoms upwards let them stand to cool.

When your Bread is a day old you may venture to feed your Horse with it,
having first chipt away the Crust; and sometimes giving him Bread, sometimes
Oats, and now and then Oats and spelted Beans, according as you find his
stomach; you need not fear but such Feeding will bring him into as good
condition as you need desire for Ordinary Hunting.

When your Bread is prepared, and you first Fortnight expired, you must then
pitch upon a Day for his first going abroad after the Dogs, and the Day before
you hunt you must always order him after this manner. In the morning proceed in
your usual method as before, only observe that day to give him no Beans,
because they are hard of digestion, but give most of Bread if you can draw him
on to eat it, because it is more nourishing than Oats; and after your Evening
Watering, which ought to be somewhat earlier than at other times, give him
only a little Hay out of your hand, and no more till the next day that he
returns from Hunting: and to prevent his eating his Litter, or any thing else
but what you give him, you shall instead of a Muzzle put on a Cavezone joined
to a headstall of a Bridle, being lined with double Leather for fear of hurting
him, and tying it so straight as to hinder his Eating; and this will prevent
Sickness in your Horse, which is incident to some Horses when their Muzzle is
set on, notwithstanding the invention of the Lattice-window, now adays so much
in use; but this way your Horses Nostrils are fully at liberty, and he will
never prove sick. But as to his Corn, give him his meals, both after his
Watering, and at nine a clock, at which time be sure to litter him very well,
that he may the better take his Rest, and leave him for that Night.

The next morning come to him very early, as about four a clock, and having
dressed a Quarter of a Peck of Oats very clean, put them into his Locker, and
pour into it a Quart of good strong Ale, and after having mixed the Oats and
Ale very well give him them to eat, whilst you put back his Dung and foul
Litter, and make clean his Stable, but if he will not eat washed Oats then give
him dry; but be sure put no Beans to them. When he has done eating, Bridle him,
and tie him up to the Ring, and dress him. When he is dressed saddle him; then
throw his Cloth over him, and let him stand till the Hounds are ready to go
forth. But be sure not to draw your Saddle Girths straight till you are ready
to mount, lest by that means he become sick. But generally old Horses are so
crafty, that when an ignorant Groom goes to girt them up hard, they will streth
out their Bodies to such a bigness by holding their Wind, (on purpose to gain
ease after they are girt) that twill appear difficult to girt them; but
afterward they let go their Wind, and their Bodies fa^l again.

When the Hounds are unkennell'd, (which should not be till Sunrising) go into
the Field along with them, and rake your Horse up and down gently till a Hare
be started; always observing to let him smell to other Horses Dung, (if he be
desirous of it) which will provoke him to empty himself, and let him stand
still when he does so: and if you meet with any dead Fog, Rushes, or such like,
ride him upon them, and by whistling provoke him to empty his Bladder.

When the Hare is started, you are not to follow the Hounds as the other
Hunters do, but to con^ider, that this being the first time of your Horses
hunting, he is not so well versed in the different sorts of Grounds as to know
how to gallop smoothly, and with ease on them; and therefore you are not to put
him as yet to above half his speed, that he may learn to carry a staid body,
and to manage his Legs both upon Fallows, and Greenswarth. Neither are you to
gallop him often, nor any long time together, for fear of discouraging him, and
breeding in him a dis^ike to this Exercise; but observing to cross the Fields
still to your best advantage, you shall make in to the Hounds at every default,
and still keep your Horse (as much as these Rules will allow you) within the
Cry of the Dogs, that he may be used to their Cry; and you will find, that in a
very short time he will take such delight and pleasure in their Music, that he
will be desirous to follow them more eagerly.

Now if at any time the Chase be lead over any Carpet ground, or sandy
Highway, on which your Horse may lay out his body smoothly, you may there
gallop him for a quarter or half a mile, to teach him to lay out his Body, and
to gather up his Legs, to enlarge and shorten his Stroke,^ according to the
different Earths he gallops on, as if on Green-swarth, Meadow, Moore^ Heath,
etc. then to ^^oop, and run more on the Shoulders; if amongst Mole-hills, or
over high ridges and furrows, then to gallop more roundly, and in less compass,
or according to the vulgar phrase two up and two down, that thereby he may
strike his Furrow clear, and avoid setting his Fore-feet in the Bottom of it,
and by that means fall over; But by this way of galloping, tho he should happen
to set his Feet in a furrow, yet carrying his body so round and resting on the
Hand in his gallop, would prevent his Falling; and to this perfection nothing
but use, and such moderate Exercise can bring him.

According to these Rules you may spend your Time in Hunting, till about Three
a Clock in the Afternoon, at which time you shall have him home in a foot pace
as you came out in the Morning, and besure that he be cool before you bring him
out of the Field; and as you are going home^ consider with your self, whether
or no he has sweat a little, (for you must not sweat him much the first time;)
but if not, then gallop him gently on some Skelping Earth, till he sweat at the
Roots of his Ears, a little on his Neck, and in his Flanck, but it must be done
of his own voluntary motion, without the compulsion of Whip and Spur: and then
when he is cool as aforesaid, have him home and Stable him, and besure avoid
walking him in hand to cool him, for fear he cool too fast, or washing him, for
fear of causing an obstruction of the natural course of the Humors, (which are
thought by some Horsemen to abound most in Winter) and by that means cause an
inflammation in his Legs, which is the Parent of the Scratches.

When you set him up in his Staul (which must be well litter'd against his
coming home) tie up his Head to the Ring with the Bridle, and then rub him well
with dry Straw all over both Head, Neck, Fore-bowels, Belly, Flank, Buttocks
and Legs; and afterward rub his Body over with a dry cloth till there be not a
wet hair left about him, then take off his Saddle and rub the place where the
Saddle stood dry likewise, and so cloth him with his ordinary Clothes with all
speed, for fear least he take cold; and if you think him too hot throw a spare
cloth over him, to prevent his cooling too fast, which you may abate when you
please, and so let him stand on his Snaffle Two Hours or more, stirring him
with your Whip now and then in his Staul, to to keep his Legs and Joints from
growing stiff.

When that time is expired, and you think it may be throughout cold, then come
to him, and having drawn his Bridle rubbed his Head, and picked his Feet from
Dirt and Gravel which he may have gathered abroad, put on his Collar, and ^ift
him a Quart, or three Pints of Oats, and mix with them a handful of clean
dusted Hempseed, and give them to him; but give him not above the quantity
prescribed, for fear of taking away his stomach, which will be very much
weakened through the hea^ of his body, and want of water. Then remove the
spare-cloth (if you have not done it before,) for fear of keeping him hot too
long, and when he has eaten his Corn, throw a pretty quantity of Hay clean
dusted, on his Litter, and let him rest two or three Hours, or there abouts.

Whilst you are absent from him, you shall prepare him a good Mash, made of
half a Peck of Malt well ground, and water that is boiling hot, observing to
put no more water than your Malt will sweeten, and your Horse will drink, and
then stir them together with a Rudd^r, or stick and then cover it over with
cloths, till the water has extracted the strength of the Malt, which will be
evident to your taste and touch, for twill be almost as sweet as Honey, and
feel ropy like Birdlime; then when it is cold, that you can scarce perceive it
to smoak^ offer it to your Horse, but not before, lest the steam ascend into
his Nostrils, and thereby offend him with its scent; and when he has drunk the
water, let him if he please eat the Malt also. But if he refuse to drink, yet
you must give him no other water that night, but by placing it in one Corner at
the head of his Stall, in such manner that he may not throw it down, (which you
may effect by nailing a Spar across before the Bucket) let it stand by him all
Night, that he may drink at his pleasure.

Now you will find this Mash, or (as some call it) Horse-Caudle, very
beneficial to your Horse on several Accounts; for it will comfort his Stomach,
and keep his Body in a due temperate heat after his days Hunting; it will
cleanse and bring away all manner of Grease and gross humors, which have been
dissolved by this Days labor, and the fume of the Malt-grains, after he has
drunk the water, will disperse watery Humors, which might otherwise annoy his
head, and is allowed by all Horsemen to be very advantageous on that account.

When he has eaten his Mash, then strip him of his Clothes, and run him over
with your Curry-comb, French Brush, Hair Patch, and Woollen Cloth, and clothe
him up again, and then cleanse his Legs as well as his Body of all Dirt and
Filth which may annoy them, as you have been directed in Dressing; th^n remove
him into another Stall (that you may not wet his Litter) and bathe his Legs all
over from the Knees with warm Beef-broth, or, which is better, with a quart of
warm Urine, in which four Ounces of Saltpeter has been dissolved; then rub
his Legs dry as when you came in from Water, set him into his Stall, and give
him a good Home-feeding of Oats, or Bread, (which he likes best) or both, and
having shook good store of Litter under him, that he may rest the better, and
thrown him Hay enough for all night on it, shut up your Stable close, and leave
him to his Rest till morning.

The next morning come to him betwixt six and seven a clock, for that is time
enough, because the Mornings rest is as pleasant and refreshing to the Horse as
it is to a Man, for then the meat being concocted the sleep is more sweet, and
the brain is at that time more thin and pure. If he be laid disturb him not,
but stay till he rises of his own accord, (and to know this you ought to have a
private peep-hole) but if he be risen, then go to him, and the first thing you
must do is to put back his Dung from his Litter, and to observe what Color it
is of: observe whether it be greasy, and shining outwardly, and break it with
your Feet, that you may see whether it be so inwardly; for if it be greasy and
foul either within or without, (which you may know by its outward shining, and
by spots like Soap, which will appear within) or if it appear of a dark brown
color, and harder than it was, it is a sign that your former days hunting was
beneficial to him, b^ dissolving part of the inward glu^ which was within him;
and therefore the next time you hunt you must increase his labor but a little.
But if you perceive no such Symptoms, but that his Dung appears bright, and
rather soft than hard, without grease, and in a word that it holds the same
pale yellow color it did before you hunted him, then it is a sign that days
Hunting made no dissolution, but that his Body remains in the same state still,
and therefore the next days Hunting you may almost double his Labor.

When you have made these Remarks from his Dung, you shall then proceed to
order him as in his days of Rest; that is to say, you shall give him a handful
or two of Oats before Water; then dress, water, air, feed, etc. as in the first
Fortnight.

Now as to his Feeding you must remember the way I have already showed, of
changing his Food; as giving him one while Bread, another Oats, a third time
Oats and Beans, which you find he likes best; observing always, that variety
will sharpen his Appetite. But Bread being his chief Food, as being more
nourishing and strong than the others, you must feed him often'st with it.

And as in the first Fortnight I directed you to observe his Digestion, whether
it were quick or slow, so likewise must you do now that he begins to eat Bread.
If you ^ind him quick, and that he retains his Bread but a little while, then
(as I have already directed) you shall only slightly chip your Bread; but if he
be slow, and retains it long, cut away all the Crust, and give it to some other
Horse, and feed your Hunter only with the Crum; for that being light of
Digestion soon converts to Chyle and Excrements, but the Crust being slow of
Digestion requires by reason of its hardness longer time before it be concocted.

The next day after he has rested, you shall hunt him again as you did the
first day, observing from the Remarks you have made, to hunt him more or less,
according as you find the temper and constitution of your Horse; and when you
are returned home, observe to put in Practice the same Rules which you have
just now read; and thus hunt your Horse three times a week for a fortnight
together, observing to give him his full feeding, and no other Scowrings but
Mashes, and Hempseed, which is equal in its Virtue to the former, and only
carries off superfluous Humors in the Dung.

And here before I conclude this Chapter, I cannot but take notice of the Abuse
of Scowrings, and my own Ignorance, being led away by the persuasions and my
mistaken opinion of other men's Skill, who because they could talk of giving a
Scowring, (tho Experience has since taught me, that they never knew the
Operation of them, nay nor the Disposition of the Horses which they kept) I
thought most eminent and skilful Horse-Doctors. But indeed I found to my Cost,
that my Ignorance led me into the same mistake with those men, that take
Physic by way of Prevention, and by that means render their Bodies more liable
to Diseases, their Pores being so much opened by Physic. In like manner I
found that tho I bought Horses of sound and strong Constitutions, yet by
following the false Rules and Practices of Others I quickly brought them to
weak habits of Body; and by continually using them to unnecessary Physic, to
be tender, and apt to take Cold and Surfeits on every small occasion: which
taught me to know, that as Kitchen Physic is best for a Man, (unless he
languish under some more than ordinary Distemper) so natural and true sound
Feeding is best for a Horse, it strengthening his Constitution, and keeping his
Body in good temper; for a Horse that is full-fed with good natural Diet is not
subject to costiveness; and from hence I infer, that a Horse which is sound,
and in health, and of a strong Constitution, needs little Physic more than
good wholesome meat, and his fill of it, provided you order him as he ought to be
when he is come from Hunting.

But as Horses no more than Men are free from Distempers, but by reason of
abuses and unkind Masters are rather more liable to them, (it being become a
Proverb, As many Diseases as a Horse); so when at any time they happen recourse
must be had to Physick^ and as it is good in its true use, so I shall in the
subsequent part of my Discourse set down when, and what manner of Scourings are
useful, and how they are to be applied with skill, and safety; of which in its
proper place.

CHAP. VI. Of the Horses Third Fortnights Keeping, and first thorough-Sweating.
BY this time your Horse will be drawn so clean, his Flesh will be so inseam'd,
and his Wind so improved, that he will be able to ride a Chase of three or four
Miles without much blowing, or sweating; and you will ^ind by his ^haul and
Flank, as well as his Ribs, that he is in an indifferent good state of body,
and therefore this next Fortnight you must increase his labor, by which means
you will come to a true knowledge of what he is able to do; and whether or no
he will ever be sit for Plates, or a Match.

When your Horse is set over night, and fed early in the morning, (as in the
last Fortnights Preparation for Hunting was directed) then go into the Field
with him, and when your Horse is empty, as he will ^e by that time you have
started your Game, you shall follow the Dogs at a good round rate, as at
half-speed, and so continue till you have killed or lost your first Hare. This
will so rack your Horses wind, and by this time he will have so emptied
himself, that he will be sit to be rid the next Chase briskly; which as soon as
begun you shall follow the Dogs at three quarters speed, as near to them as is
consistent with the discretion of a good Horseman, and a true Huntsman; but be
sure as yet not to strain him.

During this days Riding you shall observe your Horse's sweat, under his
Saddle, and Forebowels, if it appear White like Froth, or Soap-sudds, it is a
sign of inward glut and foulness, and that your days sport was fully
sufficient, and therefore you shall have him home, and order him as before you
are directed. But if your Sport has been so i^different, as not to sweat your
Horse thoroughly, then you shall make a Train-sent of Four Miles long, or
thereabout, and laying on your Fleetest Dogs, ride it briskly, and then having
first cooled him in the Field, ride him home and use him as aforesaid.

Now that I may not leave you in ignorance what a Train-scent is, I shall
acquaint you that it has its Name, as I suppose, from the manner of it, viz.
the trailing or dragging of a dead Cat, or Fox, (and in case of Necessity a
Red-Herring) three or four Miles, (according to the Will of the Rider, or the
Directions given him) and then laying the Dogs on the scent.

But this Caveat let me give all Huntsmen, to to keep about two or three Couple
of the fleetest Hounds you can possibly procure for this purpose only. For
although I have seen skillful Sportsmen use their Harriers^ in this Case, for
their diversion yet I would persuade them not to use them to it often; for it
will teach them to lie off the Line, and ^ling so wide, that they will never be
worth any thing.

When you unbridle your Horse, give him instead of Hempseed and Oats, a
handsome quantity of Rye bread, (to which end I would advise you to bake a Peck
Loaf for this purpose) which being cold and moist will assist in cooling his
body after his Labor, and prevent Co^tiveness, to which you will find him
addicted, then give him Hay, and afterward a Mash, and then order him in all
points as formerly.

The next morning if you perceive by his Dung that his Body is distempred, and
he is hard and bound, then take some Crumms of your Rye-bread and work it with
as much sweet fresh Butter as will make it into Paste, and then making it into
Balls about the bigness of a large Wallnut, give him 5 or 6 of them in the
morning fasting; and then setting on your Saddle upon his Cloth, mount him^ and
gallop him gently in some adjoining grass-Plat, or Close till he begin to sweat
under his Ears, then lead him into the Stable, and let him be well rubbed, and
throwing a spare Cloth over him, and good store of fresh Litter under him, let
him stand two hours on the Bridle, then give him a quantity of Rye-bread, then
throw him some Hay to chew upon, and after that get him another warm Mash, and
then feed him with Bread and Corn as much as he will, and be sure to allow him
what Hay he will eat. The next day water him abroad, and order him as in his
days of rest.

The day following Hunt him again^ but by no means so severely as you did the
time before till the Afternoon, but then ride him after the Dogs briskly, and
if that does not make him sweat throghly make another Train-scent, and follow
the Dogs three quarters speed, that he may sweat heartily. When you have a
little cooled him, have him home, and upon his first entrance into the Stable
give him two or three Balls as big as Wallnuts, of this most excellent
Scowring; viz.

Take Butter four Ounces, Lenitive Electuary two Ounces, Gromell Broom and
Parsley seeds, of each one Ounce, Aniseeds, Liquorish and Cream of Tartar, of
each half an Ounce, Iallap an Ounce make the Seeds into Powder, and stir them
into a Paste, with the Electuary and the Butter; knead it well, and keep it
close in a Pot for use.

As soon as you have given your Horse these Balls rub him dry, then dress him
and cloth him up warm and let him stand two or three hours on the Snaffle,
then give him two or three handfulls of Rye-bread, and order him as you did
before as to Hay Provinder, Mash etc. and so leave him till the Morning.

Then come to him and first observe his Dung whether it keep the true Color,
or whether it appear dark, or black, or red and high colored; next whether it
be loose and thin, or hard and dry. If it be of the right color I mean Pale
yellow it is a sign of health, strength and cleanness; if it be dark, or black,
then it is a sign there is Grease and other ill humors stirred up which are not
yet evacuated: if it be red and high colored, then it is a token that his Blood
is Feverish and distempered through inward heat: if it be loose and thin, it is
a sign of Weakness, but if hard and dry, it shows the horse to be hot inwardly,
or else that he is a foul feeder: But if his dung carry a medium betwixt hard
and soft, and smell strong, it is a sign of Health and Vigor.

When these Observations have been taken notice of concerning his Dung, then
you shall feed, dr^ss, water, etc. as in his former days of Rest; observing
always to give variety, and his belly full of Corn and Bread. The next have him
abroad in the Field again, but by no means put him to any labor, further than
to rake him from hill to hill after the Dogs, to keep him within ^ound of their
Cry; for the design of this Day's Exerci^e is only to keep him in breath, and
get him an Appetite. Observe as you ride, that you let him stand still to dung;
and look back on it that you may draw Inferences from the Faces. When the Day
is well nigh spent bring him home without the least sweat, and o^der him as at
other times, only observe to give no Scourings, nor Rye-bread. You may if you
please wa^^r your Horse this day, both at your going into the Field and at your
coming Home, observing to gallo^ after it, to warm the water in his Belly. The
next is a day of Rest.

In the same manner in every respect as you have spent this Week you must spend
the next likewise, without alteration in any point; and by that time assure
your self that your Horse will be drawn clean enough for any ordinary Hunting;
so that afterward observing to hunt your Horse moderately twice or thrice a
week, according to your own pleasure, and the consti^ution of your Ho^ses body,
you need not question but to have him in as good state and strength as you
would de^^^e, without danger of his Wind, Eyesight, F^e^, or b^dy.

Now wh^^ you have thus according to art drawn your Ho^^e clean, you will
perceive those signs which I told you of, verified; for his Flesh on his short
Ribs and Buttocks will be as hard as a Board, his Flank will be thin, and
nothing to be felt but a double skin, and chaps so clean from Fat, Glut or
Kernels, that you may hide your Fists in them; and above all his Exercise will
give plain Demonstration of the Truth of this Art, for he will run three or
four Miles three quarters speed without sweating, or scarce blowing, I say when
this is perfected, you must avoid all scourings after hunting, (because Nature
has nothing to work on) but Rye-bread and a Mash, except your Horse be now and
then troubled with some little Poze in the Head; and then you shall bruise a
little Mustard seed in a fine linen Rag, and steep it in a quart of strong Ale
for three or four hours, and then untying the Rag mix the Mustard Seed and the
Ale with a quarter of a Pe^k of Oats, and give it your Horse.

Lastly, when your Horse is drawn clean, you must beware that he grows not foul
again through want of either Airing, or Hunting, or any other Negligence, lest by
that means you procure to your self and your Horse double pains and labor, and
no thanks from your Master.

CHAP. VII. Of making a Hunting-Match, its advantages and disadvantages.
SInce many Persons of Honor delight in good Horses, both for Hunters as well
as Gallopers, it may not be improper to speak a word in this place concerning
the Advantages or Disadvantages which happen in making of Hunting-Matches;
since he that proceeds cautiously and upon true grounds in matching his Horse
is already in a great measure sure of gaining the Prize, at least if the
Proverb be true, that a Match well made is half won.

The first thing to be considered by him that designs to match his Horse, for
his own advantage and his Horses credit, is this; That he do not flatter
himself in the opinion of his Horse, by fancying that he is swifter than the
wind, when he is but a slow Galloper; and that he is whole-running, (that is,
will run four miles without a sobb at the height of his speed) when he is not
able to run a mile.

And the ground of this Error I suppose arises from a Gentleman's being
mistaken in the speed of his Hounds, who for want of Trial against other Dogs
that have been really fleet, has supposed his own to be swift, when in reality
they were but of middle speed; and because his Horse (when trained) was able to
follow them all day, and at any hour to command them upon deep as well as light
Earths, has therefore falsely concluded him to be swift as the best; but upon
trial against a Horse that has been rightly trained after Hounds that were
truly fleet, has to his cost bought his Experience, and been convinced of his
Error.

Therefore I would persuade all Lovers of Hunters to get two or three Couple of
tried Hounds, and once or twice a week to follow after them a Train-scent; and
when he is able to top them on all sorts of Earth, and to endure Heats and
Colds stoutly, then he may the better re^ie on his Speed and Toughness.

That Horse which is able to ride a Hare-chase of five or six miles briskly,
and with good courage, till his body be as it were bathed in sweat; and then
upon the death of the Hare, in a nipping frosty morning can endure to stand
still, till the sweat be frozen on his back, so that the cold may pierce him as
well as the heat; and then even in that extremity of Cold to ride another
Chase, as briskly and with as much courage, as he did in the former: That Horse
which can thus endure heats and colds oftenest is of most value amongst
Sports-men. And indeed it is not every Horse that is able to endure such
extraordinary Toil; and I my self have seen very brave Horses to the Eye, that
have rid the first Chase to admiration, that when the Cold had struck to them,
and they began to grow stiff, have flagg'd the second, and given quite out the
third Heat.

Therefore to make a judgment of the goodness of your own Horse, observe him
after the death of the first Hare, if the Chase has been any thing brisk: if
when he is cold, he shrinks up his Body, and draws his Legs up together, it is an
infallible token of want of Courage; and the same you may collect from the
slackning of his Girths after the first Chase, and from the setting of his
Teeth, and the dullness of his Countenance; all which are true marks of
Faintness, and Tyring^ and therefore there is no reliance on such a Horse, in
case of a Wager.

But if on the contrary, you are Master of a Horse (not only in your own
judgment, but in the opinion of knowing Horsemen) that is approved for Speed,
and Toughness, and you are desirous to match him, or otherwise to run for a
Plate; I will to the best of my power tell you the advantages that are to be
gained in Matching.

But before I enter upon the subject proposed, I think it convenient to tell
you the way our Ancestors had of making their Matches, and our modern way of
deciding Wagers. First then the old way of Trial was by running so many
Train-scents after Hounds, as was agreed on between the ^arties concerned and a
Bell-Court, this being found not so uncertain and more durable than
Hare-hunting, and the advantage consisted in having the Trains led on Earth
most suitable to the nature of the Horses. Now others chose to hunt the Hare
till such an hour prefix^d, and then to run the Wild-goose-Chase, which,
because it is not known to all Huntsmen, I shall explain the use and manner of
it.

The Wildgoose Chase received its Name from the manner of the flight which is
made by Wildgeese, which is generally one after another: so the two Horses
after the running of Twelvescore Yards, had liberty, which Horse soever could
get the leading, to ride what ground he pleased; the hindmost Horse being bound
to follow him, within a certain distance agreed on by Articles, or else to be
whipped up by the Triers or Judges which rode by, and which ever Horse could
distance the other won the Match.

But this Chase was found by Experience so inhu^ane, and so destructive to good
Horses, especially when two good Horses were matched; for neither being able ^o
distance the other, till ready both to sink under their Riders through
Weakness, oftentimes the Match was fain to be drawn, and left undecided, tho
both the Horses were quite spoiled.

This brought them to run Trainscents, which afterward was changed to three
Heats, and a straight Course; and that the Lovers of Hunting-horses might be
encouraged to keep good Ones, Plates have been erected in many places of this
Land, purposely for Hunters, and some their Articles exclude all others,
(namely Gallopers) from Running.

But whether you design to match your Horse against any One Horse in
particular, or to put him in for a Plate, where he must run against all that
come in general; yet it is necessary that you know the nature and disposition of
your Horse, before you venture any wager on his head; that is to say, whether
he ^e hot and fiery, or cool and temperate in Riding; whether he be very swift,
but not hard at bottom, or slow, but yet sure, and one that will stick at mark;
on what sort of Earths he most delights to gallop on, whether to climb or run
down hills^ or else to skelp on a Flat; whether to run on de^p, or light
Grounds; whether on rack-ways, or Carpet-ground; whether amongst Mole-hills, or
on Meadow ground; whether he be well-winded, or thick winded, so that tho he
will answer a Spur, and mend upon Lapping, yet he must have ease by Sobs. All
these things must be known, to the end that you may draw those advantages from
them which may be offered in matching; as this for Example.

If your Horse be hot and fiery, it is odds but he is fleet withal (for
generally those Horses are so) and and delights to run upon light and hard
flats; and must be held hard by the Rider that he may have time to recover Wind
by Sobb^; or else his Fury will choke him. But whereas it is the general
opinion that nothing that is violent can be lasting; and therefore that it is
impossible that such hot mettled Horses can be tough and hard at bottom, this I
conceive may be but a popular Error; for I have sometimes seen by Art those
two Qualities reconciled, at least so far, as to make the most Fiery Horse
managable, and to endure both Whip and Spur; and then tho he should not prove
at bottom so truly tough as the craving Drudge, yet by his Riders management
his Speed shall answer it in all points and serve in its stead; But to return
to my Subject..

The best way to Match such a Horse is to agree to run Train-scents and the
fewer the better for you, before you come to the Course: Also in these
Trainscents the shorter you make your distance the better: and above all things
be sure agree to have the leading of the first Trayn, and then making choice of
such grounds as your Horse may best show his Speed, and the Fleetest Dogs you
can procure, give your Hounds as much Law before you, as your Tryers will
allow, and then making a loose try to win the Match with a Wind; but if you
fail in this attempt then Bear your Horse, and save him for the Course at
last.

But if your Horse be slow, yet well Winded, and a true Spurred Nagg; then the
more Trainscents you run before you come to run the straight Course the better.
Observing here too, to gain the leading of the first Train, which in this case
you must lead it upon such deep Earths that it may not end near any light
Ground. For this is the Rule received among Horsemen that the next Train is to
begin where the last ends, and the last train is to be ended at the starting
Post o^ the Course. Therefore observe to end your last on deep Earths as well
as the first.

In the next place have a care of making a Match of a sudden, and in Drink,
for fear least you repent when you are Sober. Neither make a match against a
Horse, which you do not know, without first consulting some skillful or trusty
Friend, on whose Judgment and Honesty you can safely rely, and who is able to
give a good Account of your Adversaries Horse's Speed and his manner of Riding;
and if you find him any ways correspondent to your own in speed or goodness be
not too Peremptory to venture, but upon some reasonable probabilities of
Winning: for it is neither Braggs nor Fancy that will make your Horse run one jot
the better, or your Adversarys the worse: and remember this, that there is no
Horse so good, but there may be another as good; and then if you proceed on
good Grounds, and true Judgment, you may be the bolder to go on, and stand to
your Match, notwithstanding the opinion of other men may be against you.

One material Advise I had like to have forgot and that is this; be sure at no
time give advantage of Weight, for you will find the inconvenience of it at the
latter end of the Day: for tho a Horse feel it not when he is fresh, yet it
will sink him very much when he grows weak: a Horse-length lost by odds of
Weight in the first Train, may prove a distance in the straight Course at last;
for the Weight is the same every Heat tho his strength be not.

But if on the other side you gain any advantage of Weight, article that the
Horseman shall ride so much weight as you are agreed on, besides the Saddle,
for by this means the Rider (if he be not weight of him self) must carry the
dead weight somewhere about him, which will be troublesome to the Rider as well
as the Horse; and the more to the latter, since it is more remote from his Back
then if it were in the Saddle, and by consequence will more disorder his stroke
if the Rider incline to either side then if it were nearer the Center; as you
may see by a pair of Scales, where if the Pin be not placed exactly in the
midst of the Beam, the longest part (as being most distant from the Center)
will be the heaviest.

Now as to the time that you take for dyeting, that must be according to the
Nature of your Horse, and the present state of Body he is in; for tho he may be
clean enough for ordinary Hunting, yet he may be far distant from that perfect
State of Body, that is required in a Match, and to keep him in such strict Diet
all the Season, (except on such extraordinary Occasions) would be an
unnecessary Expense.

As to your Horses Disposition for Running, you must know it by use and
Observation, for in this Point Horses very much differ, for some run best when
they are high in case, others when they are in middle Condition of Flesh, and
some again when they appear to the Eye Poor, and Low in Flesh; there fore
according to your Horses Nature, and the time required to bring him into his
best State, you must order your day for the trial of your Match to be.

But if you design to put him in for some Hunting Plate; there neither the
choice of your Ground, the Weight, nor the Horses you are to run against are at
your disposal, but you must take them as you find them; only the time for
b^inging your Horse into a good Condition is at your own discretion, since you
may begin as soon or as late as you please to keep him in strict Diet, the time
for all Plates being usually sixth, and annually the same.

CHAP. IX. Of the Ordering the Hunter, for a Match or a Plate.
WHen you have either Matched your Horse, or entertained thoughts of putting him
in for a Plate, you must consider that you ought to reserve a Month at the
least, to draw his Body perfectly clean, and to resine his Wind to that degree
of perfection which Art is capable of attaining to.

First then you must take an exact view of the State of his Body; both
outwardly and inwardly^ as whether he be low or high in Flesh, or whether he be
dull and Heavy when abroad, and this occasioned through too much hard riding,
or through some Grease that by hunting has been dissolved, but for want of a
scowring has not been removed.

If he appear sluggish and Melancholy from either of these causes, than give
him half an Ounce of Diapente in a pint of good old Malligo Sack, which will
both cleanse his Body, and revive his Spirits: and then for the first week you
shall feed him continually with Bread, Oats and split Beans, giving him
sometimes the one and sometimes the other, according as h^ likes, always
leaving some in his Locker to eat at his own leisure when you are absent; and
when you return at your Hours of Feeding to take away what is left, and to give
him fresh till you have made him wanton and playfull. To which end you shall
observe that though you ride him every day morning and evening on Airing, and
every other day on Hunting, yet you are not to sweat him, or put him to any
violent Labor, the design this week being to keep him in Wind and Breath, and
to prevent pursiveness.

But you are to observe that both your Oats, Beans and Bread are to be now
ordered after another manner then you did before, for first you must dry your
Oats well in the Sun, then put them into a clean, Bag and beat them soundly
with a Flail or Cudgel, till ^ou think they are hulled; then take them out of
the bagg and winnow them clean both from hulls and dust and so give them to
your Horse as you have occasion. Your Beans in like mann^r must be separated
from the hulls which are apt to breed Glut, and must either be thrown away or
given amongst chaf to some more ordinary Horse. And for your Bread whereas
before you only chipt it, now you must cut the Crust clean away, and dispose of
it as you please; for it is hard of digestion, and will be apt to heat and dry
his Body. And now that you are to put him into stricter keeping, you are to
make a finer sort of Bread then before, as thus;

Take two Pecks of Beans, and two of Wheat, and grind them together, but not
too fine, to prevent too much Bran being in the Bread; and dress one Peck of
the Meal through a ^ine Range, and knead it up with new Ale-Barm, and the
Whites of a dozen new laid Eggs, and so bake it in a Loaf by it self, and the
rest dress through a Boulter, and knead it only with Ale and Barm; and use it
in all other points as the former: Now the Peck-loaf is to be given your Horse
when you set him, and the other at ordinary times.

This Bread assists Nature much in increasing the Strength, Courage and Wind of
your Horse, provided you add thereto (as I have always told you) true Labor,
as any Bread whatsoever; nay even as either of M. De-Greys sorts of Bread,
which he mentions in his Complete Horseman 40 p. 232. ed. 40 especially his
last, which he says is better Bread, and a greater Cooler; and which he
prescribes to make thus,

Take Wheat Meal one Peck, Rye-meal, Beans and Oat-meal, all ground very small,
of each half a Peck, Aniseeds, and Licorish, of each one Ounce, White
Sugar Candy four Ounces all in fine Powder, the yolks and whites of Twenty Eggs
well beaten, and so much VVhite-wine as will knead it into a Paste, make this
into great Loaves, bake them well, and after they be two or three days old, let
him eat of this Bread, but chip away the Out side.

Now the Reason why I have cited this is, because I have heard several (who
would be thought knowing Horsemen) applaud this very Bread beyond any other to
be met with in any Book, tho for my part I can find nothing excellent in the
whole Composition.

For first Oat-meal tho it be strong, yet it is a dry grain, hard of digestion,
and a great dryer up of the Blood. The Wheat is of a drying quality likewise,
tho it be light; for the Aniseed and Licorish, they are not only Physical but
hot also; so that the Body becomes over heated, and thereby costive. And yet
these People will not be persuaded, but these Drugs will make him long-winded;
possibly they might assist him in Neighing, as some men say it does Songsters
in Vocal Music, wherein there is no Exercise of the Body used; but where
bodily strength is required, I am apt to believe it more prejudicial than
pro^itable.

But here some will object that there is Rye and Beans both which are
moist^ing; especially the Rye which is both cold and moist, and is the very
reason De Gray himself gives why he put Rye into his latter Bread, because
(says he) Rye is a Loosner and a Cooler, and therefore it will make the Horse
more soluble.

I have already said, that if his Body have Feeding proportionate to his
Labor, the Horse will continue in a right state ^f Health. Yet since he is hot
by Nature, and Labor might increase his natural Heat, and render him costive,
therefore I have all along prescribed him Rye-bread alone as Physical. But here
let the Horse be in what condition soever, whether bound in his body or
laxative, yet Rye being a part of your Bread, ^our Horse must continually feed
thereon, which has this undeniable disadvantage, that if he be loose in his
body, this Bread (to use de Grey's own words) will make him more soluble.

And now whilst I am discoursing of Horsebread, I cannot be condemn another
curiosity in some Feeders, who think, by dressing their Meal to the utmost
degree of Fineness they do wonders, and that such pure Food must of necessity
bring him to the greatest perfection imaginable both of Body and Wind.

But in this point I think they are deceived, for the Meal being dressed so
very fine, nothing remains but the quintessence of it; which tho it be lightened
by Barm and Whites of Eggs, yet when it is above a day old twill begin to
harden, (as may be observed by Manchet) and especially if Oatmeal be in it, by
reason of its drying quality, whereby it will not be so easy of digestion, as
it would be otherwise if it had no Bran in it; and by consequence will be more
apt to oppress his Stomach, if he be heated, before it be thoroughly digested,
and so breed raw crudities, and an in^lammation of the blood, and by that means
hazard a Sur^eit, than which nothing can be of worse consequence to a Horse
that is matched.

And therefore it is that I advise, that your Horsebread should only be made of
Wheat and Beans, and that it should not be dressed too fine, nor too course,
but so, as that there may be neither so much Bran left as to annoy the blood,
nor so little as to make your Bread too close and solid; but you may leave some
on purpose to scowr the Maw, and further your Horses Digestion. And thus much
by way of Digression.

Having spoken to the first condition of Horses which we proposed, viz.
melancholy, and low in flesh, we are now to speak of those which are brisk and
lively; which if your Horse be so, that when you lead him out of the Stable he
will leap and play about you, then you must not only avoid giving him the
Scowring last mentioned of Sack and Diapente, but any other whatsoever: for
there being no foul Humors, or any super^luous matter left in his body for the
Physic to work on, it will prey upon the strength of his body, and by that
means weaken it, which it must be your utmost endeavor to preserve by full
Feeding and sound Labor, which will necessarily produce a perfect Wind, which
is the Support of Strength, for when his Wind once fails, his Strength avails
nothing.

As to the manner of it, if your Horse be engaged in a Hunting-match, you shall
sweat him twice this week, but not by hunting him after the Hare, as formerly,
but by Train-scents, since the former on this Occasion may prove deceitful; for
tho the Hounds be very swift, yet the Scent being cold the Dogs will often be
at fault, and by that means the Horse will have many Sobs, so that when he
comes to run Train-scents in earnest your Horse will look for ease, his Wind
being not so perfect as in Art it ought to be.

Therefore lead your Train-scents with a dead Cat over such Grounds as you are
likely to run on and best agrees with yous Horses Humor, and be sure make
choice of the Fleetest hounds you can get, and then your Horse will be kept up
to the hight of his speed.

As to the Number of Train-scents that you are to ride at a time, that you must
order according to your Match, or (which is better) according to your Horse's
strength, and ability for performing his Heats. For if you labor him beyond
his strength, twill take him off his speed, weaken his Limbs, and daunt his
Spirit. If you give him too little Exercise, it will give opportunity for
pursiveness and ill humors, as Glut, etc. to increase in him, and gain in him
a habit of Laziness, that when he comes to be put to labor above his usual
rate, he will grow restiff, and settle like a Jade, either of which will
redound to your discredit, and therefore it must be from your own knowledge in
the state of his Body, and not from any general Directions in writing, that you
must steer your Course

Only this Direction may be given you, that if you are to run Eight
Train-scents and the straight Course, more or less, you are to put him to such
severe labor not above twice in your whole Months keeping; and and if it be in
the first Fortnight, twill be the better, for then he will have a complete
Fortnight to recover his strength again; and for his labor in his last
Fortnight, let it be proportionate to his strength and wind, as sometimes half
his Task, and then three parts of it. Only observe, that the last Trial you
make in the first Fortnight be a Train-scent more than your Match, for by that
means you will find what he is able to do. And for the proportion of his
Exercise, twice a week (as I have already said) is sufficient to keep him in
breath, and yet will not diminish or injure his Vigor.

But if your Hunting-match be to run sewer Train-scents, then you may put him
to his whole Task the oftener, according as you find him in condition; only
observe that you are not to strain him for Ten days at least before he ride
his Match, that he may be led into the Field in perfect strength and vigor.

If you intend him for a Plate, let him take his Heats according to this
Direction, only let it be on the Place, that he may be acquainted with the
Ground; and as for the Hounds you may omit them, as not being tied to their
speed, but that of your Adversaries Horse's. But as to your Number of Heats,
let them be according to what the Articles exact; only observe that as to the
sharpness of them, they must be regulated according to the temper of his
strength, and the purity of his Wind. And when you heat him provide some Horses
upon the Course to run at him, which will quicken his spirits, and encourage
him, when he finds he can command them at his pleasure. And here too the same
Rule must be observed, not to give your Horse a Bloody heat for Ten days or a
Fortnight before the Plate be to be run for: And let his last bent which you
give him before the day of Trial be in all his Clothes, and just skelp it
over; which will make him run the next time much more vigorously, when he shall
be stripped naked, and feel the cold Air pierce him.

But now that I am speaking of sweating, it may be expected that I should lay
down some Rules how to order a Horse that is in keeping for a Match in Frosty
weather, or in case he be an old strained Horse, so that you dare not heat him
in hard weather, for fear of Lameing him a fresh.

In these cases some Horsemen have practiced sweating their Horse in the House,
by laying on him multiplicity of Clothes, being first made hot at the Fire;
which is the most unnatural way of sweating a Horse that can be, since it is
provoked by heat arising from the outward parts, and is too violent, the
extremity of the heat joined to the weight of the Clothes, not only weakening,
but almost smothering him.

The next way in use, is to give him his Heat a^road, as I just now mentioned
in his Clothes, but this too is not so natural and kindly, as without his
Clothes, since here too the heat is augmented from without, and consequently
abates his strength the more, and yet does not altogether so well improve his
Wind.

Therefore if either you have a Horse that has been strained, or otherwise the
weather be unseasonable, find out some dead Iog, or sandy way, though of but
half a Miles length, and there breath your horse till he sweat as you would
have him. I remember to have heard of a Gentleman having matched his horse for
a very considerable sum; and the weather proving hard, took this course to
keep his horse in breath; he caused Straw, and foul Litter to be spread all
along round an adjoining Close, and every morning his Servnats shook it up and
turned it, to keep it hollow and soft, and then the Horse was had forth to
gallop on it after his Water, and by this means kept his Horse in tolerable
Wind.

Now during this Month both on his Resting-daies, and after his sweats on
Heating-daies, you are to observe the same Rules which you were taught in the
first week of your Third Fortnights Keeping; only you are to omit all
scourings, but Rye-bre^d and Mashes; since your Horse being in so perfect a
state of Body has no need of any. Only if you think there may be any occasion,
and that your Horse prove Thirsty, about Eight or Nine a Clock at Night you may
give him this ^ulip to cool him and quench his Thirst.

Take Barly-water Two Quarts: of Syrrup of Violets 3 Ounces, of Syrrup of
Lemmons 2 Ounces, mix them together, and give them to your Horse to drink; if
he refuse, fasten it from falling as you did the Mash, and so let it stand by
him all Night.

During the last Fortnight, you must not only dry your Oats, and hull them by
beating, but likewise take half a Strike of Oats and wash them in the Whites of
a dozen or twenty Eggs, and stirring them therein let them soke all Night; then
the next Morning take them and spread them abroad in the Sun, till they be as
dry as at first, and so give them to your Horse, and when they are spent
prepare more in the same manner. This Food is light of Digestion, and very
sovereign for his Wind.

^is Beans must be ordered as before, only give them not so frequently, if he
will eat his Oats without them; and for his Bread this Fortnight let it be
three parts Wheat to one of Beans, and let it be ordered as before directed.
And likewise if you find him inclined to costiveness forget not to relieve
Nature by giving him Oats washed in two or three Whites of Eggs and Ale beat
together; for that, as I have told you already, will cool his Body, and keep it
moist.

During the last Week omit giving him a Mash, only give the Barly-water as
before; but as to Hay let him have as much as he will eat (which will not be
much, if he have his fill of better food) till a day before he is to ride his
Match, but then you must hold your hand, that he may have time to diges^ that
which he has eaten, and then and not before you may muzzle him with your
Cavezone; and be sure that day, and so till the morning he is led out, to feed
him as much as possible, for such a days Labor will require something to
maintain strength. Therefore in the Morning, an hour before you are to lead
out, give him a Tossed or two of White-bread steept in Sack^ which will revive
his Spirits, and so lead him into the Field.

But if you are to run for a Plate, which usually is not till three a clock in
the Afternoon, then by all means have him out early in the morning to air,
that he may empty his Body, and when h^ is come in from Airing feed him with
Tosts in Sack; for you must consider, that as too much fullness will endanger
his wind, so too long fasting will cause faintness. When he has ^aten what you
think fit to give him, put on his Cavezone, and then having chafed his Legs
soundly with Piece-grease and Brandy warmed together, or Train-oyl, (which
ought likewise to be used daily at Noon for a Week^ before the Match, or longer
if you see cause,) shake up his Litter, and shutting up your Stable close, and
preventing any Noise to be made near him, leave him to his Rest till the hour
come that he is to go into the Field.

As to platting his Main and Tail, shooing him with Plates, pit^hing his Saddle
and Girths, and the like preparations, they are things which every Groom can
instruct you in, and therefore I shall not trouble you with Rules concerning
them, but in lieu thereof shall add some farther Directions how to judge of the
State of your Horses Body, and if you find any thing amiss therein how to
redress it.

CHAP IX. Of the Means to judge of your Horses State of Body, and of curing all
Casualties that may happen after Matching.
THere are several Observations to be made by you during your Dieting your
Horse, which if you miscarry in, may be the loss of your Match, or your share
in the Plate. Therefore, that you may know how to proceed regularly in this
Ar^, I shall endeavor to sum them up.

First then you are to observe his Chaule, his Ribs, and his Flank, according
to the Rules formerly laid down; for if he be clean within, he will also be
clean there; but yet he may feel clean there, when he is not clean within; and
therefore those Grooms are very conceited, who upon their first view of a Horse
and handling of his Flank, pronounce him to be in a true state of Body; for
gentle Airing, warm Clothing, scanty Feeding, may disperse the gross Fat and
Glut, and drive it from the outward parts, so that he may appear clean, when in
reality he is not so: and therefore you are only a competent Judge, who know how
he was cleansed.

Therefore you are to observe, first, whether in all points you have proceeded
according to Art in his Training; as whether he performs his Heats with vigor
and true courage, whether he have been all along home-fed, whether you have not
suffered pursi^eness to increase by too little labor, or abated his Flesh and
strength by too much. These things are the very grounds of Keeping, and
therefore ought to be scanned and considered with judgment.

Next you are to observe his manner of Feeding, as whether he holds his
Appetite or no; and observe what sort of Food he likes best, and of that give
him oftenest; and in case his stomach abate, keep him out longer Morning and
Night, at his airings.

In like manner you must observe his Dung, which tho it be as fallacious
oftentimes as a Sick-man's Water, it being liable to alteration on the change
of Diet, or being influenced by the air, yet being clean and in health it will
usually be a pale yellow color, and be voided in round Pellets; but if it be
loose, and soft, it is an infallible sign of weakness, and therefore must by
good Feeding be remedied as soon as possible. But if it be hard and dry, so
that he cannot dung but with difficulty and straining, then you must endeavor
to relieve Nature, but not with scowrings, which would weaken too much, but
rather choose to give him this Glister, which will both cool and refresh him.

Take a Quart of Whey, of Syrrup of Violets, and Pulpe of Cassia, of each Four
Ounces and of Manna half an Ounce; this will Purge him gently, and is most
excellent to cool his Bowels.

The next thing to be considered is Lamness, which if it proceed from old
strains you must make use of this Ointment, which I have several times
experimented with good success.

Take a fresh Butter, Oil of Bays, Dialthea, and Turpentine of each Two
Ounces, mix and boil them together on a soft fire, and when they are well
incorporated, as hot as the Horse can suffer it, anoint the Horse twice a day,
and give him exercise, by Airing him abroad Morning and Evening a foot pace,
and you will find it a certain Remedy for any Strain in the Shoulder^ Clap on
the back sinews, or any gri^f what soever, that proceeds from Strains.

But if you only fear Lameness from Old Strains, then you must be careful that
your Exercise be moderate, and always when you come in from Water and his Legs
are rubbed dry, anoint them with such supple Ointments, as are accounted good
for the Limbs, as Linseed, Train, Sheepsfoot, Neatsfoot, Nerve-Oyle and the
like; all which may be used on his days of Rest, but on his heating days
Urine and Saltpeter. Some Horsemen make use of Brandie and Sallet Oil mixed,
and bathe his Legs, and afterward heat it in with a hot Iron, and commend it
as the best thing for the Limbs of an Old s^if^ Horse.

But if your Horse through Negligence, or any casualtie happen to have the
Grease fall into his Heels, you must endeavor to remove it by a good sound
heat, and a scowring after it, and apply to his Legs this Poultiss.

Take of Honey a Pound, of Turpentine, common Gum, Meal of Linseed, and the
Meal of Fenugreek, of each 4 Ounces, and the Powder of Bay^berries well
sea^ch'd 3 Ounces, mix and boil all these well together; then take it off, and
put to it a Pint of White Wind, then boil it again, till it be very thick: and
with this, as hot as the Horse can suffer it, lap his legs about Plaister-wise,
and renew it only once in three days, and it will certainly bring his Legs
within compass^

If your Horses Feet be bad, either surbated^ or foundred, then instead of
Cow Dung, you may stop them with blew-clay and Vinegar temperd together, and on
his Heating-daies at Night stop them with grey-sope, and keep it in with a
piece of an old Shoo-sole.

If your Horse be troubled with any Dose in his head give him Mustard Seed
amongst his Provender, but if it be a worse Cold, which you will perceive by
his Rattling, then give him this Lambitive, or Electuary.

Take of Honey and Treacle, each half a Pound, having mixed these together, add
to them Powder of Cumminseed, Liquorish, Bay Berries, Anniseeds, each an Ounce,
mix all these together, and put them to the Honey and Treakle, which will make
it of a thick consistance. If your horse has a Cold, instead of his Oats
before Water, give him the quantity of a Walnut of this Lambitive on the top of
a stick or in a Spoon, and let him lick it off; and the same do after Airing,
when first you come in, and you will find the advantage of it.

These at present are all the Inconveniences that I can call to mind, which
are liable to Hunters, or Gallopers in their Keeping; and tho through
inadvertency, or want of memory I should have omitted any, yet from these
Grounds, you may form your Remedies for any common Accident or Distemper; and
now that we draw near to the Match-day, and the End of our Discourse, we will
only discuss some few Rules relating to the Trial of the Hunting Match. I mean
Rules to be observed in Riding, and so conclude.

CHAP. X. Of riding a Hunting-Match, or Heats for a Plate, and the Advantages
belonging to each.
I Have endeavored to show the Necessity and the Manner of Training and
Dieting Horses, but this alone is not sufficient to the winning of either Match
or Plate without a knowing and an honest Rider, and a skilful Judge or Tryer be
joined thereto; but since no man is sitter to ride the Horse than he that has
the training of him, I shall lay down some general Rules how to ride to the
best Advantage either a Hunting-Match, or three Heats and a Course for a Plate.

The first Requisite in a Rider, next to faithfulness in his Trust, is to have
a good close Seat, his Knees being held firm to his Saddle-skirts, his Toes
turn^d inward and his Spurs outward from the Horses sides, his left hand
governing his Horses Mouth, and his right commanding his Wh^p; observing during
all the Trial throughout to sit firm in his Saddle, without waving, or standing
up in his Stirrops, which very much incommodes the Horse, notwithstanding the
conceited Opinion of some Iockeys that it is a becoming Seat.

When you spur your Horse, strike him not hard with the Calves of your Legs, as
if you would beat the wind out of his body, bust just turn your Toes outward,
and bring the Spurs quick to his sides; and such a sharp stroke will be more
serviceable to the quickening of your Horse, and sooner draw blood. Be sure not
to spur yonr Horse but when there is occasion, and avoid spurring him under the
fore-bowels, between his Shoulders, and his Girths near the Heart (which is the
tenderest place) till the last Extremity.

When you whip your Horse let it be over the shoulder on the near side, except
upon hard running, and when you are at all; then be sure with a strong jerk to
strike your Horse in the Flank, for there the skin is tender'st, and most
sensible of the Lash^

Observe when you whip or spur your Horse, and that you are certain he is at
the top of his speed, if then he clap his Ears in his Pole, or whisk his Tail,
be sure that you bear him hard, and give him as much comfort as ever you can,
by sawing his Snaffle to and fro in his Mouth, and by that means forcing him to
open his Mouth, which will comfort him, and give him wind.

If there be any high wind stirring when you ride, observe if it be in your
Face to let your Adversary lead, and to hold hard behind him till you see your
opportunity of giving a Loose; yet you must observe to ride so close to him,
that his Horse may break the Wind from yours, and that you by stooping low in
your Seat may shelter your self under him, which will assist the strength of
your Horse. But if the Wind be in your Back, ride exactly behind him, that your
Horse may alone enjoy the benefit of the Wind, by being as it were blown
forward, and by breaking it from him as much as you can possible.

Next observe what Ground your Horse delights to run best on, bearing your
Horse (as much as your Adversary will give you leave) on level Carpet-ground,
because your Horse naturally will be desirous to spend himself more freely
thereon. But on deep Earths etc. give him more liberty, because he will
naturally favor himself thereupon. Be sure, if you are to run up hill, to
favor your Horse and bear him, for fear of running him out of wind; but down
hill, (if your Horses Feet and Shoulders will endure it, and you dare venture
your own Neck) always give him a Loose.

Only take this for a general Rule, that if you find your Horse to have the
Heels of the other, that then you be careful to preserve his Speed till the
last Trainscent, if you are not to run a straight Course, but i^ so, then till
the Course, and so to husband it then too, that you may be able to make a Push
for it at the last Post.

Next you are to observe the nature of your Opposites Horse, and if he be
fiery, then to run just behind, or just cheek by joul, and with your Whip make
as much noise as you can, that you may force him on faster then his Rider would
have him, and by that means Spend him the sooner. Or else keep just before him
upon such a slow Gallop, that he may either over reach or by treading on your
Horses Heels (if he will not take the leading) endanger falling over.

Observe on what ground the contrary Horse runs worst and on that Earth be sure
to give a loose that your Adversaries being forced to follow you, may hazard
stumbling, or clapping on the back Sinnws.

Observe likewise in your Riding the several Helps and Corrections of the Hand
the Whip and the Spur, and when and how oft^n he makes use of them; and when
you perceive that his Horse begins to be blown by any of the former Sy^ptoms,
as Whisking his Tail, clapping down his Ears, holding out his Nose like a Pig
etc. you may then take it for granted that he is at the top of what he can do;
therefore in this case observe how your own rides, and if he run cheerfully and
strongly without Spurring, then be sure keep your Adversary to the same speed
without giving him ease and by that means you will quickly bring him to give
out, or else distance him.

Observe at the End of every Train-sent what Condition the other Horse is in;
and how he holds out in his Labor; which you may be able to give a judgment of
by his Looks, the Working of his Flank, and the slackness of his Girths. For if
h^ look dull it is a sign his Spirits fail him; if his Flanks beat much, it is a
token that his Wind begins to fail him, and then of necess^ity his Strength
must too. If his Wind fail him, then his Body will grow thin and appear tuckt
up, which will make his Girths appear slack to the Eye. And therefore take this
for a Rule that there is no greater Sign of Weakness then this which I have
last mentioned; so that if your Adversaries Horse want girting after the first
Scent, provided he were close-girt at his first starting, you need not much
despair of winning your Wager.

When each Train-scent is ended (and so likewise after every Heat for a Plate)
you must have dry Straw, and dry Clothes both Linen and Woollen which have
been steeped in Urine and Saltpeter a day, or two, and then dried in the Sun;
and likewise one, or two of each which have been so steeped, must be brought
wet into the Field; and after the Train is ended you must have two or three
Hel^ers, and after your Groom has with a Knife of Heat (as the D. of New Castle
calls it) which is an old piece of a Sword blade, scrapt off all the Sweat from
your Horses Neck, Body etc. you must see that they first with Straw, and then
with their dry Clothes rub him dry all over, whilst others are employed about
his Legs; and as soon as they are rubbed dry then chafe them with your wet
clothes, and never give over till you are called by the Judges to start again.
This will keep his Joints plyant and nimble, and prevent any inflammation which
might arise from any old Strai^.

The next thing to be considered is the Judges, or Tryers Office, which is to
see that all things are ordered according to the Articles, which to that end
ought to be publicly read before the Horses Start.

Next that each Tryer on whose side the Train is to be led, according to the
Articles give directions ^or its leading according to the advice of the Rider,
or his Knowledge of the Nature and Dispos^^ion of that Horse on whose side he
is Chose.

Next that each Tryer be so advantageously M^^^^ed, as to ride up behind the
Horses, (but not upon them) all day; and to observe that the Contrary Horse
ride his True-ground, and observe the Articles in every particular, or else not
to permit him to pr^ceed.

Next that after each Train-scent be ended, each Tryer look to that Horse
against whom he is chosen, and observe that he be in ways relieved but with
rubbing, except Liberty on both sides be given to the contrary.

Next, as soon as the time which is allowed for rubbing be expired, which is
generally half an hour, they shall comm^nd them to mo^^^, an^ if either Rider
refuse, it may be lawful for the other to (...) without him, and having ^ea^
him the distance agreed on, the Wager is to be adjudg'd on his side.

Next, the Tryers shall keep off all other Horses from crossing the Riders, or
leading them; only they themselves may be allowed to instr^^t the Riders by
word of mouth how to ride, whether slow, or fast, according to the Advantages
he perceives may be gained by his Directions.

Lastly, if there be any weight agreed on, they shall see that both Horses
bring their true weight to the starting place, and carry it to the end of the
Train, on penalty of losing the Wager.

The same Rules are to be observed (especially this last) by those Gentlemen
which are chosen to be Judges, at a Race for a Plate; only they usually stay
in the Stand, that they may the better see which Horse wins the ^eat.

Now for running for a Plate, there are not so many Observations to be made,
nor more Directions required than what have been already mentioned; only this,
that if you know your Horse to be tough at bottom^ and that he will stick at
mark, to ride him each Heat according to the best of his performance, and avoid
as much as possible either riding at any particular Horse, or staying for any,
but to ride each Heat thro^^^out with the best speed you can.

But if you have a very ^^ery Horse to manage, or one that is hard-mouthed, and
difficult to be held, then start behind the rest of the Horses with all the
coolness and gentleness imaginable^ and when you find your Horse to begin to
ride at some command, then p^t up to the other Horses, and if you ^ind they
ride (...) their Ease, and are hard held, then endeavor to draw them on
faster; but if you find their Wind begin to rake hot, and that they want a Sob,
^f your own Horse ^e in wind, and you have a Loose in your hand, keep them up
to their speed, till you come within three quarters of a Mile of the End of the
Heat; and then give a Loose, and push for it, and leave ^o Fortune and your
Horses Goodness the Event of your Success.

Many more Rules there are which may not occur at present to my memory, and
others which I purposely omit; but those may serve the honest Iockey, and for
the others which relate to Foul-play, as crossing, ^^nging ^n the Posts,
leaning on the other Horseman, yoking^ etc. I desire not to instruct any one in
them, and could wish that they might never be made use of, but be ^holly
relinquished by all honest Horsemen.

Lastly, when either your Hunting-Match, or your Trial for the (...) is ended,
as soon as you have rubbed your Horse dry, yo^ shall (...) him ^p, and ride him
home, where the first thing you give him shall be this Drink to comfort him.

Take a Pint and a half of sweet Milk, and put three Yolks of Eggs beaten into
it; then make it lukewarm, and put in three pennyworth of Saffron, and three
Spoonfuls of Sallet-oyl, and give it him in a Horn.

When this is done dress him slightly over with your Curry Comb, Brush, and
Woollen Cloth; and then bath the place where the Saddle stood with warm Sack to
prevent Warbles, and wash the Spurring-places with Piss and Salt, and then
afterward anoint them with Turpentin^ and Powder of Iet mixed together; and
be sure let the Sta^le I (...) very well litter'd; and then cloth him up with
all speed, and so let him stand two hours. Then feed him with Rye-bread, after
that with a very good Mash: then give him his Belly full of Hay, and what Corn
or Bread he will eat. Then but he his Legs well with Urine and S^lt-pe^er,
leave him Corn in his Locker, and so let him rest till the next Morning; at
which time order him as before directed in his days of Rest.

Thus I have imparted to the ^ublick what my own Experience has taught me,
relating to this part of Horsemanship. I desire no Person to rely on it further
then they shall find it advantageous upon Pra^tice and Trial. If others more
skilful would be as free to communicate their Observations on this Subject,
this profitable part of Knowledge might then perhaps be improved to perfection.
The giving a Specimen (...) all that is here designed. If the Reader finds any
Errors, he is desired either to pardon or (...) them. To those that either know
no better, or want other^ Helps, this possibly may prove no (...) piece of
Service.

ERRATA.
Page 15. l. 19. for rot read moot. p. 22. l. 22. for lyare r. lya^^^ p. ^^. l.
3. (...) Dose ^^ Pose. (...) p. 47. ^. 1. for to (...) etc. in (...), r. him^
and s^ (...) him by (...) and (...) p. 51. l. 2^. for Da^^^. Palc. p. ^^. l. ^.
for so (...).

FINIS.

