ZINGIS: A Tartarian History. WRITTEN In Spanish, and Translated into ENGLISH.

By J. M.

Humbly Dedicated to the EARL of DALKEITH, Apparent Duke of BVCCLVGH.

LONDON, Printed for Francis Saunders in the New Exchange, and Richard Parker
at the Royal Exchange, 1692.

TO THE Right Honorable LORD JOHN, EARL of DALKEITH, Apparent DUKE of BVCCLVGH.
My Lord,
AMong the many Ornaments which Fortune has bestowed, Nature infused, or Noble
Industry acquired to your Lordship, there is none more Illustrious than your
Love to your Country, generous Clemency, and courteous Facility to all Men: And
indeed as these Noble Virtues always most flourishingly budded in the early
Blooms of your Lordship's tender Years, so they do now most ripely and
radiantly display themselves in the glorious Sunshine of your courageous
Inclinations and honorable Intentions; Which also as they do encourage an
obscure Stranger (desiring to grace his weak Endeavors with the Honor of your
Lordship's Name prefixed) to prostrate this small Piece at your Lordship's
Feet; so they do justly entitle your Lordship to the Noblest Actions of the
greatest Heroes, and incline you to grant your Patronage to the unworthiest of

Your Lordship's most humble and devoted Servants, J. M.

ZINGIS: A Tartarian History.
EAstern Tartary, after having enjoyed several Kings worthy to govern that fair
Canton of the World, saw her self in the end subjected to Undkan a weak Prince,
and governed by an imperious Wife, who inspired him only with violent
Resolutions. The City of Cambalu, where the Kings ordinarily resided, every way
magnificent and glorious in the Majesty of six Kings who stayed at Undkan's
Court, was upon the point of being made a Theater of the Cruelty of Zamar, for
so was the Wife of that Prince called.

Undkan had an only Daughter of his first Marriage, called Taxila, who was
admired by all the Tartars, and whom he designed for the Son of the Queen his
Wife. That Prince, named Timur, was King of Tenduc, and in lieu of all merit
had the blind love of an ambitious Mother, capable of sacrificing all things to
her own Grandeur.

The Princess of Tartary was born with admirable perfections, never was there
seen any thing so fair as she. The Charms of her Wit equaled those of her
Beauty. She had a great Soul, a perfect Virtue, and it may be said that Heaven
was not wanting in its Favors to her. Her Inclinations were very opposite to
the designs of the King her Father, and in spite of Timur's pretensions, she
avoided dexterously the force of the absolute Orders that were imposed upon
her. But her Heart, which the Son of Zamar could not touch, was nevertheless
not insensible. Zingis who was banished from Cambalu, though guilty of no Crime,
but that of having too much merit, occasioned a tender unquietness in her Soul.
She saw all leagued against him, Undkan, Zamar, Timur, and several Kings,
cowardly adorers of a Tyrannick Power. Taxila alone took his part, with a
perseverance due unto the services of that illustrious Lover: but he was
absent, and the jealous Timur possessed of an absolute Power by the Authority
of his unjust Mother.

One night Taxila wholly taken up with the remembrance of Zingis, heard a great
noise, and saw the King her Father enter into her Chamber, who came, with eyes
full of fury, to upbraid her with holding private Intelligence with his most
mortal enemy. After an infinite number of injurious Speeches, he commanded her
to be strictly guarded in her apartments, where he left her alone.

The Princess easily judged that this Enemy he talked of could be no other but
Zingis; but she could not comprehend what had moved Undkan, who for more than a
year had left her in some sort of quiet, to begin a persecution afresh, which
time seemed to have mitigated, and now to recall into his memory a man whom he
had always endeavored to banish from it. An Officer of the Guards unriddl'd
the mystery to her, telling her that Zingis was very lately surprised at one of
the Gates of the Palace, on the banks of the Polizangi, where Zamar had heard
him speak from a Terrace where she was walking. That she perceiving by his
Discourse, that he was returned to Cambalu, for the sake of the Princess, had
ordered him to be assaulted, that his valor being overpowered by number, they
had overwhelmed, though not conquered, him, and that he was carried laden with
Irons to a great Tower, in which the vilest Malefactors were usually shut up.

This Discourse pierced the Soul of Taxila with a new Grief, she bid the Tartar
withdraw, and suffering her self to fall into Axione's arms, a Maid whom she
tenderly loved, because she was altogether lovely: Ah! my dear Axione, said she
unto her, the fatal accident which I so much feared, has now befaln us, and
the generous Zingis is in the chains of the implacable Zamar. Alas! I supported
his absence patiently, because it removed him out of the reach of that
barbarous enemy; but he precipitateth himself into her hands, and it is the
passion that he has always had for me that drives him back again. I enjoyed
all kind of sweetness in thinking that he loved me, and that I had no cause to
be apprehensive of any danger for him. I reckoned up his Services, that I might
recompense them with a most tender affection, and endured the importunities of
Timur, hoping that Heaven would not abandon me to a Man so little worthy of me.

The afflicted Taxila accompanied these words with a torrent of Tears, and the
fair Axione, who, because of the liberty which the Princess of Tartary gave
her, and the noble Motions which animated her Soul, used all decent freedom
with her, said unto her all that she judged proper to moderate her Grief. No,
Axione, replied the fair Princess, we can no longer entertain any hope. My
Father is faint-hearted, Zamar has her Victim in her Power, Timur has no
Virtue, and the Heavens are resolved to convince me to what height they are
irritated against me. But, Madam, continued Axione, Do You believe that the King
will abjure Equity altogether, and that he will give so just a cause to so many
Princes that have their Eyes upon him, during their abode at Cambalu, to detest
his Cruelty. Axione, replied Taxila, the Princes you speak of are naturally
base, and are moreover incensed against the Valor of Zingis, who has made
them Slaves, and imposed upon them the Tributes that support Zamar's pride.
Madam, answered Axione, among the Kings whom we see here, there may perhaps be
some that are brave and generous. It Is true, replied the Princess, that the
King of Thibet has a merit that distinguishes him from the rest; together
with that, added Axione, he has Power, and I am persuaded that he will attempt
any thing for Zingis, for he is a lover of Virtue, and cannot endure Injustice.

Whilst these two amiable Persons entertained one another in this manner, Zamar
had the pleasure to see her self Mistress of the Destiny of a Man who had so
much curbed her insolency. Undkan had a great share in her joy, and Timur
triumphed unworthily over the misfortunes of a generous Rival, to whom he was
obliged for his Life and Liberty.

The day published the astonishing News among the Tartars. Those who had seen
Zingis, both in time of War and at Cambalu, prayed for his Ruin or Safety,
according to their different inclinations; but there were very few who would
not have willingly rescued him from the present Danger.

As Soon as they could have access to Undkan, the Kings of Tanguth, Cerguth,
Ergimul, and Ung, waited upon him, and after them Philing King of Thibet. The
first four expressed a great deal of joy for the captivity of his Enemy, and the
last, who with an independent Kingdom much more considerable than the rest, had
also inclinations infinitely more noble and generous, spoke boldly in Zingis's
favor, and openly made it appear, that without knowing his Person, he was full
of Respect and Esteem for his Virtue, and for that glorious Reputation, which
had rendered his name so famous in Asia. Undkan frowned at Philing's discourse;
and Zamar who heard it, from that time looked upon him as a suspected Person.
Never any could discover in him inclinations unbecoming a King. His Person was
perfectly handsome, his Realms were of a vast extent, and owned no other
Superior. The neighborhood of China, which bordered on his Dominions, was
able to give him very great Advantages, in calling to his Assistance a People,
who being often assaulted by the Tartars, had hitherto kept on the defensive
side, but longed for a occasion to humble them. All these reasons rendered the
King of Thibet redoubtable to the Tartar, who answered him calmly, That Zingis
was a Traitor, and that the security of his Crown obliged him to keep him in
Prison. Philing did not think fit to importune further an incensed King and
Queen at present, in behalf of a Man whom he knew but imperfectly, and he went
out looking disdainfully on four Princes, who dishonored their Character in
basely flattering Undkan and Zamar.

Philing from thence went strait to the Princess, whither his Heart often
called him, but by reason of the Orders already given out, he could neither be
permitted to see her, nor the amiable Axione. From thence he went to see
Almundzar, an illustrious Tartar, in whom he had found a great deal of Virtue,
who governed Tartary by the profound Knowledge which he had of its most secret
Affairs, and whom Zamar upon that account did not love. He was a sincere Friend
of Zingis, and Philing found with him a faithful Servant of that Prince, who
having found means to get off in the obscurity of the night, was come to
solicit Almundzar to labor for his Master's Liberty. The generous Tartar had
received him perfectly well: but he feared with reason to be unable to do any
thing for Zingis, against the fierce and subtle Zamar. They were upon this
subject when the King of Thibet entered. Generous Almundzar, said he at first
to the Favorite of Undkan, What shall we do for the Illustrious Zingis,
against so many implacable enemies? Hatred, Subtilty, and Treachery, are armed
against him; and it is our Duty, whom Heaven has favored with more reasonable
inclinations, to unite Virtue, Friendship, and Sincerity for his Assistance.
The Squire of Zingis, who knew not Philing, and admired his good Mien, was
ravished to hear him speak in that manner. Almundzar assured the King of Thibet
that he was ready to hazard his Fortune and Life for the Service of Zingis; but
withal that he knew nothing that could counterpoise the power of Zamar. I am
ignorant of the particulars of Zingis his Life, said Philing, and am only
preoccupy'd with that shining Merit, of which Fame speaks so advantageously:
but, Almundzar, Cannot you inform me better? There is a Man, my Lord, replied
Almundzar, pointing unto the faithful Squire of Zingis, who can better than I
give you that satisfaction. Yes, my Lord, added Zerbin, with a respectful bow,
and I will do my Master a sensible pleasure, to make him known to a Prince such
as you. Philing caused Zerbin to withdraw into another Chamber, to leave
Almundzar in liberty to set about the Affairs with which he was usually busied,
and having conveniently seated himself, Zerbin began his Discourse in this
manner.

The History of Zingis and the Princess Taxila.
YOU know, my Lord, that may Master is the Son of Sukuh, or Bahadur, sirnam'd
the Warrior, King of the Monguls; and you are not ignorant that amongst the
rest of the Asiatick Nations, these have made themselves be distinguished by
the undauntedness of their Courage, and the strict Unity which they preserve
among themselves. Bahadur is of the Lineage of our most ancient Kings, the
worthy Successor of innumerable Heroes, the Terror of his Enemies, and Darling
of his Subjects. His Dominions are of a vast Extent. The River Tartar and Lake
of Coras render a great part of the Country fertile, and that desert Region
which comprehends Bargu, and reaches to the Sea of Tartary, is almost
unknown to those who border on Undkan's Realms.

Bahadur had two Children of the Queen his Wife; the famous Zingis whom Fortune
does now expose in so cruel a manner, and the Princess Zenelie who was carried
away by Robbers at three years of age, in a Voyage which the Queen made to seek
a place, the Air of which might be advantageous to their Health, which was in a
languishing Condition. The loss of the innocent Zenelie brought her with Sorrow
to her Grave, leaving the young Zingis the only Consolation of her afflicted
Husband. He was first called Temuzin; but there appeared in him even in his
Infancy, so much Greatness of Soul and Courage, that the People named hin
Zingis, which is a Name given only to extraordinary Persons.

Bahadur enjoying a Son so worthy of his Affection, did not desire a more
numerous Posterity, and made the Prince Zingis the Object of all his Cares, who
in few years became perfectly well accomplished. The King with a great deal of
Pleasure saw his excellent Qualities increase together. He knew by his first
setting out, that he would not degenerate from so many Great Men, whose Blood
streamed in his Veins, seeing he aspired unto true Glory, loved Virtue above
all things, and bewraied only generous Inclinations. When he had attained the
seventeenth year of his Age, he appeared of so graceful a Mien, that never any
like him had hitherto been seen. Bahadur delighted in his presence; but the
young Prince who had thus far lived a peaceful Life, and whose Courage required
Business of greater Noise, began to think of leaving his Father for some time.
My Lord, said he, one day unto him, Are you not sensible that I owe something
to the Honor which I have to be your Son? Hitherto I have been able only to
testify my Respect unto you; but, my Lord, this is not sufficient to satisfy
the Blood that animateth us. The profound Peace which the Monguls enjoyed by
your Valor, does not permit me to live at Molg in perpetual sloth: we might
one day blush, and even perhaps suffer for it. It Is time that I should learn
the only Occupation that is worthy of a Prince. If there be no War in Asia, I
must seek it in Europe, and return to you with a Name less unknown to the rest
of the World.

This Discourse flattered the great Courage of Bahadur, but the same time it
frightened the tenderness of his Love. Zingis, replied he to the young Prince,
Neither your illustrious Ancestors, nor the most envious Nations, have as yet
any thing to reproach you with, and you have been employed in a diligent
Preparation for a glorious riper Age. I love to see you, and I fear to lose
you: But, my Son, notwithstanding this, do not think that I will always detain
you in a Country, which in the Opinion of the greatest part of Mankind is more
proper for Wild Beasts, than for Princes, whom Heaven has created with some
Merit: I do not oppose that noble Emulation which animateth you; but, my dear
Zingis, wait a little longer; you know that the King of the Tartars does
threaten us; he is perhaps ready to declare himself our Enemy. The Tributes
which he exacteth of several Kings will certainly come as far as us; and then
we will not want War. Alas, my Lord, said Zingis interrupting him, How hard is
it for a Man of my Age and Humor to delay such Projects? I don't know whether
the King of the Tartars confounds us with the other Princes whom he would
render his Vassals; but by what you have done, I believe he will consider more
than once upon it before he attack you. In the end, my Lord, these are but
uncertain Conjectures, and if you will not permit me to pass the Limits of
Tartary, suffer me to run through all the extent thereof, that I may instruct
my self by sight of many rare things, which I have only confusedly heard of.

The King of the Monguls found so much reason in the Prince's Design, that he
consented at last to his departure, though not without doing himself a great deal
of Violence; but upon Condition, that he should not pass the Bounds of Tartary.
He permitted him to visit Undkan's Court, with whom he had not yet any broil;
and Zingis satisfied with what he had obtained, thought on nothing else but to
make ready his Equipage. He would not carry along with him a great Train of
Servants, because a profound Peace reigned over all the Countries through which
he designed to pass. Seeing I had been educated near his Person, and favored
with his Friendship, I accompanied him, and we parted from Molg, as if we had
left a Prison.

The first thing we visited was the Burying-place of the Tartarian Princes. The
Tombs are situated in Hills which do not hinder a Traveller to behold from afar
an infinite number of magnificent Pyramids which overlook the tops of the
Mountains. From thence coasting along by the Deserts of Belgian, we saw the
Kingdoms of Tanguth and Ergimul, without stopping in any place, or making our
selves known, and took the way to Cambalu, where we designed to make a longer
abode.

As we drew near to that City, we were told that Undkan was gone with all his
Court to pass the fairest Season of the Year at Cingui, a pleasant Town seated
on the River Pazantu: Seeing it was only for the Court that my Master was going
to Cambalu, upon this News he directed his Journey toward Cingui. The
Palace-royal is without the Town, and one of the most magnificent in all
Tartary: The Gardens are vast and curiously cultivated; the Waters add unto
them a thousand Embellishments; the Trees form a charming obscurity, which the
Sun in many places can scarce penetrate, and there one may walk at all hours.
We discovered the Royal House from a good distance, and Zingis fatigued with
the heat, seeing one of the Gates of the Garden open, and kept by none, had a
mind to enter into it and refresh himself some moments, pointing with his hand
to a place where he commanded us to wait for him. Although he had already made
a great Journey, there was nothing neglected about him, and the magnificence of
his Habit setting off the luster of his good Mien, one may say that he appeared
to be something more than humane.

He admired the Beauty of these Gardens, which certainly is extraordinary, he
walked in them with pleasure, and thought of returning to us, when crossing an
Alley, he saw at the end thereof several persons together, and distinguished
amongst the rest some Women. As he is nothing less than fearful, he advanced
with a great deal of boldness, and as he drew nearer, he perceived that these
Women were of the highest Quality, by the respect that was showed unto them: He
was desirous to know more of them, and therefore walked faster; but a Man
breaking off from the rest came up to him, and looking upon him with a
disdainful air; Ho! Who art thou, said he unto him haughtily, that violating
the sacred Laws of the place, come insolently to fail in the respect thou
owe to the Majesty of the Princess of Tartary? Art thou ignorant that no
Stranger dares to appear before her, without being introduced according to the
usual Customs? and is it to brave those who follow her that thou come thus to
expose thy self to our just Fury?

Zingis was not accustomed unto such Discourses, and this manner of accosting
him surpised him: His Action appeared unto him innocent, and the Tartars
incivility incensing him: I am a Man, replied he, who am not born to give an
account of what I pretend to do: I would justify my self to the Princess, but
I do not know how to give that satisfaction to the Subjects of Undkan.

He who heard Zingis, was too haughty not to be incensed with that Answer;
'twas Timur, whom the Titles of King of Tendur, and Son of the Tartarian Queen,
had swelled with Pride even to Insolency; and though that Character of Grandeur
which appeared over all the Person of the Mongul Prince, ought to have stayed
his hand, seeing himself backed in his base Design, he drew his Sword, and
lifted up his Arm to strike Zingis; but how fatal had his Rashness like to have
proved unto him: The terrible Zingis prevented him by so heavy a blow on the
Head that he laid him quite stunned at his Feet, and had it not been for the
thickness of his Head-Tire, he would never have afterward disturbed the quiet
of my Master.

The Fall of Timur made a great number of the Guards run thither, who would
have seized upon Zingis: He defended himself valiantly, but nevertheless could
not have preserved himself from proving what Virtue has cause to fear from
persons altogether void of it, if Undkan had not appeared in the same Alley. At
first he was informed of the cause of this Disorder, and finding it so small,
he was sorry for what had befaln Timur; and having but too good an opinion of
him, who feared danger so little, he approached unto him with the Princess.

Undkan has a goodly Presence, able to inspire even those who do not know him,
with respect; but it was the Beauty of Taxila, and not the presence of her
Father, that made the Mongul Prince render his Arms. This charming sight
surpised him in such a manner, that he found himself unable to abstain from
gazing upon her, and from yielding up his young Heart to those glorious Fetters
which Fortune had prepared for him. Undkan who had not as yet bid adieu to
Generosity, looked upon my Master with admiration, and Zingis accosting him
with a Grace that was natural to him; I perceive, my Lord, said he, that you
are the King of the Tartars, and it is only to you that I am obliged to
justify my self. I am Zingis Prince of the Monguls, and came into your
Dominions with a purpose to remain a while with you as a Friend and Allie.
Passing by these Walls, by chance I observed an open Door, and not knowing the
Customs of the place, I entered without deliberation into a place I judged
free, and was affronted by a man, who is as ignorant of his duty to Strangers,
as I am of the Customs of your Kingdoms.

My Master's Discourse surpised Undkan: He had not a more considerable Allie
than the King of the Monguls, and it was a great Honor to him to see that
King's Son at his Court, being withal the handsomest and most lovely Prince
that his Eyes had ever yet beheld. I knew well that you were none of our
Tartars, answered he, for none of them are so handsome as you. But, my Lord,
that which according to our Laws would be a Crime in an ordinary Stranger, is
none in the Prince of the Monguls, whom I will always behold with pleasure at
Cingui, Cambalu, and through all the Extent of my Empire. Ac these words he
embraced him, and presenting him to the Princess; Taxila, said he unto her,
Entreat the Prince Zingis to forget the bad Reception he met with upon your
account. My Master, who found all his Wrath assuaged, and his natural
fierceness yielding to Taxila's Charms, saluted her kneeling, and asked Pardon
of her for the Error his Ignorance had betrayed him into. The Princess
replied, That she could add nothing to what her Father had said; and my Master
who could not withdraw his Eyes from so charming an Object, did already feel
the powerful Impressions which her extraordinary Beauty made upon him.

Timur was come to himself again, and Zingis hearing that he was the Queen's
Son, Accosted him with an Air that had nothing of an Enemy in it: I am very
sorry, my Lord, said he unto him, for having been engaged in an Anger, which I
entreat you would forget, and please to be reconciled to a Prince, who did not
design in coming to Cingui, to create unto himself such Enemies as you are. At
these words he offered to embrace him, and though Timur received him coldly,
the Presence of the King hindered him from resisting my Master's advance.

Zamar came afterward, and was in a few words informed of the Adventure that
had happened. Undkan presented Zingis unto her, and she could not hinder her
self from entertaining a secret Resentment of the Affront her Son had received.
Nevertheless she appeared civil unto my Master, who not having his Eyes open
but to contemplate Taxila, had not leisure to examine the Queen of Tartary's
Actions.

Undkan, who had secret Designs, would not suffer Zingis to go out of his
Palace, and was not sorry to have in his power so dear an Hostage of the King
of the Monguls. We had Orders to wait upon our Prince, who was placed in one of
the fairest Apartments, and quickly judged that this Adventure would ere-long
be the cause of many others.

He was in a little time advanced by all the Tartars, and the Princess had a
judgment too just not to distinguish his Merit: They lived in greater
Tranquillity at Cingui than at Cambalu, because the Court was not so numerous.
Undkan, who was desirous to gain the Affection of a considerable Prince, that
he might obtain of him by Sweetness, what he pretended to impose upon others by
force, neglected nothing that might please the young Zingis. He sought all
occasions of entertaining him with Pleasures agreeable to his Inclinations, and
seeing that Timur still kept up his coldness, he entreated him to constrain
himself: And he, though not without Repugnance, by the Advice of a politic
Mother, who hoped to obtain for this Son one of the greatest Crowns in Asia
from Undkan, did what the King desired him.

As for my Master, he wholly gave himself up unto Love. The more he saw Taxila,
the greater Empire she gained over him: His Heart full of an ardent Passion,
began to feel Pains before unknown to him, and fearing as yet more cruel
Vexations, he became restless as soon as he began to love. He was the Son of a
Prince that could deny him nothing, but Taxila was the Daughter of a Man, that
destined her for Timur; and the Dominions of this Rival were much inferior to
the Kingdom of the Monguls, he was a King and the Son of Zamar who had all
power over Undkan.

In the end they left Cingui to return to Cambalu: There the Divertisements
changed Face; instead of Walks, they were taken up with Plays and public
Spectacles. Taxila had several Maids of Quality about her: But a few days
before our Arrival at Cingui, she had been presented with an unknown Girl
admirably Fair, and perfectly Lovely, whom the Princess soon distinguished from
all the rest, by a Friendship full of Esteem and Confidence. The Men who made
the greatest Figure at Court, were Timur, Almundzar, and Omir Prince of Brema,
who had been brought young to Cambalu, the King of Tartary having possessed
himself of his Father's Dominions, who had lost his life in defending them.
There were also Bazian, Mirantes, Ozran, Ziphanes, and several others. My
Master perceived at first the great Merit of Almundzar, and united himself in a
strict Friendship with the Prince of Brema.

Whilst some Months past over in this manner, those among the Tartars whom my
Master frequented were abundantly sensible of his Worth, and esteemed him
perfectly well. For him, his only Care was to please Taxila, who remarked his
Earnestness in serving her, though she was diligently observed by Timur, who
enjoyed the Privileges which his Mother's Credit gave him, and often put the
Patience of the Princess of Tartary to a cruel Test. For thinking himself
secure of a Happiness he did not merit, he spoke before her with an
insupportable Boldness, and Taxila comparing the submissive Procedure of the
Prince of the Monguls, with the arrogant Behavior of the Son of Zamar, she
observed the same difference between them, that Nature had put between their
Persons.

Zingis had too much Respect, not to impose upon himself an exact Discretion:
Although he was a Prince, and in a Condition to pretend unto all Things, yet he
would not precipitate a Declaration of his Love, lest it should irritate the
Princess, and waited till he had by his Services prepared her to give him a
favorable Audience. The Heart of the Princess found it self on Zingis side,
and her Aversion for Timur received a great Augmentation since my Master's
Arrival.

On a Day which Timur looked upon as his own, because it was Taxila's
Birthday, he prepared Divertisements for all the Court, and among the rest
extraordinary Shows upon the Polisangi. A thousand gilded Barks covered the
River: Every one wore what Colors he pleased, and nothing was to be seen but
Ciphers and Devices on the Streamers; the Cordage was of Gold and Silk, the
Oars covered over with shining Pictures; and these little Barks full of
Magnificent Court, formed the most pleasant Show in the World.

The Princess would have willingly dispensed with all this Gallantry of Timur,
but the fear of incensing obliged her to accept of it, and she was even forced
to appear on this Festival with all the most far-ferch'd helps of Art. Timur in
all his Equipage observed a Magnificence that tended to Prodigality, and my
Master with less Affectation had greater Advantages. Zamar did not slight these
Shows as she had done many others, and Undkan to do his Wife a Pleasure,
honored them with his Presence. The Amorous Zingis had the Vexation to see the
Name of his Rival every where intermixed with that of Taxila, and to think that
so much Beauty and Virtue was destined for a Man, in whom he saw nothing that
could render him worthy of them, and these Considerations did cost him many a
heavy Groan, which the Princess sometimes overheard.

In the end, my Lord, that Day which Timur was desirous to Solemnize in an
extraordinary manner was Remarkable for a memorable Adventure, which had like
to have proved Fatal. All were taken up with the Pleasures prepared for them on
the River; a harmonious Melody filled the Air, when by an unexpected
Misfortune, the Boat in which the Princess was alone with Axione the unknown
Maid that was become so dear unto her, because these little Barks were able to
bear but four persons at most with the Rowers, was overturned, being dashed
against some of the rest, and Taxila and Axione were exposed to so great a
Danger, that all there present believed there was no Remedy. Cries of Grief
succeeded the Harmony of the Instruments. Timur, the cowardly Timur did nothing
but excite some of his Train to dive for Taxila amongst the Waves; but the
courageous Zingis animated with other Sentiments, threw himself into the River,
and nimbly cutting the Water, received the Princess in his Arms, just in the
nick that she appeared again, and when perhaps she was going to sink for ever
into the bottom of the River: His Action was so quick, that none of the rest
were able to prevent him. The Prince of Brema who was with him rendered the
same Service to Axione, and being equally happy on this Occasion, they were
full of joy to have rescued from Death the two most Amiable Persons in the
World. The Danger was great, for the Men who fell into the Water with Taxila
perished, because of the little Care that was taken to help them, their
Negligence in some measure meriting their unhappy Fortune.

This Accident disturbed all the Solemnity: Undkan being Alarmed, commanded
them to regain the Shore; the Princess and Axione were carried thither almost
without sense, and Timur incapable of, Shame, had the Boldness to approach unto
them. Zamar who had beheld with Envy my Master's Action, and who began to
penetrate into the secret interest of his Heart, appeared confused for her Son,
and could not forbear murmuring at his Cowardliness.

The Princess opened her Eyes and came, to her self again; when they had laid
her in a Bed, she asked News of Axione, whom they had tended with the same
Care, and then betook her self to the Rest that was necessary for her: She past
the Night sweetly, and finding her self perfectly recovered in the Morning, she
asked her Maids, To whom among the Tartars she owed her Life. Although she had
no good Opinion of Timur, she feared she had received so considerable a Service
from him, and being informed that it was Zingis that had saved her, having
prevented all others with a Precipitation full of Zeal, she felt a secret Joy,
and thanked Heaven for it. They did not fail to tell her that the King of
Tendur did not so much as hazard himself for her, and she was much joy'd to
think that she had no Obligation to him.

As soon as Day appeared, Axione waited upon the Princess, who embraced her
tenderly: Undkan had declared unto my Master, how much he was sensible of what
he had done for Taxila. Zamar who was excellently skilled in the Art of
Constraining her self, thanked him also, and Timur said something of that
nature to him, notwithstanding his Confusion, but it was not they who he wished
might be sensible of it.

Taxila arose, and willing to prevent Timur's private Importunities, she went
out of her Apartment, just as the Queen was coming to see her; and meeting her
in a common Gallery, Madam, said Zamar to the Princess, I praise Heaven for the
great Care it has had of your Life, and I assure you, that at that moment when
I saw it in danger, I would have heartily hazarded mine own to preserve it. You
would have done much more, Madam, replied Taxila with a modest Smile, than many
Men were able to do, and you see that in the middle of my Fathers Dominions,
there were only found two stranger Princes generous enough to despise the
Danger. But, Madam, added she, with a profound Reverence full of Grace and
Majesty, your Days are more precious than mine, and too many Illustrious
Persons have an interest in them, to let them be exposed to the least Danger,
and I am as much obliged to your good Intentions, as if they had produced other
Effects.

Zamar perceived by this Discourse that Taxila had much Gratitude for Zingis,
and Scorn for Timur; but not being resolved to insist longer on this Subject,
she was entreating the Princess to return unto her Apartment, when the King
past by, followed by Timur, Omir, my Master, Almundzar, and several others.

Taxila blushed extremely; her fair Eyes which as yet looked languishing, told
Zingis in an obliging manner, that she knew what he had done for her: and Timur
had the mortification to remark that she did not so much as turn them toward
him. My Daughter, said Undkan to her, you have made me pass the Night with a
great deal of anxiety, which the good Condition in which I now see you, does
agreeably dissipate. Mean-time, methinks you should not have left your
Apartment so soon. My Lord, answered the Princess, a little Exercise cannot
hurt me, and I feel no more any remainder of my Illness. The King made an
obliging Compliment to the lovely Axione, which she received with much Respect,
and all this goodly Company went with Zamar, because the Hour of Dinner
approached.

My Master, who saw that the Princess being watched by Timur, could not be
entertained by another, retired, and after Dinner the King of Tendur Accosting
her without any Obstacle, had the liberty to say what he pleased: He looked a
great while upon the Princess with a premeditated Air, and then looking
downwards; The same Day on which Heaven gave you to the World, as the richest
Present it could bestow, had like to have been the last of your Life: Madam,
said he, and I tremble to think of the Danger which threatened you. All the
World did not believe it so great as you did, my Lord, replied Taxila
disdainfully, and the Princes of the Monguls and Brema showed that they
despised it, in exposing themselves thereto. It Is true, Madam, answered Timur,
Red with Anger and Shame, that they showed some fearlesness; but they at that
time had all their Reason about them, whereas mine was disturbed by the most
frightful of all Ideas: And all this Disturbance and Trouble, my Lord, replied
the Princess, with a malicious Smile, would have even let me perish, had there
not been found more unconcerned persons, and less interested for my Life. I see
well, answered Timur, that you would enhanse the price of a Service great
indeed, but which a thousand others would have rendered unto you. All the World
would have done it, except the King of Tendur, said Taxila, interrupting him;
but, my Lord, be not incensed if I have some acknowledgment for this Service,
which well deserves it; seeing I promise that I will make reckoning of your
trouble of Mind, and even of the fear it caused in you. Timur would have
answered, and perhaps would have done it without respect; but a multitude of
people that came to see the Princess hindered him, and he went out full of
Confusion. Taxila who saw the Day was very fair, went down to the
Palace-Gardens, and walked there for some time: Those that followed her,
remarking that she was desirous to be alone, retired a good distance from her;
She sat down at the end of a Terrace that faceth the Polisangi, and observing
the place where she had almost been drowned; Axione, said she to that fair
Maid, as we afterward came to know, as courageous as you are, do you not
quake, when you look upon that River? My Princess, answered Axione, I protest
unto you that I was troubled only for you, and that with the knowledge that
remained with me, though I believed my own Death certain, yet the Thought of
yours was that which most tormented me. You are too good a Friend, my dear
Axione, replied Taxila, pressing her hand, and I cannot enough requite that
tender and generous Motion of forgetting your self for me. I may truly say,
answered Axione, sighing, that you are one of the most powerful Causes that
make me desire Life, and one, added she with watery Eyes, which at present ought
to carry it over all the rest. You render mine dear unto me, replied the
Princess; but, Axione, I don't know whether I ought to rejoice that it is
lengthened. Ah, Madam! cried out Axione, why should not you be satisfied with a
Happiness that is precious to all reasonable persons? Alas! answered Taxila, a
Happiness that must be Sacrificed to Timur, can promise me no Satisfaction.
What Man, among all the Men of the World, does the King my Father choose? Shall
I be the Victim of that Power which his Weakness gives unto Zamar? Besides the
little Inclination that naturally I have for Timur; he does nothing that he
ought to do to win me; he thinks I am his by duty, and you see how he behaved
himself in our late Adventure; more in love with his Life than with the unhappy
Taxila, he abandoneth her to an evident Danger, and leaves to the Generosity
of others to Rescue her. Ah! what can he ever expect from that Princess whose
Preservation he so faintly neglected? O Heaven! O just Heaven, continued she in
a sadder Tone! I who so much abhor Baseness, will you permit me to fall into
the power of the basest of all Men? As the Princess expressed her self after
this manner, my Master, who had heard that she was in the Garden, appeared with
the Prince of Brema; Taxila perceiving, rose up to meet them: Zingis presented
his Hand to her, after he had Saluted her. Omir rendered the same Office to
Axione, and they continued their Walk. Well, Madam, said my Master to the
Princess, How do you find your self after that cruel Accident? And you, my
Lord, replied she with a charming Sweetness, You who took so generous a part,
and so advantageous for me, in what condition is your Health? Though it had
been attacked by a Malady, answered Zingis, My joy that I had successfully
served a great Princess, in whose Safety all the World ought to interest
themselves, would have entirely dissipated it: Our Bodies are fitted for
greater Fatigues; you suffered much, and I have reason to be troubled at it. I
assure you, my Lord, replied Taxila, that there remains nothing of that
Adventure with me, but the remembrance of the sensible Obligation that I have
unto you. O, my Lord, added she! with an Earnestness that witnessed her
Acknowledgment what can I do to acquit my self of it. It is too much that you
remember it, answered the Prince of the Monguls, and that Price is great enough
to recompense more important Service. I do not know any that can be more worthy
of my Remembrance, replied Taxila. -- Madam, said my Master, sighing, and
interrupting her, Although according to all Appearances, I have only labored
for Timur, yet I cannot but look on Yesterday as the happiest Day of my Life.
The Princess looked downwards to hide some Tears which these Words forced from
her, and which, nevertheless, Zingis perceived: He was grieved that he had
touched her in so sensible a part, and continued thus; Pardon me, Madam, if I
have named the King of Tendur: I fear I have failed in the Respect I owe you.
No, said Taxila, interrupting him, But you have set before my Eyes an
afflicting Idea, which I often endeavor to put out of my Mind. You know the
King my Father's Intentions concerning Timur: but, my Lord, you do not know
mine, and you are doubtless ignorant, that I cannot think of seeing my self
subjected to the Son of Zamar, without a mortal Grief. I am not resolute enough
to disobey Undkan, and whatsoever it costs me, I must, if he command me,
sacrifice my self. Judge, my Lord, having a natural Aversion, or rather
invincible Hatred for Timur, in what Condition I must needs be, when I think on
my Father's Designs, and the Queen's Authority. This Freedom of the Princess
Charmed my Master, and rendered him bolder. I confess, continued he, That there
is nothing in Timur that is worthy of you, nor even in persons much more
accomplished. O! What Man, Madam, amongst all those whom Nature and Fortune
have most distinguished by their Favors, could without a Crime aspire unto the
precious Advantage of not displeasing you, or the Glory of possessing you one
Day? My Lord, replied Taxila, I can discern Merit where it is, and not draw a
blameworthy Pride from that which I have not: There are Men enough in the
World who might justly pretend to the Alliance of the King of Tartary, and
Timur himself would not be unworthy of it for his Quality, if his evil
Inclinations were not absolutely incompatible with mine. Though Fortune should
authorize some Prince to offer unto you all that he possessed, added my Master,
if his person had not wherewithal to touch your Heart, his other Advantages
would be to no purpose; and there are Princes puissant enough who would sigh
before your Eyes, without daring to tell you that they Adore you. I would
certainly be very Savage, replied the Princess of Tartary, to arm my self with
an unjust Fury against those who had some Affection for me, and I would need be
free of all Passions, if I dared to boast of remaining always insensible. But,
my Lord, continued she, with a freer Air; this Subject would carry us too far,
and I had rather speak of the Obligation that I have unto you: If it inspire
you with any Goodness for me, answered my Master, it will be very advantageous
for me in the Circumstances I am in, seeing that loving you with an ardent
Passion, the beginnings of which I have carefully hid, I cannot hinder the
Declaration of this Mystery from escaping in spite of all my Respect. My Lord,
replied Taxila with a trouble, which gave no sad Presage unto my Master, I see
the King, and that is all I ought to say unto you. And indeed Undkan appeared,
and Zingis could not continue: He knew well by the Air of the Princess, that
she had Confusion without Anger, and for some Days afterward, if he remarked
any Commotion in her Eyes, yet Indignation had no part in it.

Taxila was beloved of all the Tartars, and the important Service that my
Master had rendered unto her, made a great Impression on all grateful Minds.
That Nation looked upon Timur with Scorn after his late base and cowardly
Action. Undkan was even vexed to see that he rendered himself so little worthy
of all the Advantages he destined for him; and could not forbear, as we knew by
Almundzar, to speak of it unto the Queen: but she had so much power over him,
that he past over the cowardliness of the King of Tendur, and resolved to be a
no less religious Observer of his Promise.

About that time Zamar, who was desirous to extend the Limits of Tartary, in
hope to see her Son Master of it; insinuated into Undkan, that it was a Shame
to him, who was Lord of so much Power, not to exact of his Neighbors the
Tributes which he might easily impose upon them. The most part of these Kings
have preserved somewhat of the Fierceness of the ancient Scythians, but have
lost all their Valor, of which you may in this Court see Examples in those of
Cerguth, Tanguth, Ergimul, and Ung. Undkan gave their Ministers to understand,
that they owed something more than a simple Embassy to his Grandeur, and that
together with Homage, they must pay him an Annual Tribute. These Strangers
asked time to communicate this Affair to their Masters; and having in the end
answered, That their Design was not to humble themselves so low, they Retired
into the Dominions of their Princes, and everywhere were made great
Preparations for War.

The Kings of Tanguth, Cerguth, and Ergimul, could easily join their Forces,
because of the Neigbourhood of their Provinces, but he of Ung being more
remote, and lying on the opposite side, was to make a Diversion. Though Zingis
had reason to believe, That the Monguls would have their turn next; yet loving
Taxila as he did, he would not remain idle in her Father's Court, and though he
found injustice in Undkan's Attempt, yet Love hindered him from examining his
Procedures rigorously. He soon determined to offer his Arm to the King of
Tartary; and however afflicting his absence from Taxila, might prove to his
Heart, he resolved to remove, that he might become more worthy of her.

The Kings of Tanguth and Cerguth advanced to the Dominions of the King of
Ergimul, who was first to be attacked, being Undkan's next Neighbor. There was
need of two Armies, because the King of Ung was alone, and Timur's Kingdom
being adjacent to that, it was to him that Undkan entrusted a part of his
Forces to make that Conquest: But Experience taught him that he had put them in
very ill Hands. The King of Tendur would have willingly stayed at Cambalu, if
his Mother more Courageous than he, had not excited him to his Duty: So with
good Lieutenants and Warlike Troops he marched toward the Enemy whom he had to
Vanquish.

Zingis had the Command of no Army given him, as had Timur, though he was much
more capable of it: Undkan marched in person, and my Master would take no
Charge upon him, that he might fight near his Person.

The Princesses beheld these Warlike Preparations with very different
Agitations of Spirit. Zamar who knew that her Husband and Son were not of an
humor to hazard themselves, thought on their Departure without Alarms; but
Taxila who already knew perfectly the Love and Courage of my Master, had not
the same Tranquillity.

Affairs being in this condition, Zingis went to take his leave of her, and
Timur's present Occupations, freeing her for some time from his Importunities;
He found none but Axione with her: Seeing they did not suspect her, the Prince
did not constrain his Love, and the Princess suffered her Sadness to appear.
You are going to depart from us, my Lord, to pursue Victories which we may well
be without. Ah! how covetous is the Ambition of Zamar, and how skilful is she
in finding out means to shed Blood? Seeing the Glory of the King your Father is
concerned, Madam, answered Zingis, those who may lose their Blood on this
Occasion, have no reason to repent it. Whatsoever be the Motives of a War,
replied Taxila, it is still grievous unto me: But, my Lord, the War which you
now undertake, appears unto me so much the more cruel, that Timur will be
decked with the Spoils thereof, which will raise his Vanity to an extreme
Insolence. So long as the King lives, continued my Master, he will not enjoy
the Fruits thereof; and if Fortune put an end to his Life, I see few Tartars
inclined to submit themselves to the Laws of Timur. I cannot flatter my self,
my Lord, answered Taxila, with a greater agitation of Mind than before, he will
Reign, the unhappy Ascendant which over-ruleth my Destiny has so ordained, and
would to the Heavens that my Death may prevent his Fortune. Ah! Madam, said my
Master, interrupting her in a passionate manner, is it thus that you comfort a
miserable person, whose duty constrains him to follow Undkan, and who cannot
depart from you but with intolerable Grief? What shall I do in the Extremity to
which I now see my self reduced? Shall I remain a cowardly and useless
Spectator of a War which may expose Tartary unto some Disorder, because the
proud Timur lays claim to it? and shall I behold the Father of Taxila, a
Princess whom I adore, and for whom I would hazard a thousand Lives, if they
were in my power, shall I see him, I say, march to the War, without making a
Rampart of my Body and Arms to defend him, because he favors my Rival? In
end, Madam, shall I stay at Cambalu, or shall I retire to the Monguls, to evite
uncertain Evils, and merit that my Name be buried in oblivion amongst Men? Ah,
my Princess! How unworthy should I be to Sigh for you, and to bear these
glorious Chains which I have received with so much pleasure! Whatsoever the
time to come may produce, the present ordains me to serve the King of
Tartary: My Fidelity and Zeal will perhaps make some impression on his Soul:
But, Madam, you are silent, and I see nothing in your Eyes but a Trouble that
alarms me. What Misfortune can it presage unto us? My Lord, answered Taxila,
You see that it is an effect of my Weakness, your Reasons have overcome me, but
they cannot settle my Heart. Alas, Zingis! Was not I miserable enough to hate
Timur, if it be the will of Fate that I must be his, without loving. -- Taxila
blushed, and could not go on, but her Eyes were the Interpreters of her Heart,
and those of the amorous Zingis read in them the happiness for which he sighed.

Never was there Separation more tender on Zingis's side, and more obliging on
Taxila's, than was that of these two illustrious Persons: Timur did not give
himself the trouble of so much Respect and Niceness, he only in an unpleasant
manner repeated what he had said so often, and appeared as insolent, as if he
had been assured of the Conquest of all the World.

We found the three Kings joined, and ready to give us Battle: Their Troops
were refreshed with a long Repose, whereas Undkan's Men were Fatigued with
climbing over the Mountains and Woods. The Enemies were possessed of advantageous
Posts, and appeared to be resolute: Nevertheless fight we must. All that is
related of the fabulous Heroes does not surpass that which Zingis then did:
Undkan looked upon him as a Prodigy; 'twas his Valor alone which made Victory
still declare it self in our Favor: He saved Undkan's Life, who against his
will was engaged among the Enemies, and after many Battles, he took the three
Kings Prisoners on different Occasions, which put an end to the War on that
side.

Undkan left the Prince Master of the Destiny of the Captives: He gave them not
only their Lives, but also their Liberty; and contented himself to engage them
to pay the Homage and Tribute which the King of Tartary had demanded of them:
The Generosity of such a Conqueror served only to animate them with a secret
Rage against him: but Undkan after having publicly owned, that it was to him
alone that he owed the Glory of this Expedition, seeing his Enemies subdued,
disbanded his Troops, and returned to Cambalu.

Fortune had not been so favorable to Timur, and the King of Ung with Forces
inferior to his, chased him out of his Provinces, and prepared to march
toward those which compose the Kingdom of Tendur. These News afflicted Undkan,
and my Master desirous to finish as he had begun, past without stopping to the
place where Timur was, brought him back to the Battle, and returned to Cambalu
after he had triumphed over the King of Ung, as he had done over the rest.

Undkan received him with great Testimonies of Joy, and Zamar, although envious
of his Glory, was obliged to testify her Acknowlegment to him: but it was not
their Applause that touched him, and Taxila's Praises were of much higher Value
in his Heart: A Year of absence had as yet augmented her Beauty, and my Master
at his return found her such as his Ardour could have wished. I do not know if
my Vows have had any part in your Victories, my Lord, said she unto him, when
he went to salute her: But sure I am, I have made very ardent and sincere ones
for you. I do not at all question the Obligations which I have to your
Goodness, Madam, answered Zingis, and certainly the Hope I had that I did not
displease you, has rendered me more bold and brave than the Hope of possessing
the Unners would have done. But, Madam, what will become of so much Love which
your charming Beauties have inspired me with, if Undkan be only favorable to
the Son of Zamar? O, what will become of my Tenderness and Acknowledgment for
you, interrupted Taxila, if in spite of me they give me to him whom I abhor?
He is not sensible of his own Shame, and pretends to cover himself with your
Glory; and even my Father, notwithstanding all that you have done for him, is
capable to requite all with Ingratitude. It Is the knowledge that I have of his
Injustice that afflicts me; bemoan with me, my Lord, bemoan with me, and
whatsoever come to pass, believe me, I will be ever more miserable than you.
Timur then entered; he had not seen the Princess but with his Mother; his Gate
was full of Haughtiness, and he had received for a Reward of his Baseness, new
assurances of Happiness; or rather Zamar, who desirous to comfort him in his
bad Fortune in War, and to dissipate a gloomy Pensiveness which disquieted him,
had drawn from Undkan stronger Promises, That he would give Taxila unto her
Son, than ever he had made unto her before. He was vexed to see Zingis in a
place, where from henceforth he was resolved to Reign alone; and if he durst
have followed the motions of his Soul, he would have at that instant told him
his Mind, but the remembrance of what past in the War retained him, and
contenting himself with showing him no Civility. We come from enriching the
Crown of Tartary, Madam, said he unto her, with several Tributes of Importance,
and it is at present the only Crown in Asia that can reckon great Kings amongst
its Subjects. You might speak less generally, Timur, answered the Princess,
with a disdainful Coldness, worthy of the King of Tendur's Arrogance; and if
Fame has done you Justice, the King of Ung ought to have carried the same
Advantages over you, which the Prince of the Monguls has carried over him and
the rest.

These Words did pierce the proud Son of Zamar to the quick, insomuch that his
Fury for a long time shut up his Mouth: But coming to himself again, if you
were more just and less prejudiced, continued he, you would not take from the
Arms of the King your Father, the Glory which is due unto them, to give it unto
others; and I was not in so desperate a Condition, when they came unto the
Provinces of Ung, but I could have quickly subdued them. If they had followed
my Advice, replied the fair Princess with the same Coldness, they should have
given you all the time you had need of; and truly, my Lord, you ought to have
taken it your self. I don't know, said my Master, whether I have any part in
the obliging Words of the Princess, or in Timur's Scorn; but this I know, that
I would esteem my self much more Glorious in the one than Dishonored by the
other. My Lord, added Taxila, I would certainly be very unreasonable, if I was
the only person in Tartary, that rendered not Justice to the Services which it
has received of you, and the taking of Four Kings has spoke loud enough to be
heard of all the World. There are some Kings, replied the inconsiderate Timur,
that are not so easily Conquered; and if we were one to one, he would perhaps
find it hard enough to do what you pretend he has done. Your Insolency,
replied Zingis with a Disdainful Smile, would be no dreadful Adversary,
neither would I use any great Precaution to execute upon certain persons that
which their Weakness does always render easy to be done: But, my Lord, Would
you raise a War in Tartary, after you have settled a Peace therein? No,
continued Timur, with Eyes sparkling with Fury; because he knew that in the
Princesse's Presence my Master's Respect was an Obstacle to his Valor; but I
will carry one into the Bowels of the Monguls, on the Head of a Hundred
thousand men, when by Undkan's Orders I have obtained an absolute power over
that unjust Princess. They will oppose much less than a Hundred thousand men to
your Irruptions; but you will not be the more terrible, and he who has imposed
Tributes upon the Kings you know of, is able enough to impose a heavier Yoke
upon the King of Tendur.

This biting Conversation would have come to a greater height, if Zingis's
Discretion had not obliged him to retire, after he had respectfully saluted the
Princess, who looked upon Timur with greater Scorn than before. At last, Madam,
said the Son of Zamar unto her, You observe no more measures; your Aversion
unto me appears in all its Extent: but the King your Father, who has once
again promised that he will never give you to any other but me, will call you
to an account for it. Timur, answered Taxila with a resolute air, Although my
Father's Promises make you constrain my Inclinations, you shall not be the
happier for it. You have not labored to merit them, and it is not an Insolency
like that which reigns in your Heart, that can touch the Heart of Taxila: and
you should have gone to work with submissive proceedings, and with a generous
and uninterested Behavior, and not have relied upon the Queen's Credit; but it
is your Fortune you act for, and seeing the Crown of Tartary has more powerful
Charms than mine are, enjoy them, if you can, I will not be jealous, provided
you leave me in Repose: it is evident enough that my Person is not dear unto
you; the adventure of Polisangi is a sufficient proof of it, and just now you
have quarell'd before my Eyes with a Prince that generously hazarded his Life
for the preservation of mine.

These last Words raised a cruel Jealousy in Timur's Soul: He was already
persuaded that my Master loved the Princess, and now saw too plainly that he
was also beloved. You have paid very dear for the Obligation of which you
speak, replied he, seeing that happy Stranger being favored by a little good
Fortune, has made himself Master of your Heart: but though War and Love do at
the same time protect him, I hope the King will put a difference between us
that will not be very advantageous for him. Timur then went out and left the
Princess in liberty to meditate upon all that she had cause to fear from a man
void of Honor and Generosity.

She was considering her Misery, and Zingis was in the same Occupation, when
Timur went to the Queen, and told her all that could animate her both against
the Princess and my Master: she gave a favorable Ear to his Complaints, and
promised speedily to calm all his Troubles. For this end she began to Wheedle
her Husband with all those affected Sweetnesses, that had so often surpised
his Weakness; She informed him that Taxila loved Zingis, and that contrary to
his Word, which she ought to have respected, that disobedient Princess thought
only of making the Prince of the Monguls happy, and easily incensing the Father
against the Daughter, he protested unto her with Oaths, that the rebellious
Taxila should never be Wife to any but Timur. Zamar not content with this first
Advantage, was desirous to obtain a second; and solicited Undkan, that he
might humble Zingis, to render him his Tributary, as he had done the other
Princes that were Vassals to their Crown. Seeing this was no easy Attempt,
Undkan rejected the Proposition, and by what he had seen the Prince of the
Monguls do, he believed that no Power was able to conquer him.

As soon as the crafty Queen had left him, he sent for the Princess Taxila; and
said unto her, looking steadfastly upon her, I am unwilling to believe what I
have heard concerning you: I am told that your Heart is engaged, in spite of
the Choice that I have made for you, and that you prefer the Prince of the
Monguls to Timur. You might have known long ago my Resolutions in respect to
your Establishment, and you have had leisure to prepare your Inclinations, if
already they were not disposed to obey them. I have destined you for Timur
since your most tender Infancy: He is a King, he is my Wife's Son, and if you
have any foolish Ideas, resist them, or rather triumph over them, to please me,
since no Law ought to be more powerful over you, than that which obliges you
to obey me. I esteem Zingis as a young Hero, who may aspire unto great Things:
but as to what concerns you, I can, do nothing for him, having promised you
unto another before I knew him.

The Princess heard this Discourse which touched her Repose in the most
sensible part, with a great agitation of Spirit: She observed every word of it,
and arming her self with a Resolution worthy of her Virtue, although she had a
particular Esteem for Zingis; My Lord, answered she, The most severe Judges
could not find fault with me, and what he did for me, whilst Timur abandoned me
to a fatal Adventure, does well deserve my Acknowledgment. I will not allege
unto you the important Services which he has so lately rendered to this
Kingdom, but wilt only tell you, my Lord, That were my Heart absolutely free,
it would never, incline to favor Timur: You may Sacrifice me to his Ambition;
my Respect owes all things to you, nevertheless my Duty cannot overcome my
Aversion to Timur. Ah, my Lord, There are so many Princesses in Asia, or some
other part of the World, able to render his Condition more happy. You are wise,
interrupted Undkan, with a moderation, which shortly after degenerated into
Violence, and I am persuaded that you will love Timur as soon as he shall be
your Husband: So, Taxila, no more words, what I have promised, I will and ought
to perform.

In this manner did the King of Tartary dismiss his Daughter; She bemoaned her
self, she wept: but all were leagued against my Master, who had none for him,
but the Princess and Almundzar; the Prince of Brema having departed from
Cambalu, at his return from the War, where he had gloriously Signalized
himself, the Cause of this his sudden resolution being unknown.

Axione an ardent Friend of my Master's, told him all that had past, and the
Grief that tormented the Princess: This did nothing but surcharge him with
Affliction, his Love reproaching unto him all the Pains of Taxila.

Zamar and her haughty Son, being assured of Zingis's Passion for the Princess,
resolved upon the conclusion of her Marriage with Timur: To delay it, was to
suffer these Fires to grow up, which were but too violent already, so that they
thought upon nothing else.

The Queen, being satisfied with the Promise that Undkan had made unto her,
went to visit the Princess, and saluted her with these sad Tidings. Madam, said
she unto her, with a contented air, After the Favor which it has pleased the
King to grant unto my Son, I cannot too much proclaim his Goodness, nor do
enough, to testify my Satisfaction: I know that you do not join with me in
desiring that double Alliance with which he honors us: but we will make so
great Efforts to soften your Heart, that it will perhaps at last become
favorable unto us. I see a trouble in your Eyes, that promises the
continuance of your Scorn; we resent it with Grief: but, Madam, you spend it on
constant persons, who will not be wearied with suffering. How great need had
the Princess of Constancy, not to make a noise. I am persuaded, Madam, answered
She, with her ordinary moderation, that you owe only to your self that which
you call a Happiness for Timur, and which according to the Inclinations that
Heaven has given me, can be none for me. Your perpetual Solicitations force
the King to constrain me; mean time, Madam, my Respect to him exempteth you
from the Scorn you speak of, and of which I am not very capable. You know,
Madam, that his Alliance exalts you above all the Princesses of Asia, and
that formerly you could only pretend to be ranked amongst the meanest of them.
Must this Advantage be made use of by you to Sacrifice me? Can I love your Son
in spite of my Heart; and if I love him not, would you render us both
miserable? I have told him, and I repeat it unto you, that I will yield up all
my Right to the Crown of Tartary to him, providing he do not ask of me a Heart,
which I have never been able to give him.

That which was most piquant in this Discourse, and which had escaped from the
Princesse's great Courage did not move Zamar, who had had time to prepare her
self for all she could say. It would be too much, continued she, to abandon
your just Claim to Timur; he is more reasonable than to expect it: But as he is
not without Ambition, and is not satisfied with that mean Figure which we have
made in the World, seeing it is the King's pleasure, he will share them with
you, and expect from his own Perseverance and your Equity, that Heart which you
are not yet disposed to give him. For me, Madam, added she, saluting her, I
will always walk with you as becomes an indulgent and affectionate Mother; and
it is no small Token of my Esteem for you, when I offer you the most precious
Thing I have. She went out and left the Princess in a Perplexity, which all
Axione's Consolations could not lessen.

The next Day Undkan communicated to his most considerable Subjects, the Design
he had to make Timur his Successor, by giving him the Princess his Daughter:
The sincerer sort, who esteemed nothing in Timur, because indeed there was
nothing in him that merited their Esteem, did not approve the Choice: But the
unworthy Flatterers whose Suffrages Zamar had bought, applauded it, and they
made up the greatest number. The Marriage was published on the Morrow, and
magnificent Preparations were made for it. Almundzar was one of those who did
not declare for Timur, and Zamar who loved not that Favorite of Undkan, put
this upon account with her other Motives of hatred against him.

It is impossible for me to express my Master's Despair, when he was told of
this speedy Resolution: He found himself so much the more miserable that he
could allege nothing to the King of Tartary, but a Love posteriour to that of
Timur. He knew that he was loved, and tasted the Sweetness of that precious
Advantage; but he saw the lovely Taxila made subject to an absolute Power, and
upon the point to be Sacrificed to him whom she hated. All his Thoughts were
violent: although he should Arm all Tartary against himself, by attempting
against Timur's Life; he concluded that he had better perish, than leave him in
peaceful Possession of Taxila. Things were arrived to that height, that the
Princess was forbidden to see him; and this Prohibition did completely incense
him, so that he went out of the Palace resolved to abandon himself to his
Wrath. Passing through the great Place, he saw Timur accompanied with a small
number of Attendants, and forgetting that not only he was at Cambalu, but also
in the view of Undkan and Zamar, beholding in Timur the Persecutor of Taxila,
he advanced toward him with a terrible air. King of Tendur, said he unto him,
You who design to carry a War as far as the Mogols, begin it at Cambalu against
a man, without whose Assistance you would not be in a Condition to exercise an
unjust Violence against the Princess of Tartary. It is by your Orders that I am
prohibited to see her, and I will lose my Life, or you shall give me
Satisfaction for this Injury. Timur was not prepared for so troublesome a
Rencounter, and had no mind to fight: He would have put it off with a
disdainful Answer. But Zingis who had his Sword drawn in his Hand, constrained
him to put himself in a posture of Defense. Timur's followers run in between
them: but my Master's Valor had quickly dispersed them, and seeing his
unworthy Rival without other Defense than his Arms; Defend thy self, Traitor,
said he unto him, and show thy self this Day worthy of Taxila, by giving some
Proof of thy Courage. The Son of Zamar heard these Words, but was no less
fearful than feeble; and my Master sent him to the Ground pierced with several
Strokes, without receiving any hurt by his Arms.

Zingis would not retire after this Action; but Almundzar, whom the noise of
the Combat had brought to the place, obliged him in the Name of the Princess
to take care of himself, and the Night happily approaching, he made him be
conducted unto a sure Retreat, which I alone knew.

They carried Timur to the Palace, without any signs of Life: Zamar cried out
dreadfully, and uttered horrible Imprecations against Taxila and my Master.
Undkan ordered a diligent Search to be made for them; but Almundzar had
provided sufficiently for his Safety. He came to see him that very Night, and
informed him of all the Preparations that were making against him, showing him
that there was an unavoidable Necessity for him to depart out of Tartary. My
Master resisted a great while; but Almundzar convinced him, that though he
staid at Cambalu, he could not see the Princess, that she would be in continual
Alarms, and that for her quiets-sake he ought to go and wait somewhere else,
until this Storm was over-blown. Zingis yielded not but upon condition that he
should see Taxila before his Departure, and the next Night the faithful
Almundzar introduced him unto her by a private way which he knew. Axione alone
was in the Secret: Almundzar went out to watch that no body should Surprise
them; and Zingis casting himself at the Princesse's Feet, lay there a great
while without being able to express himself. What have you done, my Lord, said
she unto him, raising him up? and what will be the Consequence of this last
Effect of your Valor? What was I not obliged to do, to take you from Timur,
Madam, replied my Master, or at least to retard his Happiness. I know not,
continued Taxila, whether Heaven may not sometimes pardon a violent. Action:
but certain it is, that I cannot grieve for Timur's present Condition.
Mean-time, my Lord, you must be gone, you must resolve upon it, for as long as
I know you are here, I shall be disquieted with perpetual Frights. Madam,
replied my Master, If I had only my own Life to look to, I protest I would not
depart from Cambalu; but seeing your Quiet is concerned, I am ready to do any
thing. In the mean time, my Princess, consider unto what Punishment he that
loves you with so much Ardour, is going to be exposed in the uncertainty of a
long Absence. The proud Timur will be cured; my Arms have not been so happy as
to put an end to his life. Ah! who will defend you against that Enemy, when
Zingis is far from you? Suffer me to wait here, until I see what may be his
Destiny, that so I may hinder yours from being miserable. No, my Lord, replied
the fair Princess, I will not be guilty of so cruel a Complaisance. O Heavens!
I tremble as I speak to you, when I consider that the revengeful Zamar is so
near us. Suffer me to offer up Vows for you that are not disturbed by Fear;
perhaps Heaven will hear them: Whatsoever happen, believe that I love you. I do
not offend Virtue in assuring you of an innocent Tenderness, and if this can
satisfy you, taste the Pleasure thereof entirely. Think for your Comfort, when
you leave me, that though you depart from Taxila's Presence, yet you shall
still abide in her Heart: and that not only her Quiet, but also her Reputation
obliges you to this Constraint. Yes, Madam, replied the Amorous Zingis, I will
depart, since you command me, and I will comfort my self with the precious
Assurances which your Goodness has given me: But how shall I behave my self
toward the King your Father? Shall I defend my Life against him, if he Assault
me? and will the Respect which I owe unto you, permit me to Arm my Subjects
against the Tartars? Yes, my Lord, answered the Generous Taxila, and if my
Father become your declared Enemy, after the Obligations which he has unto
you, make use of your Forces and Valor, only spare his Life: It is his Person
alone that I recommend unto you. Go, my dear Zingis, stay no longer in a Place
so full of Danger. At these Words she held out her Hand to him, which the
Prince respectfully Kissed, and without hiding her Tears from him, she received
his Adieu, and in fine, obliged him to Retire. He took his Leave of Axione, who
was no less Afflicted than the Princess; and after he had a thousand times
Embraced Almundzar, who had made all necessary Preparations for our Departure,
we left Cambalu, and took the way to Molg. Our Voyage was very sad, and finding
the King Dead at our Arrival at Molg; my Master, who loved him tenderly,
received a terrible augmentation of Affliction, and manifested the Goodness of
his Nature by the deep Mourning in which he continued a great while. His
Subjects ravished to see him again, Swore an inviolable Fidelity to him; and
some Months after his Arrival, not doubting but that he would be attacked, and
Taxila having permitted him to defend himself, he visited all his Provinces,
and past even unto the Deserts of Bargu, and Disciplined in a little time those
People, that were never trained before, teaching them the Art of War which he
knew as perfectly as any Prince in the World. His Neighbors jealous of his
Glory, would have disturbed him; but in a few Months time he added some
Provinces to his Dominions, amongst which were Jek, Motrik, and Melair. In this
Triumphant Condition, being more sensible of his Love than of so much Glory,
seeing that Tartary made no Advances against him, and believing that perhaps
the face of Affairs there was changed, he dispatched a magnificent Embassy to
Undkan, to demand the Princess, but he was rejected, and treated as a
presumptuous Person, Timur, as he had foreseen, was recovered of his Wounds: He
turned the Fury of his Despair against new Enemies, and was ever Victorious.
But unable to live longer without seeing Taxila, knowing that she was yet free,
by a secret Correspondence which he kept with Almundzar, he returned to
Cambalu, with a Design to make the Princess consent to be carried away, or to
die before her Eyes, if she proved obstinate. Arriving at the Palace-Gate which
was to be opened unto us, the Impatience of Zingis betrayed him; he spoke,
Zamar heard him, and you know, my Lord, what she has done against my Master.

THUS ended Zerbin, and the King of Thibet, after having spent some time in
Admiration of so Illustrious a Life, assured the Mogol that he had no less
Affection for his Master, than those that were most particularly acquainted
with him; and returning to Almundzar, praised him for his zealous Fidelity to
Zingis. My dear Almundzar, said he unto him, What Methods shall we take to save
the Prince Zingis? What shall we do against the cruel Zamar? As her Hatred is
inflexible, and her Power over Undkan absolute, I see no way left to Triumph
over her but by Force, and I know not where we can find Forces sufficient for
an Enterprise of that Importance. Whatsoever may happen, continued Philing, I
will die before I suffer the King of the Mogols to perish: We must see Undkan,
and once more try the ways of Sweetness; but if he persevere in his Cruelty, I
will openly declare my self his Enemy. Almundzar approved of the generous
Resolution of Philing, and assured him, that whatsoever he attempted for
Zingis, he would still stand his Friend.

This Day past over very sadly; on the Morrow, the King of Thibet went to see
Undkan, whom he found still Beleaguered by Zamar, and made the more have,
because he feared some secret Cruelty; for they talked at Cambalu of Zingis's
Death, as of a thing absolutely certain.

Zamar and Undkan feared the Presence of this Prince, who was neither their
Subject nor Tributary, and who they saw did ever declare himself boldly for
Virtue. His Arrival put them out of Countenance, and Zamar was extremely
troubled at it: My Lord, said he to the King of Tartary, I don't know whether
the Design that has brought me hither this Morning, will have a favorable
Success; but I protest I never had a more pressing Interest, than that which I
have in the King of the Mogols Life. It will be glorious unto you, my Lord, to
Treat a Prince generously, who you believe has given you just cause of
Offense: but it would be an eternal Shame unto you, to exercise an unjust
Cruelty over him, having so many Reasons to esteem him, and to look upon him as
the Greatest among Men. No body is ignorant of the Services that he has done
you, and his Love for the Princess is the only Crime you can accuse him of.
But, my Lord, In the Dignity to which Heaven has exalted you, consider what
you owe to that of other Kings: Shall you be Powerful only to be Unjust, and
will you exercise that Power over an Enemy, who would not be in your Hands, but
that he put himself in them; an Enemy all whose Steps are Glorious, and on whom
the Eyes of innumerable Kingdoms are fixed: that would be a ready way to
confirm the Ideas which other Nations have of us: they look upon us still as
Scythians; that is to say, People without Laws, without Gods, and without
Religion. Will you imitate those barbarous Examples of Antiquity, which are
deservedly esteemed frightful Prodigies? And will you Sacrifice a great King
for so light Reasons? These light Reasons, interrupted Zamar, transported with
Anger, will not pass for such in the Hearts of Mothers, as tender as I am, and
he who attempted to kill my Son before my Eyes, and almost in my Arms, can
never be too severely punished for a Violence that has cost him so much Blood,
and me so many Tears.

I am told, replied the King of Thibet, that Timur was well accompanied, when
Zingis attacked him, and even that the Rules of Generosity were not at all
observed on this Occasion, seeing many Swords were at once turned against one
Man: And methinks I have also heard, that the King of the Mogols saved the King
of Tendur's Life oftener than once in the Wars of Ung. My Lord, answered Zamar,
You are so well informed of all that concerns Zingis, that it seems you have
kept a particular Correspondence with him; and that doubtless in our Dominions,
and upon these Conjectures, we might justly -- What, Madam, interrupted Philing
coldly, Lay me in Chains as well as him, and add one Injustice to another? It Is
no matter from what Mouth I have learned the Miracles of his Life; it is
sufficient that I am a very sincere and zealous Admirer of them. My Lord, said
Unkan, The Queen speaks as an enraged Mother, and you ought not to condemn
her Resentment. I have considered your Reasons, but they have not convinced me;
and it would be no less than to endanger Virtue, to suffer these Men to live
that disquiet Kingdoms, and without Reason defile the Palaces of Princes with
Blood. I have received Services of Zingis, and Honored him as a Stranger whom
I judged worthy of my Esteem; but he, abusing my Easiness, remained at my
Court, to delude a young Princess, and withdraw her from the Obedience which
she owes unto me; and pushing on his Arrogance to a greater height, he
assaulteth a Prince who is my Son, because he is my Wife's, and to whom I have
destined my Daughter; and returns incognito to Cambalu, to be introduced into
my House, there to Plot secretly with the weak Taxila. What do I know but he
has laid Designs against my Life, and who will assure me of the Innocence of
his Intentions? In fine, I owe this Victim to my own quiet, and it is only to
lose time in vain to solicit his Liberty. I perceive, my Lord, answered
Philing, That his Ruin is sworn, and that you cannot be opposed in places
entirely subject to your Power. But of the Humor of which I am, I will never
suffer this Cruelty without resenting it. Probably you never fear the Wrath of
Heaven, nor the Scorn of Men: but do you imagine that the juster part of this
Portion of the World which we inhabit, will suffer you to immolate the
Illustrious Zingis, without doing any thing for his Revenge? India, Persia, and
China will be easily moved, and there wants only, added he, inspired by his
Generosity, a Prince such as I am to excite them to it, and to bring into your
Dominions a Storm that will soon overwhelm you. He went out after this, and
seeing his Threats were far distant, Undkan and Zamar were more incensed than
frightened at them. Their first Thought was to make him to be apprehended; but
Almundzar, and some other Tartars in whom Undkan put Confidence, hindered him
from proceeding to that Extremity, representing unto him, that it would be to
arm all the Powers of the Universe against himself. Zamar was not of this
Opinion, but she was forced to yield.

The King of Thibet would once again endeavor to see the Princess: He was
denied admittance into her Apartment as formerly; but whilst incensed with this
Denial, he meditated upon Means to humble an unjust Power, the afflicted Taxila
and amiable Axione lived in a sad Solitariness, and were only accompanied with
dismal Thoughts. But what were the Thoughts of Zingis, so nigh Taxila, and yet
so unable to discourse with her? Knowing his Enemies so well, he doubted not of
his Misery; and the Idea of Death, which he had so often braved, was less
tormenting to him, than his Absence from the Princess.

Almundzar interest'd himself as a generous Friend in Zingis's Misfortunes: But
how great soever his Credit was with Undkan, Zamar still got the better of him.
He spoke boldly enough, to make himself be prohibited to speak more; and he had
not so much as the Consolation to be able to mitigate the Incommodities which
the King of the Mogols suffered in Prison. Zerbin who still lay hid in the
House of Zingis's generous Friend, informed him, that his Master had Six
hundred of the bravest Men in the World hid in several places about Cambalu,
who would cheerfully expose themselves for their Prince. Almundzar resolved
immediately to communicate these News to the King of Thibet, and was glad to
see a Party increase, whereof that Prince might be Head.

There were even Tartars bold enough to declare in Zingis's Favor against
Timur, whom they hated mortally, and whose Rule they dreaded. Almundzar thought
fit to hide his Zeal, that he might be more useful to the Princess and the King
of the Mogols, and by this Policy he had the liberty to Negotiate with a great
many considerable Tartars, who respected the Virtue of Zingis, and contemned
the baseness of Timur, both which had appeared in so many Occasions.

The King of Thibet, enraged with the second Denial he had received from the
Princess's Guards, carried his Vexation along with him to Almundzar's house, to
whom he made his complaints. You see, my Lord, answered the Tartar, that all
Things here are carried on against Honor and Justice; neither do I believe
that in any other they would fail in the Respect that is due to a King, such as
you are. My dear Almundzar, said Philing, I would not perhaps much resent
Things of that Nature, if I had only interests of Glory to look to; but I have
those of a Lover to satisfy, and in me you behold the most Amorous of all Men.
Of whom, my Lord, replied the astonished Almundzar? of Axione, continued
Philing, of that charming Damsel that is so dear unto the Princess, whom I have
loved these several years, and whom I will love Eternally. I know not,
Almundzar, whether you have frequented her enough to know all her Virtue, which
is indeed equal to her Beauty; and the obscurity of her Birth is recompensed by
the Greatness of her Thoughts. This Effect of Axione's Merit does not at all
surprise me, added Almundzar, but that which astonisheth me, is, the manner in
which she came to Cambalu, and the abode she has made here without you. It is
nevertheless she alone that brought me hither, answered Philing, and for whose
sake I have staid so long here. But, Almundzar, I must make you perfectly
acquainted with so rare a Person, and the Passion that I have for her, in
opening my Heart sincerely to you. Almundzar who was very desirous to know
Philing's adventures, prayed him not to defer this Pleasure, and the King of
Thibet who could not be more agreeably busied, than in speaking of Axione, did
thus begin his Relation.

The History of PHILING and AXIONE.
THE King of Thibet is none of the least considerable of Asia, whether you
consider its Extent or Commerce: For though it be surrounded with Mountains,
the Indians and Chinois do often visit us. Our Towns are well Peopled, our
Fields Fertile, and Magnificence is no stranger amongst us.

I was but Six Years Old when I lost my Father, and Nine when the Princess
Thamiriza my Sister and I were also left destitute of our Mother. These first
Misfortunes were great, but our Age diminished our Sorrows, and made us quickly
forget them. It would even be hard to tell you what we felt, and I confess that
I have but a slight Remembrance of these my dearest Relations

My Father had been entirely beloved of his Subjects, and his Memory was still
dear unto them: Never perhaps was there seen a People more faithful to a young
Successor, who neither knew his Fortune, nor what might disturb it.

Among all those whom my Father had distinguished by his Favor, Hildezar was
the most powerful. There were even Alliances betwixt the Royal Family and his,
and to him the Regency was committed during my Infancy. He acquitted himself
worthily of this Charge: His knowledge was vast, and his Courage great; He was
Vigilant and Zealous, and the Face of Affairs was not changed under his
Conduct. For me, I had Governors of great Merit, and Thamiriza had chosen
Women to wait upon her.

Our ordinary Residence was at Kachen: Hildezar lodged in the Palace; He had
lost his Wise, who left him one only Daughter, who was Educated with no less
Care than my Sister; and they placed about me several young Children of Noble
Families, to render my Childish Occupations more agreeable to me.

Hildezar at that time was but 35 Years Old: He was not free of Ambition, and
seeing he had all the Power of Thibet in his Hands, he resolved to make me
marry his Daughter. Hunting was his beloved and most frequent Divertisement;
His Family was more numerous than mine, his Expenses much greater, and his
Train equally Splendid. It Is true, that one of Ten Years of Age required no
great Magnificence, and it is as certain that my Interests were not neglected by
the Regent. He had for one Year been possessed of all Authority in Thibet under
my Name, by the Death of the Queen my Mother, and our Mourning being over,
Divertisements shared our Time with Exercises proper to form both the Body and
Mind. All our Mountains are of very difficult access; there is nevertheless
very good Game, and Hildezar who often Diverted himself with Hunting, suffered
me sometimes to take a part, without exposing me to what is laborious in that
Exercise.

Having picked out one of the fairest Days of the Spring, we went to one of
the pleasantest Places that we could light upon, near Kachen, and traversed the
Hills a great while with greater Vigor than is usual in Children: Passing
under some scattered Trees, whose Roots are bathed with a small Rivulet, we saw
a Spectacle that surpised my young Heart, and made a lasting Impression upon
it. The Brook was swelled with the Blood of many dead and dying Men, and a few
paces off, we beheld a Girl of Six or Seven Years of Age, richly habited, and
of a Beauty so extraordinary, that it astonished all our Troop. She was
weeping, and lifted up her Eyes and Hands, not knowing from whom to ask Help.
In this lamentable Condition, her Clothes were even stained with Blood, and
never could an Object more charming and more worthy of Compassion present it
self before us. Hildezar stopped; our Arrival made the Innocent Unknown
redouble her Cries, and frightened with her Misfortune, she threw herself among
our Horses-feet. I must acknowledge, Almundzar, that Love seized upon me from
that very moment, but I did not perceive it at first, and my Innocence made me
mistake it for simple Compassion. Hildezar alighted from his Horse, and
approacht the amiable Stranger: He is dead, said she, with a charming
Innocence, in the Tartarian Language, but somewhat different from ours, My
Father is dead: These cruel Ones have killed him, but he has killed some of
them also. Ah, my Father, added she! turning her head toward the dead Bodies:
Ah, my Father! I shall never see you more, and will die with you. Hildezar
struck with Compassion took her in his Arms, and made her show him whom she
called her Father; but neither in him nor the rest could we perceive any sign
of Life.

After this, Hildezar himself carried the little Axione, for so she was called,
to Kachen, asking Questions of her by the way; and all he learned was that
Marzillus her Father, with those that accompanied him, had been attacked in
that place by these wicked Men; but she could neither inform him of her Country
nor Quality, which, in all probability, was not mean. The sight of my Sister,
and of Alzine Hildezar's Daughter, who were both almost of an Age with Axione,
did a little calm her Sorrow, and in a little time she appeared so Fair, that
all our Court was Charmed with her. I never saw so much Grace, Sweetness and
Modesty, as appeared in the meanest of her Actions; and though she had past her
first Years in a Vagrant Life, she had an admirable Genius, which was not
corrupted by the Defects of her Education: Her Reason out-running her Years,
did much surpass that of persons that had attained to a much greater Age: She
was Complaisant, without doing any thing that was mean, and observed a certain
deference to the Quality of a King, which my Tenderness could not endure. My
Sister loved her perfectly: Axione lived familiarly with her, and we past the
space of Five or Six Years with the greatest Sweetness in the World. Mean-time,
Axione became so Fair, and I so Amorous, that I thought on nothing else but to
See and Please her; I rendered unto her some little Services that engaged her
Acknowledgment: but being ever Humble and Modest, she received them with
Respects that my Passion could not away with. Axione, said I unto her one Day,
after I had presented her with some Flowers, for which she returned as many
Thanks, as if the Gift had been much more precious; you value sorry Presents at
a very High Rate, but I can offer some unto you that are more worthy to be
regarded. All that comes from your Hand, my Lord, replied she, ought to be
very considerable unto me, and a King such as you are, can never give sorry
Presents to a Girl like me. Axione, cried I out, If some Flowers have obtained
for me so obliging an Answer, what may I not expect from a Heart that is less
unworthy of you, which I have given you a great while ago? Hitherto my Eyes
alone have told you of it, but I must now let you know it in another manner.
Yes, Axione, I have given you that tender Heart which will prove faithful to
you; and if you are capable of Acknowledgment, it must be for this Present. The
modest Axione blushed, sighed, and looking upon me with a touching air, but
full of Grandeur and Majesty, the Hearts of Sovereigns ought not to render
themselves so easily, my Lord, replied she, nor should they be received with so
little Precaution. Think upon what you were Born, and remember the Condition in
which you found me; reflect seriously upon a Goodness that may pass for
Weakness, and which I will not abuse; believe that I will ever respect in you
the Dignity of a King, and a Merit, which perhaps, I am too sensible of. But,
my Lord, believe also that the obscurity of my Life does not vex me so much, as
to make me desire to get rid of it by crafty Methods. You have too much Wit,
Axione, answered I, and would to Heaven, that you had as much Tenderness! What
can the Obscurity of your Birth signify against so much Beauty and Virtue that
are in you? Do You believe that I am one of those that always offer Sacrifices
to Fortune, and never to true Merit; I am contented with what I have, and would
esteem my self more happy in pleasing you, than in being loved of the Greatest
Queen in the World. Do not then prescribe Lessons unto me, which I esteem
Cruelties; suffer me to love you, and suffer it with pleasure: But all my
Earnestness was to no purpose, she still answered as before; and all the
advantage I had was to speak, and to be heard, and when I protested unto her
that it was not the Quality of a King that emboldened me to take this liberty,
she seemed better satisfied: but Almundzar, when her Stature was formed, and
her Beauty complete, I felt my Passion augmented, and found my self capable to
sacrifice all for her.

I was not the only person that loved her in this manner; I had a terrible
Rival. Hildezar Regent of Thibet, of an advanced Age, Alzine's Father, who had
acquired a great deal of Esteem in our Country, and amongst our Neighbors, by
his prudent Conduct, seeing the fair and virtuous Axione grow up, felt his
Heart seized upon by Flames of an extraordinary Violence: He labored in vain
to extinguish them, and that which he had done for Axione flattering his Hope,
he suffered a Malady to gather strength, which it was not possible for him to
cure.

He had remarked by all my Actions the Love that I had for Axione; but he did
not believe it so pure, and imagining that a young King cannot be without
Ambition, he hoped that Time would fix my Inclinations on some other Object,
and suffered his own to act freely.

Axione had looked upon him as a Father, sent unto her by Heaven, and
whatsoever he did, she thought on nothing less than what he truly designed.

One Day when I was not in the Palace, Hildezar found Axione walking alone upon
a Terrace, and making use of this Opportunity, when there was none to observe
him. Stay, Axione, said he unto her, I have a Business of Importance to impart
unto you: Axione, who did not foresee what was to follow, smiled at those
words. What is it, my Lord, replied she? Is it concerning the Obligations that
I have unto you, and would you chide me for having failed in any thing I owe
unto you? If you have any Obligation unto me, answered Hildezar, it is in your
power easily to acquit your self of it, and it is this power which is yet
unknown you, that I would inform you of. As long as you were a Child, not
feeling what I now feel with the same Violence, I abstained from telling you
what was then above your Reason, and I have since been restrained by a Fear,
which a more absolute Power enableth me now to surmount. One that loves
desperately cannot remain always discreet and reserved. This Declaration will
surprise you: but, Axione, the knowledge you have of your own Beauty, ought to
have prepared you for it. Fear nothing from my Designs, they are full of
Respect, and at the same time that I offer unto you my Heart, with an absolute
Empire over my Will, I offer unto you also my Hand, and all that Fortune has
given me.

Hildezar's Discourse struck Axione dumb: He solicited her long for an Answer,
before she was able to return one; at last recovering a little out of the
Trouble which so unexpected a piece of News had caused in her; Is it possible,
my Lord, answered she, that what you told me, is not of purpose to try me, and
can there be any Truth in a Discourse of that nature? Can you doubt of it,
replied Hildezar, and can you suspect one of my Age of such Tricks? My Love to
you must be very ardent, seeing no Consideration can restrain me from declaring
it. O, my Lord! cried out Axione, Wherein have I sinned against Heaven, that it
should expose me to such a Misfortune? What! is this Misfortune so great,
answered Hildezar, that you should be so much afflicted with it? Yes, my Lord,
added she, It is one of the most cruel Misfortunes that could befall me; and
after the Obligations that I have unto you, I would for ever abhor my self if I
should contribute to distain your Glory. What would not people say, if You
suffered Your self to fall in an Error, which the greenest Youth cannot render
excusable? What Honor could my Alliance do unto You? Unknown to my Self and to
all the World, perhaps of base Blood and unworthy of Your Inclinations. Axione
interrupted Hildezar, That Modesty does so set off the Luster of Your Virtue,
that it would augment my Love, if it was capable of any Augmentation: I see in
You all that can satisfy my Ambition and Tenderness. Speak then positively.
Well then, Hildezar continued she, I must be sincere seeing You desire it, and
I must tell You, that this unknown Blood that swells my Veins inspireth me
with so Noble Sentiments, that I will never do any thing until I be informed of
my Birth. I feel it much better than perhaps I shall ever know it. -- It is not
that which determines You, interrupted Hildezar, and I owe unto another Cause
that Resistance which fills me with Despair. I am neither Young, nor a King:
But, Axione, I love You, and am able to make You very Happy? I have Power, do
not constrain me to have Recourse to it. Philing is a Sovereign, but his
Dignity obliges him to a great Alliance; He amuseth You only with a fleeting
Passion, for Love is much more shortliv'd in the Hearts of Kings, than of other
men. I leave you, and wholly depend upon your Answer, asking nothing of you but
what is reasonable: He retired, and Axione remained alone, in liberty to
reflect upon what she had heard. This Discourse made such an impression upon
her Countenance, that it was easily perceived, notwithstanding the Care that
she took to compose her self. I found her vexed, full of Distraction; and in
fine, in a condition that I have never before seen her in. What aileth you this
Morning, Axione, said I unto her, You are no more Your self, and I cannot
imagine the Cause of this Change. My Words roused her up a little; she assured
me that nothing extraordinary had befaln her; but I read too well in her Eyes,
whom Love had made me study many Years, to be contented with this Answer. You
are not sincere, continued I; but if You hide any thing from the tender
Interest that I take in You, You will be the most cruel Person in the World. My
Lord, replied Axione, I ought not to satisfy You in what you ask of me;
nevertheless I perceive, I shall not be able to conceal it from You, but upon
condition to moderate Your Resentment. Know then, my Lord, that this Hildezar,
whom Heaven has made an Instrument to sweeten the first Miseries of my Life,
has now done me the most sensible of all Injuries: There needed no more to
make me comprehend Hildezar's Designs; and had it not been for the condition
under which Axione made me her Confident, I would have made search for him to
punish him. Hildezar is in love with You, replied I, and what will become of
me, Axione, if You be favorable unto him? My Heart, added that fair Girl, is
not very precious; but it is not to Hildezar that my Inclinations have destined
it. I am exposed to his Discourses, and perhaps to his Humors -- What? Do You
make no reckoning of my Authority, interrupted I? Dy'e think that my Love will
suffer his to act in quiet? O my dear Axione! my Interest in this is greater
than Yours; and You are too dear unto me, to suffer You to be importuned by a
Rival; I am a King, and ought to be Master of all but Axione. You may extend
your Dominion even over my Will, my Lord, replied she, seeing Your Generosity
will never put upon me any thing that is rude; and besides, You are All Potent
here. No, Axione, added I, I will never assume any Power where You are, but
what You are pleased to allow me, for You shall always Reign Soveraignly over
me. Oh Heaven, continued that amiable Maid! Can it be possible that I should
prove ungrateful to so much Goodness, and will You not one Day enable me to
testify my Acknowledgment? I hope, my Lord, continued she, That my
Indifferency, or rather Disdain quashing Hildezar's Hopes, he will change his
manner of acting; but if it fall out otherwise, I must change mine. Yes,
Axione, replied I, and besides You must change Your Condition: Do not think
that I will stick to make You Queen of Thibet: The Throne that I possess will
never please Me without You; and if our Laws did permit me, I would offer it
unto You without a Partner. My Lord, answered Axione, with Looks full of
Gratitude, You honor too much a miserable Unknown, whom Fortune has hitherto
esteemed unworthy of the least of her Favors. It would indeed be a very great
One to possess the Affections of an Illustrious Prince, and to share his Crown
with him: But, my Lord, I will never abuse so generous a Bounty; Your Glory
shall never be soiled with an Alliance like mine, and to prevent that
Misfortune, I would abandon my self to the most cruel Miseries, and even give
my self to Hildezar. What! shall it be said, that Axione is Queen of Thibet,
and that all her Dowry is a Descent unknown to all the World? I owe unto You,
and I owe also to my. Self a perfect Manifestation of what I am; and if there
be found, added she, with an extraordinary Majesty, any thing in my Life that
is not unworthy of You, believe me, my Lord, there shall none be able to
dispute it with You, and I would esteem my self too happy.

O Heaven, cried I out, charmed with Axione's Virtue! Could you have infused so
Noble a Grandeur into an ordinary person? Ah, Madam! do not seek for any other
Proof of what You are, than the Beauty of Your Sentiments: They render You
worthy of all the Thrones of the World; Accept of mine, and do not torment me
by too modest and obstinate a Denial. My Lord, replied she, with a stronger
Tone, It is an unalterable Resolution: I cannot tell whether I commit a Crime
against Decency, when I confess unto You, that You have touched my Heart, and
that of all that my Eyes can behold, nothing can be more agreeable to them than
You; but I will willingly commit this Fault, to testify unto You, that the
dearer You are unto me, and the more highly I esteem You, the greater Care I
ought to have of Your Glory. She blushed in finishing these last Words, and
would by no means continue the Discourse.

To satisfy her, I was constrained to neglect the Offense that she had
received from Hildezar, and to act as if I had never been informed of it. But
my Eyes being then opened, I saw but too well what past in the Heart of this
presumptuous Rival: But I did not penetrate so well the Factions that he was
raising in Thibet, by the Authority he had acquired during my Infancy. As Soon
as he had discovered his Thoughts to Axione, he took secret measures to oblige
me to Marry his Daughter, on whom I had never so much as thought, and of whom
he never spoke to me. He engaged all the Kingdom, and seeing till then my
Education and Love had occupi'd me more than State Affairs, it was easy for
him to insinuate into those who shared the Public Cares with him, all that he
was desirous they should do. He told to every remarkable person that had Credit
among the People, That I, possessed with a blind Obstinacy, abandoned my self to
the Love of the unknown Axione, and that I designed no other Princess for my
Subjects. Every one desired him to speak to me of it, condemning my
Pre-occupation; but he refused to do it, and others were obliged to undertake
the Business.

I did not at all suspect what their Occupation at that time was, and was much
surpised one Day, being upon the account of an Affair of great Importance,
obliged to be present at Council, to which I seldom went, believing that my
Presence was not always necessary, when the most Venerable of those that
composed this Assembly addressed himself to me in these Terms:

I speak unto you in the Name of all Your Subjects, my Lord, who entreat You by
my Mouth to give them a Queen. Your Age is not far advanced, but Your Reason
is; and this will tell You, that nothing can be more agreeable to People, than
to see their Sovereigns in a Condition to leave behind them a Glorious
Posterity. This makes the King more Vigilant, and the Subjects better
Disciplined. Unmarry'd Princes are for the most part without Interest, and that
of a Family, engages them to labor for the Glory, and aggrandizing of Your
Dominions. Resolve then, my Lord, to satisfy us, and do as several of Your
Predecessors have done. Go not to bring from a Foreign Clime a Princess that
could not prove very affectionate unto us. There are in Thibet Houses Noble
enough to aspire unto the Alliance of their King: And even that Favor is due
unto the Zeal and Loyalty of Hildezar. Alzine is able to reckon Princes amongst
her Ancestors, and is not the first of her Blood that has entered into the
Royal Family of Thibet.

This Harangue astonished me to such a degree, that I was at first unable to
make any Answer. Choler seized upon my Soul, and I looked upon these Men as so
many Enemies, plotting against my Quiet, and I was particularly incensed
against Hildezar, not doubting but that he was the only Cause of all that
passed. In the end, composing my Countenance, which the Politic Hildezar
examined, I spoke, because I was obliged so to do. Botsar, said I to him that
had expressed himself in the Words I have related unto you, I don't know from
whom you have immediately received the Commission of which you have at present
acquitted your self: but I assure you it is not at all agreeable to me. Who
ought to interest themselves more than mine own Heart in the Choice you desire
me to make? and what man should be more careful of my Fortune than my self? You
must needs look upon me as a weak Person, when you take the boldness to
prescribe Rules to me, and determine the Objects of my Inclinations. I am
neither so ignorant of the Laws of Thibet, nor of those of all the other
Kingdoms of the World, but that I can regulate my Actions with some Glory, and
am able to choose a Wife for my self when it shall be time. My Lord, said
Hildezar, seeing that I had lest off speaking, you must not take it ill, if so
many persons who look upon you as their only Good, do ardently desire to see
you tied unto them by the Interest of which you speak. I have perhaps given
them my Suffrage; but it was not I that proposed Alzine, though, my Lord, she
may well countervail an unknown Maid, and would be more agreeable to your
Subjects. Hildezar, interrupted I with a wrathful Look, You abuse the
Consideration that I have for you: I am nevertheless clear-sighted enough to
perceive that you are not so void of Esteem for unknown Persons; and you also
might have seen enough of my Inclinations, to have made you more respectful and
less daring. Moreover, I am a King, and pretend to be Master. When the People
of Thibet are Oppressed by my Injustice, it will be time for them then to
complain against me; when I shall abandon them to their Enemies, then will they
have cause to upbraid me with Baseness; but hitherto they can charge me with no
Fault, but I may justly reproach all of you, that you have failed in that
respect, which I will endeavor to make you observe in time to come. After this
I went out full of Wrath, the Effects whereof I would have made these
presumptuous Ones feel, but that I was afraid to give Axione the least cause of
Offense. She read the Agitation of my Mind in my Eyes, but I was not willing to
inform her of the true Cause thereof, disguising it with some other pretext.

Hildezar being incensed against me for the interest of his Daughter, but much
more for that of his Love, a dangerous Malice succeeded in the place of the
Affection that he had hitherto professed unto me: He esteemed my Ruin necessary
for the establishment of his Repose and Fortune; and seeing the Peace that
reigned among us, suffered no Cloud to hang over us; he raised a War by
pernicious Intrigues, not doubting but that I would run with Ardour unto the
Places where I might acquire any Glory. He hoped by my Death to ascend a Throne
that had no other Heirs; and though Benzide and Othrize, two considerable
Princes in Thibet, pretended some Right to it, yet the Suffrages he was assured
of made him look upon them as no great Obstacle to his Designs. It was he then
that wheedled that part of my Subjects into an Insurrection, who inhabit the
Frontiers toward India. Upon the first noise of this Rebellion, I resolved to
act the part of a Captain and King. Hildezar was cold and slow, and did not
appear very forward in preparing for the War: His Creatures imitated him, but
in spite of him, I saw my self very quickly at the head of a considerable Army.
As Soon as he saw me ready to be gone, he counterfeited himself sick, that he
might have pretense to remain at Kachen. This was a cruel Necessity for me to
leave Axione exposed to his Importunities. No, said I to her, when the time of
my Departure was come, I will not abandon you to the Indiscretion of Hildezar;
He is Master of all Power here, and my Misfortune has swelled his Authority.
My Lord, replied she, seeing I am near the Princess, and seldom come out of her
Presence, I do not think that I have cause to fear any thing, and it is not his
Importunity that disquieteth me; it is your Life, my Lord, which will be
exposed to rebellious Arms; it is you your self, it is that great Heart that
burns with a Desire to Signalize it self. Alas, my Lord, Sympathize with our
Weaknesses, do not pursue too ardently that Glory which will always follow
you, and in the heat of Battles forget not the Care you owe to the Preservation
of your own Life. This Mark of Axione's Tenderness, whose fair Eyes appeared
moist, touched me sensibly: That Life which I have Consecrated unto you, fair
Axione, replied I, will not be exposed to so many Dangers as your Goodness
persuades you, but seeing you Ordain me, I will take Care of it, as of a Thing
that you are not willing to lose. For you, Axione, I entrust you to your self;
resist the Arrogance of Hildezar, and at my Return resolve with your self to
put an eternal obstacle in the way of his presumptuous Pretensions in giving
your self to a Prince that lives only for you. Go, my Lord, continued the fair
Maid, whither the Rigor of Fate commands you to carry your Arms; and if I be
Mistress of any of your Interests, assure your self that they can never fall
into more faithful hands.

In this manner I took my leave of Axione, and having tenderly Recommended her
to my Sister, I went out of the Palace, accompanied with Benzid, Othrize, and
several other Persons of Quality. Hildezar, said I to that Traitor when he
came to receive my last Orders, you have been desirous to remain at Kachen;
remember always that I Reign there and reign justly, do not abuse the Power
that I have suffered you to assume; render unto my Sister what you owe unto her
Dignity, and above all respect Axione, all whose Interests are mine. Excite no
new Broils, whilst I go to calm these that are already set on foot: I dare
assure you that I will return speedily; Adieu. He answered me only with a
Salutation, and I began to march, but not without anxious Apprehensions.

I may boldly say, Almundzar, that I rushed like a Torrent upon the Rebels:
They were animated by no courageous Captain, and their Revolt being only an
Effect of Hildezar's Treachery, I had no great Trouble or Glory to vanquish Men
that were overcome at the first sight of our Standards. My Anger permitted some
of them to perish for an Example to others, and how much soever I was inclined
to Clemency, I could not without Resentment consider, that they were the cause
of my Absence from Axione. In the end, almost without the loss of a Man, or
renewing the least Wound, though I did not spare my self, I had in less than
three Months quieted all things. The Conquered submitted themselves to my
Pleasure, and I took the way to Kachen, from whence I had received many
Letters, none of which acquainted me with any thing that could make me suspect
the Misery that waited for me. But arriving at that Town, I neither found
Hildezar nor Axione. The Traitor had carried her away, and how exact soever
Thamarize had been in observing her, she could perceive nothing, and appeared
unto me desperate at the Accident. Alzine her self, the innocent Daughter of so
criminal a Father, protested that she had no hand in Hildezar's Action, and
courageously offered her Blood unto me as an Atonement for the Offense I had
received: I assured her, as afflicted as I was, that not confounding her with
the Traitor that gave her Life, I would have held her guiltless of all. In
fine, Almundzar, without staying at Kachen, I run through all Thibet, and even
exposed my self to dismal Wanderings in the howling Deserts of Xama, and after
having consumed a great deal of time in an useless Quest, I returned to Kachen
to settle Things for a longer Voyage, entrusting the Government to my Sister,
and leaving her to the Conduct of Benzid and Othriz in important Affairs, I
departed from Thibet, unable to live without Axione. I saw almost all Asia; I
met with Adventures, which I do not relate unto you, because they have no
direct Relation to my Love, and after a vain Search of two Years, being in
Tartary, and passing through a Forest, that pertains to the King of Ergimul,
I found Hildezar at the Root of a Tree, pierced with several mortal Wounds, and
in a condition worthy of his Treasons: He breathed as yet, and easily knew me:
His Misery asswag'd my Anger, and I went to help him; No, my Lord said he, You
ought not to lavish your Goodness for a Man that has but too much abused it. I
am Guilty, nor is it Death that extorts this Acknowledgment from me, and it is a
great while since a just Remorse has executed Vengeance upon me for my
Treacheries. This Death is too sweet for a Man that has merited the worst of
Punishments, seeing it permits me to ask Pardon of my Master. At these Words
he would have made an Effort to raise himself upon his Knees, but I hindered
him, and asked News of Axione: He told me with a mournful Sigh, That he had
been almost two Years separated from her: That after he had made her wander up
and down a long time, he was assaulted in Tartary, by persons that carried her
away. That after that he had searched for her to no purpose, and that the same
Robbers had now left him in the Condition in which I found him, because he knew
them, and endeavored to make them confess what they had done with Axione.
After that he breathed his last, and having caused my Followers to cover his
Body with a little Earth, I came straight hither, where in the end, I
unexpectedly found Axione. I made my self known to Undkan: I have ever
continued to see Axione; she loves me, I am certain of it; but her severe
Virtue will not permit her to consent to my Happiness, till she know her self
perfectly. she informed me, that Hildezar carried her very privily and by a
subtle Stratagem; that he did not show himself to her till long after their
departure from Kachen; that he had conjured her to pardon his Love, that made
him sacrifice all for her; that she reproached him bitterly with his Treachery;
but that nothing could make him alter his Resolutions; and that in the end, She
was violently taken from him in Tartary, and sold to some Tartars, who gave her
to the Princess Taxila.

Philing left off speaking: Almundzar admired his Generosity, and Axione's
Virtue; Afterward returning to the Interests of Zingis, they discoursed of the
Troops that he had about Cambalu, and of the measures that were most proper to
be taken, to avert the Misfortune that threatened the Life of that famous
Prince.

In the mean time, Timur the Author of all the Sufferings of so many Noble
Persons, was not altogether free of a restless Anxiety himself, and though the
Man in the World whom he hated most was upon the Point of being Sacrificed unto
him, having as much Love for Taxila as he was capable of, he could not live out
of her Sight, and knew well that if he dared to present himself before her, he
would doubtless hear nothing that would please him. Zamar, who loved him even
to Idolatry, saw his Melancholy with Grief: Why do ye languish, Timur, said she
unto him, all Things conspire together for your Felicity, and there is no Crown
in Asia equal to that which you shall possess? What more can be done to
satisfy you? After so much Care that I have taken, will you always show me a
gloomy Countenance? Madam, replied Timur, These Motions are not voluntary, and
it is against my Will that you perceive them: You have done but too much for me:
My Gratitude can never rise high enough; but if my Ambition be contented, I
feel my Love alarmed. Too constant Lover of Taxila that I am, I must either
deprive my self of her Sight, or expose my self to her Reproaches! Ah, Madam!
How do I deserve to be lamented? and how uneasy do I find my self in the
height of my Prosperity! Rather say that you are weak, interrupted the Queen
of Tartary, and that you deserve real Miseries, seeing you torment your self
with imaginary ones: Suffer our Enemy first to perish, and afterward make your
self Master of Taxila. It Is no matter whether or no you obtain her Consent;
Undkan's Authority will remove these Obstacles. In fine, My Son, I will have
you to Reign over the Tartars, and there is nothing but I will do to effectuate
this Resolution. Go see that ungrateful Taxila, whose Disdain I bear with only
upon your account, and in the mean time, I will press the King to put Zingis to
Death.

The Son of Zamar instigated by such a Mother, left her and went to the
Princess, to whom he alone had access. Taxila, who had not seen him since her
Disgrace, was so moved at the sight of him that she had almost lost her
Understanding: To follow his Mother's Advice, he had laid aside his Sadness, so
that he appeared before her full of a bold Arrogance. Madam, said he, One would
have hardly believed, that such a Person as you had been capable to draw exiled
Enemies into Tartary, and even into the King your Father's Palace; and without
reckoning my Interest, you had others powerful enough to have dissuaded you
from such a Correspondence.

As moderate as the Princess was, she lost all Patience at those Words: Though I
had committed something that obliged me to make Reparation, replied she, it
should never be to the King of Tendur (a vile Slave of his own Vanity, and his
Mother's Passions) that I would justify my self. This is indeed to Treat me as
a Prisoner, to carry your Insolency to the place to which I am Confined: Cannot
the Aversion for you that Nature has inspired me with satisfy you, unless you
augment by Proceedings full of Injustice and Presumption? Go, pretended King of
Tendur, go to the Feet of the cruel Zamar, and solicit the Death of Zingis;
but know, that into whatsoever Condition your common Fury may reduce him, he
shall be ever dearer to me than my Life. I would never perhaps have said so
much, if he had not been miserable; but in the present state of our Affairs I
have no Measures to observe; and all my Tenderness is but a mean Recompense for
what he has done, and now suffers for me. At these Words Taxila went into a
Closet, where she shut her self up; and Timur full of Rage and Confusion, said
a thousand Things to Axione without Respect or Reason. She answered him with a
great deal of Wit and Courage, and did not swerve in a Point from the
Princess's Sentiments, which raised the Fury of the Son of Zamar to such a
height, that he returned to his Mother, to bawl against Taxila, and hasten the
Death of a Rival, whom he could not endure to see preferred before him.

Undkan so ardently solicited by persons that had all Power over him, was
quickly persuaded to a fatal Resolution. Almundzar, whose Affection to Zingis's
Interest made him a watchful Spy over all their Actions, perceived what past in
Undkan's Mind, and went to Advertise the King of Thibet of all. Then keeping no
more measures, they dispatched Zerbin to assemble the Mogols that lay near
Cambalu, and Almundzar took the same Care for the Tartars that had declared in
Zingis's Favor.

The King of Tartary desirous to act with some form of Justice, lest he should
draw upon himself the hatred of all the Earth, believed that it would be
esteemed a Crime great enough to condemn the King of the Mogols, that he was
surpised in the Nightime at the Gates of his Palace, in a design to enter
into it. Zamar made choice of the Judges, who according to her Instigations
condemned the Illustrious Zingis to lose his Head within three Days. When the
Sentence was pronounced, he was nothing moved: But the King of Thibet and
Almundzar, upon whom Generosity had so powerful an Influence, trembling for
Horror and Anger, resolved to lose all or save Zingis. They acted with so much
diligence and secrecy, that they quickly formed a strong Party, whom they
dispersed through the Twelve Suburbs of the City of Cambalu, to appear in Arms,
when it should be time, and rescue Zingis from Vndkan's Guards. King Philing
made no scruple to declare himself Head of his Defenders: He owed nothing to
Vndkan, and did not violate any Right, in resisting one that endeavored so
barbarous an Act of Injustice.

The Noise of Zingis's Death reached the Princesse's Ears, who repented but too
late, that she had irritated the Jealously of Timur. She remained in the dismal
expectation of that Misfortune, shedding Tears in abundance with her dear
Axione; and that fair Maid more touched than ever before she had been, felt a
Grief not much inferior to that of Taxila.

The Day appointed for the Death of the King of the Mogols being come, the
Streets were crowded with a multitude of People in the Morning. He was to lose
his Life before the Palace; and it was easy for them that designed to save
him, to conceal themselves in a Cround composed of all sorts of persons: The
Scaffold was erected before Zamar's Apartment, that from her Chamber Windows
she might taste the Pleasure of that Spectacle. Vndkan took his Place with
Zamar, Timur, and the Kings of Vng, Tenguth, Cerguth, and Ergimul, worthy
Slaves of the Tartarian Queen. The People beheld with Astonishment this
Assembly of Sovereigns in an Occupation so unbecoming their Royal Dignity;
whilst the afflicted Taxila groaned, or rather was ready to expire in the Arms
of Axione.

Zamar who saw her Revenge ready to be executed, tasted the Delights that a
barbarous Soul usually sindeth in cruelty: The weak Vndkan suffered himself to
be drawn away by the same Motions, and the unworthy Timur, that declared Enemy
of Virtue, prepared himself to behold the Victim that they were going to
sacrifice to him, as Heroes would dispose themselves to the most generous
Exploits; that is to say with a contented Mind, and a confident Countenance;
and the Four Kings bound to Zamar's Chair, served for an Ornament to this
unworthy Triumph.

Not only did the King of Thibet, Almundzar, and some other Tartars bolder than
the rest, murmur against so black an Attempt: Amongst the People and Soldiers
were found some equitable Souls, sensible of the Merit and Innocence of Zingis,
and who only wanted Head to declare openly in his Favor.

He was brought from the Gaol about Noon, that the Sun might light the
Solemnity: His Guards caused him to mount a Chariot that waited for him, and to
add Disgrace to Cruelty, the Executioner having tied his Hands, placed himself
beside him.

The contented Zamar looked upon all this without changing Color: Her Courage
made all those that surrounded her tremble; and many remembering they had seen
him in those Rencounters where he had acquired so much Glory, bowed down their
Eyes, and sighed mournfully, to behold so great a Man fall by so deplorable a
Blow. Never had he appeared with more Grace and Majesty than in this
unfortunate Condition: His Hands that had chained so many Kings, bore their
Fetters without shrinking; he despised the Shame, and lifting up his Eyes to
the Heavens; O, Taxila! said he aloud, I offer my Life to you as heartily as I
would have done the Empire of the Universe, if it had been in my power: Receive
it as a certain Proof of my faithful Affection, and remember Zingis.

The Chariot in the mean time advanced, and every where might be seen a Deluge
of Tears: The Men excited one another to save Zingis, the Women begged his
Life, and even the Children gave marks of Tenderness.

They drew near to the great Place before the Palace, and the Crowd divided
themselves at a place where the Street grew broader, to make way for the
Chariot, when the King of Thibet stopped it. He would not suffer Almundzar to
take up Arms, that he might have occasion to act afterward. Zerbin alone was
with him, and upon the first Signal they gave, the Mogols and Tartars opposed
the Passage of the Guards.

This so unexpected an Obstacle astonished all the People: Zingis himself was
surpised with it. The first thing the King of Thibet did, was with one Blow of
his Sword to cut off the Head of him that was to do the same Office to the King
of the Mogols, and to untye the Hands of that valiant Prince. My Lord, said he,
presenting him with Arms, If you dye to Day, you shall not dye unaccompanied,
and it shall be in a glorious manner. Receive this Service from a Man, who for
being unknown unto you, is not the less in your Interests. Zingis took what
Philing gave him, and saw himself quickly in a condition to carry Terror
through all: He struck the Tartars therewith by his supernatural Actions.
Philing imitated him valiantly. Zerbin surpassed himself. The Mogols seemed to
be so many Heroes; and the Tartars, who after what they had done could hope for
no safety but from Zingis, did immolate their Countrymen that favored Zamar's
Design. In stead of one Head that should have fallen that Day, Rivers of Blood
covered the Streets of Cambalu. Vndkan not fearing this Surprizal, had thought
a part of his Guards sufficient to secure Zingis, and had not armed the old
Bands of Soldiers that remained in he Suburbs; and in a few moments Zingis's
Party cut in pieces all those that resisted them.

But with what Eye did Zamar, Vndkan, and Timur behold this Rebellion? Pride
and Anger had almost stifled the Queen. Vndkan was agitated with several
Passions at once, and the cowardly King of Tendur grew pale for fear, not
doubting but that he would be obliged to expose himself to Zingis's Valor,
which he had so often experimented. Zamar to no purpose excited the Tartars
with Cries and Promises, the feebler sort fled, and the bravest durst not
advance. The Kings themselves whose Submissions made her so haughty, stood
unmovable without attempting any thing. What, said she, beholding them at her
Palace-Gate, in the presence of five other Kings, shall a daring Criminal
triumph over the Laws and our Authority, and perhaps load us with the Iron that
he is freed from? O mad Fortune! how great is thy Fury and blindness this Day?
These Words covered those that heard them with confusion: but she had not the
power to inspire them with Courage. Vndkan whose Safety was interested in this
Affair, as well as his Glory; and who notwithstanding the number of his Years,
was perhaps the bravest of all these Kings, went out, and the rest followed
him: they sent Orders to the Soldiers to advance, and led on those that were
able to bear Arms in the Palace. As Zingis and Philing were at the point of
making themselves Masters of the Place, the Presence of Vndkan rallied those
that sled; but his Blood was quickly frozen when he beheld the Prodigies that
these two Kings performed. Zingis knew him, and might have easily turned
against him that admirable Valor, that had before done him so great Services;
but respecting him who had given life to the Princess, he turned his Sword
elsewhere, when he saw a Knight that had joined his Party some moments before,
lift up his Arm to kill Vndkan. The generous Zingis not contenting himself to
have spared his Persecuter, would yet defend him against his own Friends, and
opposing himself to the valiant Man that fought on his side; Stop, who ever
thou art, said he to him, and do not defile thy Arms with the Blood of Taxila's
Father. Vndkan was no more surpised at this Action than was the Unknown, to
whom Examples of Virtue were familiar. All the World remarked the proceeding of
Zingis, and Philing was so charmed with it, that his Affection for so great a
Man augmented. The King of Tartary retired amongst his Men pale and trembling,
and in the mean time the old Band of Soldiers, who were Quartered in the
Suburds, as we told you before, and who had time to make themselves ready, came
pouring in on all sides. As Soon as the cowardly Timur saw them appear, he
shouted for joy, and advanced at their Head; but how dear did his boldness cost
him! Zingis who had appeared so moderate in respect of the Princesse's Father
was not so in respect of an insolent Rival; but violently leaping upon him;
Thou shall dye, without possessing Taxila, said he, and thy Eyes shall not be
Witnesses of the death of Zingis. A Shower of Blows followed these Words, and
the Son of Zamar fell down lifeless at the Feet of the King of the Mogols: His
Fall overwhelmed the Heart of his Mother, who encouraged him from the Windows,
with all that Grief and Rage has most violent. She blasphemed Heaven and Men,
and even reviled her Husband, falling into Convulsions, that betoken'd the
cruelty of her Passions.

Whilst Zingis, Philing, Zerbin, the Unknown, and the Mogols, with a part of
the Tartars, completed the Victory: Almundzar seeing the Princesse's Apartment
without Guards, run thither and found her frighted at the noise which she
heard, without knowing the Cause thereof. Ah, Almundzar, said she to him! Is
the King of the Mogols dead? No, Madam, answered the Tartar, and I hope you
shall see him shortly in a Condition to put an end to all your Alarm? Then he
related to her all that had past; and seeing she was no Lover of Blood, the
Death of Timur did not please her, how great soever the Advantage was that she
received by it. But of all that which touched her in Favor of Zingis, nothing
had so great an Influence upon her as the glorious Action, which had afforded
the Tartars so great a cause of Admiration. O Heaven! said she, If Zingis
persecuted and ready to succumb under the pitiless Sword of his Enemies,
defends the Father of Taxila against those whom Generosity armed to save him
from the Fury of Vndkan, what does not she owe to so strong Marks of so pure a
Love? Axione being interested for her Lover, and for a Prince whom she tenderly
loved, reassumed Hope with the Princess; and they redoubled their Vows.

Fortune had entirely declared against Zamar: The loss of her dear Timur was
followed with the Death of several thousands of Soldiers. The King of Cerguth,
Tenguth, Ergimul and Vng fighting faintly without Valor and Courage, perished
by the Arms of Zingis and Philing, and the Tartars that came from the Suburbs,
were constrained to give back.

Zingis had no design upon Vndkan's Crown. Seeing that Prince stunned with the
Disorder re-enter his Palace, he embraced the King of Thibet, with whom the
affectionate Zerbin made him acquainted, and after having said unto him all
that a just Acknowledgment can dictate to a generous Heart, he turned toward
the valiant Man that had fought with so much advantage, and seeing his Head
discovered, he knew him to be the Prince of Brema: Then it was that their
mutual Embraces expressed their Friendship. Zingis praised the Mogols and
Tartars that had served him, with all the affection that their Valor obliged
him to. His Friends advised him to go into the Palace; but whatsoever
Impatience he had to see Taxila, he judged that out of respect to her he ought
not to leave Vndkan, and retired to the same House where he had lain sometime
absconded. Philing and Omir accompanied him thither, and Zerbin took care of
the remainder of the Mogols. But scarce had they been two Hours in that place,
when Almundzar came to seek them. Come, valiant Princes, said he to them, with
immoderate transports of Joy, come and enjoy the Fruits of your Valor; you
have no more enemies to fear: Fury has executed upon Zamar, what your Arms
have done upon the rest; She is dead, and Vndkan, freed from the Bondage in
which her Artifices had enthralled him, recalleth that Virtue which she had
banished out of his Soul, and with ardent Breathings desires a Reconciliation
with you. These Words which inspired them with Hopes of an agreeable
Revolution, did not at first find a perfect belief in those to whom they were
addressed; but in the end, they were obliged to give Faith unto them, and
follow Almundzar to the Palace. Peace was already re-established there; all the
People made Vows for Zingis; there were none found lamenting for Zamar, and
much less for her wicked Son.

Coming to Vndkan, Zingis found there the Princess, and Philing the charming
Axione: The King of Tartary with open Arms received the King of the Mogols, and
that Prince humbled himself respectfully to receive his Embraces. Will you
forget the Cruelties that cover me with an eternal Shame? My Lord, said he to
Vndkan, and can you pardon me for what the unjust Empire, that a Woman had
usurped over my Weakness, has made me commit against you, notwithstanding the
many Services that you had so generously rendered unto me? By your first
Actions you merited the Crown to Tartary, and all that you have added unto it;
and by preserving my Life for the sake of Taxila, you deserve also that
Princess: I give her unto you, Zingis, and with her Tartary, and all that is
subjected to my Scepter, being sensible of no other Pleasure than in seeing you
two Reign together. At these words he took the Princess by the Hand, who full
of Joy received that of Zingis. My Lord, said he to Vndkan, Your Goodness
surpasses infinitely my Hopes and the Merit of my Services. I receive with all
due respect the precious Advantage of being united to the Princess: but for the
Crown of Tartary, I will not join mine to it, but to the end that I may make
you Master of both. Reign my Lord, Reign in Peace, and receive my Homages. No,
no, interrupted Vndkan, I have been King too long, since I have been guilty of
so great Injustice in that quality: whilst I Reign in you, you shall Reign for
me, and I will reap from thence both Pleasure and Glory. Then he asked Pardon
of the King of Thibet, praised his Generosity, and was perfectly reconciled to
him. But casting his Eyes upon the Prince of Brema, who had not yet changed his
Habits, he knew him to be that terrible Man against whom Zingis had defended
him. He was somewhat moved at the sight of him; but the rising Virtue, which
begun to chase from his Soul all that approached to Vice, would not permit him
to entertain any Resentment. He embraced him then as he would have done a Son:
The King of the Mogols would not suffer you to take Vengeance on me, Omir, said
he unto him, and I will not find fault with one that attacked me in so just a
Cause. Omir answered with a great deal of submission. Almundzar received also
new Marks of Vndkan's Friendship, and this King spoke with much sweetness to
all those that took Arms for Zingis.

Mean-time Love triumphed, and Zingis and Taxila perceived it mutually in their
contented Eyes, and received from one another the most tender Assurances
thereof. Philing told Axione all that he had suffered during a few Days
absence, and conjured that scrupulous person to be somewhat less fixed in her
Resolutions, and to yield at last to make them happy. She thanked him for what
he had done for Zingis; and after this first Interview, the Princes having
received some slight Wounds that had need to be looked after; went out together
with Almundzar: They were not considerable enough to oblige them to keep their
Chamber, and they prepared themselves to visit the Princess, when the Prince of
Brema spoke in this manner to the King of Thibet:

I know not, my Lord, whether what has happened unto me in your Dominions will
draw upon me your hatred: I have committed a Fault, and yet cannot be a
Penitent. The Princess Thamarize is at Cambalu; it is I who brought her hither;
but when you shall hear my Reasons, you will perhaps pardon me.

This Discourse astonished Philing: He did not doubt but Love had been the
principal Agent in the Affair; and seeing he had not a Heart disposed to
condemn that Passion, that had so great an Empire over him, seeing the Prince
of Brema's Worth, and knowing the Service that he had done to Axione.
Whatsoever you have done, my Lord, replied he, I am persuaded that my Sister is
obliged to you, and I being so, in so touching a manner, believe that I am
incapable to condemn you: But since Thamarize is at Cambalu, let us see her
quickly, that she may receive the Embraces of a Brother that has always dearly
loved her.

Philing and Zingis would have accompanied Omir; but Almundzar prayed them not
to stir, and he went with that Prince to seek Thamarize, whom they immediately
brought to Vndkan's Palace: The Brother and the Sister gave to one another all
the marks of a tender Friendship. Zingis saluted the Princess of Thibet, whose
Beauty he admired, and Vndkan hearing of her Arrival, came to see her, that he
might show the greatness of his Respect for Timur, and would himself lead her
into an Apartment whither Taxila and Axione also came. As soon as Thamarize had
saluted the Princess of Tartary, she received Axione with open Arms; and she
received her Caresses with a respectful tenderness. The King retired, and all
the Company being desirous to be informed how Omir and Thamarize were come
together, the Prince of Brema, with the Princesse's permission, spoke in this
manner to these Illustrious Persons.

The History of OMIR and THAMIRIZE.
THere are none but know that I have been unhappy from the Cradle; the Son of a
Prince Conquered and Subdued by the King of Tartary's Arms, without Fortune,
having lost all in that Revolution; and without hope to re-establish my House,
unless by my own Courage, and the assistance of my Friends.

Vndkan did not neglect my Education; and I must own my self obliged to him, in
that I was brought up as the Son of a King: but having attained to a more
reasonable Age, Timur's Insolency made me perceive that I was only a Slave, he
always treating me as his Inferior. I bore all a great while, not knowing what
to resolve upon. The Arrival of Zingis into Tartary stayed me there, by reason
of the Affection that I bore to him: we made our first Campaign together; but
at our return from the War, not being able to live under a Power which Zamar's
Authority and Timur's Credit rendered unjust, I departed from Tartary without
acquainting any with my Resolution, and first visited the unfortunate Place
where I first saw light: Such sad Objects served only to afflict me; I
descended toward the South, and insensibly came into the Kingdom of Thibet.

I arrived at Kachen a little after the King had left it: Sadness reigned over
all; those that governed the State taking advantage of the King's Absence, and
of the small Experience that the Princess had in these great Affairs, minded
their own Profit, and usurped too great an Authority.

The first time I saw Thamirize was in the Temple, where she was performing her
Devotions: Her modest and melancholy Air rendered her Beauty All-potent over my
Heart: I perceived even then that I was beginning to fall in love, and I had
not the force to resist this Disposition. Having seen her a moment, I burned
with a desire to see her again: but how could I have Access to her? Philing's
Absence made the Court solitary, and the Palace inaccessible to Strangers. I
was constrained then to expect from Fortune the Occasions of satisfying my
rising Passion. The Idea of Thamirize never forsook me; I returned into the
Temple, but because it was public, she came thither but seldom.

I learned, after a small abode at Kachen, that since the King's departure, the
Princess lived retired: that Men had no access to her, not those even of the
greatest Quality, that she spent her time in Reading, Walking, or some other
Occupations of that nature. They whom I came acquainted with made a
Portraicture of her Humor, and charmed me; they told me that she was Generous,
Pitiful, of an easy Access to those that had Business with her, witty in
Conversation, and incapable of doing an Injustice: She had several Maids of
Illustrious Families about her, and this little Court, so severe to our Sex,
inspired my youthful Fancy with a design as odd as bold, but the only one that
gave me Hopes of Success: being of convenient Features, I resolved to cloth my
self like a Woman. They wear their Habits somewhat loose in Thibet, I caused
some to be made proper for a Person of Quality, by means of a Girl whom I
acquired, and who was faithful unto me. There was none but would have been
deceived with this Disguise, even those of my most familiar Acquaintance, there
being nothing forced in my Actions, and my Face might have past for that of a
handsome Maid.

Overjoyed that I had fallen upon this Stratagem, I resolved quickly to make an
Essay, and in two Days having perfectly accustomed my self to act the Maid, I
was showed the way to the Palace-Garden, into which my Cloths easily obtained
for me a permission to enter. I walked there a great while alone; but at last
Thamirize who was wont to come thither daily, came at her usual Hour, and past
by near the place where I was: I saluted her respectfully; she returned my
Salutation with an extraordinary Goodness; and after she had walked some paces
off, the Idea of my unknown Face striking her Imagination, she asked of the
Maids that followed her, whether any of them knew me: They all answered in the
Negative, and it being the will of Fortune, that the Princess should find
something in me not unworthy of her Curiosity, she sat down, and ordered one of
her Maids to entreat me to come to her: I obeyed with a great Agitation, and
Thamirize took it for a sign of Modesty, that which was only the Effect of my
Love. Do not take it ill, said she unto me, with a graceful Sweetness, that I
am desirous to know you: Your Mien is able to pre-occupy all those that see
you, in your Favor; I wish I could be useful to you to testify that I speak
sincerely to you.

These obliging Words pierced to the very bottom of my Heart, and filled it
with a very sensible Joy. I was indeed informed, Madam, replied I, that you was
a Princess as Generous as Fair; and that the Misfortunes of my Love would
certainly be remedied by your Goodness, if I could once appear before you: I
was Born in Tartary, Madam, and Educated at Cambalu, with the Princess Taxila,
being of a Quality that procured me that Honor. Certain deplorable Misfortunes
obliged me to leave that Court, and Heaven conducted me to Thibet, where I
abide, that I may evite greater Evils; unknown to all your People, without
Protection, and without Friends, I have already past some sad Days here: but,
Madam, they will be hereafter more pleasant, and the Happiness that I have this
Day received, will make me forget all my past Pains. Thamirize looked upon me
attentively all the while, I spoke, and offering her hand to me with an Air
full of Goodness; I am sorry, said she to me, that Fortune has been so
ungrateful to your Merit, as to expose you to any cross Adventures: but at the
same time, I am glad that she affords me an Occasion to assist you. You may
abide with us, and nothing that depends on us shall be wanting to make your
Life easy.

I cast my self at the Princesse's Feet, transported with Love and delight; and
having thanked her for the Favor she did me, I entertained her with a recital
of my Adventure, as my Fancy at that instant dictated to me, still keeping
within the bounds of probability, and told her that my Name was Irmise.

This was the success of my Stratagem of Love: I abode in the Palace among
Thamirize's Maids, and forgot no Precautions that might serve to conceal my
Secret, and to continue me in a quiet possession of the Advantage that I
enjoyed. In a little time I acquired a considerable rank in the Princesse's
Friendship; she gave me a thousand innocent marks thereof, and seemed delighted
to hear me talk: but my greatest trouble was to hide my Love, which received
new augmentations every moment: I had this advantage in my Happiness, that it
did not excite any Envy against me, and that all Thamirize's Maids were my
Friends. Alzine the Daughter of one Hildezar a Fugitive, and the cause of the
King's Absence, did often bewail her Father's Crime before the Princess, who
informed me that it was Axione who had obliged their Brother to leave his
Kingdom, and she was not a little joy'd, when I told her news of that lovely
Axione.

My greatest care was not to abuse the Princesse's Goodness, by allowing too
great a liberty to my Eyes: I shunned her Presence at those Hours that Decency
forbids us to see Women in; I never went to her Chamber till she was dressed,
and came out of it always before they put her to Bed.

In this manner then I past my time the first Month; but I could not expect to
remain still without trouble. The absence of the King and Hildezar, who was the
most considerable after that Prince, swelled the Courage of several persons,
that dared not to pretend to any thing before. For believing that neither of
them would ever return, and seeing the Princess destined to Reign after
Philing, Othrize and Benzide, who were of the quality of Princes, appeared in
love with her, and declared it openly. The King had judged them capable to give
advice to Thamirize, the youngest of them being above 30 Years of Age at his
departure from Thibet, recommended unto them the State, and a Sister whom he
dearly loved, and they made a tyrannical use of this Recommendation.

Though Thamirize was desirous to shun all Men, these two had Privileges that
she could not oppose: As soon as they knew one another to be Rivals, Jealousy
set them at odds; they had both Pride and very little Merit; and a Soul so
delicate as that of the Princess could not be touched in their Favor. For me,
I soon perceived that their Love was interested and void of respect. They had
heard of my Adventures, and seeing the Credit that I had with Thamirize, both
of them endeavored to gain me to their side, and entreated me to promote the
Interest of their Loves. As they both made the same Harangues unto me, I
returned to both a like Answer. My Lord, said I to Benzide, who was oldest, and
as I believed, wisest, the Princess is too judicious her self to ask Advice of
me concerning your Proposals: but though she should do it, and address her self
to me, I would send her back to consult her own Heart and Reason, which are
alone capable to regulate the Sentiments of such a Person as she: But seeing
you honor me with your Confidence, permit me to tell you, that of the humor I
take her to be, declared Lovers will meet with no good Reception from her,
especially in the King's absence. Philing replied, Benzide will never return to
Kachen, and the cause that carried him hence will doubtless prove his ruin: It
is not that which perplexeth me, and all the cause of my disquiet, is, that I
am ignorant of the difference that Thamirize puts between Othrize and me. I
believe, said I, that she puts none at all. Well then, continued Benzide,
not well satisfied with me, I must make a difference, and I hope shall be able
enough to do it. He left me, and the Princess perceiving that he went away
vox'd, approached to rescue me out of a thoughtfulness into which this
Discourse had put me. Are you my Rival, Irmise, said she to me smiling, and
has Benzide been making a Love-declaration to you? Ah! how would I be obliged
to your Beauty, if it had freed me from his Importunities: I am only Benzide's
Confident, Madam, answered I; He solicites me to promote his Interest with you,
and wishes that I could render him agreeable unto you. My dear Irmise, replied
she sighing, I fear Benzide and Othriz will perplex me sadly. Nor was this Fear
groundless, and never two ambitious Men pushed their Timerity to a greater
height.

For me, I lived with more equitable but no less disquieting Desires: The
Beauties of Thamirize flattered the present time, but they gave me no Hopes for
the future. I was guilty of deceiving her by a criminal Artifice; and however
pure my Intentions were, I had cause to believe that she would not leave my
Fallacy unpunished. After I had satisfied blindly the first motions of my Love,
these Reflections racked my Soul; the least look of the Princess alarmed me; I
still fancied that she read the Truth in my Heart, and that she had discovered
my Sex. This plunged me into so profound a Melancholy, that I was often in a
doubt whether I should declare my Crime, and expose my self to her just
Indignation, and receive the Punishment that I merited, or banish my self from
her, and preserve my Crime eternally secret. These Agitations made a great
impression both on my Body and Mind. Thamirize who loved me, perceived this
alteration with Grief. Irmise, said she to me, one Evening, when I was alone
with her, I am thinking on you, though I believe you do not think on me. It is
doubtless the ill Fortune that brought you into Thibet, that inspireth you with
that Melancholy, which I cannot see without trouble, and which I wish I was
able to remove at any rate. Madam, replied I, Since you have sweetened, or
rather fixed that cruel Fortune, which crossed my tenderer Years, it is
impossible that I can be one moment without thinking on my Obligations to you.
Alas, Madam! I am far from being guilty of the Crime of not thinking upon you,
and if you had never another to reproach me with, I would perhaps be less
disquieted. I blushed in pronouncing these words. Thamirize perceived it, and
looked upon me fixedly; but not comprehending any thing of the mystery: I do
not believe, replied she, that any thing can make you pass for guilty in my
esteem: But, Irmise, speak sincerely, and if you desire my satisfaction, tell
me why you languish? If there appears any Fire in your Eyes, you look as if
you designed to hide it. I never surprise you but sighing; you sometimes look
up to Heaven in a suppliant manner; you seemed diligent in serving me at the
beginning of our acquaintance, and now methinks my Presence troubles you. You
are free here, and I did not give you a Sanctuary with a design to constrain
you: But, my dear Irmise, added she smiling, and stretching out her hand
obligingly to me, you must discover your Mind to me. I believe you are in love,
and that some Illustrious Tartar possesses that Heart, in which I am desirous
to have a little room. During this Discourse I was a hundred times tempted to
declare my self, but considering that Thamirize would then perhaps show me as
much Severity, as she had hitherto done Sweetness, I imprisoned my Love once
more, and endeavored to compose my self.

If any one had a larger share in my Heart than the Princess of Thibet,
answered I, I would never perhaps have seen her, and being of the humor I am
of, I could hardly leave the place where I was staid by so strong a tie. I do
not say, continued I, that my Soul is altogether void of Tenderness, and that
is perhaps the cause of my languishing Groans. I don't doubt, said Thamarise,
more perplexed than before, but you are capable to make a good choice, and upon
this account, I promise to be always favorable to him that has the Happiness
to please you. And what would you say, Madam, replied I, You that have so much
Reason and Wisdom, if you found a Girl resolute enough to love, and so bold as
to own it. I would not condemn her for a Freedom that I had forced her unto,
answered Thamirize; and seeing there may be a lawful Tenderness, I would not
esteem her the less. Since you approve in me, replied I, a Passion which so
many condemn; one would be tempted to think that a Prince worthy of you by his
Merit and Person, might one Day have the Honor to touch you. It Is true,
continued Thamirize with a modest Blush, that I do not feel my self incapable
of loving an extreme lovely Object; and you see, Irmise, seeing I love you,
that I am not insensible. Ah, Madam! cried I out, The Love with which you
honor me, would not satisfy an amorous Prince; and I know some that would not
be contented with it, as precious as it is. Seeing you have traveled through
Paths that are as yet unknown to me, added the Princess, you are able to give
me a Lesson: But, Irmise, since it is not in favor of Benzid and Othrize, that
I design to make use of your Skill, we must expect some other occasion.

I was not sorry that I had found a pretext to cover my Melancholy: I suffered
Thamirize to believe that I was in love, and after this discourse she asked me
no more questions.

About this time the two Rivals redoubled their Importunities, and began to
form Parties underhand in Thibet: On this Occasion it was that I admired the
inconstancy of the People. Thus Philing had only left Kachen for a Voyage, his
ungrateful Subjects no sooner saw he was gone, but they flattered the Ambition
of the two Usurpers, declaring that they would not live without a King, and
that the Princess to Reign alone, the hope of Reward emboldened interested
Souls, and Thamirize's Lovers had but too many Abettors.

They had managed their Plots so closely, that we could not foresee what
happened: These two Men inspired by the same Interest, acted in the same
manner; and one Morning when the Princess was in the Garden with her ordinary
Train, that is to say, some of her Guard and her Maids, we saw Benzide
approaching at the Head of many armed Men, with as proud an Air as if he had
been marching on some glorious Expedition; and Othrize appeared on the other
side with an equal number of Persons, and a like Arrogance. Ah, Irmise! said
the Princess unto me, What is the cause of the coming of these Princes to Day,
and what do they seek for with so many armed Men and Soldiers? I had already
guessed at their Design; I did not doubt but that they intended to make
themselves Masters of Thamirize's Liberty, and being resolved to perish for her
sake; be not frighted, Madam, replied I, Heaven does not protect Violence, and
you are not so far abandoned to their Fury, as you perhaps fear. As I finished
these Words, they both drew near to the Princess: but it was not to her that
they spoke. What come you to seek for here, said Benzide to Othrize? And what
Business do you pretend here, replied the last? I perceive that both our
Designs are the same: Let us fight for Thamarize, since it is by Arms that we
must decide our quarrel. Then did they begin to let fly at one another, with
more fury than skill; and as long as they exercised their Valor in this
manner, I remained an useless Spectator of their Combat. But Othrize more happy
than Benzide, laid him along at his Feet dangerously wounded, and putting his
Enemies to the rout, run to seize upon the Princess. Then it was that I begun
to feel what I was, and no consideration could retain me. Will you suffer your
Princess to be captivated, said I to the Guards, and will you not rather dye,
than show your selves so base and treacherous? Othrize's Party was strong, for
he had lost few Men, and Thamarize had but a small number of her Guards with
her: but not contenting my self with animating them by Words, but desirous to
give them an Example, I laid hold on a Dead-man's Sword, and notwithstanding
that my Habit cumber'd me, I fought with an ardour that astonished the
Princess. He that had often fought for indifferent Interests with some
Advantage, could not be slow in defeating Thamirize's Enemies, who full of
Fear, and surrounded with her Maids, looked upon that which she esteemed a
Prodigy. The Guards believed that it was an Aid miraculously sent from Heaven,
and bestirred themselves with the greater Bravery: I shed a great deal of
Blood; this could not be done without losing some of my own, and coming up
close to Othrize, I wounded him in several places; but as he fell pierced with
my strokes, his Party yielding to the Valor of the Guards, one that was full
of Affection to Othrize being mortally wounded and mad to find himself in the
Agony of Death, came behind me and thrust his Sword quite through my Body. This
grievous Blow sent me to the Ground also, and the Earth that received my Body,
made the Sword that stuck in it fall out.

The Princess saw her self without a Protector and Enemies both at once;
Compassionating my Misfortune, and believing my Death contain, she run through
dead and dying Men, and finding me in a condition worthy of her Tears, she shed
them in abundance. Irmise, said she unto me, my dear Irmise, Why did you
precipitate your self into Danger? If my Repose be purchased at the rate of
your Life, I shall never enjoy it with Delight. I am not worthy of Life,
answered I, with a feeble Voice, and the Blood that I give to atone for my
Crime, is not sufficient to wash it away. Withdraw, Madam, think on your own
Safety, and leave the unhappy Omir Prince of Brema, who that abused your
Goodness, but dies adoring you, and who never would have done you any Offense,
if he had not loved you too ardently. I could not speak any longer; Thamirize
believed I was dead, and, as she since told me, was more sensible of Grief than
Anger.

Benzide and Othrize were dangerously woundep, but not killed: Their Creatures
took care of them, and by the Princesse's order I was carried into an Apartment
of the Palace: Every one was astonished, when they were informed of my Sex; but
of all those that were in the Princesse's Interests, not one endeavored to
incense her against me.

She complained highly of the Violence of the two Princes; but seeing they had
preoccupied the Spirits of the People, and ere long were out of all danger, and
in a condition to begin their Persecutions afresh; Her Words were in vain, and
she saw that the baseness of the people would abandon her to their Ambition. My
Cure went on more slowly, because I suffered more: They doubted even at first
whether I could escape. In the mean time my restless Anxiety was very cruel: I
did not see the Princess, and I could not persuade my self, that she had any
more Interest in me, but I was very carefully tended in the mean time.

When I was altogether out of danger, and in a condition to entertain a
Discourse, Thamirize came one Evening to the Chamber where I lay with her
Maids: I did not expect her, and I never was so much moved. When I had saluted
her as respectfully as the present posture I was in could permit me, she sat
down, and after some moments of silence; You have deceived me, my Lord, said
she, and a more furious person than I would doubtless have made a noise if they
had received such an Offense: but you have served me, and I am willing to
forget so great an Injury in consideration of so considerable a Service. These
are my Sentiments, my Lord; but how can I justify my self to the Public? Who
can believe that you have lived disguised in the Palace without my knowledge?
And what will the King my Brother think of such an Adventure, when he shall be
informed of it? Ah, my Lord! How much Vexation would you have spared me, if you
had been more circumspect.

All that the Princess said was so full of Equity, that it could not but
inspire me with a true Remorse: She saw in my Confusion that I was a suppliant
Criminal; I dare say nothing in my own justification, Madam, answered I when
she had left off speaking; I am guilty, and will suffer without Complaint all
the Punishments to which your just Resentment may condemn me. They that are
acquainted with the Power of Love, will perhaps have some Indulgence for me,
but I can expect none from you, and I must dye for your Satisfaction. What
cause soever of Vexation you have given me, interrupted Thamirise, I demand no
such Reparation. Live, my Lord, and think only on your Departure from Thibet,
where I can suffer you no longer without shame. And you are not revengeful,
interrupted I next, in choosing for me a Punishment so great as that of
Absence. If you will condemn me to it, I must obey, but it will certainly kill
me; since that I might see you, I adventured even to offend you, it is beyond
all doubt that my Life is bound up in that Pleasure. After all, Madam, I will
notwithstanding be gone, and at this very moment, if my Strength would permit
me. No, no, my Lord, replied the Princess, with a less imperious Air, recover
your Health first, and when that is done, we shall determine the time of that
Departure that disquieteth you. She left me after these Words, and passed the
Night pretty calmly.

The Sight of the Princess had such an Influence upon me, that in a little time
I left my Bed, and then my Chamber: but in another Figure than that of a Maid,
notwithstanding the Fury and Jealousy of Benzide and Othrize.

I went to see the Princess trembling, and she seemed to be so full of
Confusion, that the trouble that I had occasioned to her, gave me a new
Vexation. The Habit they had brought me was handsome, and set me off to the best
advantage: I had a great deal of Love, Fear, and Respect. This was a happy
moment for me, and Thamirize granted to my ardent Supplications a Pardon,
without which it was impossible for me to live; and though she did not Treat me
as she had done Irmise, I was nevertheless well satisfied.

They who saw me abide in Kachen, and were of the party of my Rivals, believed
that really the Princess had had a hand in my Disguise. But Othrize and Benzide
openly declared themselves my Enemies, and publicly swore my Ruin. They had
seen me defend my Life so well that they had no mind to attack me without
advantage. In the end, my Lord, their Factions were so powerful, and their
Parties grew furious to that height, as to pretend to force the Princess to
make a Choice. It was to no purpose to represent that the Royal Authority was
encroach'd upon in Philing's absence; her Words were too weak a Bridle to
restrain so ungovernable boldness, and the two Princes agreed, that for whom
Thamirize should declare, should remain peaceable Master of her Person and
Kingdom. She resisted a great while; but what could she do in a general Revolt?
I offered to dye in her Service; and when you are dead, said she unto me, Shall
I be less unhappy. Well, Madam, said I, I believe an Advice which you may
perhaps judge interested, but is nevertheless very sincere. Entrust your self
to my Respect; let us depart from Thibet: let us go into Tartary, where the
King your Brother will have doubtless found Axione; and after we have put you
in a secure Place, it will be casie for us to come and punish your unworthy
Subjects. Thamirize started a thousand Difficulties which my Reasons
surmounted; and in spite of the great number of Spies that watched over her, I
look so just and happy measures, that we escaped out of Kachen without any
trouble, and afterward got out of Thibet, bringing along with us only one of
the Princesse's Maids, and twenty Men for a Convoy. By diligent Pains, and
different Paths we entered into Tartary; the Princess bore with courage the
Fatigues of a long Journey, and Yesterday in the Evening we arrived at Cambalu,
where hearing of the Tragedy that was like to be acted, I immediately
determined to expose my Life for that of Zingis. Behold, my Lord, said Omir to
Philing, I have told you my Crime, and the state in which we left Whibet.

The Brother of Thamarize did tenderly embrace her Lover, and thanked him in
expressions full of gratitude for what he had done for her: The Commotions in
Thibet did not much disquiet him, being persuaded that Benzide and Othrize whom
he knew, would destroy one another.

Omir charmed with his happiness tasted perfect joy at the feet of Thamarize,
who now suffered without Constraint and Affection to appear that was authorized
by the King her Brother. All Zingis's thoughts run upon Taxila, and Philing
still in vain solicited the obstinate Axione to make him happy.

Vndkan recovered from his Fury, looked upon the Death of Zamar and that of
Timur, as Effects of the Justice of Heaven: Finding himself then freed from the
Empire of the proud Queen, he repented of his Weakness, and renouncing these
Grandeurs which had only served to enable him to execute his Injustice; his
only desire was to abandon them to Zingis and Taxila, for whom he was then
sensible of a true Tenderness.

Whilst the three satisfied Lovers entertained the three fairest Persons of the
World, with what they felt for them; the careful Almundzar was razing Zamar out
of the remembrance of Vndkan, by Discourses full of Virtue.

The King of Tartary ordered Preparations to be made with a Royal Magnificence
for the Solemnity of the Marriage of Zingis and Taxila, and the Ceremony of
their Coronation. Six Diadems were in one day added to the Crown, and the
Valor of Zingis promised a great many others. Almundzar was agreeably occupi'd
with these Cares; and one Day as he was in the Place before the Palace, where
he was causing to erect a splendid Triumphal Arch, in lieu of the unworthy
Scaffold, that a little before was to be seen in that Place; he was accosted by
a Man, whose Mien surpised him. He was Old but Venerable. My Lord, said he
unto him, Since all the Power here is in your Hands, it is to you that I
address my self, to obtain for me a moments Audience of the King of the Mogols,
to whom I must impart matters of very great Importance. Almundzar full of Zeal
for all that concerned Zingis, carried the old Stranger without delay to
Taxila's Chamber, where the King of the Mogols was with Philing, Omir,
Thamarize, and Axione.

As soon as the old Man had cast his Eyes upon the last of them, he appeared
Planet-struck: Great Gods, cried he out, transported with Joy! it is then true
that you restore unto me that Princess whom I lost in Thibet. O Axione! O
Zenelie! Who would have said that ever I should see you again?

His Exclamation surpised this Illustrious Company: But the Stranger continued
thus, and addressing himself to Zingis; My Lord, said he unto him, This fair
Axione, whom you behold, is the Princess Zenelie your Sister, who was taken
away violently from the Queen your Mother, by a Troop of Robbers of the
Tartarian Mountaineers, in a certain Voyage that she made: But I must
demonstrate this Truth unto you in a more orderly method.

I am a Mogol, my Lord, born a Subject to the King your Father, and served the
Queen in one of the principal Charges of the House: I followed her in the
Voyage I spoke of, which the languishing Condition of her Health obliged her to
undertake. She would carry the young Princess along with her, for she could not
endure to be separated from her: in traversing a Forest, these cruel Men, in
number much surpassing us, forced us to yield to them, and took Zenelie away
with them, whom they were easily able to carry off. The Queen was overwhelmed
with Grief, and I with several great Wounds: I bewailed her Misfortunes, and
upbraided my self with Weakness. As soon as I was cured, I made a Vow to take
no rest till I had found Zenelie; and leaving the afflicted Queen, I visited
all the Places where I believed I might hear News of the Ravishers of Zenelie.
More than two years past over in this manner, and I was informed by Fame of the
Death of the Queen of the Mogols: I wandered about still, having no Family at
Molg, and one Day, more happy than the rest, I rencounter'd in Thibet the
Captain of these Robbers that had carried away Zenelie, and that Princess her
self with him. I easily knew her; but she did not retain any Idea of me. I
asked that Robber what he pretended to do with a Child that was none of his. He
answered me with Disdain, and several times called her Axione. Wearied with
speaking to him in vain, being then as well accompanied as himself, I fought
him, and we reduced one another into such a condition, that Axione alone
remained standing. Se was then in the seventh year of her Age. There arrived a
great many persons on Horseback, who in all probability carried away Axione or
Zenelie. For me, I lost my Senses, and lay long in that condition: but some men
that lived in the bottom of the Forest, where they kept some Flocks, came to
the place where I was, and finding me yet warm, carried me to their Cave. I was
there more than six Months before I could stand upright; having only the
advantage of some Simples for my Cure. I was even constrained for want of
Strength, to live many years in that Desert: I Insensibly accustomed my self to
it. But when Time hadre-establish'd me in better Health, I forsook the Forest,
in which my Weakness had buried me so long. I searched, I run through a
thousand places; but at length, hearing that there was at Cambalu an unknown
Maid called Axione, I came hither, I have seen her, and I find that she is
Zenelie, so like the Queen her Mother, that one cannot observe the least
difference between them. Then Metaphanes showed them a Picture of the Queen of
the Mogols, which he had still preserved; and although it had been done for
Axione, it could not have resembl'd her more perfectly. All the Circumstances
of her Fortune corresponding exactly with that of Zenelie, no body doubted but
that she was the Princess of the Mogols. Zingis embraced a thousand times this
amiable Sister, who returned his Caresses with tenderness, Taxila and Thamirize
testified their sensible Joy to Zenelie by all that could express it; and
Philing transported, threw himself at her Feet. Zingis assured him that she was
his, and the young Princess did not contradict this Illustrious Brother.

Vndkan was informed of this Discovery, and Metaphanes told him the particulars
thereof. In the end, Joy resounded over all the Palace, and the wished for time
that was to unite these six persons, was come.

That great Day was pompously solemnized: Never so much Splendour and Riches
appeared at one time. The Temple where the Ceremony of the Marriage was to be
performed, was crowded with an infinite number of Tartars and Strangers.
Philing and Omir bore up the Mantle-Royal of Zingis, and Zenelie and Thamirize
that of Taxila. The Scepters and Crowns were placed on a magnificent Throne,
and after these happy Lovers were united together in an eternal Bond, Vndkan
with his own Hand Crowned Zingis and Taxila. Afterward the new Emperor
Crowned Philing and Omir, and the Empress Taxila performed the same Honor to
Zenelie and Thamarize. The People without ceasing repeated the Names of Zingis
and Taxila, and Pleasures ended the famous Day. Vndkan would no longer
undertake the Charge, or retain any marks of his Dignity, leaving all in the
hands of persons that so justly deserved these Honors. Not long after they
were informed, as Philing had foretold, that Benzide and Othrize had perished
in their Division, and Ambassadors from Thibet came to assure Philing that his
Sublects remained constant in their Allegiance to him: He stayed in Tartary at
Zingis's desire; as did also Omir with the Title of King of Brema. Zingis
enlarged very much the Limits of Thibet, and testified by his Liberality to the
Princess his Sister, how dear she was unto him. Vndkan died not long after, and
was lamented, for the last of his Actions had abolished the Remembrance of the
rest. In fine, Zingis founded the most puissant Empire in Asia, and rendered
his Name so Famous, that all the Universe was filled with it: He subdued India,
Persia, and all that is between the Tigris and Volga. Philing and Omir shared
in his Glory, and followed him in his happy Expeditions. Almundzar was
considered according to his Desert. Metaphanes died for Joy, having seen
Zenelie Queen of Thibet. Zerbin received the Recompenses due unto his Fidelity,
and these Princes full of Days and Honor, left behind them a numerous and
glorious Posterity.

FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT.
THere is lately Printed, A Present for the Ladies; being an Historical
Vindication of the Female Sex: By N. Tate. To which is added, The Character of
an Accomplished Virgin, Wife, and Widow; In Verse.


