Considerations Humbly Tendered, Concerning the East India Company.
IF the Present Charter and Company be dissolved, a way is paved for our
Neighbors to render themselves Masters of all that Trade, and this
irrecoverably, which will draw with it the Mastery of the Sea, and all our
Safety: For though we may think to Fight for it, while we have Mariners enough;
yet it is nothing but Trade which can breed up and retain those Mariners.

If this Company only be pulled down and another set up, (which must be with
equal or larger powers) the stop and nonplus the new Company will be plunged in
for some years, will give such opportunities to our Neighbors to possess
themselves of all that is worth their grasping, that the Error will be seen
when it is too late.

If this be done, or (as the Phrase now in Vogue) the Doors set open for new
Subscriptions, what reasonable Compensation can be made for the dead Stock, the
Forts, Factories, Arms, Ammunition, Phirmaunds and Privileges, acquired,
improved, recovered, and maintained by a vast Expense? and with what Equity can
this be done without it? whereas the daily practice of buying Stock at the
Price Current, is so easy to any who have a mind to come in fairly, so many
dying, or selling off to lay out in Lands.

If finding the ruinous tendencies of these Courses, the Nation be content with
reducing the greater Stocks to smaller Scantlings, it were as good to turn out
Ability, Honesty and Application from the management of the Stock, those being
the surest pledges which can be given for these, and then what reason that the
present Owners of the greater Stocks, the most whereof have reaped yet no
benefit thereby, should be obliged to sell off to loss? the least harm that can
be done in this case, being not to look back, but only to set limits for the
future.

But still the Conduct of our thriving Neighbors will be worth observing, who
have never offered at such Restraints, nor ever unsettled their once
Established Company, and who as earnest Asserters as they have showed
themselves of Liberty in every Circumstance; instead of countenancing the
insolent Intrusions of Interlopers, have from time to time enlarged their
Charter and strengthened it with all the Authority which they could desire.

And this is it which has enabled them to lay such deep and solid Foundations
in those remote parts, not only for Traffic but for Empire, and which wait
only for the once more disturbing of the English Company, wherein the
extravagancy of our Interlopers, and others abusing the good meaning of many
worthy Patriots in the High Court of Parliament with their specious but shallow
Insinuations and Slanders, does them as much service as if they had hired them
to it.

If it be answered, that although the East India Trade were lost some Ships and
Seamen might abate but enough remain; let such consider our Trials with the
Dutch, and the Naval Preparations of France; whose Projects in both Indies,
should they succeed, would set them up to undertake us both.

To these Considerations, take in the want of Saltpetre, and the vast Expense
of Gunpowder in the Modern Wars, at Sea especially, which irreparably ensues
upon our loss of the East India Trade.

And then is it fit the Company should be cried down as a Grievance, when it
clearly appears the Interlopers are the Aggressors, insolently contemning so
many Warnings, by repeated Proclamations in Vindication of a Charter deriving
from the Blessed Queen Elizabeth, whose Memory was never taxed with Invasion on
our Laws and Properties, and confirmed and reinforced by all succeeding Kings
for almost 100 years, Whereas had this been found to be a Grievance, is it not
strange, that so many succeeding Parliaments to which the Subjects might so
freely have applied for Redress, should never have taken it to Task? But that
notwithstanding the mischeivous Consequences of former Interlopers, a few angry
ones at present (who might as freely have come into the Stock by purchase as
any others, nay all who are now concerned in it) should thus irreverently
assume the Courage to bid Defiance to Government, and take upon them to carve
for themselves.

William Langhorne.


