TWO LETTERS SENT To the Honoble William Lenthal Esquire Speaker of the Honorable
House of Commons.

The one, concerning the great VICTORY Obtained at Cardiffe by the Parliaments
Forces under the Command of Major General LAUGHORN: Wherein were slain about
Two hundred and fifty, Eight hundred taken Prisoners, whereof two Lieut:
Colonels, two Majors, ten Captains, ten Lieutenants, diverse Ensigns, with other
inferior Officers.

T(...)her, concerning Sir Tho: Fairfax's march into Cornwall.

ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That these Letters be
forthwith printed and published: H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

London, Printed for Edw. Husband, Printer to the Honorable House of Commons,
and are to be sold at his Shop at the sign of the Golden Dragon in
Fleetstreet, near the Inner Temple. March 2. 1645.

To the Honorable William Lenthal Esquire Speaker to the Honorable House of
Commons.
Mr. Speaker,
TO satisfy the Country, and hoping good effect, I drew my Guns before
Aberistwith Castle, and spent Two hundred shot to assay a Battery; but finding
the place so impregnable, and the Governor so obstinate, no indifferent
conditions would satisfy him: during my engagement there, I received several
invitations from the chief Gentry of Glamorganshire, to desire my assistance
against the Ragland Forces, who (as they pretended) daily threatened the
invasion of their Country; but perceiving their fear greater then the danger,
(if they were unanimously resolved to defend themselves) I delayed my motion,
expecting further Intelligence, and what the issue would be: within few days
after I had News brought me of the revolt of the High Sheriff, and many other
Gentry that formerly invited me into these parts (as you shall find by their
Letter enclosed) calling a general Muster of the Country under color of
putting themselves in a posture of Defense, and thereby endeavored the
surprisal of the Governor of Cardiffe, and the rest of the Gentry who would
not comply with their Malignancy. The Colonel General and some of the Gentry
were taken, the rest made their escape by the swiftness of their horses to the
Town; whereupon they presently laid Siege to it, publishing a Declaration which
so fooled the people, that they were resolved to venture their Ruin in the
prosecution thereof. Resenting the dangerous consequence this Faction might
grow too, if not crop'd in the bud, the welfare or ruin of all South Wales
depending thereon. I presently drew off my Guns from Aberistwith, leaving
Colonel Powel to block it up, who since my departure surpised their boat, a
Captain, and fifteen Soldiers; marching directly away for the Relief of
Cardiffe, where before I could possibly come, the forces of Ragland were joined
with Carn and the rest, the Town taken, and the Governor betaken himself to
the Castle; whereupon I made my approach toward the Castle, least want of
victual or some other necessary might enforce Surrender; and coming within a
mile thereof, I found the enemy upon a heath prepared for fight: drawing up my
men I presently charged them; so God blessing our endeavors, Routed and
dispersed them all, pursuing the Rout toward Ragland six miles beyond
Cardiffe, their Foot were all killed and taken, and about forty of then Horse.
My men eager of the Victory, after their receipt into the Castle, made a sally
too soon, before my Horse could be brought about (by reason of the passages) to
second them; so that being overpowered with a body of Horse that was in the
Town, there was taken my Brother which was my Lieutenant Colonel, and some few
of the Soldiers, the rest making their Retreat good to the Castle; drawing off
my wearied Forces for that night to their Quarters within a mile of the Town,
thereby to cut off all access of Provision. I was next day plied with
continual Alarms of the gathering a Malignant party to a head in the country,
and that they had made good a passage within two miles of the Town, resolving
to relieve their distressed Friends. While I was busied with this Alarm, the
next day and night strengthening my Guards, and having a special eye to the
issue, the Governor of the Castle, and the Committee in the interim fell to a
Parley with those in the Town, and Articles of Agreement were drawn between
them, which when brought to me to desire my Subscribal, I condescended to as
much as concerned my self and my Soldiers, as not privy to the draught till
the conclusion. But Carn and his compliants making breach of the Agreement,
gave us occasion to do that which we much desired, considering the ill
consequence if they had come to join with the other party. Being demanded their
reason of the breach of Articles, answered, They would justify it with their
lives; and thereupon fell to fire on our men, which was quickly answered; for
as soon as they received orders to fall upon them, they did it with that
cheerfulness that they totally Routed them, following the chase for seven
miles. There were killed of the Enemy in both Actions, about Two hundred and
fifty, and Eight hundred taken Prisoners, whereof two Lieut. Colonels, two
Majors, ten Captains, ten Lieutenants, and diverse Ensigns, and other inferior
Officers. By the next Express I shall humbly present a a more full Relation of
each particular. I have sent copies of the Declaration and Propositions, and
their answers; as also of the Occurrences, as they ensue in order to the
Service of the State, you shall not fail to be certified of by him who is,

Cardiffe, Feb. 21. 1645. Your most obliged humble Servant ROWLAND LAUGHORN.

To the Honorable William Lenthal Esquire Speaker to the Honorable House of
Commons.
SIR,
THe marching with the Army into Cornwall, being a matter of great importance,
much being to be said against it, as well as for it, and notwithstanding great
inclination was to march to Cornwall; yet yesterday the General had a full
Council of war, of all the field Officers that could well be dispensed with
from their charge, where the business was thoroughly debated; and after some
time spent came to this resolution, That in their judgments it was advisable
to march into Cornwall before any attempt be made on Barnstable or Exeter: To
this Vote there was not one negative voice, so that I hope in the Lord as there
is unity in our Councels, so we shall find the fruit of it in our actions, and
by the blessing of God settle that County of Cornwall in a posture to serve you,
and to oppose the landing of any foreign Nation, and also break the remaining
field force of the enemies: To morrow part of the Army marches toward Cornwall,
the rest comes up on Tuesday, there being a thousand horse, and five Companies
of foot left to block up Barnstable: And Major Harris who is made Liev. Colonel
to Col. Trevilian, is raising a Regiment in these parts of Devonshire to assist
in the more close blocking up of that place. Exeter this while is drawing its
last breath, and I hope when we return neither place shall have that to stick
with them, which hitherto has done (point of honor) upon this ground, that
there was a probable sign of relief, otherwise their inclinations are much to
save themselves.

This day (as indeed every day) there came some from the enemy, who inform they
are about to draw off from Stratton, and all the passes upon the River, having
burnt down and broken the Bridges: That they were drawing off from Salt-ash;
That most of their horse were near twenty miles in Cornwall; That Hopton cannot
get his foot together, neither will the Trainedbands rise, that their fear is
great the Army will pursue them. The other day being the Market day, Master
Peter's preached unto the Country people and soldiers in Torrington, (the Church
being blown up) he was forced to preach out of a Belcony, where the audience
was great; he made a great impression upon the hearts of the people: He is sent
to Plymouth to offer things to consideration there in order to our marching
into Cornwall, and to get all the Cornish Gentlemen to meet the General in
Cornwall, to give their assistance in the better settling of that County: And I
beseech you hasten such of power and interest in those parts that are above at
London: And likewise for Devonshire, for I doubt the want of active Gentlemen
to appear to settle the Militia of this County, will make the work to be done,
when the Army is drawn back, which will not be for your and their service. It
is certain the Lord Hopton received a wound in the side of his head with a
pike, some say he is wounded elsewhere; we took one of their spies coming into
our quarters for intelligence, and that he might be the better credited by the
person to whom he was sent; he was to produce a silver Meddal with the Kings
Picture, which we took from him, and having committed him to custody, sent one
of our spies to the partee (with that Meddal) who gave credit to the bearer,
and informed the good condition of our Army, the desperate condition of theirs,
by the defeat given them at Torrington; and that they had no way left but to
fly to the furthest part of Cornwall: all the Country hereabouts are spread
with their horse and foot, that ran away in the dark that night, and are
lurking hereabouts; there are very many both horse and foot come in unto us,
and take up Arms, and diverse others desire passes to go into their own
Countries, which they have granted accordingly: All the Cornish that were
common soldiers are set at liberty, and had two shilling a piece given them to
carry them home, which we hope will work the same effect, that an action of the
like nature did at the taking of Dartmouth, for, as Major Hooper who was taken
prisoner at Dartmonth, and sent upon his parole to Cornwall, reported at his
return, that the overthrow given to Hopton at Torrington, did not so much move
the Cornish with the fear of this Army, as their carriage in the sending home
of those Cornish in that civil manner did prevail with them; who when they came
into the Country, being required to take up Arms, refused the same, and were
committed to Goal, and now lie in prison for the same; the Country being much
affected at their hard usage, and our gentle carriage; for indeed the Cornish
were made to believe, and some by reason of their cruel carriage to our forces,
when they were in Cornwall out of guilt did believe, that nothing but
destruction was intended to them: There was directions given by the General to
all the field. Officers at the Council of war, that they should give a command
to the several Regiments of horse and foot, that they do in no kind offer any
violence to the Cornish nor do any prejudice unto them in their persons or
goods: I make no doubt the Officers will be very careful to do their duties,
though (truly) I doubt the soldier (especially those that were there formerly
stripped) will hardly overcome a passionate remembrace of the same: The
Commissioners of Parliament are sent into the several Counties to pay the
recruits, and to hasten them to the Army; but the four thousand pound sent down
hither for that purpose, we are enforced to take into Cornwall with us, and have
assigned them to take up moneys in ready cash at Bristol and Taunton; We march
with a very fine Army both of horse and foot into Cornwall, and great care is
taken for an orderly and souldierlike march, and carriage of our affairs in
this expedition. The General and Lieutenant General being much intent upon it:
I rest

Torrington, Feb. 22. 1645. 10 at night. Your most humble Servant. JOH.
RUSHWORTH.

FINIS.

