Imprimatur.

Ex Aed. Sabaud. Julii 14. 1662. Geo. Stradling Rev. in Christo Pat. Gilb.
Episc. Land. a Sac. Domest.

THE Reformed Presbyterian: Humbly offering to the Consideration of all Pious
and Peaceable Spirits several Arguments for Obedience to the Act for
UNIFORMITY, As the way to UNITY. AND Endeavoring to Demonstrate by clear
Inferences from the sacred Scriptures, the writings of some of the Ancients, of
several Old Pastors of the Reformed Churches abroad, and of the most eminent
Old Non-Conformists amongst our selves: As Mr. Josias Nichols, Mr. Paul Baines,
Mr. Hildersham, Mr. John Ball, with Mr. Rich. Baxter, and other Learned
Divines: As Mr. Perkins, Mr. John Randal, and Mr. Rob. Bolton, That there is
nothing required by the Act for Uniformity that is forbidden by the Law of God.

By RICH. LYTLER, Citizen of London.

Bez. 12. Epist. ad quosdam Angl. Eccles. Frat. Non videntur ista tanti
momenti, ut propter ea vel Pastoribus deserendum potius sit Ministerium, quam
ut vestes illas assumant, vel Gregibus omittendum publicum pabulum potius quam
ita Vestitos Pastores audiant.

Ibid. De geniculatione in Coena, de Cantu Ecclesiae, Crucis consignatione,
puerorum Baptizandorum interrogatione, non est Magnopere Laborandum.

London Printed by J. G. for Nath. Brook at the Angel in Cornhil, MDCLXII.

To the Reverend, The Nonconforming Ministers of the City of London, The
Author of this following Discourse offers these his mean Endeavors for
Peace, Unity, and Obedience to the Act for Uniformity.
Reverend and much honored in the Lord,
BEing (through the Divine Providence) upon the coming forth of the Act for
Uniformity at a public Lecture; and observing by the discourse of that
Reverend and Worthy Person that then preached, that the said Lecture was not
like long to continue; and also how much in his Prayer he deprecated that black
Cloud that he supposed to hang over the City, which threatened it with the
removal of the Gospel; and also how earnestly he prayed that God would teach
the Ministers of the Word in this Hour of temptation so to act, that they might
neither through their cowardice betray the Truth, or through their rashness and
precipitancy betray their own Liberties.

I found my self not only affected with very much grief and sorrow, to observe
what dismal apprehensions were upon the mind of this Preacher, who, I supposed,
did not speak his own sense altogether, with very much pity and compassion
toward the Souls of those that were like to suffer by the deprivation of such
Ministers whom they so highly prized: but also with some kind of godly
jealousy over my self, lest that I should be mistaken, who did not apprehend
at present there was any such ground for Ministers to lay aside their Ministry
upon the occasion of this Act of Uniformity.

Upon this occasion therefore I resolved that I would once again in the first
place take my self very seriously to task, and make a diligent search into the
grounds of my own satisfaction; to the end, that if I found them but weak,
worldly, or wicked, I might disclaim them.

In this Work of self-reflection I found in the general, that as to what I now
apprehend as to the externals about Modes of Government, Worship, and the like,
that they are no new Impressions made upon me; but that ever since the horrid
murder of our late gracious Sovereign King Charles the First, finding my self
much mistaken and misled, by having so good an Opinion of the judgment of
good men in the Controversies of these times, that I did not so much examine as
I ought what was declared from the Pulpit or the Press.

I have ever since more carefully followed the counsel of my Savior, To take
heed what I hear, and so not only to beware of men, but according to the Rule
given by some of your selves upon a very serious occasion, to take heed and
beware of the examples of good men, the best of Saints having failed even in
Ecclesiastical affairs; and therefore it was neither safe, prudent, or
conscientious to imitate and follow the examples of holy men in Ecclesiastical
matters, nor receive any thing from the Tradition of our Forefathers without
examination and bringing it to the Test.

And in particular, though I had upon the coming out of several Discourses
about these matters seriously perused and scanned the same, as what was written
about the binding power of the Covenant; The sober and temperate Discourse of
Liturgies; Plus Ultra; and the Petition for Peace; yet I returned to a serious
review of the said Books before-named, containing in them, as I suppose, the
Marrow of all that has been written from the troubles of Frankfort to this day
on those Controversies.

Now having taken this pains, and finding my self rather more confirmed in the
satisfaction of my mind as to all the particulars required by the Act for
Uniformity, and so having removed those jealousies that were upon me, lest I
should be mistaken.

It came into my mind, and I hope suggested by the Spirit of Truth and Love,
that surely this poor dim light which God has set up within me was not to be
put under a Bushel.

But that probably it might be a means to communicate some light to others, if
I held it forth in this dark hour of temptation.

Not but that I knew very well the Church needs no such Advocates as I, there
having been so much published upon this Subject by persons of great reputation
for Learning and Piety of the Clergy.

But considering that I did not know that ever any in my capacity of the Laity
had yet appeared; I was after many serious thoughts inclined to believe that a
word in season from one that cannot be imagined to speak for obedience to these
things, so much scrupled, from any other design than the Public good and
Peace, having no Ecclesiastical Promotions to get or lose, might have a better
reception than what has been said by others of the Clergy, who may be supposed
to speak for their own by-ends and interest.

Worthy Sirs, I am not unsensible how that without very much Charity, which I
humbly beg of you, it may be taken for a very great piece of arrogance, that in
this attempt I should presume thus to speak to my Teachers: But i^ I mistake
not, I find it was to the members of the Church

Coloss this was enjoined, that they should say to Archippus, Take heed unto
the Ministry which thou have received, that thou fulfill it.

And therefore I humbly conceive that I have some kind of warrant for this
charitable work to say unto you, most Reverend Fathers, whom I much honor for
your work-sake, Take heed unto the Ministry that you have received that you
fulfill it: That you leave nothing undone whereby you may expose your selves to
be deprived of the exercise thereof. I do verily believe I should act the
Devils part, as S. Peter did, if I should say, Sirs, pity your selves, Let none
of those evils befall you or your Families, which must necessarily be the effect
of Nonconformity; if I should upon carnal grounds persuade you to sin to avoid
suffering. But if I be not mistaken, my design is to present you with that
whereby you may be preserved from sinning and suffering also.

I do therefore here before God, Angels, and Men sincerely declare, so far as I
know my own heart, that I have no design in this my undertaking, no creature
having directly or indirectly put me upon the same; but my principal aim and
end is Gods glory in the continuance of your Ministry amongst us, who are
scrupulous in this point.

I must deal ingeniously with you, my heart has often been troubled for you of
the Ministry in these late times past, when I saw clearly the design of those
that would extirpate Episcopacy root and branch, was to root out you the
remaining part of the Ministry of this Nation as Antichristian. To this degree
of spiritual Reformation were men of Antiministerial spirits proceeding.

And how near we were then to the confines of Popery, I beseech you consult the
sermon of Mr. Strong preached at Paul's upon November. 5. 1653. says he, page 19.
Since this Nation departed from Rome, there were never greater attempts, nor
higher hopes to bring us back unto this spiritual Egypt than there are at this
day. To make this manifest he gives ten Observations upon the present times,
to which I refer you.

Now the wonder-working God having so mightily preserved you, and delivered you
out of that storm which threatened you with so great a Shipwreck, do not, I
beseech you, now cast away your selves, being come so near the Haven: do not
through rashness and precipitancy betray your own Liberties and Opportunities
for the Ministry, and thereby expose the Souls of many to great grief and
danger thereby.

Give me leave therefore to bespeak you in the words of that Reverend Professor
of Divinity in Oxford in King Edward the Sixth's days, Peter Martyr, in a
Letter of his dated November. 4. 1550. in answer to Bishop Hooper of the 17. of
October 1550. If we hold on in dissuading from these indifferent things (meaning
the Ceremonies) as pernicious and altogether wicked, we condemn withal very
many Churches which have received the Gospel, and blame too bitterly
innumerable, which a great while ago were accounted worthy of all praise. I
would not now therefore, says he in another place of his Epistle, greatly
contend, especially for so much as we see that they by whom the light of the
Gospel is much advanced in England, and may be more advanced do take part
against us, (meaning, I suppose, the Bishops in those days.) I do observe some
that have lately written against Conformity, do argue much against it, because
of the great offense that has been taken by the Reformed Churches at these
things. And of this Plus Ultra amongst other instances gives Peter Martyr for
one, if I mistake not.

But who ever shall read his Epistle throughout, shall find that he did not
approve of Bishop Hoopers Arguments against Nonconformity: And how far he and
other Divines of the Reformed Churches were from approving of such a Contention
and Opposition of these Ceremonies and Conformity to them, that rather then to
yield, to lay down the Ministry.

I beseech you let me by way of Introduction offer to your Consideration the
judgment of other foreign Divines in this case. Beza 12. Epist. ad quosdam
Angl. Eccles. fratres, thus expresses himself, Hortamur ut omni animorum
exacerbatione deposita, salva manente doctrinae ipsius veritate and sana
Conscientia, alii alios patienter ferant, Regiae Majestati clementissimae and
omnibus Praesulibus suis ex animo obsequantur. He exhorts them, that laying
aside all bitterness or sowreness of soul and spirit, as long as the truth of
the Doctrine and purity of Conscience was safe, they would bear one another
with patience, and obey the Queens most gracious Majesty, and all her Prelates
heartily.

And says he further in the same Epistle, Non videntur ista tanti momenti, ut
propterea vel pastoribus deserendum potius sit ministerium, quam ut vestes
illas assumant, vel gregibus omittendum publicum pabulum, potius quam ita
vestitos pastores audiant. And further says he, Ibid. de geniculatione in
Coena, de cantu Ecclesiae, Crucis consignatione, pueror. baptizandor.
interrogatione, non est magnopere laborandum.

And therefore I beseech you, Sir, keep your zeal and exercise it about higher
matters then the Surplice, the Sign of the Cross, Church-Musick, etc. and do
not now expose your selves to be laid aside, to have no opportunities of
exercising your Ministerial function; for those things, as the reverend Beza
says, are not tanti momenti, and de his non est magnopere laborandum.

That you may not doubt lest that by submitting and conforming you should
offend the Reformed Chruches;

I shall make bold to remember you of a very material passage in Hieron. Zanch.
These. de vera reformandar. Ecclesiar. ratione; Testor me coram Deo in mea
conscientia, non alio habere loco quam Schismaticorum illos omnes, qui in part
Reformationis Ecclesiarum ponunt, nullos habere Episcopos, qui authoritatis
gradu supra suos Compresbyteres emineant, ubi liquido possunt haberi. Praeterea
cum Dom. Calvino, nullo non Anathemate dignos censeo, quotquot illi Hierarchiae
qui se Domino Jesu submittit, subjici nelunt.

Behold here a cord with two strings, which will not easily be broken; the
Authorities of two worthy men together, that they are to be accounted rather
for Schismatics then good Subjects to Christ, that will not submit to that
Hierarchy in lawful things, which does submit unto Jesus Christ.

What therefore I find that holy Martin Bucer concluding his Epistle to
Amplissimo Dom. and colendissimo Symmistae Joanni a Lasco, after that he had
much discoursed upon the subject matter of the doubts of many as to matters of
Conformity, says he, Therefore I desire and beseech you by the Cross of the
Son of God, by the Salvation of the Churches, which are at this day overwhelmed
with calamities, by the desired consent that we should seek to reign in all
Churches, by the Peace that is in Christ Jesus: Again I desire and beseech you,
that you do nothing rashly in this question of Ceremonies.

The like humble Petition do I make, beseeching and conjuring you by all his
Arguments, and by all that ever was said by way of Argument to Cementing
duties, that you do nothing rashly in this question of Ceremonies. Oh do not
rashly put your selves out of your Ministerial employment, who have now
opportunities, and may yet, I hope, enjoy them, of serving the Lord Christ in
the conversion of souls.

I am apt to think from what I have heard objected by some almost in the like
case;

Alas, this poor man was newly crept out of the darkness of Popery, and
therefore he could not so well judge of the sinfulness of Ceremonies, and of
Conformity to those superstitious inventions: But now we have enjoyed the
Gospel above an hundred years since his writing, and we have now therefore
clearer discoveries of the superstition of these Popish Ceremonies in Vestures,
Gestures, and such like Romish trash.

To which I shall crave leave by way of Answer to present you with my poor
Observations in this case as follows; That in all that I have read of these
sad Controversies ever since the Reformation of the Church of England from
Popery to this day, I do not find any new arguments from Scripture rightly
applied, to make or prove Conformity to be a sin. But this I have observed,
which I suppose ought to be very much laid to heart, that the further
discoveries of light that have appeared in these latter days, has herein been
manifested only by improving those mistaken and false principles laid at first
to the making of more things to be sinful and unlawful then ever were before,
that upon a serious search will be found to be clear and innocent, as you will
find in this following Discourse.

I shall make bold to give you but a few instances, by which the truth of what
I say will be evidenced.

The first thing that I observed was scrupled in King Edward's days, was the
wearing by the Minister that kind of apparel for form or fashion which the
Popish Priests had ministered in. And this I gather from the Answer of Peter
Martyr unto Bishop Hooper, who did not with the aforesaid Reverend Person
account the wearing of these Garments indifferent but sinful, and that for
these two Reasons, as being Jewish and Popish. These, says Peter Martyr, are
the chief strength of your Arguments; I will first entreat of them, after I
will add whatsoever it be, if I call to my remembrance any other thing brought
in of you to confirm your Opinion, page 5.

That these also were the Principles or Arguments used by Joan a Lasco, to whom
Martin Bucer writ, I find also in his Epistle to the same purpose; wherein
there was so much said by these two Reverend and Moderate men, that one would
think should have for ever eradicated these opinions out of the minds of good
men, especially while they were but green and young.

But yet notwithstanding I find that in the reign of Queen Elizabeth there was
such an improvement of these principles, as produced a Printed Declaration in
the name and defense of certain Ministers in London, refusing to wear the
apparel then prescribed for Ministers.

Now I find in that Declaration, besides the aforesaid Reasons, there were
several general Scriptures to prove their unlawfulness, as those Scriptures
that forbid addition to Gods Word, that his fear is not to be taught by the
precepts of men; that to observe the use of this apparel would make the Papists
more obstinate, and also be matter of scandal to the weak.

But how all these were answered I find by an Examination of that Declaration
which was written with that soberness and solidity, that one would have thought
these things would never have been heard of more.

But instead thereof I find these Principles and Scriptures used by the
Ministers in their aforesaid Declaration, are wound up higher shortly after by
those, of whom Mr. Josias Nichols does complain, That had made a rash and
temerarious separation from the Church of England; and used also in part by Mr.
Nichols himself as a Plea for not subscribing to all the 39. Articles, as you
will find in the following Discourse.

I observe further, that which some of the Non-Conformists, as by their
Petition at the coming in of King James, desiring a further Reformation, did
but argue for the alteration of some passages in the Common Prayer, as coming
too near the Papists; and so being only a thing not convenient: as you will
find to be the judgment of Mr. John Ball. This is so improved as to be made a
strong argument against the whole mode of our public Liturgy; that it is
Idolatrous, as having been used in an Idolatrous Service, even as was said of
old by Bishop Hooper, the Ministers Garments had been by the Popish Priests.
And this indeed you will find to be the great Argument against the Liturgy,
brought by the Author of the Temperate Discourse, and of all his other Reasons,
except that of the Covenant, why Ministers cannot conform to the use thereof,
are but the same with those Arguments of the London Ministers so many years
before, why they could not wear the apparel then enjoined. And the same
Arguments that are brought by those called the Brownists and Separatists from
the Church of England, and the Ordination by Bishops, Answered by Mr. John
Ball, are now brought against a form of Prayer, and the Common Prayer of the
Church, as you will find hereafter. And those things, as I said before, that
were formerly argued against as inconvenient to come so near the Papists, as to
Vestures, and the form of Worship, are by the Authors of Plus Ultra absolutely
condemned as unlawful for the Church of England to retain either in worship or
discipline any Conformity to the Church of Rome.

So that most Reverend and much Honored, by this Discourse and these
Observations, it will evidently appear that it is not by any new light from
Scripture rightly applied, that we do see further into the iniquity of these
things now scrupled, than those Worthies which were newly crept out of the
darkness of Popery. But that if these passages which I have presented be but
well considered of, and the dangerousnesse of that principle upon which the two
former do hang, viz. that to wear this or that Vesture, to use this or that
Gesture, Method, Phrase, or Form of Prayer that has no Commandment from the
Lord, nor example for it in the Word is sinful and unlawful.

It will, I hope, be thought high time to look about us, and consider whether
the hand of Joah be not in all this; and whether we have not more reason to
suspect our zealous opposition of indifferent things, and refusing obedience
thereunto; as being the product rather of that fiery spirit which our Savior
sometime rebuked in his Disciples, than of the Spirit of Peace, Truth, and Love.

I humbly offer therefore farther the judgment of that moderate and pious
Peter Martyr, in his Epistle aforesaid, says he, We must take heed, lest those
things of less importance, by our strife, may be the means that those things
which should be esteemed of greater force and value, either cannot at all be
brought into the Church; either if they be once brought in, cannot be
established with continuance. And, says he page 3. If now we pronounce those
things wicked that be of themselves indifferent, so much would the most part of
men's minds be altenated from us. That from that day they would not find in
their hearts ever after to hear with a good will at our hands sound Doctrine,
and instructions of very necessary matter.

Worthy Sirs, I beseech you consider whether this has not been the effect of
your strife and contention about these things of less importance, and has not
alienated the minds of many, that they will never hear your instructions in
matters necessary to salvation.

It is has not yet, give me leave to tell you, it will unavoidably be the end
of your present Nonconformity. Do you think that the way for to establish and
continue those things which should be esteemed of greater force and value than
a form of Prayer, a Rite, or Ceremony, viz. That soundness and purity of
Doctrine that we have amongst us, and the great liberty of Preaching thereof,
is for you to suffer deprivation of your Ministry, and hereby endanger all for
matters that the Reverend Beza says are not Tanti?

I find indeed a seeming Objection by the Petitioners for Peace, page 13. That
if men must be cast out of the Church or Ministry because that they are not
wiser then the most Learned, ^s the Pastors of most of the Reformed Churches,
and as Hildersham, Bains, Parker, Ames, Dod, Ball, Nichols, and many such
others as have taken Nonconformity to be a sin, how few, alas! how few will
there be left?

But if you be pleased but to consider of the Quotations that I have presented
before you of the Ancient pastors of most of the Reformed Churcher, of what is
newly come forth by Mr. Durel, in his Book entitled, A View of the Government
and public worship of God in the Reformed Churches beyond the Seas, and also
of what follows;

It will appear that this was a very great mistake, and that they have not
taken this Conformity, to be a sin, but disobedience rather to the commands of
our Superiors in this Case to be a sin and great abuse of Christian Liberty.

Of this mind, as I take it, is the Reverend Beza, Epist. 24. ad Peregrinarum
Ecclesiarum in Angl. Fratres; Coxsequitur cum abuti Christianae libertatis
beneficio, qui vel suis Magistratibus, vel praepositis suis sponte non paret in
Domino, nec conscientiam fratrum edificere studet.

Now I humbly conceive, that he that by refusing obedience to the commands of
his superiors shall be exposed to those sufferings which the Act inflicteth; in
this case he does not take the way to edify the conscience of his Brother, but
to fill it with horrid perplexity and fear about these indifferent things,
concluding surely they are out of measure sinful, that men will rather suffer
so much then conform to the use thereof.

As to what has been said by those worthies of our own Nation, taking
Conformity to be a sin; I hope I shall make it appear by this following
Discourse to be a great mistake.

But if any of those have taken Conformity for a sin, is this an Argument
sufficient for Ministers and Teachers of others, that do profess to abhor the
Popish Doctrine of infallibility in the Church of Rome, for to stick to the
practice of it? In this case, because that you would not be thought to be wiser
than they that have taken Nonconformity to be a sin. In my weak judgment it
is, being too much of the Colliers Faith, that I have read, and does savor of
too much following the Tradition of our Forefathers in these matters.

Certainly those Traditions that do tend to the disturbing of the Peace of the
Church and State wherein we live, to the alienating our affections from each
other, that do profess our selves to be Christ's Disciples; that do incline the
minds of men to decline the example of Christ and of his Apostles, and to
condemn the practice of many precious and pious servants of the Lord.

These are such Traditians as make the Word of God of none effect: such for
which Saint Paul repented he had been so zealous for, Gal. 14. and such as from
the observance thereof Christ came to redeem us by his most precious blood.

I confess there is scarce any thing does more stick with us in matters of
Religion than to renounce the Traditions of our Forefathers. Our Fathers
worshipped in this mountain, said the woman of Samaria to our Savior.

And if ever any had cause seriously to bethink themselves, we of this Nation
have, whose discontents and animosities (grounded very much, as I conceive,
upon the Opinions and Traditions of some good men (since our Reformation from
Popery) have produced the most doleful effects that I think any History in the
Christian World can produce or parrallel.

Charity induces me to believe, that if (...) Worthy men, such as Mr.
Hilde^sham, that ^^ch written so perswasively in Lecture 35. on Psalm. 51. to
satisfy weak Christians about the Surplice and the Cross, and to keep them
from leaving the public assemblies therefore; and Mr. Paul Baines that so
zealously reprehended in his Book upon Ephesians. 2.15. fol. 297. a Secession and
departure from the Church of God, our visible assemblies, showing this was not
so much to reform as deform; giving also this most excellent Rule, which I find
in other Pious and Learned men's advice, Aug. Epist. 119. Multa Tolerantur ub^
facultas non datur refecandi. B^za Epist. ad fratres Anglican. Possant ac^etiom
debent multa tolerariquae tamen non recte praecipiuntu^.
That whatsoever lies not in our power to reform, it shall be our zeal and
piety to tolerate and patiently bear.

And Mr. John Ball that has so vindicated the Common Prayer and Catechism of
the Church of England, as containing such points so contrary to Popery, that it
is not possible Popery should stand if they take place.

A say again, that while I do consider of the spirits and principles of these
men, whatever they might be as to their practice, yet that they could not well
take Nonconformity to be a sin, their Principles and Arguments against the
Separation now in Print (some of which you shall meet with in this following
Discourse) clearly evidencing of the same.

And I am apt to think, that had they but survived those Wars which many of
us have done who have seen and been Spectators of those garments rolled in
blood, and of all those doleful and dismal effects of our differences about
modes of Worship and Government.

And had they but experienced how much when the bodies of men subdued by the
power of the sword, their minds were no way reconciled to that Government and
Worship which was earnestly endeavored to have been imposed upon the Kingdom.

And had they but seen how much by the same persons that helped to subdue the
other, they were opposed with the same bitterness as was the Episcopal
Government: and their extirpation by some endeavored root and branch.

I cannot but believe that they would have been of the same judgment about
these things, as the Reverend Mr. Perkins is of an Oath when it does become
impossible. This is as a voice from Heaven to declare, that we are set at
liberty from endeavoring the introducing of such a mode of Worship and
Government as is displeasing to all others in the Kingdom but our selves.

And they would doubtless also have seen their own mistake in charging the
pressing of subscription to be the cause of separation and troubles in the
Church, and rather to think that the violent oposition of the same to be also
very accessory thereunto.

Now, dear Sirs, be entreated by the meekness and gentleness of Christ for
the Gospel sake, for the peace of the Church also; which, as Mr. Pool says in
his Sermon upon Gospel Worship, should be preferred above all things, next to
the salvation of Souls.

Ye, who have seen what those Learned and Pious Non-Conformists saw not,
neither possibly could have foreseen would have been the event of
Nonconformity and discords about the externals of Religion; Be entreated, be
entreated not to think those holy men before spoken of, to be infallible in
their judgments, as to what you hold from them, neither do you take your
selves so to be.

But to what you have read for your satisfaction in these doubtful and
disputable matters, concerning which I find the Petitioners for peace
professing they do impartially study and pray for knowledge, and would gladly
know the will of God at the dearest rate.

Vouchsafe, I earnestly beseech you, the reading of these poor Collections of
mine wherewith I now gresent you; and be pleased to put on this Resolution
before you begin, that you will read it through, and according to some of your
Professions do it impartially.

Weigh well, I entreat you, the Arguments that I bring to prove the lawfulness
of Obedience to what the Act for Uniformity requires, and give an Answer to
them in your own Consciences, as clearly and fully as I have there endeavored
to present them. And let me beseech you in the Bowels of Christ Jesus, that
whatsoever weakness you may find in any of the Arguments I offer, you will be
pleased to consider from whom they come: Not from a Professor of Divinity in
the Schools of the Prophets, but of Christianity in the School of Christ, who
is put upon this Work not Ex officio, sed ex charitate, as I have before
declared. And do not for the weakness perhaps of some one Argument despise any
of the other till you have tried their strength.

And above all let me remember you of what I find professed by some to be their
practice, that you will be pleased to read it impartially, with the same
candor, ingenuity and freedom from prejudice, that you desire any thing that
you (...) have made public to the World should be read by others.

And were it not for one thing that now comes in my mind, to which I shall
presently speak a word by way of Answer, I should be in very great hope that
the effect of your serious perusal of my poor and weak endeavors in these
following sheets would be much for the public Peace of Church and State.

That which I shall therefore speak to by way of Removal, I ground upon a very
serious passage that I find in the Epistle of Martin Bucer, to Joan. a Lasco.
It is, says he, a very hard thing indeed, yea, to most holy men, to deny
themselves; and he is seldom found amongst men, which would not be content
rather to yield in his Patrimony, than in the Opinion of his Wit.

I am apt to fear, if I may speak out, lest what this Wise man then observed,
should be some binderance at this time to that work which does so much conduce
to Unity, even that which is so hard and difficult even for holy men to do, To
deny themselves.

Dear Sirs, be not found now in the number of those that will rather yield in
your Patrimony, submit to Deprivation from the Ministry and all Ecclesiastical
Promotions, which are the Scholars Patrimony, rather to yield in reference to
those Opinions which you have taken up for Fundamental Truths, if I mistake not.

I beseech you consider what is said by some Ministers in the Petition for
Peace (except one put it out alone) that they would gladly know the Truth at
the dearest rate. Surely, though the knowing and obeying of the Truth, if I
mistake not, may be at a dear rate, considering what Bucer has observed, how
hard it is even for holy men to deny themselves, and retract their opinions;
yet it being in it self that which Christians are bound to do every day, if
they will exercise the grace of Repentance for their sins; they must profess
there is a great change in their minds and judgments.

Surely for those who are the Preachers and pressers of Repentance to others,
that they are to declare their Repentance not only by their sorrow for sin, but
by the change of their minds, retracting those opinions they had of sin.

It is but reasonable, that they should do themselves that which they enjoin to
others.

I do confess that to stand to our Principles, that is, such Principles as are
grounded upon the Oracles of Gods word is our duty, in which we are to be
steadfast and unmovable, standing like a Rock in the midst of the proud waves,
breaking all that beat against it, but removed by none.

But we must take very great heed of standing to our own Principles, grounded
only upon the Oracles of men and their Traditions, or the Oracles of God
misapplied. This is not constancy but obstinacy; to yield and leave these our
Principles is not Apostasy, but a great piece of self-denial and true Piety.
This declares that we have gotten a victory over our selves, which is a greater
conquest than to win a City, and have mortified that corruption that is in holy
men, as Martyn Bucer says, which inclines men more willingly to part with
their Patrimony than their Opinions, and declares also that they have subdued
that, than to the which the will of man is in nothing more naturally averse,
than subjection to the command of our Superiors, as the Reverend Calvin long
ago observed, as you shall find hereafter.

I beseech you, Sirs, consider, for I doubt not but you know it well enough,
that it is no just cause of scandal or offense given to weak Christians, nor
yet of disgrace or disparagement to the wisest, holiest and learned men that
ever were, to go back from their former assertions and opinions, so long as
they know that they go forward toward Truth, Peace, and obedience.

What Saint Jerome writes to Ruffinus is very well worthy of your thoughts, if
I may be so bold as to be your Remembrancer thereof, Never blush man to change
thy opinion, for neither you or I, or any person living are of so great
Authority, as to be ashamed to confess that they have erred.

It is far better for those in my poor judgment, to whom Christ has
committed the Care and Cure of the precious soul, and so are Leaders of their
flock, upon a due conviction to confess that they have erred, rather than by
their continuance therein to lead others out of the way by their example.

I remember a very good Note that I not long since heard, even from David's own
practice, Psalm. 119. That it was a very great piece of Christian ingenuity to
retract our Errors.

Now whether it be not an Error or a huge mistake, to publish to the World, and
frequently to deliver in Pulpits what you shall find, Petition for Peace, page
11. That all additions to Gods Worship are sinful, and to intimate that to
subscribe to any thing but what is contained in the holy Scriptures, would
accuse the Scriptures of Insufficiency, Petition for Peace, page 7.

Without distinguishing of additions to substantials or circumstantials in
Religion, as I find Mr. Ball does frequently and faithfully, by which the loyal
Subjects of Christ might be delivered from their fears of his displeasure, by
the use of those things which so much would conduce to Concord and Unity.

Surely, these are Errors, and very perplexing to the minds of weak Christians,
with others eidem farinae, which I desire may be considered of.

To make these more evidently so, I have taken this great pains, to the
endangering of my health, the denying my self of rest, while others stepped, and
breaking through many avocations I have had, so suddenly to digest my inward
thoughts and bring them to this method that I now present you with.

To take off all just occasion of censure for one abounding in his own sense, I
offer you throughout the sense and judgment of very Pious and Moderate persons
as aforesaid.

And therefore I beseech you once again, but to consider of what I find
affirmed by Martin Bucer in his Epistle aforesaid, of whose judgment I do
profess my self to be in this point, as to Conformity, my design being much
the same with his to that worthy person before named, after that he had
answered his Arguments, which are too much used in these days, says he, page
6. If therefore you will not admit such liberty and use of Vesture to this pure
and holy Church, because they have no commandment of the Lord, nor no example
of it; I do not see how you can grant to any Church that it may celebrate the
Lords Supper in the morning, and in an open Church, especially consecrate to
the Lord, that the Sacrament may be distributed to men kneeling or standing,
yea, to women as well as men; for we have received of these things neither
Commandment of the Lord, nor any example, yea, rather the Lord gave a contrary
example.

But it will be objected, says he, page 7. That in England many use vestures
with manifest Superstition, and that they do nourish and confirm the people in
superstition. Even so it may be answered, very many abuse this whole Sacrament,
as also Baptism, and all other Ceremonies. Therefore let us withstand this
mischief, and vanquish it utterly.

He looked, it should seem, upon it as a mischief to be vanguished, to argue
from the abuse of a thing against the lawful use of it. And he does further
show which way our endeavors must chiefly lie. Says he, page 7. Let us
chiefly endeavor that the heart may be purged by Faith, which Faith is first
begun and increased by the hearing of the Word. This hearing is brought by the
Preachers of the Goseel; such therefore let us call for, and that there may be
store of them, let us be earnest for Reformation.

This holy man was far from the mind of those that judge their earnestness
for Reformation consists in opposing of Forms of Prayer, Vestures, and
Gestures, even about Gods Worship; and being dead, yet speaks to you by my
means, assuring you that you are quite out of the way, in resolving to lay down
your Ministry, rather than you will observe and obey the Act for Uniformity.

Methinks the Counsel of the Wise man should be much upon your hearts at this
time, Ecclesiast. 10.4. (...) Si Spiritus dominantis ascenderit super te, locum
tuum ne demittas, quia sanitas quiescere faciet peccata magna.

If the Spirit of the Ruler by his Laws may seem to arise up against us, what
then, are we to arise up against him? No, leave not thy place, we are set in a
state of subjection to the higher Powers: and therefore let us not give over
the work where about God has set us, but think rather of yielding obeidience;
for yielding pacifieth great offenses: some render the Word, Vir sanans,
Annotations on the place.
a Healer; and so the Septuagint, (...), He that by modest and gentle behavior
seeks to heel the wound and breach between him and his Sovereign, shall
pacify great offenses. The offense that the Prince may take at our not
obeying, and the offense that we might take from the Prince commanding, are
removed by yiedling of obedience. So then that wisdom which produces obedience
is of a healing nature.

I beseech you, Sirs, let the Counsel of the Holy Ghost in this place prevail
with you to keep your places, depart not from them, but from those Opinions
which may hinder from that yielding that may be of so healing a virtue at this
time.

It is a difficult work, as the aforesaid Martin Bucer has observed; and
therefore he not only pressed it in that place, but, says he, further in the
said Epistle, page 9. We see now, being taught by the experience of so many
years, that the Lord grants but to a few to depart from that sentence which
they have once fastened themselves in, specially if also they have contended for
the same.

Surely if ever this were a mercy to any, it would be to us in this Juncture of
time; a mercy indeed, which God grants but to a few, to depart, from that
Sentence or Opinion which they have once fastened themselves in.

Oh, would God grant this mercy unto you the Ministers of this City, so
blessing the endeavors of those that would persuade you to the lawfulness of
Obedience to all that the Act for UNIFORMITY requires, that they might be
effectual with you to depart from that Sentence, that Opinion, that some are
supposed have fastened themselves in, because they have so vehemently contended
against them as superfluous, superstitious, unnecessary and unlawful.

How would then the true work of Reformation, of which Ma tin Bucer speaks go
on? whilst Superiors in commanding, and Inferiors in obeying, do reciprocal,
love each other, and seek the public good: How would the substance of Religion
and the power of Godliness be promoted, when there is a Concord Union, and
Agreement between those persons in the public Worship of Almighty God, which
have supposed the one party to be too common, irreverent and homely, the other
too carnal and formal in their devotions? How would then the Jesuits be
disappointed in their present hopes and expectations? How would then many
erroneous persons be turned from the error of their ways; the poor Quakers be
brought to see their pitiful mistakes; and those which have separated from the
Church of England as a false Church, to see that they have been of a false
Opinion?

Doubtless we should then, and I fear not till then, be practical Christians,
as to those Gospelduties, which I find conjoined together by the Holy Ghost in
one verse, 1 Pet. 2.12. Honor all men, love the Brotherhood, fear God, Honor
the King.

As we are now in this confused and devised state and condition much out of
love with Uniformity. Many of us do profess that we love the Brotherhood, those
that are of our own Fraternity, of this or that party, but we do not honor all
men; but herein the Lord be merciful to us, how do we dishonor and reproach
one another if they be not of the same way for modes of Worship and Government
which we like best our selves? The offenses of the tongue, Baxters Vain
Religion of the Formal Hypocrite, page 198, 205.
by all sorts of persons you will find reproved at large, which shows that
yet we are far from honoring all men. Many there be that do profess they
greatly fear God, but they do not honor the King, by yielding obedience to his
lawful Commands, but dispute the meetnesse and the fitness of them.

If therefore now by what I have in the integrity of my heart offered to your
consideration, the God of Love and Peace shall incline your hearts to yield
universal obedience to the Act for Uniformity, you will thereby show your
selves to be such as truly fear God, who is the God of Order, that you honor
the King, love the Brotherhood, and honor all men; you will have no occasion
then to censure those that differ from you in modes of Worship, nor any to
censure you, if once there be an Uniformity therein.

For all these good ends and purposes, Reverend and much Honored in the Lord,
do I humbly offer these my ensuing Meditations to your View; which hoping you
will take by the right handle, desiring your charitable construction and
reception of this extraordinary attempt; beseeching God, to accompany it with
as extraordinary a blessing, that it may obtain my desired ends and aim; I
take leave to rest,

London, July 7. 1662. The unfeigned desirer of your Continuance in the
Ministry, R. L.

TO All true lovers of Truth and Peace, with the Prosperity of this famous City
and Kingdom, and the continuance of their Pious Preachers still; amongst the
Inhabitants of the City of London especially.
Worthy Fellow-Citizens,
THat I may remove a very grand obstruction to the reception of those Truths
which only Christian Love and Charity have compelled me to make public in
these following Papers;

Let me prevail with you in the first place to fix this seriously upon your
Souls, and really to believe it, That although I do plead for Uniformity as the
way to Unity, and the means to continue our good Ministers still amongst us,
yet that I plead not for formality in the Service of God. I know that is a
dangerous sin and desire it may be shunned by my self and all others, as the
very cutthroat of the Power of godliness.

But yet withal give me leave to tell you, that want of Uniformity and a
public Agreement in public Worship is a great impediment, not only to that
Peace which Christ has left amongst us as a Legacy of precious concernment,
but also to the propagating of Religion amongst us in the life and power
thereof.

And that other good men have been of my mind herein, I find by their Writings,
especially that scrious recommendation of Church Unity and Uniformity written
by Mr. John Brinsley of Yarmouth, Anno 1646. a Discourse very seasonable and
worthy of your perusal.

I may peradventure by way of persuasion to Uniformity, seem to some to speak
too much for the lawfulness of what the Law requires, as a means for the
settlement of a public Agreement amongst us in the Worship of God: But if you
please to consult with the Reverend Mr. Richard Baxter in his Five Disput. you
will find that he has said so much to this purpose, that it may well be matter
of wonder, that he and others are so backward in declaring their Conformity.

For though many weak Christians by general discourses against Idolatry,
Superstition and Will worship, are apt to think that all circumstantial
additions to Gods Worship are sinful, and that thereby Gods Ordinances are
polluted with umane inventions; yet you will find Mr. Baxter fully declaring
the contrary, particularly, that a stinted Liturgy is in it self lawful, page
359. which he proves b^ eight very good Arguments, That it is lawful to use a
Liturgy that is not taken out of Scripture as to words, page 380. That
significant Ceremonies are lawful as the Surplice and Sign of the Cross,
merely as a professing signal action, page 405. That Musical Instruments, and
the help of more artificial Singers and Choristers, are warrantable, page 406.
And speaking concerning the lawfulness of professing Signs, as subscribing our
names, standing up, or the like, page 404. Sect. 18. he says, To this end, and
on these terms was the Sign of the Cross used heretofore by Christians, and
afterward standing up at the Creed, as also adoring with their faces toward
the East, etc. They used those only as significations of their own minds
instead of words; as the Prophets of old were wont by other signs as well as
words to prophecy to the people, etc.

Now the said Reverend Person after several instances of this nature, to which
I refer you, says, page 406. Sect. 15. In all these cases it is no
usurpation nor addition to the word or institution of God for man to determine,
it is but an obeying of Gods commands, etc. which passage I beseech you all
seriously to mind your Ministers of. As also what he most Christianly then
professed concerning kneeling at the Sacrament, page 411. That though it might
be sinfully imposed, yet, says he, for my part I did obey the Imposers, and
would do it if it were to do again, rather than to dislurb the Peace of the
Church, and be deprived of its communion. For, says he, further, I am not sure
that Christ intended the example of himself and his Apostles as obligatory to
us that shall succeed: I am sure it proves Sitting lawful, but I am not sure
that it proves it necessary, though very convenient; But I am sure he has
commanded me Obedience and Peace.

These things premised I hope will not only prepare you to read what I have
written without prejudice, but also provoke you to join with me in prevailing
with your beloved friends of the Ministry that they will to what I have written
in this Discourse seriously add the corsideration of what I have last quoted
from that worthy person Mr. Baxter, from whence it will appear, that what ever
they may doubt or scruple, as to this or that particular command of their
Superiors, as to matter of Conformity; yet this they may be sure of, that
Christ, as the King of his Church, though he has not commanded, as Mr. Baxter
well observes, Five Disput. page 9. In what words I shall pray, whether
imposed by others, or not, whether with a Book or foreconceived Form, or not;
Yet he has commanded obedience and peace.

Where things therefore of this nature are determined by our Superiors, which,
as Mr. Baxter agreeing with Mr. Ball and the Reverend Calvin, says, page 8.
Had been unfit for Christ to have determined in his Word, because his Word is
an universal Law for all ages and Countries; and these circumstances will not
be an universal determination, else why could not Christ have done it? nay,
how is his Law perfect else that does omit is? For example, God has commanded
us to read the Word, preach, hear, sing, which must necessarily be done in some
time, and place, gesture, number of words, etc. But he has not commanded us on
what day of the week our Lecture shall be, or at what hour of the day, nor what
Chapter I shall read, nor how many at once, nor what Text I shall preach on,
nor what Psalm I shall sing, etc,

These things belonging to a Synod to prescribe for common union and concord
amongst many Churches, as Mr. Baxter grants, page 7. I humbly conceive it is
then uncomely and uncharitable for Inferiors to argue, that these
determinations are unnecessary, and but pretenses for the Churches Peace and
Unity, etc. page 9. But to fix upon this golden sentence of Mr. Baxters in
these cases; that whatsoever we may be uncertain of, yet we may be sure of
this, that Christ has commanded Obedience and Peace. Obedience in these
general Texts, where we are commanded to submit to every Ordinance of man for
the Lords sake.

And Peace in all those pathetical exhortations of his Apostles to follow the
things that make for peace; putting it in conjunction with that, without which
we shall never enter in the Kingdom of Heaven, Heb. 12.14. Follow peace with
all men, and holiness, without which no man shall see the Lord.

Now to work this peaceable frame into our hearts, let us now persuade one
another, that laying aside those usual reflections that we are apt to make upon
our Superiors in commanding things which we are apt to judge at best
unnecessary, seriously to reflect upon our selves, and consider what is our
present duty.

I must needs confess, that I have in the midst of our greatest confusions,
when I was even out of hope that ever we should get out of them, often thought
how we came to be ingulphed in so much misery: And this in my weak observation
I gather to be the occasion of our bloody differences, as to the
circumstantials of Religion; that a violent opposing begat a violent imposing,
and that again produced a violent opposing, till the flame broke out which had
well-nigh consumed us.

To prevent the like again, as the case now stands, I am apt to think, that
we cannot better show our selves to be children of the everlasting Father, the
Prince of Peace, then by looking most to our selves, who are under command; and
what our present duty is, which I find laid down by Mr. Baxter, Five Disput
page 460. Prop. 12. supposing it to be the case whereof we are no competent
judges; That it may be very sinful to command some Ceremonies, that yet it may
be the Subjects duty to use them when they are commanded.

To persuade therefore to that which is the Subjects duty to observe now
commanded, is my chief undertaking in this following Discourse; wherein as I do
but follow the example of Mr. Sprint, Mr. Paybody, and Dr. John Burges, who are
there approved of for that service, Five Disput. page 461.

So I hope you will be so far from judging of me, as that you will conjoyn with
me to persuade your Ministers, that rather then to be deprived of their
Ministry, and we thereby of the benefit of their labors, that they would
conform.

And by way of persuasion let us not only deal with them by way of argument
from what you may find in this poor unpollished piece; but also by desiring
them to consider what they will find more scholastically written in the
Peace Offering, a book that I have heard much commended by some learned
Ministers, but never saw till I had almost finished this plain and homely
Discourse; and also a most rare discourse, newly come forth, declaring the
Conformity and Agreement of other Reformed Churches beyond Sea with the Church
of England.

To all which let us mind them how far the Apostles did, conform for the peace
of the Church and propagating of the Gospel, even to the use of such Ceremonies
as were abolished by the death of Christ. Mr. Sprint in his book before
mentioned gives several instances thereof, and Mr. Baxter in Five Disput. page
488. speaks to the same purpose, amongst his 12. reasons to persuade to
obedience in lawful things: this is the 11. Consider also what yielding in
things lawful the Scripture recommendeth to us; how far yielded Paul when he
circumcised Timothy, Acts 16.3. And when he took the men and purified himself
with them in the Temple, to signify the accomplishment of the days of
purification, etc. Acts 21.26, 27. So also 1 Cor. 9.19, 20. I am made all
things to all men, that I might by all means save some; and this I do for the
Gospels sake. Study this Example, says the learned Mr. Baxter: And let us also
prevail with our Ministers to study this passage, Five Disput. page 487, sect.
17 Now if that things before accidentally evil may by this much necessity
become lawful and a duty, then may the commands of Magistrates and Pastors, and
the unity of the Church, and the avoiding of contention and offense, and other
evils, be also sufficient to warrant us in obeying even in inconvenient
circumstantials of the Worship of God, that otherwise could not be justified.

Let us also remember them, how that Bishop Hooper, though as you will find in
this Discourse, did scruple the Episcopal Habit, and wrote to Peter Martyr his
Arguments against such Conformity, yet he was not so tenacious in his Opinion,
but that for the peace of the Church he did conform to preach in the said
apparel before the King. And for this Mr. Fox in the Book of Martyrs, page
1367. does commend him; for, says he, This private contumely and reproach, in
respect of the public profit of the Church which he only sought, he bare and
suffered patiently.

Let us therefore desire them to remember how ill Christ will take it at their
hands at the last day, that rather then with this pious Martyr and Bishop
Hooper they will lay aside their Opinions, and patiently bear the private
contumely of their Conformity from some censorious ones, they will suffer
themselves to be laid aside from the work of the Ministry, and thereby hinder
the public profit and benefit which the Church of God might receive by them.

And for a conclusion let us join together in propounding this to their serious
thoughts, That if they have but little regard to our souls welfare, that yet
they will take care of their own: For when they have suffered the penalty of
the Law for their Nonconformity to what the Act for Uniformity requires,
which is deprivation from the exercise and advantages of their Ministry; that
yet their satisfaction of the Law will not satisfy the offended justice of an
angry God: who having made himself known to be a God of order and not of
confusion, is very much displeased with the disobedience of all Inferiors to
the lawful commands of their Superiors, whether Ecclesiastical or Civil. For
as Mr. Baxter has well observed, Five Disput. page 483. That if we do through
weakness or perverseness make lawful things to be unlawful, that will not
excuse us in our disobedience, our error is our sin, and one sin will not
excuse another sin.

Disobedience to the commands of our Superiors therefore, though through
weakness, being a sin, and that against Christ, Five Disput. page 485. who
rules by them as his Officers.

Let us therefore now remember our Ministers, that seeing notwithstanding all
their sufferings without repentance, this sin of disobedience to our Superiors,
as aggravated Five Disput. 486, 487. will not be blotted out at the day of
refreshing. It would be much better to prevent all this sin, sorrow and
suffering by their Obedience and Conformity to what the Law requires.

But now, my beloved Friends and Fellow Citizens, considering that there lies
one main obstruction in the way to this happy work of our Ministers Conformity,
to which I have so much importuned you to join with me by way of persuasion
with them;

And this obstruction lying chiefly in your own power to remove; I shall in the
first place bring it forth to your view, as I find it laid forth by the Author
of the Sober and Temperate Discourse about Liturgies, etc. And the obstruction
is this that the Ministers dare not conform, because of the great scandal that
would be taken thereat by the people, page 108. for say they, Supposing that
they were fully satisfied that it were lawful to use an imposed form, etc. yet
we plainly see that they are so abhorred by many conscientious Christians, that
as those who have returned to the use of them, have almost ruined their
Ministry, by making themselves the scorn of some, and the grief of others; so
should we we do the like, some would for it vilify, and censure, and condemn
us, and separate from Communion with us.

Now, good friends, though I humbly conceive that this is no sufficient ground
of excuse for their Nonconformity, because that some Christians would censure,
condemn and separate from all communion with them:

Yet supposing that to prevent the great sin of those that shall thus be
scandalized at their Ministers Conformity, many good men may be more backward
to their duty, as being afraid to give offense to the weak about their
observance of indifferent things.

To help to remove this great obstruction, though you will find much more said
in the 14. Chapter of this Discourse; yet give me leave to offer this to your
serious consideration, that though it be a real truth that the wise God has
forbidden us to do any thing whereby our weak Brethren may be scandalized, as
by those Texts quoted by the Author aforesaid does appear, viz. Romans 14.13, 14,
15. 1 Cor. 10.24. 1 Cor. 8.3, 9.

Yet that in all those places wherein the Doctrine of scandal is laid down, as
to indifferent things, that they are to be understood only in the case where
persons are left to their own liberty in the use of them; that is, when men may
choose whether they will use them yea or no.

As for example, you will find in this following Discourse, that whether we do
pray with a form or without a form is indifferent; and is neither expressly
forbidden or commanded. Now when it is left to our own liberty, whether we will
use a form or not use a form, then we should scandalize weak Christians
according as we demean our selves in this particular. But if by a Law we are
commanded for Uniformity sake to use a public form of Common prayer; for weak
Christians to be offended at the Minister that does yield obedience to this
command, this scandal of Brethren weighs light when put in the scale with the
command of Authority.

And the reason why it does so is this, because that though the thing be in it
self indifferent, where we are left to our own liberty, as I said before; yet
when it is commanded by our Superiors, and no where forbidden by God, our
disobedience to their commands is no indifferent thing, but is a sin against
the Fifth Commandment, wherein the honor that we are to give to our Parents,
whether Natural, Spiritual or Civil does consist in obedience to their lawful
commands.

Which being so, I beseech you to be so far from being scandalized to see your
Ministers do their duty, which Aquinas as I have read, calls Scandalum
Pharisaeorum, the scandal only of the superstitious Pharisees, which our
Savior has taught us to condemn.

As that you do rather exhort and persuade them by all means, rather then to
lay down their Ministry, to care only for to satisfy themselves; and let not
the thought of the scandal that may be supposed to be taken by you at their
Conformity be any impediment or hinderance thereunto.

And that you may be free, forward and cordial in this work; I beseech you be
impartial in your pursuit of that knowledge, which may strengthen you against
this weakness in you, whereby you are apt to be scandalized at the matter of
your Ministers Conformity to indifferent things.

It is a most Excellent Rule to this purpose that is given by Mr. John Brinsley
in a Sermon of his Entitled, A Looking Glasle for good Women, and may also
serve to be a Looking Glass for good men of weak judgments and strong
affections, page 17. The most probable way to be resolved in our doubts and
scruples, is to hear what both parties can say; especially those of a differing
judgment from us, this is the most probable and rational way to be rightly
informed.

And further says he, Some are so wedded to their own Wills, as to take up
resolutions before hand in case their opinions be meddled with, or their ways
touched upon, though never so tenderly; yet they will come no more at the
public Ordinance, at least to hear such a Minister. Now surely, says he,
Christians, is this Christian? even Felix the Heathen was of a better mind, who
though troubled at the hearing of Paul's Sermon, promises to hear him again
another time. Let them take this home with them, This is but to clear an
evidence that they are but too willing to be deceived.

I beseech you therefore as a means to correborate and rectify your judgments
as to matter of Uniformity and obedience to our Superiors therein, and to
prevent your scandalizing, observe this Rule in your hearing and re^ding, and
be very careful to decline what ever may evidence to others as well as to your
selves; that ye are willing to be deceived.

And let me persuade you not to rest in a loose and confused knowledge of your
liberty, and of the liberty of others as to these things.

I have somewhere read, that a little loose knowledge in natural Philosophy is
very apt to make a man an Atheist; whereas a deep and through knowledge of the
secrets of nature may be a great conviction of a Deity. Even so a loose
confused knowledge of these things in controversy, is apt to make a person
very scrupulous if not schismatical; whereas a distinct; and well grounded
knowledge from Scripture, Antiquity,, and the Writings of Learned men, will
deliver a man not only from scrupling himself, but from censuring and
condemning others about these indifferent things. Now that knowledge which
delivers from the committing of such unchristian sins, is well worthy of the
labor of digging for it, as for silver, and of the seeking for it, as for
hidden treasure.

Which having obtained through Gods blessing upon your endeavors, even but
such a measure as may keep you from scrupling your selves, and being
scandalized at the obedience of others; I beseech you then be persuaded in the
next place as a great means to heal our present divisions about modes of
Worship and Government, to moderate and proportion your Zeal accordingly.

And here let me commend unto your practice a most rare Rule of Mr. Paul
Baines, one that is reckoned in the Petition for Peaee for one of those
Worthies that did take Nonconformity to be a sin. Now, says he in his
Commentary upon the Ephesians, Mr. Hildersham in his 25. Lecture on 51. Psalm,
has much there to this purpose.
Chapter 2. Verse 15. fol. 297. Whatsoever lies not in us to reform, it shall
be our zeal and piety to tolerate, and with patience to forbear.

This excellent Rule he says holds especially, In such things that concern not
so much what is essential to our outward communion with God or men, as the due
carrying on of every business in the said communion; wherein there may be many
superfluities and defects; Salva tamen Ecclesia. Yea he adds, that in such a
Church the best and truest Members may have more cause to rejoice then to
grieve.

Oh, Sirs, give me leave to tell you, we do too frequently feed one another
with that which increases our fears, dislikes and discontents; whereas this
holy man tells us, That even in such a Church, wherein there may be many
superfluities and defects, the best and truest member may have more cause to
rejoice then to grieve. I hope we all desire to be the best and truest members
of Christ visible Church, let us show our selves to be such in provoking and
encouraging one another to rejoice more in that effectual reformation of the
Doctrine of our Church, which Mr. Baxter does acknowledge, as you will find in
this following Discourse; then in being grieved and discontented at those
superstuities and defects, which we may suppose are yet in our Worship and
Discipline.

Were but this rule aforesaid well digested in our hearts, and reduced to
practice by us, it would hugely tend to the rectifying of our zeal, and the
stilling of our discomposed mind.

I fear many of us are apt to think, that what we may judge to be amiss in the
modes of Worship etc. our zeal and piety is not to tolerate, but to endeavor
the extirpation thereof. But this holy man was of another mind, That whatsoever
was not in our power to reform, it shall be our zeal and piety to tolerate.

And that we may be all of his mind for the future, whatever we have been for
the time past, and take heed of this dangerous Doctrine, viz. That the Church
needs not to stay for the Prince in reforming any abuse, but may reform it
though the Prince say no. Which Dr. Somes, that wrote against it in Anno 1589.
calls one of the execrable fancies of Henry Barrow and John Greenwood. I
shall give you one of his arguments as a preservative; says he, page 9. Gods
Religion was greatly decayed in King Saul's time, the holy Tabernacle was
broken, Gods Ark was in a private man's house, the Israelites had private
Chapels in Hills and Groves: David and other holy men in those days did only
mourn for these corruptions, but it being not in their power to reform, they
waited till after the death of Saul, the Reformation being put into David's hand
with the Government.

This being therefore a great Error, that the Church needs not to stay for
the Prince in reforming abuses, but may reform them whether the Prince will or
no; I desire it may be well considered of, that for Subjects to swear that they
will reform what they judge amiss, whether the Prince will or no, is a greater
Error then the former; and for Subjects to think themselves bound by their
Oaths so taken for to endeavor so to do, is the greatest Error of all three.
This, I hope, I have proved more fully in the following Discourse, to which I
refer you.

And therefore beseeching you to lay aside all such disturbing principles of
confusion, let us consider what this holy Mr. Baines and other good men have
said, which I have quoted in another place; That whatsoever is not in our power
to reform, it shall be our zeal and piety to tolerate, and patiently to forbear.

It is not in our power to be public Reformers; but if our zeal toward that
which is not in our power to reform, were turned into a zealous resolution and
endeavor of reforming our selves, and those that are under our power and
charge in our families, we should soon see such a public Reformation, as might
better deserve the name then what we have seen unto this day.

Let us not therefore seek the reforming of others, so much as our selves; let
us not mind so much the failings of others as our own: Above all let us take
heed that our zeal mislead us not even in the performance of a very necessary
duty for these times, even that of mourning, for the sins of others. It is
doubtless a great evidence of our zeal, and demonstration of our love to God
and the souls of others, to mourn for the pride, profaneness, and wickedness
of others. But yet as we may miscarry in works of great piety and charity, as
our ^aviour does instance in those of prayer and giving alms, for want of a
pu^e intention in the performance of the same, so also may we in this very
duty. I remember the Prophet Jeremiah, that wished his head to be a fountain of
tears, says, Jer. 13.17. My soul shall mourn in secret for your pride. So that
except we are called publicly to mourn for the public sins of the Kingdom, it
is most Christian to mourn in secret for that which we cannot reform. And that
with this caution also, That we must first be sure that they are sins which we
mourn for even in our secret retirements, otherwise we may take Gods name in
vain in that particular.

But whilst we think that we are doing this duty, to make the sins of others,
especially of our Superiors and Governors to be matter of our Discourse whereby
our affections are alienated from them, and discontents are cherisht; which
discontented spirit as Mr. Brinsley says in his Looking-glass for good Women,
page 8. is a forge or anvil for Satan to forge or hammer any thing that is
evil upon; Such as are privy whisperings, slanders, backbitings, mutinies,
conspiracies, treasons, deposing of Princes, and utter decay of Commonwealths;
as the Reverend Bishop Jewel has it, and much more to this purpose in his
Commentary upon the 1 These. 4. on these words, That ye study to be quiet, and
meddle with your own business, page 88.

I say, surely this mourning for the sins of others is a sinful mourning to be
repented of; and is such a practice that no ingenious child durst take up in a
family. This is but with Cham to uncover the nakedness of the parents, a sin
which God did severely punish in him, and will do in all offenders in that kind
without repentance.

This may seem to some a strange doctrine, but if you consult the sacred
Scriptures, you will find it to be a very true one. And though some of you
which are young Christians may censure me for want of zeal in this point, yet I
desire such to consider, that by that time they have had the experience that I
have, they will be of my mind; and in the mean time they would do well to
believe what these Scriptures following speak unto them, and charge their
consciences with the practice of the same, Acts 23.5. Job. 34.18. Eccles.
10.20. Epistle of Jude ver. 8. 2 Pet. 2.10. Titus 3.2.

This is a time for us to deal plainly and faithfully with one another, that do
resolve to live peaceably.

We of this City are to look upon our selves as those who have received a very
great deliverance, not only from the great dangers we were in while under the
Dominion of the Committee of Safety, but from all the late troubles and
calamities that were abroad throughout the Kingdom.

Let us therefore now consider, that though through the free grace of God our
miseries during these times, in comparison of what other Cities did sustain,
were less then any other:

Yet now through the great clemency of our gracious Sovereign, we have as large
a share in the Act of Indemnity as any; and have received more signal tokens
of his favor, then any other City under his Majesty's Dominions.

And therefore Christ's counsel to the Criple is very well worthy of our serious
consideration; Behold thou art made whole, sin no more lest a worse thing come
unto thee, John 5.14.

Let us now know the things that belong to our Peace before they are hid from
our eyes, and let us sin no more in that kind as we have done before.

But let us who do profess more piety then others, make it evident to the world
that we do practice more loyalty then others.

What God has joined together let no man put asunder: God has in his Holy
Word joined these two together, Fear God, and Honor the King, 1 Pet. 2.17.
which last, as it is the duty of all, so especially of us who are admitted, so
near our gracious Sovereign as to lodge in his Chamber; this famous City,
whereof we have the honor to be Citizens, it is called, if I mistake not, his
Majesty's Chamber: Let us therefore keep silence therein, let us not through
our jealousies, fears animosities, or discontents, make any disturbance to
hinder His Majesty's repose or our own after all his great and many sufferings.

For in so doing as we shall very much please God and our King, under whom (if
we be not wanting to our selves) we may lead peaceable lives in all godliness
and honesty; so we may do very much good to the whole Kingdom at this time by
our example

For my own part, though this appearance of mine may seem strange to some,
being the first Citizen that has been thus publicly persuasive for Piety and
Loyalty, for Uniformity and Unity, to be the daily subject of all our thoughts,
practices and endeavors; yet as when Elijah was thought to be alone, there
were 7000. reserved ones which he knew not of. So my hopes are that there are
thousands of such as I do profess my self to be; that being sensible of what
they never suspected, would have been the consequents of our late irregular
motions, will endeavor to make good what King Charles the First did
Prophetically foretell, would be the condition of such persons; writing to our
now restored Sovereign; thus drops his Royal Pen; None will be more Loyal and
Faithful to me and you, then those subjects, who sensible of their errors and
our injuries, will feel in their own souls most vehement motives to repentance,
and earnest desires to make some reparation for their former defects; of such
he says further, in that Meditation, I believe you will find them truly
zealous to repay with interest that loyalty and love to you, which was due to
me.

That we may all appear to be such, let us cast away our old principles, I do
not mean of piety and of the true Reformed Protestant Religion in opposition to
Popery; but whatever principles may have a tendency to the dishonor of the
Gospel, and the disturbance of the public peace.

These things may lawfully be done, not only because the Law of the Land
calls for it by this Act for Uniformity; but the Law of God allows it, as I
have endeavored to manifest in this following Discourse; which though probably
it may be subject to some mistakes through weakness, for which I beg pardon,
yet none through wilfulness I dare affirm.

In the impartial perusal therefore of these following Papers, I desire you to
rest assured that I have no design but the Glory of God, the interest of
Christ, the Peace of his Church, the Continuance of his Ordinances amongst us
in their purity and Power, with a settlement after all our great Confusions and
Shakings, which all good men should desire. That this weak and unworthy Work
may obtain these blessed ends, I commend it to Gods blessing upon your calm and
charitable thoughts thereof, and rest,

July 10. 1662. Yours, R. L.

The Contents of the Chapters.
CHAP. I. INtroductory, and by way of Preface pressing the necessity of
searching into the nature of the things commanded, before suffering for the
same. page 1
CHAP. II. Concerning subjection and obedience in general, our aversness to
it, and the way to heal it. page 5
CHAP. III. In which the Proposition is proved, that it does belong to the
Magistrate and Church-governour to command and appoint in matters of Religion.
page 8
CHAP. IV. The term Uniformity explained, and this Proposition proved, That
obedience to the Act for Uniformity is the way to Unity. page 12
CHAP. V. That indifferent things may lawfully be commanded, and that to obey
such commands is not only lawful, but profitable for the Peace of the Church.
To refuse obedience to indifferent things as sinful, is Negative superstition;
with several considerations about the regulating of our zeal about things
indifferent in themselves. page 22
CHAP. VI. That to declare against the binding power of the Covenant, according
to the Declaration appointed by the Act for Uniformity, is lawful both by the
Law of God and of the Land. Wherein the judgment of reverend Mr. Perkins in
six cases, as to the not-binding power of on Oath, is applied to the case in
hand. page 33
CHAP. VII. That to declare, That it is not lawful upon any pretense whatsoever
to take up arms against the King; and that we do abhor that traiterous
Position, of taking arms by his Authority against his Person, etc. is very
warrantable by the Law of God and of the Land page 48
CHAP. VIII. That Uniformity in public Worship, by obedience to an Imposed
Form is lawful. page 54
CHAP. IX. The Vindication of the Common prayer of the Church of England, be Mr
John Ball, from the aspersions of the Old Prownists, and the Authors of the
Temperate Discourse and Plus Ultra. The lawfulness also of Conformity to it,
with its Rites, proved by Bishop Jewel, Martin Bucer, and others. page 60
CHAP. X That to subscribe to the 39. Articles of Religion, and to declare an
unfeigned assent and consent, etc. is not contrary to any command of Christ,
but lawful and warrantable, notwithstanding all the objections made of old by
Mr. Josias Nichols against subscription, which are in this Chapter laid down,
and modestly removed. Page 91
CHAP. XI. That to subscribe to the use of those Ceremonies which have
significancy in them, as the Surplice and Cross in Baptism, is lawful and
warrantable; proved by the judgment of Foreign and our own Modern Divines,
both Conformists and Non-conformists. Page 106
CHAP. XII. The general argument against Subscription to the Book of making
Bishops, Priests and Deacons; because the Deacon we are to approve, his
description is not to be found in the Book of God, answered: The weakness of
which argument is evidenced from the example of Christ and his Apostles; also
the great evil of urging this argument at large, that nothing is warrantable
but what is expressly commanded. Page 110
CHAP. XIII. The Order of Deacon excepted against by Mr. Nichols as exercised
in the Church of England, justified by Mr. John Balls argument for Lecturers.
Together with several directions from Mr. John Randal, what is to be done in
this present case of Conformity, as to persuading of the Conscience. Page 124
CHAP. XIV. Contains the course that a Minister is to take as to Conformity.
Though scandal be taken by weak Brethren, in which Chapter the Doctrine of
scandal is considered, and what is alleged by the Author of the Temperate
Discourse is answered; and the Magistrate freed from what is charged upon him
under this consideration. Page 132
CHAP. XV. That to receive Ordination from the Bishop, though ordained before
by Presbyters, is lawful. Page 140
CHAP. XVI. That for our Ministers to receive Ordination by Bishops, though
ordained before by Presbyters, will not conclude the Reformed Churches, that
have no Episcopal Ordination, to have no true ministers, and consequently to be
no true Churches. Page 151

Bucer Scripta Anglicana, page 455.
I give thanks to God, who has given you grace to reform these Ceremonies in
such a purity.

And of the Common Prayer thus he there writes; I have found nothing in it
which is not taken out of the Word of God, or at least which is contrary to it,
being rightly interpreted.

Mr. John Ball's Answer to Mr. Can, part 2. page 9.
If the Common Prayer be wholly taken out of the Mass Book, how comes it to
have those things which are so directly contrary to the Mass, that both cannot
possibly stand together?

Peter Martyr's Epistle from Oxford Nov. 4. 1550. to Bishop Hooper, page 8.
How be it I will not grant that these diversities of Vestures have their
beginnings of the Pope, for so much as I read in the Ecclesiastical History,
Eusebius. lib. 3. cap. 31. How that John the Apostle wore at Ephesus, where he
dwelled, a Bishops apparel, terming it Petalum seu lamina pontificalis. As
touching S. Cyprian the holy Martyr, Pontius the Deacon writes, that a little
before he should be beheaded, he gave unto him that was appointed to behead him
his vesture, called B^rrus, after he had put it off: and to the Deacons he gave
his other Vesture, called Dalmatica, etc.

Chrysostom makes mention of the white Vesture of the Ministers of the Church,
in Mat. cap. 26. homil. 83. and ad ^o^ul. Antioch. homil. 60. etc. But be it
so, let them be the invention of the Pope, as you would have it; yet
notwithstanding for the respect of the Papistical invention in them, I cannot
be persuaded so much impiety to be therein, that whatsoever it touches it does
by and by so corrupt, that it cannot be lawful for good and godly men to use
godlily, page 7. We read how that wine was consecrated unto Bacchus, bread unto
Ceres, water unto Neptune, oil unto Minerva song unto the Muses and unto
Apollo, and many other things Tertullian rehearses in his book entitled De
Corona Militis Christiani; yet for all that we stick not to use all these
things freely, as well in holy as in profane uses, although at one time or
other before they had been consecrated to Idols and to Devils.

Perkins on Conscience of Oaths, page 527.
If at the first it were lawful, and afterward by some means become either
impossible or unlawful, it binds not conscience; for when it becomes
impossible, we may safely think that God from heaven frees a man from his oath.

CHAP. I.
Introductory, and by way of Preface pressing the necessity of searching into
the nature of the things commanded, before suffering for the same.

Section 1.

INquiries after Truth in matters controverted are not more difficult in their
prosecution, then pleasant and delightful in the satisfaction they afford. For,
though it be a true assertion of Democritus, that Veritas in puteo latet, etc.
and cannot be drawn out but with much labor; yet no dainties are so relishing
and delicious to the taste, as truth obtained is to our Intellectnals.

Sect. 2. But more especially ought we to desire to know the truth in matters
doubtful, which refer to our practice; and especially such as refer to the
purity of Gods Worship, who is a Spirit, and will be worshipped in spirit and
truth.

And though this is to be done at all times, yet especialty when we are
supposed to be brought unto such an hour of temptation, that we must either
betray the truth through cowardice in our own apprehensions, or in the
apprehensions of others betray our liberties sacred and civil by a rash and
precipitant suffering.

Sect. 3. Now this, I suppose, being the case of many both Ministers and People
at this time; there being but small hopes, notwithstanding our former Civil
wars and late Petition for peace, but that now by the Act for Uniformity
established, we must either conform thereunto, or suffer the penalties of the
same.

The present duty that now lies upon us is, by all the helps we can to make a
serious search into the nature of those things which are the subject matter of
that Conformity enjoined, and to satisfy the conscience in this particular,
Whether by obedience thereunto we become not children of disobedience unto
Christ, who is the everlasting Father and supreme Lawgiver of his Church?

Sect. 4. For this being a certain truth, That we are never called to suffer as
Christians by yielding passive obedience, but when we cannot without sin yield
active obedience; and that no Minister, I suppose, is to lay down his Ministry,
but in as clear a case as he can lay down his Life; it does very much concern
us to be persuaded in our consciences, by that which has absolutely the
commanding and obliging power thereof, viz. the Word of God, Whether or no by
yielding obedience to this Act of U ifo mity we are not Violaters of the Law of
God? For where no law is violated there is no transgression, sin being the
transgression of the law.

Sect. 5 And doubtless though there be, as the Authors of the Pe ition for
peace do intimate, p. 4. an appearance of very great love to Christ in refusing
conformity to things indifferent, because that they judge it to be an
Usurpation of his Kingly power, and an accusation of his Law as unsufficient;
and because that they dare not be guilty of adding to, or diminution of his
worship, or of worshipping him after any other Law then that by which they
shall be judged; or such as is merely subordinate to that, supposing them to be
mistaken in thinking things to be so displeasing to God.

Sect. 6. Though this may be commendable in such cases, and about such matters
wherein persons are left to their own liberty, and are not under the commands
of their Superiors:

Yet when by so doing upon a mistake, through their disobedience they shall
violate a positive and clear Gospel- precept, and in suffering upon this
account shall condemn the generation of the just, even the practice of the
primitive Christians in the Apostles days, who did conform to indifferent
things of no necessity to salvation, Acts 15. and of the tender-conscienc'd
Martyrs in Queen Mary's days; when they shall thereby also deprive the Church
of God of their labors in the Ministry, and be also matter of grief of heart
to many. solid and judicious Christians, and thereby administer matter of
horror and great scruple of conscience in weak Christians, who thence
conclude, that surely there must needs be many conscience-wasting sins in the
use of the Common Prayer, Rites and Ceremonies of the Church, etc. that men
will suffer so much for their Nonconformity.

Sect. 7. I humbly conceive that a mistake in this case is of very dangerous
consequence, and to avoid these miserable and sinful evils is a duty incumbent,
and that it would argue a very great fear of displeasing of Christ, and a
sollicitous care of obeying him, to make a diligent search into Gods Word, and
into the Writings of pious and learned men;

Before such (who especially are Teachers of others) shall expose themselves to
the deprivation of their Ministry, and thereby many good souls that delight
therein to the loss thereof.

Sect. 8. I say, they ought to be clearly and fully persuaded they are not
only Truths, but Truths of so high a nature, as may bear proportion with what
they do expose themselves to suffer for the same.

I do verily believe it would be a great sin, and highly displeasing to Christ,
if now in this juncture of time, merely to please men or avoid suffering, we
should do any thing whereby we might violate any Law of Christ, the King of his
Church. If Daniel, when there was a Law made forbidding him to offer unto God
his daily sacrifice of prayer for 30. days, Dan. 6.7. his conformity to this
Law would have been as manifest a breach of Gods Law, as for the three children
to have fallen down, and worshipped the golden Image at the command of the King.

Sect. 10. But to refuse such commands as are doubtful and disputable whether
sinful or no, it is not the judgment of those Worthies named in the Petition
for peace, page 18. who have taken this Nonconformity to be a sin; but it must
appear upon a well-grounded conviction of the conscience from Gods Word truly
applied, which does either in express terms or by a just consequence make this
or that to be a sin, which is now the matter of obedience by this Act;
otherwise we shall suffer but for our own fancies or opinions, or upon a
tradition received from our Forefathers.

And though I do believe what I have read professed in the name of many who are
yet unsatisfied in the Petition for peace, that you have by reading and prayer
sought for satisfaction; yet considering what I find asserted in the book
aforesaid, page 14. That men have not their Understandings at command; who can
tell what a word in season may do now, especially from so unlikely and so
unlook'd-for, as well as from so unworthy a one as I my self?

Sect. 11. It is an old saying, That sometimes a looker on may see more then a
gamster. And therefore though unconcerned in this last Act for Uniformity,
being in none of those capacities which call me to the observance of the same:

Yet sympathising with those that are scruplers, and desiring that they may not
thereby be exposed to those sufferings which may be the fruit of their
Non-obedience, and that all the ill effects thereof may be prevented.

Sect. 12. I have presumed to be a Remembrancer to such persons, as I was
sometimes to the Army, to mind them of such things which I shall present from
the Writings of such Non-conformists and other Divines, as are now above all
Interest, and being dead yet speak; as also from the judgment of the reverend
Mr. Richard Baxter yet living: By which I hope it will appear, That there is
not that matter of sin and danger, which I do observe some do conclude and take
for granted there is in yielding obedience unto the Act for Uniformity.

CHAP. II.
Concerning subjection and obedience in general, our averseness to it, and the
way to heal it.

Section 1.

NOw for as much as the subject matter of Obedience to this Act for Uniformity
to some appears so sinful, that they have already deprived themselves of the
opportunity of preaching the Word, and the Congregations which they have
dismissed from the hearing thereof on certain Weekday Lectures in this City.

Sect. 2. I shall by way of Introduction to what follows remember such
Ministers of what I hope may give a check to this rashness, and then propound
something in general that may incline their hearts to keep this Law.

To which purpose I humbly desire them seriously to peruse and consider of the
Reasons given by Mr. Baxter for obedience in lawful things, Five Disput of
Government and Worship, page 483. and to stay such of you as are in such great
haste to be gone out of the Lords vineyard, be pleased to consider what you
shall find proposed by the said reverend person, proposit. 1. We must obey both
Magistrates and Pastors in all lawful things which belong to their Office. 2.
It belongs not to their Office to make God a new Worship; but to command the
mode and circumstances of Worship belongs to their Office; for guiding them
therein God has given them general rules. 3. We must not take the lawful
commands of our Governors to be unlawful. 4. If we do through weakness or
perverseness take lawful things to be unlawful, that will not excuse us in our
disobedience; our error is our sin, and one sin will not excuse another.

Sect. 3. Concerning the lawfulness of the things appointed by this Act,
particularly I hope to make evident to such as will with patience read over
this whole Treatise without prejudice.

In the mean time to reconcile the minds of men to this Act, I shall prepare
them by what follows.

Disobedience, you may observe from Mr. Baxter, though but through weakness and
a mistake, is very dangerous. Obedience also to the commands of our Superiors
is exceeding pleasing to God; I say, in lawful things, Behold to obey is better
then sacrifice, quoted by Mr. Baxter, 1 Samuel 15.2.
page 489. There being also naturally in our hearts a very great averseness to
subjection, there being as the reverend Calvin says upon 1 Pet. 5.5. Nihil
humano ingenio magis adversum quam subjectio; Calvin on 1 Pet. 5.5.
verum enim illud olim dictum est, Regis animum quemque intrase habere: Nothing
to which the wit of man is so adverse as to subjection; so true is that which
was said of old, Every man has within him the heart of a King.

Sect. 4. Observe, I pray, what he says, and it will give you the reason why
men do so set their wits on work to dispute the commands of their Superiors,
why they do so strongly argue against the commanding of unnecessary and
indifferent things in their judgment, 5 Disput. 471.
and why they charge such commands as being the cause of all contentions and
divisions: I say, we may well fear what Mr. Calvin says to be the ground
thereof, because there is nothing to which the wit of man is so adverse as to
subjection; and because that which was said of old may too truly be affirmed in
our days, and will be while men are in this state of Imperfection, that every
man has the heart of a King within him, would be a Ruler over others, but
hardly brought to subjection himself.

Sect. 5. In order therefore to the healing this distemper I shall crave leave
humbly to propose even to the consideration of all peaceable spirits, and all
that desire to be such, this general Proposition; That Obedience to this Act of
Uniformity is the way to Unity.

Which if I can demonstrate (as I hope through Christ I shall) and prove by
Scripture and Reason, I am apt to believe it may very much conduce to reconcile
the minds of many to this work, which is of so great concernment at this time.

Sect. 6. To which purpose I shall also for the help of those who are in my own
private capacity and station, that they being informed in the nature of this
Act, may think well of it themselves, and not think ill of those that do
conform thereto.

I shall endeavor to explain what this Uniformity is that the Act requires.

But before I begin, considering that the reverend Mr. Baxter has laid down
this as his first Proposition, before he gives his reasons for obedience in
lawful things, viz. That we must obey all Magistrates and Pastors in all lawful
things that belong to their Offices: I shall lay down this proposition in the
first place, That it does belong to the Office of the Magistrate and
Church Governors to command about matters of Religion, especially as to the
modes and circumstances of Worship.

CHAP. III
In which the Proposition is proved, that it does belong to the Magistrate and
Church-governour to command and appoint in matters of Religion.

Section 1.

THat I may proceed more distinctly I shall first prove the proposition in
reference to Christian Kings, who are the supreme: secondly, as to
Church-governors and Pastors.

That it does belong to the office of the King to command about matters of
Religion I shall endeavor to prove, first, by the light of Nature; secondly,
by the light of Scripture; thirdly, from Ecclesiastical History; fourthly, by
the Laws of our Land, under which we live.

Sect. 2. First, by the Light of Nature this appears to be the Magistrates
office to command in matters of Religion. I shall give you but one or two
Instances for the proof thereof: first, in Nebuchadnezzar making a Law against
blaspheming the true God, Dan. 3.5. secondly, in Darius, Dan. 6.
who upon the sight of another miracle wrote to all People, Nations and
Languages, saying, I make a decree, that in all the dominions of my Kingdom men
tremble and fear before the God of Daniel. To both which let me add the
example of the King of Nineveh, who hearing and believing Jonahs message from
God, did proclaim a Fast, and charged all to put on sack cloth, etc. Jonah 3.

Sect. 3. If it be objected, These were Heathen Princes: They do the better
service to prove my assertion, that such had so much of those relics and
fragments of the Light of Nature to teach them, that as they were in office
they should restrain from Blasphemy, and command the fear of God, and
humiliation before him.

Sect. 4. Secondly, by the Light of Scripture that it belongs to the Supreme
Magistrate to command about matters of Religion, all the Examples of Moses, of
Joshua, of David, of Solomon, of Asa, of Jehosaphat, of Hezekiah, of Josiah,
and of Nehemiah, do prove the same.

And as the coming of Christ did not abolish Kingly Government, but confirm it,
as we may observe both by his doctrine and practice; so in no part of his
Gospel, or writings of the Apostles, is the dealing about matters of Religion
taken from the Magistrate, but the right that Kings had in the Old Testament
was rather corroborated by Christ's doctrine. The Magistrate therefore Romans
13.4. is called Gods Minister or Deacon, and he is said to be in this exercised
as Gods Minister to take vengeance on him that does evil; the greater therefore
the evil is, the more to be suppressed; and the greater the good is, the more
to be enforced.

Sect. 5. St. Augustine in his 50. Epistle has a very considerable passage to
this purpose, Who being in his right wits will say to Christian Kings, Take you
no care who defends or impugneth in your Realms the Church of Christ your
master, let it not pertain to you who list to be sacrilegious or religious
within your Kingdom. And upon this account he does challenge the Donatists, Cry
thus if you dare, Let murders be punished, adulteries, etc. only sacrilege
(which he expounds to be a contempt of God, his Truth, his Church) we will not
have punished by Princes Laws. And again says he, will the Donatists, though
they were convinced of a sacrilegious schism, say, That it belongs not to the
Princes power to correct or pu^ish such things?

Sect. 6. Observe, I beseech you, besides the Scripture the judgment of this
ancient Father, and that it was the opinion of the Donatists, who were very
great Scismaticks, as I find in the Arraignment of schism by Mr. Brinsley; they
also, it appears, did deny the Christian Magistrate to meddle in matters of
Religion. I wish this error be not found amongst such as Mr. John Ball wrote
against in the answering of John Can, or any other besides the great Factors
for Rome the Jesuits.

Sect. 7. I proceed therefore to prove this to be the Magistrates office in the
third place by the practice of the first Christian Emperors that submitted to
Christ's Gospel; Constantine commanded matters of Religion, as Eusebius in vita
Constant. lib. 3. cap. 38. lib. 3. cap. 27. he shows what a Nursing father he
was to the Church of Christ, how he called Councils, and in many of their
Synods did not sit idle, (but as a Moderator among them) and confirmed their
decrees with his seal.

And as Constantine so also did Constantius, and after him Justinian, who in
his Code repeateth not only the Laws of former Emperors touching the Christian
Faith, Baptism, the Church, etc. but in his Authenticks he makes many new
constitutions, in which he disposes o^ matters about Gods Worship. as in what
places, by what persons, with what loudness of voice they are to administer.

The like also did Charles the great, the Emperor of the West part 800. years
after Christ, in his Preface to his Laws, Praefat. Caroli in leges Francisc.
there is this passage, Therefore, O you Pastors of Christ's Church, and Teachers
of his flock, have we directed commissions unt^ you that will join with you to
redress those things which need reformation, in our Name, and by virtue of our
Authority.

And that this did belong to Christian Kings ever since the plantation of
Christian Religion in our Land, I find by a Letter of Eluthorius Bishop of Rome
unto King Lucius, 169. a passione Christi; in this Letter he says, That h^ is
Gods Vicar in his Kingdom, according to the saying of the Psalmist, Give the
King thy judgments, O God, and thy righteousness to the Kings son. The Kings
sons be Christian people and folk of his Realm, Fox Mon. page 96.
who if they be divided you ought to gather in concord and peace.

Sect. 8. And that this belongs to this day to our Kings to meddle in matters
of Religion, is evident by several Statute-Laws, that Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction is annexed to the Imperial crown of this Realm, I may have
occasion to name some hereafter, and therefore forbear at present.

Having, I hope, fully proved by the Light of Nature, Scripture, the practice
of Christian Kings at all times to this day, that it belongs to the
Magistrates office to command in matters of Religion, though not to make God a
new Worship, yet to command about the modes thereof:

Sect. 9. I shall speak but a word of the second part of the Proposition, That
it belongs to the Church-governors and Pastors to command about matters of
Religion also, but so as to be subject to the Higher powers, 1 These. 5.12, 13.
Heb. 13.17. 1 Cor. 11.34. The Apostle Paul having given as it were several
Canons, for reforming the great abuses that were about the administration of
the Lords Supper, he says, The rest I will set in order when I come. And the
like commission he gives to Titus 1.5. For this cause left I thee in Creet, to
set in order the things that were wanting, as I appointed thee, or commanded
thee: He does not say, as God has commanded, but as I have appointed. The
practice of the Synod in restraining the Christian Gentiles from their liberty
of eating bload, does show that it belongs to Church Governors to command
about indifferent things, and the modes of Worship and Discipline.

And thus now having proved that which I judge very necessary to reconcile men's
minds to obedience, if once the conscience be persuaded that it belongs to
the Magistrates Office to command what is the subject matter of this Uniformity:

I shall in the next place proceed to explain what this Uniformity is which the
Act requires, in order to the proof of my Proposition, That obedience to the
Act of Uniformity is the way to Unity.

CHAP. IV.
The term Uniformity explained, and this Proposition proved, That obedience to
the Act for Uniformity is the way to Unity.

Section 1.

COncerning the term Uniformity I shall not spend much Ink or Paper in a
critical or Etymological discourse thereof; for to speak de nomine, of the
Name, is to no great purpose, further then it makes the thing required more
intelligible.

I must confess I do not find the term in Scripture, but yet as Epiphan. lib.
3. haeres. 73. Nomen substantiae non ponitur nude nec in veteri nec novo
Testamento, sensus vero ubique est. But the sense or essence thereof we may
find in many places of Scripture commanded and commended, that we should all
speak the same things, and with one mind and mouth glorify God. And that is
the chief thing propounded by this Law, page 71. viz. An universal agreement in
the public Worship of Almighty God.

Sect. 2. I have therefore but one thing from the term Uniformity to observe,
as to its Etymoligy, if I mistake not, and that is this, Uniform does signify
one form, mode or manner, in which by a universal agreement the public Worship
of God is to be performed. And were this but well considered, this Act would be
the more readily obeyed, it requiring of us no more then what Gods Word
commands or allows, and his Church has practiced, as you shall read hereafter,
that in the manner of our public Worship we should be uniform, the whole
Church to have but one mode and one rule for its rites and ceremonies.

Now take the term Uniformity in my proposition in this sense, for one form,
mode or worship to be observed by all that are members of our visible Church;
and

I humbly conceive it to be a seasonable Truth to be treated on, That obedience
to this Act for Uniformity is the way to Unity.

Sect. 3. The reason in general why it is likely so to be is, because that our
chief discords, dissentions and divisions, which we so long have labored
under, have been about our modes of Worship and Discipline.

That they have been so from the very first beginning of the troubles of
Frankefort to this very day, he is a stranger in our Israel that knows it
not; yet if you will not take it from me, be pleased to take it from Mr.
Baxter, who in the Postcript of his Epistle to the Reader, before his Treatise
of the Vain Religion of the Formal Hyppocrite, having cleared the Doctrine of
the Church of England from being any matter of our most unchristian discord, he
says, The more is the pity that the very modes of Worship and Discipline
should be the matter of such sharp and uncharitable discords.

Now then if our sharp and uncharitable discords be and have been about the
modes of Worship and Discipline, then for all to observe one mode, or form, or
rule in public Worship and Discipline must needs be the way to unity and
agreement.

Sect. 4. This at first view may seem to be Durus sermo, a very hard saying,
who can bear it? and I do the more incline to believe it by what I have read,
which discovers how contrary the apprehensions of some learned men are to this
Truth.

Who have therefore pleaded very much for Nonconformity, and a liberty for
persons to choose or refuse what form or mode of Worship they please, as the way
to peace.

Now this, I say, being the general argument against Uniformity, with the means
conducing thereunto, as I find in the Petition for peace, and also in Mr.
Baxters sive Disputations; I shall make bold with all tenderness and meekness,
and with much respect to those worthy persons, to weigh and consider of the
truth and strength thereof.

Sect. 6. The argument I find in the Petition for peace, page 14. in these or
the like words; Nothing more affects us then to think of the lamentable
divisions that have been caused, and are still like to be, whilst things
unnecessary are imposed; and on the contrary, how blessed a unity and peace we
might enjoy, if these occasions of divisions were removed.

So that here in short lies, as is said, if I mistake not, the ground of all
these lamentable divisions about modes of Worship, even since the Reformation
begun in King Edwards days to this time, That things unnecessary have been
imposed.

And that this is the chief exception against our Superiors commands I find
page 12, 16, 17. and others in the said Petition for peace, that they are
esteemed unnecessary; but that I find them not to be charged as absolutely
sinful in themselves, in all that book, is worthy of observation.

For this being acknowledged in the general by those persons of that moderation
and piety, which were to review the Book of Common Prayer, etc. That they are
but unnecessary, and not sinful:

Sect. 7. I humbly conceive that it should put a great stand to the thoughts of
such who are methinks too forward to consider, Whether only for non-obedience
to unnecessary things in their own judgment, or in the judgment of some others
that have taken up this tradition from the troubles of Frankfort, it be lawful
for them to lay down their Ministry, or to do that which might by Law deprive
them of the same?

Before I proceed further I shall crave leave to ask this modest question;

Whether or no this argument against obedience to the commands of our
Superiors, because we judge the things commanded to be unnecessary, is not
only a principle of division, but of confusion in all Government?

Sect. 8. I remember that I have somewhere read, that Licurgus the Lawgiver to
the Lacedaemonians, being moved by one to establish a Democratical Government in
the Commonwealth, he bid him go home, and exercise it first in his own family.

And surely if we do but seriously consider of it, we shall find, that were but
this objection brought against our commands, as we are Parents or Masters in
the government of our Families, that they are unnecessary, what can be expected
but disorder, disobedience, division and confusion?

Sect. 9. And had the converted Gentiles, whom the Governors of the Church,
Acts 15. enjoined to abstain from blood and things strangled, as necessary, not
to salvation, but for the settling of the peace, which was broken by the Jewish
Teachers, ver. 2. and to propagate the Christian Religion: which are the two
professed ends of the framing this Act for Uniformity, page 71. had they but
pleaded, This is an unnecessary Imposition, and so have been non-conformable;
how had the Christian Religion been interrupted in (...) first plantation, and
the dissentions and divisions, occasioned by the Jewish Teachers, been
propagated and continued?

I humbly conceive therefore that this argument or objection against the
commands of our Superiors, That their Impositions are unnecessary, is a very
unnecessary objection, and a principle of confusion and division in Church,
State or Family.

But now that a universal agreement in one mode and form of public Worship and
Discipline is the way to peace and unity, and therefore no unnecessary
Imposition, I thus argue;

Sect. 10. First, that which does deliver us from dividing sins must needs be
the way to unity.

Secondly, that which tends to the Honor of Religion, the edification and
building up of the Church, that must needs be the way to unity.

Now to have one form, and to agree universally in the modes of Worship and
service of God does conduce to both these, and therefore Uniformity is the way
to Unity.

I shall begin with the first, and show what are these dividing sins, naming
but the principal ringleaders, amongst them, and they are Pride and Error.

Sect. 11. First, Pride, that it is a dividing sin, and the spring of division,
if not of disobedience, the Wiseman tells us, Prove. 13.10. only by pride
comes contention; as if this were the spring of all division and disobedience.
But besides, from this root spring many more dividing sins, as
self-conceitedness, and thinking of our selves more highly then we ought to
think; a sin forbidden with an unusual preface, Romans 12.3. a sin whereby we are
apt to think our selves wiser then seven men that can render a reason, Prove.
26.16. and more holy then the rest of our brethren, as did the proud Pharisee.
From whence also flows the judging, censuring, condemning and despising of
each other; which are all dividing sins, and exceedingly tend to the tearing of
that Badge by which Christ would have all his Disciples to be known, even by
their love to each other.

Sect. 12. Secondly, as Pride so Error is a dividing sin; for though Truth be
but one, yet Error is the seminary of all schisms and divisions. The Apostle
John 1. 4, 6, 7. lays down a (...), a mark or character how we may know the
spirit of Truth from the spirit of Error; the spirit of Truth is a Fountain of
love, and consequently the spirit of Error is the spring of discord, as we have
found by woeful experience. Error in doctrine is by our Savior compared to
Leaven, Mat. 16.6. compared with the 12. Verse: now as Leaven diffuseth a
sowrenesse into the whole mass or lump wherever it comes, so also does Error
diffuse a sowreness and moroseness of spirit, whereby he becomes unsociable and
apt to divide and separate himself from the rest of his brethren that is
leavened with it; even as the Pharisees did in our Saviors time, whose name
with the name of Nabal are symbolical.

Sect. 13. Now then that obedience to the Act of Uniformity is the way to
unity, as it is a blessed means for the mortifying of these grand ringleaders
of division and disobedience, may be thus evidenced, as it does remove the
occasions of committing these sins.

For, did all that profess the true Reformed Protestant Religion observe an
Uniformity in their public Worship, and in the rites and ceremonies thereto
belonging, all distinctions of men and parties would soon vanish away; there
would be no occasion given for the drawing forth those woeful fruits of Pride
before-named neither in Ministers or People.

Sect. 14. As the Minister by his obedience to these indifferent things acts
and exercises those graces which are diametrically opposite to pride and self
conceitedness, viz. humility and self-denial, and declares that he has got
the victory over that to which the reverend Calvin says the wit of man is
nothing more adverse and contrary to, viz. subjection.

Sect. 15. So the People are thereby delivered from the occasion of putting
forth those dividing sins before named, in whom there is a natural aptitude
upon the forbearance of the Ministers in these modes of Worship to atgue;
Surely those men do see more into the iniquity of the Common prayer, the
Surplice, etc. then all the Governors that enjoin them, or the rest of their
Brethren that observe them; and have therefore a more pure, delicate and tender
conscience, and consequently their Ministry is like to be most soul-saving. And
thereupon all other Ministers are usually censured for Time-servers and
men-pleasers; by which means Christian love and charity is destroyed, and
divisions are contracted and continued.

That therefore which removes these occasions, as for all to be uniform in
their external modes of Worship does, as I have before showed, must needs be
the way to unity.

Sect. 16. Secondly, as Pride so Error also is a dividing sin, as I have before
showed: Now that which takes away one occasion, and a great one too, of
diffusing and spreading Error, must needs be the way to unity; now Uniformity
in prayer does this, and was therefore by the Church in the primitive times
appointed for this end and purpose, Because that Heretics did convey and
spread their poisons in their Prayers. In the Council of Milva, which was in
the year 416. it was appointed, That none should use any prayers but such as
were appointed by a Synod.

Sect. 17. There is a desultory levity in the minds even of some good men,
whereby they are subject to offend in their public Devotions, without a great
measure of humility and spiritual prudence, which all Ministers have not; and
therefore it was the judgment of the reverend Calvin, in his Epist. ad
Protector. in the Reign of King Edward the Sixth, that there should be a set
form of prayer and Ecclosiastical rites: says he, Quoad formulam precum and
rituum Ecclesiast, valde approbo, a quo pastori in functione discedere non
liceat, etc. Observe, he would have a set Form of prayer, and certain rites and
ceremonies; but were they to be left to the Ministers choice, whether he would
conform to them yea or no? I suppose not: he was not of Mr. Baxters mind in his
Disputations as to this point, nor yet with the Petitioners for peace, but
says expressly, From which form of Prayer and Ecclesiastical Rites it may not
be lawful for the Pastors in their function to depart. They were then to be
imposed by Law upon them; and for what end? for these three Reasons; first,
that thereby provision may be made for the simplicity of some: secondly, that
the consent that all the Churches have amongst themselves may more certainly
appear: and lastly also, that the extravagant levity of some that affect
novelties may be prevented.

So that it is very evident that this reverend person did approve of a
Uniformity in prayer and other rites as the way to unity, as it did conduce to
concord and agreement, as it prevented dividing sins.

Sect. 18. I proceed now to the second Branch for the proof of the proposition,
and that is this, That which tends to the honor of our Religion, the
edification and building up of the Church, that must needs be the way to Unity.

But now if all persons, both Ministers and People, would be Uniform, and there
were an universal agreement about these modes of Worship and Discipline; the
Reformed Protestant Religion, which for our Non conformity and divisions
amongst our selves, by our Adversaries the Papists is very much reviled; as you
find Harding in his Answer to the Apology of the Church of England, flouting
them even for the Non-conformists that were amongst them in Queen Elizabeth's
days.

Sect. 19. I say, how would our Religion be honored? nay, not only so, but
how would it strike a terror into the hearts of all Romish Catholics, and
fill them with despair of ever seeing the Church of England reconciled to the
Church of Rome, for to see these woeful divisions that have been amongst us
removed by an universal conformity amongst Protestants in these matters, which
are and have been the cause of such unchristian discords?

Now if this would not edify and build up the Church, judge you.

Besides, how amiable then would our assemblies be, and how delightful would
Gods public Worship be to such as desire to fear his Name, and to reverence
his Sanctuary, to behold it celebrated orderly and uniformly, while all that
worship do sit, and stand, and kneel together, as if but one body; while all do
speak the same things required of them, as if but one mouth.

Sect. 20. This was the practice of the primitive Church long before Popery. I
remember I have read that the whole Congregation were then so uniform in
public prayer, lifting up their voices so all together when they said Amen,
which, affixed to our prayers, signifies a full consent and agreement to what
is prayed for; I say, it was uttered with such uniformity, that St. Jerome, as
I have read, compared their sounding of Amen in the Church unto a clap of
Thunder, and St. Basil to the roaring of the Sea.

You see therefore that this Uniformity in matters of religious Worship it is
bonum, jucundum, and utile; it is good, it is pleasant, it is profitable; and
that not only as you have read it is pleasing and delightful to those that
join in that Worship, but as it is profitable also, and so edifying.

Sect. 21. As the God of peace, who has promised to be with them that are
like-minded, Romans 15.33. So the great Master of the Assemblies, the Prince of
peace, has not only promised to be present where two or three are gathered
together in his Name, but also has made a promise to their uniformity and
agreement together in prayer, Mat. 18. Where two shall agree together to ask
any thing on earth, it shall be granted them. When they shall symphonise, so
the word is in the Original, when they shall be harmonious and uniform in their
supplications, even to this agreement together is the promise made, if I
mistake not. And I think St. Chrysostom is somewhat of my mind in Homil. 3. de
incomprehensibilis Dei natura; Thou do not so soon obtain thy prayers when
thou prayest alone unto the Lord, as when thou prayest with thy brethren, for
there is somewhat the more of concord and consent, etc.

Sect. 22. And in his 4. Homil. upon 2 These. says he, Quod quis apud se
precatus accipere non poterit, hoc cum multitudine precatus accipiate, quare
etiam si non propria virtus, tamen concordia multorum potest. The thing that a
man cannot obtain praying alone, praying together with the multitude he may
obtain; why so? though not for his own worthiness, yet the concord, unity and
agreement prevails much.

And thus now having I hope made it evident, That obedience to this Act of
Uniformity is the way to Unity; and that to have all one form in public
Worship, though to some it may seem very unnecessary, yet for those good ends
and purposes aforesaid, though in it self it be an indifferent thing, neither
forbidden or commanded by God, yet obedience to it when commanded by our
Superiors is very necessary, as it delivers from dividing sins, and tends to
the honor of Religion.

I shall, before I proceed further, desire all humble and peaceable spirits to
compare without prejudice this argument with my proofs thereof, with an
argument that I find in Five Disput. chap. 6. page 433.

CHAP. V.
That indifferent things may lawfully be commanded, and that to obey such
commands is not only lawful, but profitable for the peace of the Church. To
refuse obedience to indifferent things as sinful is negative Superstition: with
several considerations about the regulating of our zeal about things
indifferent in themselves.

Section 1.

THough I do confess that there is much prudence and moderation to be used in
every Government, and what the Wiseman says is applicable to all Governors,
Be not thou a Lion in thine own house: and that Fathers are not to provoke
their Children to wrath by unjust and unmeet precepts, and by pursuing them
with contumelious words, etc. and severe corrections beyond the merit of their
crime. Imperiousness in government doubtless is to be avoided.

Sect. 2. But yet should our superiors fail of their duty in this or any other
kind, we are not to fail in ours; duty to our superiors being not an act of
commutative but distributive justice. The same Lawgiver that forbids Fathers
natural, spiritual, political, not to provoke their children to wrath, lest
they be discouraged, yet does likewise command children, whether natural,
spiritual or political, to obey their Parents in all things, Col. 3.20. in the
Lord, Ephesians. 6.1.

And this, with the consideration of what follows, that in every act of
obedience to the lawful commands of our superiors there is a complication of
many graces, which grace our profession, as humility, self-denial, love to God,
care of the public peace, and of the preservation of unity and order in the
place where God has set us.

I say this consideration should keep us from disputing our Superiors
commands, from possessing either corrupt heads or hearts with any principle
which may heighten that aversness which is in every man's heart naturally to
subjection, as Mr. Calvin says.

Sect. 3. The argument therefore, with the reason thereof, I desire may be a
little weighed in the balance of the Sanctuary, as I find it in Five Disput.
page 423. proposit. 6.

It is not lawful to make any thing the Subjects duty by a command that is
merely indifferent, amecedently both in it self, and as clothed with its
accidents.

The reason is evident, because that nothing but Good can be the object of the
Governous desire, and nothing but Good can be the just matter of his Law.

Sect. 4. Now taking into consideration good and indifferent in the sense there
propounded, I humbly conceive that the reason is not evident; That therefore it
is not lawful to make any thing the Subjects duty by a command that is merely
indifferent, because that nothing but good may be the just matter of a Law, and
not that which is neither good or evil, but indifferent.

For should this be true, all Government would be dissolved; the Magistrate
then is to make no Law at all: What would then become of us may easily be
judged.

I offer therefore to consideration this distinction concerning Good and
Indifferent, the omitting whereof, I suppose, may occasion this great mistake,
A thing may be said to be good materially or mediately.

Sect. 5. Now an indifferent thing neither good or evil in its own nature may
be mediately good, may have in it bonitatem medii, it may have bonum publicum,
the public good for its end.

A command therefore of our Superiors, by which a thing indifferent is made
bonum necessarium, a necessary good, and bonum publicum, for public peace and
unity, it is no idle Law, page 434. because it is not unprofitable: It may
therefore lawfully be commanded for the reason beforesaid.

Now that a public agreement in the externals of Gods Worship is a public
good, as the way to peace, and good in the acception you take goodness,
commended by Gods Law, which is the first rule of moral good, page 435. that
which this Law propounds being no more then what is our duty, viz. That which
the Apostle did so earnestly pray for and persuade to, That With one mind and
mouth men would glorify God, that they would be like-minded, seek peace and
follow after it.

Sect. 6. I humbly conceive that the Answers to all those Objections in Five
Disput. from page 435. to page 437. in my weak judgment are not strong enough
to bottom that upon which is like to be made the great occasion of those
sufferings which are expected to come upon many good and pious men by reason of
this Act.

For it will appear, that most of the matters enjoined by the Act, except the
Declaration about the Covenant, are allowed by the Author of the Five
Disputations, as you will find hereafter.

Sect. 7. I beseech you therefore for the Lords sake do not dispute your selves
out of the Exercise of your Ministey, do not bring your selves in trouble
needlessly, and thereby trouble the peace of the Church. It is a very strange
conclusion in my simple judgment, That because there needs no Law to make
that which is neither commanded or fo bidden to be indifferent, Five Disput.
page 437. that therefore it is not lawful to make any thing the Subjects duty
by a command that is merely indifferent, but that indifferent things must be
left for us to use or not to use at cu own liberty.

Sect. 8. I beseech you all consider but what is said Five Disput. page 439. to
this purpose, If God have left us this liberty, Men should not take that
liberty from us without great cause, and without some accidental good that is
like to come by depriving us of that liberty, and that good must be greater
then the accidental evil.

To all which I do fully agree, and offer to consideration, whether what I have
said all this time, that the liberty that God has left us in private, whether
we will use a form or no form in Prayer, being taken away at sometimes only in
public (for I am of the mind of K. Charles the First, of blessed Memory, in
his Meditation on the Ordinance against the Common prayer; though I am for
Common prayer before Preaching) That yet there is use of a grave, modest,
discreet and humble use of the Ministers gifts even in public, the better to
fit and excite their own and the peoples affections. I say, whether this
liberty is not taken away without great cause, viz. for the Peace of the
Church, which was the cause why the liberty of eating Blood, etc. was taken
away from the Gentile Christians, Acts 15.

Sect. 9. And that the accidental good which is like to be by Uniformity, is
greater then the accidental evil which is the depriving us of our liberty; so
that as Mr. Calvin says, the Pastor in his Function may not lawfully depart
from that Form and those Rites appointed, which he had liberty to do before;

Will evidently appear, not only by what I have said of Obedience to the Act
of Uniformity as the way to Unity; but also by what you may find in the Five
Disput. amongst those many reasons which are there given for Obedience in
lawful things, such as a Form of Prayer, the significant gestures of standing
at the profession of our Faith, and the Surplice, etc. as you will find in the
said Disputations, if I have not forgot what I have there read, are there
granted to be lawful.

Sect. 10. If I mistake not, amongst those reasons beginning at page 483.
(which are all very good ones, and I desire may be laid to heart in this
juncture of time) I find page 487. reason 10. That by this disobedience in
things lawful, the Members of the Church will be involved in contentions, and
so engaged in bitter uncharitableness, and censures, and persecutions, and
reproaches one of another; which scandalous courses will nourish Vice,
dishonor God, rejoice the Enemies, grieve the Godly that are peaceable and
judicious, and wound the Consciences of the contenders. We see the beginning of
such fires are small, but whether they will tend, and what will be the end of
them we see not.

Sect. 11. Now if the preventing of every one of these sinful evils be not a
greater good then that accidental evil before spoken of;

That which I further offer, I desire may be seriously laid to heart.

As there is nothing, as Mr. Calvin says, to which the Wit of man is so averse
as subjection; so there is nothing to which humane nature is more subject, then
those sins before-named in Five Disput. as Uncharitableness and Censoriousness
about small matters: we have found it so by woeful experience both formerly and
to this present day. It is easy to observe how such as take their liberty, as
to matters of Conformity, that do not wear the same Canonical habit as it is
called, that are no Common prayer men, how are they esteemed by the generality
of professors, for such that see more into the evil of these things then other
men? And on the other side, how are those which do conform, such as are
peaceable and judicious, how are they condemned and censured by the same
persons for Sursingle-men and superstitious temporizers?

Sect. 12. There being therefore such probable grounds of hope, that by a
general obedience to the Act of Uniformity these evils may be remedied, these
sins suppressed which dishonor God, grieve the judicious godly, make the
Papists to be confirmed in their ill opinion of us for our dissentions,
occasion others to fall off to them, as we find it to be the case of Grotius,
mentioned Five Disput.

Upon all these considerations laid together, I humbly conceive I have made it
evident to all, That obedience to the Act for Uniformity is the way to Unity,

Wherein I have also proved how great the mistake is in the Petition for Peace,
That the commanding of these unnecessary Impositions have been the cause of all
the dissentions and divisions that have been from the beginning of the
Reformation of Religion in King Edwards days.

Sect. 13. I shall speak a word or two in order to the inclining of such as are
concerned to observe the Act of Uniformity, by showing the great mistake there
is, as I humbly conceive, in what is urged by the Petitioners for peace, page
15. who there say on the comrary, That if these unnecessary Impositions were
removed, we should enjoy a blessed unity and peace.

For if the bare removal of these unnecessary Impositions would procure a
blessed unity and peace;

Give me leave to desire you seriously to consider, how comes it about that in
all this time of liberty from these Impositions we have been so woefully
divided, that were so unanimous before against the rites and ceremonies of the
Church?

Sect. 14. Surely had I known so much before the beginning of those troubles,
as now I know, that there was so great a difference and feud between the
Non-conformists and the Separatists, as now appears unto me by their Writings
that I have seen between them in the Bishops days; I should have foreseen by
their principles which I gather most clearly in a book set forth by Mr. Simon
Ash, written by Mr. John Ball against John Can, edit. 1642. by which book it
appears that the one sides principles did tend to Independency, and the other
to Presbytery: I say, I think verily I should have foreseen, that when the
Bishops were down great dissentions and divisions would arise amongst
themselves.

Sect. 15. Mow that it did so fall out, that they did fall out extremely when
Episcopal Government was laid aside, is so well known to all the Christian
World, that I need not fear I should be the first publisher thereof; which
animosities, and divisions, and oppositions of each other I desire may be
buried in everlasting forgetfulness, and should not mention it now, the
remembrance thereof being so grievous to me, and should be to all
tender-conscienc'd Christians, but that I desire so much may be gathered from
it, as may be a means to prevent the like Enterprises again. Sed sat verbum
sapienti.

Sect. 16. I have observed this as one great argument used by the
Non-conformists to reclaim those of whom Mr. Nicholls complains, (as great
hinderers of their desired Reformation) for making a rash and temerarious
separation from the Church of England; That they should consider how much God
had showed his displeasure against that way, by the perverse spirit that he had
mingled amongst them, so that they could never agree amongst themselves;
implying that their divisions were a punishment for their sin.

Sect. 17. And surely if this were but well thought on, we might have cause (in
this gloomy day of darkness, as is supposed) to descend into our hearts, and
suspect our selves, whether those divisions which are our sin, occasioned
though our disobedience to these commonds about these supposed unnecessary
Impositions, may not be a punishment for sin also.

I beseech you therefore, laying aside your contentions about these things, let
us follow the things that make for peace, according to the Apostles counsel,
and things whereby we may edify one another.

Amongst which, if I be not mistaken, Uniformity is one, and obedience to the
Law that requires it is the way to Unity.

Sect. 18. And think not to say with your selves as I somewhere find it is
said, That these are but poor and inconsiderable things to be enjoined upon
such severe penalties as the Law inflicteth. Is not the faithful Preaching of
the Gospel the Unum necessarium, the one thing necessary? and do you think that
the Lord is better pleased with Reordination, Subscription and Ceremonies,
then the saving of souls? that Uniformity, agreement and concord must be placed
in those things which are no way necessary to salvation?

Sect. 19. Doubtless God is more pleased with the saving of souls, then with
the things before-named absolutely considered; and should Uniformity in these
things be required as necessary to salvation and holiness placed in them,
obedience to such commands were sinful, and might justly be scrupled: But as
they that command, if I mistake not, are not therefore guilty of Affirmative
superstition; O take heed that you by refusing are not guilty of Negative
superstition, which you seem so much to dread, which lies in placing sin in
those things which God has not; choosing rather not to preach the Gospel, then
to be Uniform in one mode of Worship and Discipline.

Sect. 20. Surely if we had learned what this means indeed, The Kingdom of
God consists not in meats or drinks, but in righteousness, peace and joy, Romans
14. we would proportion our zeal more about those things wherein Christ's
Kingdom consists, then about Meats and Drink, matters of modes of Worship and
Discipline.

For my part, I do not believe that in the imposing of these things aforesaid
so severely, that the Kingdom of God does consist but subordinately, as it may
prevent those sins which keep souls from entering into Christ's Kingdom, those
dividing sins before-named; neither that the Kingdom of Christ consists in the
violent refusal of obedience to their commands.

Sect. 21. But I am persuaded by what I find by my own experience, that could
we but follow the Apostles counsel, mind most the substantials of Christ's
Kingdom, such as are holiness, justice and mercifulness toward men, in all
which senses righteousness is taken; and could we get our hearts peaceably
disposed, and from the sense of the inward joy of the Holy Ghost be joyful,
cheerful and amicable in our converse with meu; these substantials of Christ's
Kingdom ruling within us, would so mortify and circumcise that consorious
morosity and narrowness of spirit, which is contracted by our zealous
contentions about meats and drinks, these small and circumstantial matters of
modes of Worship and Discipline; that we should not think few or none godly but
those that are of our mind and way: But we should come to abound in love to all
men, and speak evil of no man, which are the Gospel-preceps.

Sect. 22. And what would then be the effect of this the Apostle tells us in
the words following, ver. 8. He that in these things serves Christ, he is
accepted of God, and approved of Men.

This is worthy of consideration, that whereas our Savior has foretold his
Disciples, that they shall be hates of all men for his namesake: Yet here he
that serves Christ in these things, wherein his Kingdom chiefly consists, that
to his holiness joyneth righteousness and mercifulness, doing good to all, that
is, peaceable and free from censoriousness in his converse, and subject in
lawful things to his Superiors, he is not only acceptable to God, but
approved of men.

That enmity that is between the seed of the Woman and the seed of the Serpent,
is suspended by the exercise of those good works, which the Apostle tells us
are profitable unto men, Titus 3.8. I say by this we come to be approved of
men; even by all, but such as have not un-Man'd themselves by horrid debauchery
and beastly lusts.

Sect. 23. Be pleased to consider what the Apostle Peter says to this purpose,
1 Pet. 3.8. after that he had exhorted them to what I now exhort you, to be all
of one mind, etc. He gives this reason to urge it, If any man long after life
and would see good days, let him endeavor first to be good himself; and let
him show his goodness by eschewing evil, and doing good, by seeking peace and
following after it. And then says he, ver. 13. Who is he that will harm you if
you be followers of that which is good? as members of a politic body; who is
he then that will harm you? We that are peaceably-minded shall live quietly
amongst men, they will approve of us, and we by our good conversation shall put
to silence the ignorance of foolish men.

We shall not then fear Gods Deacon the Magistrate: Would thou not, says the
Apostle, be afraid of the power, do then that which is good, and thou shall
have praise of the same.

Sect. 24. Now because that to this it may be objected, That here lies the
ground of all our fears and scruples, that what the Magistrate commands by this
Act of Uniformity, is to put us upon the doing of that which is evil; we desire
to be followers of that which is good; but we cannot think to declare, that the
Solemn League and Covenant, that we have taken, to be unlawful and binds no
man, is good, but a sin.

And to declare our unfeigned assent and consent, to all and every thing
contained and prescribed in and by the Book of Common prayer, and to the manner
of making, ordaining and consecrating of Bishops, Priests and Deacons. This we
do very much fear is not good, but is a sin also; most of these things having
no warrant from Gods Word, but are additions to the same, forbidden Deuteronomy. 12.32.

Sect. 25. We fear also to subscribe the 39. Articles, as they refer to these
Books aforesaid for the very same reason.

And we fear that we being ordained by Bishops, we should receive an Ordination
from the limbs of Antichrist, and renounce the Ordination we receive from the
Presbyter; and therefore this alters the case very much. The Apostle Peter that
you quote, if you read a little further, says, notwichstanding all you have
alleged, that If we suffer for righteousness-sake, blessed are we.

Now to suffer rather then sin, is to suffer for righteousness-sake; and this
is our case.

Sect. 26. Now therefore that I may, according to what I have already declared
as my End in this my unusual undertaking, be instrumental in this hour of
temptation that is upon many pious and good men, whose books I am not worthy to
carry after them;

I shall proceed to the examining of these Objections, which, I suppose, are
the chief which may be made against obedience to the Act of Uniformity.

And because that I do believe by what I find granted by the Author of the Five
Disput. that many who may be satisfied as to the Common prayer, Reordination
and Cereminies, yet are much perplexed about what is required concerning the
Covenant.

I shall begin with that in the first place, and take into consideration what
the Act requires of all that are in Holy Orders, Schoolmasters and Tutors to
declare.

CHAP. VI.
That to declare against the binding power of the Covenant, according to the
Declaration appointed by the Act for Uniformity is lawful both by the Law of
God and of the Land. Wherein the judgment of reverend Mr. Perkins in six cases,
as to the not-binding power of an Oath, is applied to the case in hand.

Section 1.

THe words of the Declaration, as to the Solemn League and Covenant, run in
these words; I do declare, That I hold that there lies no obligation upon me,
or on any other person, from the Oath commonly called The Solemn League and
Covenant, to endeavor any change or alteration of Government either in Church
or State, and that the same was in it self an unlawful Oath, and imposed upon
the Subjects of this Realm against the known Laws and Liberties of this Kingdom.

That I may the more distinctly speak unto this great and weighty business, and
that the subject matter of this Declaration about the Covenant may be rightly
understood, and the doubts and scruples about the same may be the better
resolved;

I shall consider of these particular parts which are included in this general
Declaration.

First, I do declare, that I hold that there lies no obligation upon me, or
any other person, from the Oath commonly called the Solemn League and Covenant.

Secondly, what the Covenant binds not me or any other to do, viz. To
endeavor any alteration of Government either in Church or State.

Thirdly, that the same is in it self an unlawful Oath.

Fourthly, that it was imposed upon the Subjects of this Kingdom against the
known Laws and Liberties of this Realm.

Sect. 2 But before I begin to speak of these things, I hold my self under this
obligation to declare, That what my thoughts and apprehensions are upon this
subject which I now impart, have not been formed in me upon any account of
carnal fear or interest by the late occurrents of these times, but some years
before, when it was very much beyond my thoughts that ever either I or any
other should have been by the Authority of the King and both Houses be called
to a Declaration of this nature.

And I hope that I may appeal to the searcher of all hearts, that if I can but
be convinced by such clear and evident demonstrations, as I hope to offer to
the contrary, I shall bewail my error, and retract the same, and repent of it,
as being guilty of a great sin; for I am very sensible of what my blessed
master has taught me in his holy Word, that he that breaks the least of his
Commandments, and teaches men so to do, shall be called the least in the
Kingdom of Heaven.

Sect. 3 Hoping therefore that God has heard my prayer, and will deliver me
from falling into this evil; and that I may by this following Discourse convert
some from the error of his way, and so hide a multitude of sins, in the
integrity and sincerity of my heart I shall proceed as follows.

In the first place therefore I shall begin with what I propounded in the
second, as being the most principal, viz. What every person by the said Act is
to declare, that he holds no obligation to lie upon him, or any other person,
from the Oath commonly called The Solemn League and Covenant, viz. To endeavor
any change or alteration of Government either in Church or State.

So that the matter of the scruple lies but in a close compass, and a very
little room.

Sect. 4. Whether or no any person whatsoever, who has no lawful Authority
from Gods Law or the Lands, to change or alter the Government of Church or
State, or to impose an Oath upon any others so to do, be bound by this Solemn
League or Covenant, they have taken to endeavor any change or alteration in
the same?

Observe here by the way, that whatever we are obliged to by the Law of God and
of the Land, our Baptismal Vow and Covenant, the Oath of Allegiance and
Supremacy, we are not called upon to renounce, as is expressed in this
Declaration.

But that it binds not the Subjects of this Realm, on whom it was imposed
against the known Laws of the Land, to endeavor that for which, if I mistake
not, the Earl of Straffard and Archbishop of Canterbury were charged with High
Treason for: This was the first Article of the Charge against the Earl of
Strafford, and Mr. Pim in his speech in following the Charge has these
expressions toward the later end: says he, The 10. consideration in this,
That as it is a crime odious in the nature of it, viz. to endeavor the
alteration of the Government of the State; so it is odious in the judgment and
estimation of the Law, to alter the settled frame and constitution of the
Government is Treason in any State.

Sect. 5. So then by this argument of Mr. Pim, to swear to do that which is a
crime odious in it self, and in the estimation of the Law, Treason, viz. to
endeavor to alter the settled Frame and Constitution of Government, must needs
be an unlawful Oath, and therefore binds not any that have taken it. This
being the judgment of the Assembly of Divines and all others, that an unlawful
Oath binds not.

But it may be objected, that though it be true for any particular person to
alter the Fundamental Government of the Land in Church or State be unlawful:
But to be engaged to endeavor this in our own particular places and callings
by a lawful Authority, this makes that which was Treason in others to be a
duty incumbent on us by virtue of the Oath aforesaid.

Sect. 6. For answer to which I humbly conceive, though it be an evil thing
after Vows to make inquity; yet to prevent a greater evil, it is that which is
our great concern at this time, to do that which we should have done more
seriously before we entered into the said Covenant, make this inquiry; Whether
any persons whatsoever, who have no Authority from Gods Law or from the Law of
the Land to alter the Government of Church and State, though for so good an end
as public Reformation, are a lawful Authority to impose an Oath upon others,
for to endeavor to do that thing which is unlawful in it self. For if this
appear to be the case, I humbly conceive that we may lawfully make this
Declaration, That I hold my self or any other person bound by the Solemn League
and Covenant, to endeavor the change or alteration of Government both in
Church or State.

Sect. 7. In order to the clearing of this, let us first to the Law and to the
Testimony, even unto the sacred Word of God: For in the inquiry which I
propound we are all to make for the satisfying of our consciences. The rule I
propose, is first Gods Law, whether any persons whatsoever who have no
Authority from Gods Law to alter the Government of Church and State, though for
so good an end as public Reformation, are a lawful Authority to impose an Oath
upon others?

I beseech you Brethren, who do so much press for a command out of Gods word to
warrant what you do, to show me where there is any command of Christ, or any
approved example in the Holy Scriptures, for subjects without the consent of
their Prince and Soveraigre, to swear and make others to swear, that they will
endeavor an alteration of Government in Church or State, though for so good an
end as public Reformation.

Sect. 8. I must needs profess that I do not, or cannot upon my own search find
any precept or president for the same in the Old Testament.

In the New indeed I find general precepts for Christians to submit themselves
to Principalities and Powers, 1 Pet. 3.1. To yield obedience to every Ordinance
of man for the Lords sake, whether it be to the King as supreme, or
under-Governours that are sent by him, etc. 1 Pet. But nothing that may give
warrant for this practice, for subjects to bind themselves or others to
endeavor any alteration of those humane creations to which they are to submit
for the Lords sake: Neither by an Oath or Covenant to swear a public
reformation without or against the consent of their Kings and Governors.

And therefore which is observable, all Covenant-reformations from Joshuahs
time to Josiahs time, were regularly commanded by the good reforming Kings and
chief Rulers; but none by the Elders of the people against the cammand or
consent of their Sovereign.

The Covenant that all the people stood to, 2 King. 23.3. was made by the King.
And the King stood by the Pillar and made a Covenant before the Lord, and the
Oath at which all Judah rejoiced was not by them imposed upon the King, but the
reforming King, 2 Chronicles. 15.8, 9, 15. compared after that Asa had taken away
the abominations out of the Land of Judah and Benjamin, Verse 9. he gathered
all Judah together. This was the ground of the Assembly at Jerusalem in the
third year of the reign of Asa; they assembled not to make this Oath, at which
all Judah rejoiced, without the Kings Authority, by which he did gather them
together.

Sect. 9. If therefore there be no command or example in the Old Testament
approving this practice, the express commands of the New Testament forbidding
things of this nature and tendency; the scope of that place, 1 Pet. 3. being to
arm the Christian Churches against that vile Sect, who called themselves
Gnostics, as knowing more of the mysteries of the Gospel them others; who
taught amongst other things destructive to humane society, the Doctrine of
liberty and manumission to Christian subjects and servants, as by considering
of what follows to the 12. Verse may appear.

And thus now having from Gods Laws showed that there is no precept or
president for subjects, yea, for the Elders of the people to enter into a
Covenant for public reformation, without the consent or gathering together of
the King, and that therefore consequently they are no lawful Authority by the
Law of God to impose an Oath upon others.

Sect. 10. This being considered, I humbly conceive that we have nothing now
left to resolve our consciences in this case; but the known Law of the Laid,
and the Fundamental constitutions of its Government. And I should think this
very consideration should put such of the Ministry as are scrupulous to a
little pause, and make them to suspect their own judgments in this point all
this while.

The resolving of this case of conscience being so different from those, whose
subject matter are not so perplexed, intricate and doubtful, that without the
help of the Lawyer the Divine may prove but a blind guide, and when the blind
lead the blind, our Savior tells us, both will fall into the duch.

Sect. 11. I have somewhere read a very good direction, which if we had
followed at first might have prevented this inquiry now, concerning making Vows
and Covents, That no action which is matter of Question and Dispute, especially
of Religion, should be the matter of a Vow. And the instance that is given is
in a case somewhat like ours, which I desire may be laid to heart; Sie Novatus
Novitios suos compulit ad jurandum, ne unquam ad Catholicos Episcopos
redieriat. Eusebius. l. 2. Eccles. Histor.

For Novatus, the Author of the second great schism, as I find in Mr.
Brinsley's Arraignment of Schism, for him to compel his Novices, which he had
drawn into that sin with him, to enter into an Oath that they would never
return to the Catholic Bishops, never be ordained by them more, or submit to
their Jurisdiction; the matter of this Oath was unlawful in a very mild sense,
because doubtful.

Sect. 12. And if the modes of Worship and Discipline were not doubtful and
disputable amongst us, when this Covenant of endeavoring to alter the
Church Government was imposed, what was the reason that there were such
writings for and against the mode of Church Government, etc. almost ever since
the Reformation of the Church of England? Sutcliffe de Presbyt. edit. 1591.
Bilsons Perpetual Church Government, 1610. with those contests which were
betwixt Dr. Downam and the Diocesans Trial, much about the same time, with many
others, and continued to the sitting of the Parliament called by the King,
1640. So that doubtless these matters were very disputable, and to be made the
subject of an Oath we now find dangerous; as I find that judicious and learned
King of Divines, as Mr. Ford of Northampton styleth King Charles the First,
Prognosticating this Covenant would be very dangerous, because the ma ter
doubtful.

Sect. 13. There being therefore no remedy now, but to be more wise and careful
for the time to come, taking heed of being too dogmatical in what we hold as to
matters of modes of Worship and Discipline, because that other holy and good
men are of that mind. For likewise one of our opinion, as to the binding power
of the Covenant, let us not Juraere in verba magistri any more, neither lean
too much to our understanding, but consult with the Laws of God and of the
Land, especially in this case.

Sect. 14. The Act, you know, that requires that we should declare, that in
this particular the Solemn League and Covenant lays no tie or obligation
upon me or any other, to endeavor to change the Government of Church or State.

On the other side, many are of this opinion, that though it be the judgment of
the major part of the Judges that are learned in the Laws, of many great and
learned Divines, some that have written De Juramento, and therefore well know
the binding power of an Oath, and of the major part of the representative body
of the Kingdom; yet notwithstanding are persuaded the Covenant, that they have
taken, binds them to endeavor the alteration of the Government of Church or
State.

Sect. 15. In this case therefore, as I said before, the Laws of the Land are
to be consulted with; for there being no other judge in this case but the known
Laws of the Land, we must stand to their determination as to the satisfying the
conscience about the binding power of the Covenant.

For if by the Law of the Land it appears that the matter of the said
Covenant as to this particular be by the Law unlawful, and the Imposers thereof
without a power by Law invested in them; we may safely and with a good
conscience declare, That we hold that there lies no obligaaion upon me or any
other person from the same.

I do verily believe, that as to the Government of the State, the altering it
from a Monarchical to a Democratical Government could never be subscribed to by
the Engagement, even by such persons who do yet believe that the Covenant
binds them to endeavor to alter the Government of the Church.

Now be pleased to consider whether the reason be not the same; They would have
altered the Government of the State without Law, and others the Government of
the Church without Law.

And that you may be the better persuaded of this, give me leave to impart that
little smattering that I have of the Law, as I have learned from the Learned in
that Science.

Sect. 16. Concerning therefore the Laws of the Land you may please to observe
this in the general;

That the Law has three fulcimenta or grounds, and they are these: First,
Custom or Usage. Secondly, Judicial Records. Thirdly, Acts of Parliament.

Now Judicial Records and Acts of Parliament, they are but Declarations of the
common Law and customs of the Kingdom. Law is is not known but by usage and
custom, and usage proves the Law, 10 Eliz. Plowden 316.

Now if this be so, and it being evident that the Government in this Kingdom as
to Church and State, as now it is established, having been of so long
continuance, as the Histories of this Kingdom do tell us:

This custom and usage of Government so long exercised, makes it to be a
Fundamental Law. Plowdens Commentary 195.

Sect. 17. To alter therefore a Fundamental Law, as to the Government of Church
and State, can never be done lawfully, but by those persons whom Use and
custom, Judicial Records and Acts of Parliament have invested with Authority so
to do.

Now who these are the Law must tell us; not the two Houses alone, not the King
alone, but both together, make up the Body politic; that make Laws for the
Government of Church and State, Dier 38. fol. 59, 60. The King is the head of
the Parliament, the Lords the principal members of the body, the Commons the
inferior Members of the same, 1 Ed. 6. cap. 2. All Authority and Jurisdiction,
spiritual and temporal, is derived from the King. And every Member that sits in
Parliament takes a corporal Oath that the King is supreme over all persons;
the King therefore must needs be above the two Houses of Barliament, which is
evidenced further thus; That as the power of their Assembling is by virtue of
his Writ, so the time of their staying is determined by his Royal will and
pleasure, according to the usage and custom of the Land. The two Houses
therefore are not above the King; and there being no Law to be made without the
King and both Houses, neither alone, according to the Fundamental Laws and
Constitutions of the Land, can alter, or endeavor to alter, the Government
either of Church or State.

So that the altering of the Government, except by such persons who have
Authority by Law, is an unlawful act in it self, and the imposing of it upon
others by an Oath makes it still more unlawful, if the Imposers have not
Authority by the Law of the Land so to do.

Sect. 18. Now I beseech you consider but as to matter of fact, who did impose
this Covenant, and by the Law of the Land you will soon be resolved, whether
either the matter were lawful or the power lawful.

That the matter was unlawful thus appears, not only by what is already
alleged, but by what follows; That matter of an Oath is unlawful that is
contrary to the Law of the Land. The Government of the Church, as it now
stands, being in the general secured by Magna Charta, which great Charter is
confirmed by 32. Acts of Parliament, as I have read, the first Article whereof
runs thus, Salvae sint Episcopis omnes libertates suae.

Sect. 19. Now these general Laws of the great Charter of our Liberties, and
the Petition of Right, there being no particular Laws against what is there
contained, such, I say, as are not repealed by a lawful power; it is not the
first Article of the Covenant, as to the extirpation of that Church Government,
makes the great charter void as to that particular.

I am apt to think in this case, that an Oath imposed by persons, that by their
Oaths acknowledge the King supreme, and above them, that can make no Law
therefore without the King, and consequently can impose no lawful Oath by their
Authority; an Oath also as to the matter of it being unlawful, as you have
heard; cannot make void a known Law, or bind the conscience of the taker to
endeavor the same.

But these Laws being in force do relatively bind the conscience to observe
them, and to endeavor by any power, but those that made them, to change and
alter them, I humbly conceive, is above the sin of Disobedience; and to swear
to it makes the sin to be the greater.

Sect. 20. And therefore I am very much mistaken, if I or any other may not
without sin declare what the Act for Uniformity requires, That I hold there
lies no obligation upon me, or any other from the highest to the lowest, as
having no lawful power to endeavor to alter the Government either of Church or
State.

As to the obligation that lies on us by the covenant, to alter the government
of the State, I do not remember that there is any clause therein that gives
any ground for such thoughts; and therefore I shall pass that over.

But for the further evidencing of the lawfulness of declaring the non-obliging
power of the covenant according to the Act;

Sect. 21. I shall humbly offer further the judgment of the reverend Mr.
Perkins, who in his cases of conscience, and other where, does resolve this
doubt, concerning the obliging power of an Oath, both when it binds and when
it binds not, page 107. When an Oath binds not he resolves in six cases:
Some of them I shall produce, desiring that we may faithfully without prejudice
apply to our case in hand.

Sect. 22. First, an Oath binds not when it is against the Word of God, and
has a tendency to sin. I desire it may be considered whether this Oath in
question, being imposed by part of the two Houses, be not as contrary to the
Word as the Law of the Land, and being an Usurpation of the supreme Magistrates
office, as to public Reformation, has not a tendency to sin, whether it has
not a tendency to Injustice, taking away without Law the liberties of such as
are confirmed so often by Magna charta; whether also it does not tend to the
strengthening us in our disobedience, as to the commands of our Superiors about
Church Government, and to the maintenance of the sin of discord and division
about matters of this nature. I am apt to think that when an Oath pleaded for
produces these effects, it binds not; for an Oath, as Mr. Perkins says, is
not to be a bond of iniquity.

Sect. 23 Secondly, Mr. Perkins says an Oath binds not when it is made
against the wholesome Laws of the commonwealth, because, as he says, every
soul is to be subject to the higher powers, Romans 13.

Now whether to swear to change the Government either in Church or State be not
against the wholesome Laws of the commonwealth, I have showed at large by the
statute of the 25. of Edward 1. The great charter is declared to be the common
Law of the Land; and this, as I have said, secureth the liberties of the
Church. And if the Text that Mr. Perkins quoteth, Romans 13. Let every soul be
subject to the higher powers, does not condemn the practice of all inferiors
that shall impose a new Oath without a new Law, especially to alter the old and
ancient Government of Church and State, I am much mistaken and desire to be
better informed.

Sect. 24. Thirdly, he says further, if the Oath be made by those who are
under the Tuition of their superiors, and have no power to bind themselves,
then the Oath binds not. Now that the two Houses are under the Tuition of
their superior the King is very evident, 1 Eliz. in Cawdryes case part 5. fol.
5. Every Member of the House of Commons and of the Lords too, if I mistake not,
at every Parliament take their corporal Oaths, that the King is the supreme and
only governor in all cases and over all persons; and the said Statute of Eliz.
is but declarative of the ancient Laws. And in the first of Edward 6. all
Authority and Jurisdiction Spiritual and Temporal is derived from the King;
therefore all his subjects are under his Tuition and Jurisdiction.

Sect. 25. I desire this may be a little thought on; for if the Imposers of the
Covenant be as our Law teaches, and as their Oaths declare, under the Kings
Jurisdiction, and so have no power by Law to bind themselves by an Oath without
a new Law, and this Law cannot be made without the Kings consent; as Mr. Prin
does acknowledge in his sovereign power of Parliaments, page 46, 47. That the
Kings assent is necessary to make Laws and ratify, the King being the Head of
the Kingdom and of the Parliament.

And this Solemn League and Covenant being never enjoined by any such Law, but
by such who had no power to bind themselves.

I humbly conceive that we may safely without sin declare, that it binds not
me or any other; for that which inse, in it self has no binding power, binds
not any person whatsoever.

Sect. 26. Especially considering what Mr. Perkins says surther, That an Oath
binds not, page 527. of Conscience, when persons are not Sui Juris, but are
under the power of another, proving it out of Number 30.3. If a Woman vow unto
the Lord, and bind her self by a bond, being in her Fathers house, etc. verse
5. If her Father disalloweth her the same day that he hears all her vows and
bonds they shall be of no value, and the Lord will forgive her: The case is
also the same when a Wife voneth, ver. 7, 9.

Now I humbly conceive this was the case as to the Covenant, when it was
Imposed by part of the two Houses, the Father of our Country so far disallowed
the same, that in the day that he heard thereof, he Issued out his Proclamation
against it from Oxford, and in his (...), after his discourse upon the
Covenant, in which are so many passages, which laid together must needs
conclude that he in no wise consented to it.

Sect. 27. That you may observe the deep sense that he had of his subjects
sinning against God by taking it, after that he had, I say, given his Judgment
in the general of it; that he reckoned it to be the pawning of his peoples
souls to his subjects of Scotland, he does conclude with this prayer for us; To
thee, O Lord, do I address my prayer, beseeching thee to pardon the rashness of
my subjects swearing, and to quicken their sense and observation of those Just,
Moral and Indispensable bonds which thy word and the Law of the Kingdom has
laid upon their consciences, etc. make them at length to consider, that nothing
violent and injurious can be religious.

Sect. 28. There is a fifth case, page 525. and that is this, an Oath binds
not if it be made of a thing that is out of our power. As if a man swear to his
friend to give him another man's goods; this I conceive may be applied to the
case in hand; to alter the Government of Church or State is not in our power,
neither by the Law of God or the Land, we cannot do it without very great
injury to others, as you have learned, and therefore to endeavor after it is a
sin.

Sect. 29. And sixthly says he, If at first it were lawful, and after by some
means becomes either impossible or unlawful; for when it becomes impossible,
then we must safely think that God from Heaven freeth a man from his Oath,
which I think also is considerable in this case.

And, says he, when it does begin to be unlawful, then it cease to bind;
because the binding virtue is only from the Word of God, which binds not to
any thing forbidden in the holy Scripture, or that is unlawful either from the
Word of God or the Law of the Land.

I beseech you consider, that if when an Oath whose institution by God is to be
the end of all strife, shall have a natural tendency to the maintaining of
strife, division and contention, to be the occasion of wars and commotions in
the Land of our Nativity, to administer matter and occasion of jealousy in our
Superiors, that while we judge our selves bound in conscience by an Oath, that
we have taken to endeavor to alter and change the Government whether he will
or no, there can be no safety.

Sect. 30. Consider, I pray, whether in this case an Oath, which we have
apprended lawful at one time, may not now begin to grow unlawful; because that
the word does forbid resistance of the powers that are over us, and does
require obedience of us for conscience sake; the contrary whereunto we do exert
in our endeavors to change the Government, though we should never be able to
effect the same.

Sect. 31. And therefore upon all these considerations, which I now offer to
all peaceable spirits, to you especially which should be the Ambassadors of
Peace, and should with John the Baptist be Instrument by your Ministry to turn
the hearts of children toward their Parents; Let what I have offered as the
judgment of that Orthodox and Reverend Mr. Perkins, who being dead, and so
above all interest, yet speaks, that as to the not binding power of an Oath,
which I hope may prevail with you to declare, That you hold that there lies no
obligation upon you or any other person, from the Oath commonly called the
Solemn League and Covenant, to endeavor any change or alteration of the
Government of Church or State; especially considering that, if I be not in a
very great error, I have made it appear by the Law of God and of the Land,
that it is an unlawful oath, and that it was imposed upon the Subjects of this
Realm against the known Laws and Liberties of the Kingdom: Both which are to be
declared also, and doubtless may very well be without sin.

Sect. 32. There is also another thing particularly to be declared against,
required by the said Act, which I do hold needful to speak a word unto; though,
I hope, but very little, if not at all scrupled by Presbyterian Ministers or
People; and that is to declare, That it is not lawful upon any pretense
whatsoever to take up Arms against the King; and that I do abhor that
traiterous Position, of taking Arms by his Authority against his Person, or
against those that are commissionated by him. But of this in the next Chapter
briefly.

CHAP. VII.
That to declare, That it is not lawful upon any pretense whatsoever to take up
Arms against the King; and that we do abhor that traiterous Position, of taking
Arms by his Authority against his Person, etc. is very warrantable by the Law
of God and of the Land.

Section 1.

THat this Declaration may be cheerfully made by all His Majesty's subjects,
and especially the most zealous haters of Rome and Popery, and also may be
lawfully made without sin, one would think there were no need to speak a word
in that behalf.

But considering how much the Reformed Protestant Religion has been
dishonored, how much the. Bilson, the differences between Christian Subjection
and Unchristian Rebellion, Edit. 1536. lib. 3. page 92.
Jesuits Doctrine of the lawfulness of the Subjects taking up arms against
their Prince, has of late years been too much justified.

I shall write a little more then I intended, referring the Reader to more of
this subject in Bilsons Answer to this Jesuitical doctrine. Bilsons subjection
lib. 3. page 97. and so on.

Sect. 2. That this therefore may lawfully be declared, that it is not lawful
upon any pretense whatsoever to take arms against the King, etc. I argue thus:

That which is unlawful by Gods Law and of the Land for me to do, I may without
sin declare to be unlawful.

But for subjects upon any pretense whatsoever to take arms against the King is
unlawful; and therefore I may declare according to the Act.

Now that for subjects upon any pretense to take arms against the King is
unlawful, Romans 13.1. may serve for a Scripture Proof instead of many; Let every
soul be subject to the Higher powers, for there is no power but of God, and the
powers that be are ordained of God, ver. 2. Whosoever therefore resists the
power, resists the Ordinance of God, and they that resist, shall receive to
themselves damnation.

It is you see a most dangerous sin to offend this Gospelprecept by our
disobedience, which commands and requires subjection of every soul. No persons
of what order or degree soever, whether Ecclesiastical or Civil, but are to be
subject to the Higher powers thereof; him, as the Apostle Peter does
acknowledge to be the supreme, the King whom the Laws of the Land does invest
with Supremacy of Jurisdiction in all Cases, and over all persons in his own
Dominions.

Sect. 3. But to resist the power, this is to resist the Ordinance of God; and
therefore the punishment is expressed to be so dreadful to deter us from it.
For they that resist shall receive to themselves damnation, instead of getting
dominion over others, they shall receive damnation to themselves.

Whoever therefore takes up Arms upon any pretense whatsoever, be the cause
never so good, against the supreme and higher powers, must have his commission
for it out of Gods Word, otherwise you see it is a very great sin: How contrary
it is to Gods Law you may read more in Bilsons Christian Subjection. I having I
hope said enough to persuade to the lawfulness of making this Declaration, from
the unlawfulness of taking up Arms against the King upon any pretense
whatsoever, it being so expressly forbidden to resist, Romans 13.2. now he that
takes up Arms against his King resists him.

Sect. 4. But further, I may declare it is not lawful upon any pretense to take
up Arms against the King, because the Law of the Land forbids it, and makes it
to be high Treason so to do; Mr. St. John's speech page 6. the words of the
Statute are 25 Edward 3. If any man do levy War against our Lord the King in
his Realm, this is declared to be Treason.

And so also is the arising to alter the Religion by Law est ablished, 4 of
Philip and Mary, not repealed if I mistake not.

These being the known Laws of the Land, such Ordinances of men to which we are
to yield obedience for conscience sake, and for the Lords sake.

Therefore to declare that it is not lawful to take Arms against the King is
warranted, and may be done with a safe conscience.

Sect. 5. And that we may lawfully declare that I do abhor that traiterous
position of taking Arms by his Authority against his person, or against those
that are commissioned by him; this is agreeable to Gods word also. The
Scriptures, which command us to honor the King, 1 Pet. 3. mean his Person as
well as his Authority; it is so doubtless in reference to our natural Parents
whom we are commanded to honor, Command. 5. that we honor their Persons as
well as their Authority, and therefore why not to our political Parents?

Further, if I am to obey those which are commissioned by the King as Supreme;
That is, those that are sent by him; if this be our duty, 1 Pet. 3. Then to
take up Arms against those that are commissioned by him is sinful and
unlawful.

Sect. 6. To affirm therefore that the Kings Authority is separable from his
person, and that I may take up Arms by his Authority against his Person. It is
High Treason by the Law of the Land, and therefore may well be declared to be a
traiterous position. Sir Edward Coke in the 7. part of his Reports in Calvin's
Case says thus, fol. 11. In the reign of Edward the second, the Spencers the
Father and the Son to cover the Treason hatched in their hearts, invented this
damnable opinion: That Homage or Oaths of Allegiance was more by reason of the
Kings Crown or Authority then by reason of the person of the King: upon which
opinion they inferred these execrable and detestable consequences.

First, if the King do not deem in him by reason in the right of the Crown, his
Lieges are bound by Oath to remove him.

Secondly, seeing the King could not be removed by suit of Law, that ought to
be done per Aspertee, that is, by force.

Thirdly, that his Lieges be bound to govern in aid of him and default of him.

All which were condemned by two Parliaments, one in the Reign of Edward the
second called Exilium Hugonis le opencer, the other by the first of Edward the
third chap. 2. all which Articles against the Spencers are confirmed by this
last Statute: the Article; as I have read are extant in the Book called Veter a
Statuta.

Sect. 7. Now if these things be so, what manner of persons ought we to be as
to our humiliation for what is past, as to our obedience and subjection to the
known Laws of the Land for the time to come, and as to our satisfaction in the
present case, concerning the not binding power of the Covenant, and the
lawfulness of declaring against the taking up of Arms against the King?

And thus now having turned my heart inside outward, and showed you what does
satisfy my conscience, and may any other, I suppose as to the lawfulness of
declaring that I do hold there lies no obligation upon me or any other person
from the Oath or covenant, to endeavor the alteration or change of Government;
and how the same is in it self an unlawful Oath, and imposed upon the subjects
of this Realm against the known Laws and liberties of this Kingdom.

Sect. 8. I humbly conceive the counsel that was given by the Assembly of
Divines in their exhortation to the taking of the Covenant, is absolutely
necessary to be followed; which if I mistake not is this, That if an Oath
should be found, into which any Ministers or others have entered, not warranted
by the Law of God and of the Land, in this case they must teach themselves and
others, that such Oaths call for repentance, not pertinacy in them.

I beseech you therefore, if there be any consolation in Christ, if any comfort
of love, if there be in you any compassion and mercy either to your own souls,
bodies, estates with their peace and prosperity; or likewise to all these great
concerns of others which now lie at hazard by your means, think of these things
which I have laid before you.

Sect. 9. You especially, who do more peradventure scruple the declaring
against the binding power of the Covenant, then many called Independents did
long ago, calling it an Almanac out of date, or the Scotch Hook.

Be pleased to take these things into your calm and Christian consideration,
you more especially who have not corrupted your consciences by the purchase and
possessing your selves of any of the Kings lands, in Law called Patrimonium
sacrum lex terrae, page 5. or the Revenues of the Church which is sacrilege so
to do. Oh take heed that you drive not on the designs of those that we may
suspect would fain involve us again in blood, that they might lick up again
those morsels that they have been forced to disgorge.

Sect. 10. And let the great concerns of your liberty, and opportunity for the
exercise of your Ministry for the good of souls, the great doubtfulness at
least of what you scruple, as to the bincing power of the covenant to alter or
endeavor a change in the Government of Church or State. The assurance that you
have to the contrary by the Body politic in this present Act of Parliament,
prevail with you to incline to what I have here offered to you upon this
argument, I have prefaced so much of the integrity of my heart, and the
sincerity of my intentions i^ this Discourse, that I shall now leave it to your
consideration.

Sect. 11. And because that I am apt to believe that there are some amongst us,
that do scruple obedience to the use of an imposed form of prayer, should this
scruple of the Covenant be removed; this being greatly argued against by the
Author of the Temperate Discourse about Liturgies and forms of prayer, etc. And
also that there are others, that though they should yield to the use of a Form,
yet not the Liturgy of the Church of England, being assumed by the Authors of
Plus ultra to be Tantum non the Mass Book; by Discourse of Liturgies not to be
used, having been offered up to an Idol, etc.

The Act of Uniformity requiting every Minister, page 77. to declare, That they
will conform to the Liturgy of the Clurch of England as it is now by Law
established.

Sect. 12. I shall through Gods assistance proceed, by answering what is
objected by these two aforesaid Authors, make evident the lawfulness of
Conforming to the Liturgy of the Church of England, as it is now established by
Law; beginning first more generally with what is said by the Author of the
Discourse of Liturgies; a book which I have heard too much commended by some I
much honor.

And then particularly by removing what is said by Plus ultra against the
public Liturgy, as taken out of the Mass Book, etc.

CHAP. VIII.
That Uniformity in public Worship, by obedience to an Imposed Form, is lawful.

Section 1.

COncerning Uniformity in public Worship I have given a little touch before,
speaking to the term; and as to its lawfulness the instance before given of
the bonesit thereof, Christ having made so gracious a promise to those that do
agree together in prayer, that do symphonise therein, according to the Greek
phrase, Mat. 18.19. (...). Again I say unto you, that if two of you shall agree
on earth as touching any thing that they shall ask, it shall be done for them
of my Father which is in heaven. I say, it is very much evidenced thereby; for
our Savior in the very infancy of the Christian Church would never have given
encouragement to such an harmony and agreement in his service, by making so
great a promise to his little congregation as there he did, if it had not been
lawful.

Sect. 2. And admit there should be no other Text in all the New Testament in
express terms to prove it, yet if it be in any general Text commanded or
approved of, and it appear to be the constant practice of the Church under the
Old Testament administration; then doubtless it must be of Divine Institution,
the Church of God being stll the same. Therefore Uniformity or an universal
agreement in public Worship is lawful to be conformed unto where it is
commanded.

Sect. 3. I find in the Church of God, that in Ezra his time there was an
Uniformity in public Worship, Ezra 3.10, 11. and that after the Ordinance of
David King of Israel, 1 Chronicles. 16.7, 8. They sung together by course; there was
a symphony, an agreement and harmony in their Worship. And this was done
according to an Act of Uniformity set forth by King David very long ago; forin
1 Chronicles. 16.4. David he appointed certain of the Levites to minister before the
Ark of the Lord, and to rehearse, and to thank and praise the Lord God of
Israel, with Instruments of Music: and verse 7. then at that time David did
appoint to give thanks unto the Lord by the hand of Asaph and his brethren,
which were Choristers, and Asaph the chief Singer amongst them, as you may find
in the Title to some Psams of David: and in ver. 36. by David's appointment the
people were to be uniform also: when the Priest had said, Blessed be the Lord
God of Israel for ever and ever; then were all the people to say, So be it, or
Amen, and Praise the Lord.

Behold here Uniformity commanded or appointed by David, practiced by the
Church according to his Ordinance in the time of Ezra.

Sect. 4. In David's practice in this place we may observe, that Kings may
command about the modes of Worship and Discipline, to sing joyfully unto the
Lord, and to glorify him by offering of him praise; this has God commanded.
But as Mr. Baxter says, Five Disput. page 406. Whether we shall use the Meeter
or any mellodious tune to help us or not; use a Musical Instrument, or the help
of more arisicial singers or choristers; these are left to our reason to
determine of by general rules, which Nature and Scripture have laid down. Now
the Scripture lays down, that this mode of praising God by Instruments of
Music, and the help of more artificial singers and choristers, may be lawfully
appointed by the King, as we find in David's practice, who appointed the Levites
with Music; which is the first time that I read of Music in Gods public
Worship enjoined, except in the Chapter before quoted.

Sect. 5. The like also may be said of the time and place for Gods Worship;
though, as is said in Five Disput these are left to humane determination, and
accordingly by King David they were determined and appointed; Asaph and his
brethren were to do this every day, ver. 37. the times in this day were Morning
and Evening, ver. 40. and the place where was also determined by him, ver. 37.
then he left them before the Arc of the Lords covenant.

And though none of all these circumstances in Gods Worship are particularly
commanded by God, yet to show how he approved of such things as no sinful
additions to the same: I find that at the Reformation of Religion by the good
King Hezekiab, where he also did command the Lovate to worship according to the
Ordinance of David. In the 25. Verse of the said Chapter it is said, that
Hezekiah appointed the Levites in the house of the Lord, with Cymbals and with
Harpes, to praise the Lord according to the commandment of David and of Gad
the Kings Seir: It is said for the commandment was by the hand of the Lord and
by the hand of his Prophets; so that what was appointed by the commandment of
David is said to be done by the commandment of the Lord, he approving of the
same.

Sect. 6. For as I do not find God any where commanding any of these
circumstances of Music, Time and Place, etc. So the Spirit of God would not I
humbly conceive have attributed so precisely the Uniformity of the Church in
Ezra's time, to be according to the Ordinance of David, if he had not been the
first appointer thereof, and his appointment by Divine approbation, as you have
heard, and generally submitted unto and observed in the Church of the Jews; for
in Solomon's time the same mode of public Worship was observed with so very
great Uniformity, that 2 Chronicles. 5.13. in their singing of praise they were but
one, and made but one sound.

And as they were Uniform in their singing, so the Burden of the song was one
and the same form: That which was in David's time, 1 Chronicles. 16.34. was in
Solomon's time, 2 Chronicles. 5.13. was in Hezekiahs time, 2 Chronicles. 29.30. and in
Ezra's time 3.11. Even in the same words, He is good, for his mercy endures
for ever.

This might be taken for a short shred of a Doxology, as Gloria Patri, etc. in
the Common prayer, are by some I have read, but I am apt to think the shortness
of that and other of our public prayers are justified by the brevity of this
Doxology and their Uniformity therein.

Sect. 7. That these and more then I have named tending to Uniformity, were not
determined by God in the Jewish Church. I find the Reverend Mr. John Ball in
his answer to Mr. John Can, bearing witness; whose distinguishing of
substantials and circumstantials in Gods Worship, I desire may be well observed
by those when have only a confused knowledge in this point concerning the
sinfulness of addition to Gods Worship, as you may find them in the first part
of the said Treatise, page 45, 46, 47, 48.

To which purpose you shall find that amongst the Jews, who were commanded to
make no addition to Gods Worship, and to do all things according to the pattern
of the Mount; yet the said Mr. Ball does affirm page 47. That though their
Synagogues, their Oratories and places of Worship throughout the Land of
Canaan, the hours in Morning and Evening sacrifice, their course in reading of
the Law, together with their sections of the same, were not of Gods
appointment: Yet all these things which tend to an universal agreement in the
public Worship of God, are by Mr. Ball acknowledged to be of men, and no
sinful additions, though no where commanded.

Sect. 8. The like may be said, says Mr. Ball page 47. of the divisions of the
Chapters and Verses in our Bi-Bles. The phrase of speech and method used in
Prayer, Preaching, Administering of the Sacraments, and the very words of
Translation wherein the Scriptures are read, and cannot be one and the same in
all Societies, and so are circumstances, how often, at what hour, on what day, in
what place, the Pastor shall Preach, which are particular determinations of the
Church, and so variable: This is when the Church sees it necessary.

But to be more clear and satisfying as to what I have propounded to speak to,
as to the lawfulness of Uniformity by a form of prayer, etc.

I shall offer further a very substantial argument that I find in the Five
Disput. 359. Proving a stinted Liturgy is in it self lawful, this says he is
thus proved.

Sect. 9. Argument 1. That which is not directly or consequently forbidden by
God remains lawful; a stinted Liturgy is not directly or consequentially
forbidden by God, therefore it remains lawful.

The major is undoubted because nothing but a prohibition can make a thing
unlawful, page 359. Now the minor, that a stinted Liturgy is not forbidden, we
need no other proof then that no prohibition can be produced, Five Disput. page
361.

If it be prohibited, it is either by some especial prohibition, or by the
general prohibition of not adding. But it is by neither of these, therefore
not at all. Special prohibition I never yet saw any produced, God has no where
forbidden a form of prayer, and the general prohibition of not adding extends
not to it. For, first, it is the Worship of God which is the matter we are
there forbidden to add; but the praying with a form or without a form as such,
are neither any part of the Worship of God, etc. Secondly, if prayer with a
form be an addition to Gods Worship, then so is praying without a form, for God
only commands prayer; but neither commands a form, or that we forbeat a form.
Thirdly, undetermined mutable modes and circumstances are none of the
prohibited additions, but left to humane determination.

Sect. 10. Beloved, this argument is, as I said before, a very good one to
prove the lawfulness of a set or stinted form of prayer; and I desire heartily
that the Author of the sober and temperate discourse against Liturgies and a
form of prayer, as well as against the Imposition thereof; and so all such who
are affected with his arguments, as it hinders the intention of our souls, and
of the fervency of our spirits in prayer, would consider of this arguments of
Mr. Baxters before said, and also of his second argument, page 367. of his
third also, and of his fourth, which is, that Christ has left his approbation
of such forms by his own owning and citing them, by his thrice repeating the
same words in his prayer, which if it had been any hinderance of the fervency
of our spirits in prayer, or limiting that spirit of grace or supplication
which was in him above measure, he would not in his Agony have used the same
words in his own prayer three times, as the Evangelists do record.

Sect. 11. But, as I said before, besides the usefulness of the first argument,
to prove a stinted form of prayer lawful;

I shall crave leave to offer the same argument for to prove obedience to an
imposed form of prayer, with an Uniformity in rites and ceremonies to be lawful
also.

That which is not directly or consequentially forbidden by God remains
lawful; Obedience or Conformity to the use of a Form of Prayer, with certain
rites and ceremonies tending to decency and order, are not directly or
consequentially forbidden by God.

The minor that proves, that a stinted Liturgy is not forbidden, proves also
that obedience to a stinted Liturgy or form of public or common prayers is not
forbidden; and therefore obedience when imposed or required is lawful.

Besides which aforesaid argument, which does well agree with Mr. Balls in
answet to Mr. Cans, as you shall read hereafter; I desire you to consider
whether that Mr. Baxters second proposition upon this head does not hugely
corroborate what I propound to speak principally to in this case, That
obedience to an imposed form of public prayer is lawful, viz. page 365. That a
stinted Liturgy in some parts of public holy service is ordinarily necessary:
that is, excepting some unusual cases.

Sect. 12. The parts of Worship where a set form is necessary are, 1. Reading
of the Word. 2. Singing of Psalms. 3. Baptism. 4. The use of a form of
Consecration and Administration of the Lords Supper. 5. The blessing people in
the name of the Lord. 6. Ordinarily there should be somewhat of a form of
Confession of Faith. 7. If there be not a frequent use of many of the same
words, and so somewhat of a form in Marriage, Confirmation, Absolution,
Excommunication, the danger will be more then the benefit by mutation will be.
8. And with some Ministers even in prayer, a form, especially about the
Sacraments, the ordinary use of a form may be the best and fittest way.

Now if in all these parts which I have extracted, First, the nature of the
thing sufficiently proves the ordinary fitness of a form: Secondly, the
constant practice of almost all Churches, if not all, is for it, etc. that in
these parts of Worship there should be a form commanded: Then obedience to a
form of prayer, and other Rites, etc. by the Text also quoted by Mr. Baxter,
page 367. is lawful.

Sect. 13. Now to what I have said proving the lawfulness of obedience to a
form of prayer, and other Rites and Ceremonies not forbidden:

I desire it may be considered, that whether the third proposition in Five
Disput. page 367. may not be serviceable to the end I propose? That a form of
prayer at some times may not only be submitted to, but be desired, when the
peace of the Church does accidentally require it.

Concerning which I shall only say, that what I find there is very true, in
the same page. He is far from the temper of a Christian that sets sought by the
peace of the the Church, that he would not use a lawful means for the procuring
of it; when Paul would become all things to all men to save some, and would eat
no flesh while he lived, rather then offend his weak brother.

Sect. 14. Doubtless if S. Paul, who while he was at his own liberty, was so
wary of offending his weak brother, that he would eat no flesh while he lived
rather then do so; he would if under the command of his superiors for the
peace of the Church been uniform in Gods public Worship; for he was very much
for order and for peace also.

And surely whoever is of the temper of a truly self-denying humble Christian,
though of never such elevated parts and gifts, will for the peace of the Church
conform to the use of that which is not only lawful in it self, but the peace
of the Church does accidentally require it. And how much obedience to the Act
of Uniformity is the way to unity and peace I have showed, even of that peace
which tends, as is said page 368. Five Disput. to the promoting of holiness,
to the saving of men's souls. the furthering of the Gospel, and prosperity of
the Church in spiritual respects. And as it is there said, that a peace that
undermineth and betrayeth these is not desirable.

So that non-obedience that does betray and undermine the furthering of the
Gospel, the promoting of holiness, the saving of men's souls, and prosperity of
the Church, is dangerous and undesireable.

Now that the suffering of the Deprivation from the Ministry of the Gospel has
its direct tendency that way, I leave to the judgment of every unbiassed and
unprejudiced person.

Sect. 15. I might be large in the proof of this point of Uniformity by the
judgment of M. John Ball, who was not only very much for a form of prayer, and
obedience to it, and for obedience to the Liturgy of the Church of Engl. as you
shall hear hereafter; but did very much charge the Brethren of the separation
with disaffection to all set forms of prayers or Liturgies whatsoever, part 2.
fol. 8. accounting of all set forms of prayer as humane inventions, as false,
devised, idolatrous, Antichristian Worship, forbidden in the second Commandment.

But I shall pass them all by, and confirm the lawfulness of obedience to
things of this nature which have no command in Gods Word, as to circumstantials
in Worship, by the example of our blessed Savior who never sinned.

Which I choose to do the rather, because that I have heard some say that they
could conform if it could be proved that Christ did ever conform.

Sect. 16. Now that Christ did conform to the orders of the Jewish Church, not
only in observing some of their Feasts which only were of humane
determination, as the Feast of Dedication, not commanded by God, but also by
frequenting their Synagogues, and observing their modes of Worship.

In Luke 6.16. I read that our Savior went into the synagogue on the Sabbath
day, as his custom was, in which place he conformed to the Ruler of the
synagogue; an Officer no where commanded that we read of in the Scripture;
there he stayed till the Minister delivered him the Book of the Prophet Isaiah,
which probably was to be read that day by the appointment of the Church; and
when he had read that Section he closed the Book and gave it to the Minister.
And whereas he stood reading according to their mode, he then sat down and
taught them by opening and applying what he had read unto them, saying, This
day is the Scripture fulfilled in your ears.

Sect. 17. Now that sitting was their custom while they taught the people,
appears to me, if I mistake not, by what our Savior alludeth to, saying,
They sit in Moses Chair, hear them.

Now our Savior conforming to these things and many more, which might be
observed by his practice, which were no where commanded, and he being one that
never sinned at any time, though wickedly charged by the Scribes and Pharisees
for the largeness of his principles and practice, contrary to their narrow
spirits.

It is very evident that to conform to a form of pray: and other modes of
Worship, not forbidden by God in his Word, is lawful and warrantable.

Sect. 18. Now because it may be objected that whatever Christ did, yet in the
Acts of the Apostles or their Epistles we do not find any forms of prayer, etc.
imposed by them upon any of the Elders of the Church in their days; which
indeed is the objection of the Brownists, page 17. And also of the Temperate
Discourse, page 147.

I shall give the answer of Mr. John Ball to it, page 17. which is very
considerable, says he page 17. But a set Liturgy might be in use in their
times, though we read not of it, for the Apostles set not down a Catalogue of
all and every particular Order that was in the Church, but give us a perfect
rule and Canon of faith, etc. And if there were no set Liturgy in their days,
yet for order a set form of prayer to be used in public is lawful, because it
is in the number of things which God has not determined in his Word; and where
God has not prescribed any form, there no form must be esteemed any part of
Gods Worship, or condemned as simply unlawful. Observe his reason, I pray you,
for as to call that holy which God has not sanctified is Superstition; so it
is erroneous to condemn that as unholy or profane which God allows, or is
consonant to his Word.

Sect. 19. I beseech you consider of this, for if this reason were well
weighed, and the answer that he gives to Mr. Cans argument, that no Worship is
lawful, but what Gods Word commands, were but well digested and received into
our souls, it would give us soon to see the insufficiency of that position that
is laid down by the Authors of Plus ultra, page 28. That any action especially
conversant about the Worship of God not undertaken in faith is sin, and faith
has no ground to stand upon but Divine Authority. And also of this Argument
against Liturgies by the Temperate Discourse, and also how contrary Mr. Baxters
argument for the lawful use of set forms, being not forbidden by Deuteronomy. 12.32.
Five Disput. page 361. is to what is affirmed, Petition for peace, page 14. The
strict prohibition of adding to or diminishing from the things commanded by the
Lawgiver of the Church, Deuteronomy. 12.32. puts such a fear into the minds of
multitudes of Christ's loyal subjects, lest by such additions or diminutions in
the manner of his worship they should provoke him to displeasure, as will be a
certain and perpetual hinderance to any common unity and concord in such
humane Impositions, of which many of the servants of the jealous God will have
a continual jealousy.

Oh Sirs, if what I now offer to your view from the Scriptures, the example of
our Savior, the judgment of Mr. Ball and Mr. Baxter, were but well received
into your understandings, doubtless these fears and jealousies would soon
vanish, these hindrances to unity and concord would not be perpetual, but
would soon vanish and disappear.

Sect. 20. I am apt to think that if Ministers would but faithfully
distinguish, as Mr. Ball does, and not be guilty of that which he charge Mr.
Can with, in a matter of so much weight, confound things that differ, allege
Scriptures to little purpose.

Multitudes of Christ's loyal subjects would be delivered from their needless
fears, and be preserved, if I mistake not, from needless sufferings.

I am sure the learned and judicious Calvin, though he did not fully approve of
the Liturgy of the Church of England, writing to the Brethren at Frankfort
about it, as having in it many Tolerabiles ineptiae, which might in charity, I
suppose, be translated Tolerable unfitnesses, which yet I leave to the learned;
yet he did not see so far into the work of Reformation as did some in our days
that petition for peace, that would have either form of prayer left to the
Ministers choice; but as I have before quoted, would have a Form of prayer
imposed: Says he in his Epistle to the Duke of Somerset, Lord Protector in the
minority of King Edward the Sixth; Quod ad formam precum and rituum
Ecclesiasticorum, valde probo, ut certa illa extet, a qua pastoribus discedere
in fanctione sua non liceat; jam ut consulatur quorundam simplicitati and
imperitiae, quam ut certius ita constet omnium inter se Ecclesiarum consensus;
postremo etiam ut obviam eatur desultoriae quorundam levitati, qui novationes
quasdam affectant. Calvin. Epist. ad Protector. Angl. As touching the Form of
prayers and Rites of the Church, I approve very much that it be set. Observe by
the way that he was for a set form; he did not look upon it as a limiting or an
appearance of quenching the Spirit, to use a set form, but would have it
imposed also; so that, says he, It may not be lawful for the Ministers to
depart or vary from the same. The reasons why this holy man would have a Form
of prayer imposed, I have Englished before, page 19. to which I refer you.

And he also was careful in distinguishing about matters of this nature,
Institut. lib. 4. cap. 10. sect. 30. he distinguishes in matters merely
ceremonial and circumstantial in the Worship of God, and gives these reasons
why Christ did not prescribe particularly concerning externals of Discipline
and Worship; that is to say, why these things are not determined by Christ the
Lawgiver of his Church, and therefore may be determined by Authority: First,
because that Christ foresaw these things to depend upon the occasions and
opportunities of time, and how unlike it was for one form to accord with all
Ages: And therefore, says he, Hereupon we must have recourse unto the general
rule, whatsoever the necessities of the Church shall require unto order and
decency. Finally, he delivered nothing expressly, because that those things are
not of necessity to salvation.

Sect. 21. It is worth the observing what he says, that externals about
Discipline and Ceremonies, they are not of necessity to salvation.

Let it suffice therefore, that our sharp discords and contentions, as Mr.
Baxter says, about matters of mode in Discipline and Worship, be no longer
cherisht; and above all not so vigorously pursued as to lose the liberties of
your Ministry in this quarrel: and if the reasons of Mr. Calvin aforesaid be
well considered, I should think might prevail that way. Christ, he delivered
nothing expressly for or against the external circumstantial modes of Worship
and Discipline, because that these things are not of necessity to salvation.
And will any of you conclude them of such necessity to salvation, as that you
will rather expose the salvation of the souls of many of Christ's loyal subjects
to danger through the deprivation of your Ministry, then yield obedience to
such cammands of your Superiors as are not countermanded by Christ?

Surely, if this be not an appearance of a very great sin, to make our selves
more wise and more holy then Christ the Lawgiver of his Church: If this be
not, as Mr. Ball says in this case, to condemn for unholy or profane that
which Gods Word allows, and is consonant to his word, though it be not
precisely commanded, and consequently superstition and Will Worship. Hear
further what Mr. Ball says, page 46. part. 2.

Sect. 22. To place Necessity, Holiness and Worship in these circumstantial
things, when they be not determined or commanded by God, this is Will Worship
and superstition.

This I humbly conceive is affirmative superstition, but when Uniformity in
Worship shall be commanded, not as having an intrinsecal holiness therein, as
necessary to salvation in it self as a substantial of Gods Worship, but as Mr.
Calvin says only for order and decency; that is, for Uniformity for a general
agreement in Gods public Worship and Service, and that men may know by what
rule they are to be guided as to the externals of Worship, which are the very
reason given in this very Act of Parliament, page 71. then till I am better
informed that superstition lies in not conforming. For if I mistake not there
is a negative superstition and Will Worship lying in touch not, taste not,
handle not, pray not in this or that form, observe not this or that rite, for
this is sin. I say so too, if you show me where forbidden, but Mr. Baxters Five
Disput. has sufficiently proved a stinted form lawful, as being no where
forbidden, to which I again refer you.

Sect. 23. I have been the larger upon this, because that I humbly conceive
that if Christians did but see their liberty and know but their duty, how would
all those black chains by which we lie bound under, perplexing unnecessary
scruples and soul- sadning fears fall off from us? How would we then serve the
Lord with one shoulder, disappoint the hopes and expectations of the devil,
that man of sin the Pope and all his adherents? and doubtless we should find
what our gracious Sovereign propounds in the enacting of this Law, Religion
propagated, and the peace of this Land established, which all good men desire.

Sect. 24. Now knowing that it may be objected by some who are peaceably
minded; that though they are satisfied as to the lawfulness of their obedience
to the use of a public form and some certain Rites for order and decency, yet
they do very much scruple conforming to this Book of Common prayer and
Administration of the Sacraments, to which they are enjoined by the Act to
declare their unfeigned assent and consent, page 73. and promise they will
conform to the use thereof, page 77.

I shall proceed through the assistance of the spirit of Truth, to offer to you
what are the grounds which satisfy my conscience in this case following, and I
hope may satisfy all that love the Truth and Peace.

CHAP. IX.
The Vindication of the Common Prayer of the Church of England, by Mr. John
Ball, from the aspersions of the Old Brownists, and the Authors of the
Temperate Discourse and Plus ultra. The lawfulness also of Conformity to it,
with its Rites, proved by Bishop Jewel, Martin Bucer, and others.

Section 1.

TT is without all doubt very desirable to all persons whom God has blessed
with a being in this Kingdom of England, where the Gospel has shined upon us
for so many years since the Reformation of Religion; from the Idolatries,
Errors and superstitions of the Church of Rome, to be assured that the way or
mode for the public Worship of God be reformed also.

Concerning which, in the satisfying of my self, I have observed that two sorts
of persons have made their objections. First, such as have condemned the common
and public Liturgy of the Church as sinful and Idolatrous, because taken out
of the Mass Book, etc. Some only as symbolizing with the service of the Romish
Church; Of the former sort were the Brownists of old, the later the wiser sort
of the Non-conformists, both formerly and at this present time; who do
therefore press a necessity of a further Reformation thereof, as appears by
the Discourse of Plus ultra, and by the desires of those persons that were
commissioned to advise about the Liturgy, etc. who thought no Reformation like
the laying aside the old one as to themselves, and the making a new one in its
stead, to be left unto the Ministers liberty to choose which they would use.

Sect. 2. I shall therefore for the clearing of the lawfulness of our obedience
to the use of this Liturgy of the Church, present and lay before you the
objections against the Liturgy of the Church of England by the English
Brownists, by which also the Authors of the Temperate Discourse and of Plus
ultra may see who they do symbolize withal, and how much mistaken I suppose
they are, who say, the cause of the Non-conformists has been long ago stated
at the troubles of Frankfort, and has continued the same.

Sect. 3. That which is laid to the charge of the English Liturgy is this, by
those called the Brownists, I find in the second part of the Mr. Balls answer
page 4. The whole form of the Church service is borrowed from the Papists, for
none can deny that it was culled and picked out of the Popish Dunghill, the
Mass Book, full of all abominations; from three Romish channels, I say, it was
raked, the Breviary, the Ritual and the Mass Book, mentioned by the Sober
Discourse, page 21. and Plus ultra, page 17. with much earnestness affirms,
that the English Liturgy is Tantum non the Romish Mass.

Now to vindicate this mode of Gods Worship in the English Church from this
charge, and so consequently to give us to apprehend that we may lawfully
declare conformity to the use thereof; be pleased to take notice of Mr. Balls
answer page 6.

Sect. 4. That which you allege against the English Service Book in
particular, you intend against all set forms of prayer or stinted Liturgies
whatsoever, etc. to page 8. and there says he further, It is true, the
Nonconformists say that it was in a great part picked and culled out of the
Mass Book; but it follows not thence, that either it is or was esteemed by
them a devised or false Worship, for many things contained in the Mass Book it
self are good and holy. A Pearl may, be found upon a Dunghill. We cannot more
credit the man of sin then to say, that every thing in the Mass Book is
devilish and Antichristian; for then it should be Antichristian to pray unto
God in the mediation of Christ, or read the Scriptures, to profess many
fundamental divine Truths, necessary to salvation, page 9. Our Service was
picked and culled out of the Mass Book you say, and so it might, and yet be
free from all fault and tincture, from all show and appearance of evil; though
the Mass Book it self was fraught with all manner of abominations. For if
Antichrist sit in the Temple of God, and profess himself the servant of Jesus
Christ, of necessity some Treasures, Riches and Jewels of the Church must be
gathered into his Den, which being collected, purged and refined, might serve
to adorn the chaste Spouse of Christ. Neither in so doing does the Church
honor Antichrist, but challenge her own right; if she retain ought that
belongs to Antichrist, that is her stain and blemish; but the recovery of
that which Christ the King of his Church has given as her wealth and ornament,
must not be imputed a fault.

Sect. 5. Further says he page 9. If it be wholly taken out of the Mass Book,
how comes it to have those things which are so directly contrary to the Mass,
that both cannot possibly stand together? In our Book of Common prayer we pray
to God only in the mediation of Jesus Christ, and in a known Language, we
profess that Christ by one Oblation of himself, once for all, has made a full,
perfect and sufficient satisfaction for the sins of the whole World; that he
has commanded a perpetual remembrance of his Death and Passion in that
Ordinance of the Supper; and that the Sacrament is to be administered in both
kinds, the Minister and the People to communicate together: Were these things
taken out of the Mass Book? The Church of Rome joyneth the two first
Commandments into one, or takes away the second, thereby to cloak their
Idolatry in the worshipping of Images; but the Common prayer book of the Church
of England divides them into two, therein following (two of the Fathers at
most excepted) all Antiquity, and sets down the words of the second
Commandment at large. The Church of Rome teaches, that in the Sacrament of the
Eucharist the body and blood of Christ is received and eaten carnally, that as
much is received in one kind as in both, and that in the Mass Christ is offered
up as a propitiatory unbloudy sacrifice for the sins of quick and dead; but the
Common prayer book of the Church of England teaches expressly in the form of
administering that Sacrament, that spiritually by faith we feed on him in our
hearts, eating and drinking in remembrance that Christ died and shed his blood
for us. In the Mass the Priest receives alone, the people standing by and
gazing on him; but the Minister and people are appointed with us to communicate
together, according to the Instition of Christ, and the practice of the
primitive Church. We make the Communion of the Eucharist purposely a Sacrament;
they a Sacrament and propitiatory Sacrifice. They celebrate at an Altar; we at
a Table, according to the example of our Savior Christ, his Apostles, and the
Primitive Church in the purest times. We pray for the living; they for the
living and dead. And if these be not points directly contrary to the Roman
Service, Rome is much departed from her self.

Sect. 6. I have been the larger in the transcribing of this most singular
vindication of the common prayer book by this judicious and learned Mr. John
Ball, to the end that such good people, who, as the Author of the Treatise of
Liturgies says, can by no means be reconciled to the use of it, as being an
Idolatrous Service, may here see the vast difference between the Mass Book and
our common prayer, and be brought to love and like thereof.

And that such Ministers as profess by the said Author, that when their people
come to them, and say to them, This common prayer was taken out of the
Mass Book, will you read it? they know not what to say; may be furnished with
such an answer, as by Gods blessing may be not only very informing, but
reforming also.

And that such Ministers and People that do fear that by this Act of
Uniformity, which requires a Declaration from every Minister, that he will
conform to the use of the common prayer book, and that he does assent and
consent thereto; that all this conformity required is but preparatory to
Popery: may by a diligent comparing and considering of what Mr. Ball has
published, be quieted in their minds about their fears in this thing, Mr. Ball
says expressly, page 9. That there are such things in the common prayer, such
Drctrines there taught, and such practices there enjoined, that are so directly
contrary to the Mass Book, that both cannot possibly stand together.

Sect. 7. And that I may the further corroborate your minds in this particular,
I humbly desire that the further insinuatians of the displeased Ones with the
common prayer, as being but the English Mass; and as is affirmed page 5. that
one Dr. Carrier a dangerous seducing Papist should say, That the common prayer,
and the catechism in it contained, hold no point of Doctrine expressly contrary
to Antiquity; that is, as he explaineth himself, the Romish Church; only has
not enough in it: may be removed not only by what I have already transcribed,
out of Mr. Ball, but also from what follows in answer to the Brownists charge
against the common prayer by this Carriers judgment beforesaid.

Says this reverend person, page 11. Carriers pretense in that particular is a
mere juggling trick, that he might insinuate a change of Religion might be made
amongst us without any great alteration; which is as likely as that the light
should be turned into darkness, and not be espied; if many points of Popery be
not condemned expressly in the catechism or Service Book, etc. yet so many
points are there taught directly contrary to the foundation of Popery, that it
is not possible that Popery should stand if they take place.

Sect. 8. How much therefore it concerns all zealous haters of Popery to take
heed of their contempt of the Service Book and Catechism therein contained,
and to take heed of such a Reformation thereof, as should take this form of
Common prayer, Catechism, and manner of celebration of the Lords Supper out of
the way, may appear by what is so confidently and rationally affirmed, if it be
seriously considered, that it is not possible that Popery should ever stand if
they take place amongst us, page 11.

That I may further show how unlike it is that the Reader of the Missale
Romanum, etc. or the comparer of the Rituale Romanum, etc. with the printed
common prayer Book of the 5. and 6. of Edward the 6. or this our English
Liturgy as it is commonly put to sale, shall find but very little but what is
to be found in the Mass Book in Latin; Discourse of Liturgies, page 1, 21, 22.

I shall desire what is further alleged by Mr. Ball, may be seriously laid to
heart; says he to such who speak in the language aforesaid, page 11. It is
more proper to say the Mass was added to our Common prayer book, then that our
Common prayer was taken out of the Mass Book; For most things in our Common
prayer were to be found in the Liturgy of the Church long before the Mass
whereof we speak on was heard of in the World, and the Mass was patched up by
degrees, and added to the Liturgy of the Church, now one piece and then
another, so that the ancient truths and holy Liturgies were at last stained
with the Idol of the Mass, which was sacrilegiously thrust into them.

Sect. 9. And that the Reverend Bishop Jewel so much magnified by Plus ultra,
as a greater friend to his design, was a great friend to this truth laid down
by Mr. Ball, you may find in his defense of the Apology of the Church of
England, upon the occasion of Hardings challenging the Church of England with
changing their Communion book so often; replies by retortion, that it was their
crime to be guilty of chopping and changing of the Church Liturgy, and not
they, says he, page 198. If thou will read the often changes and alterations
of the Mass, read I beseech thee Platina and Polydore Virgil, concerning the
same, and there shall thou find how, and by whom, and on what occasion, and in
what process of time all the parts of the Mass were pieced and set together.
So that it is more easy to observe how Bishop Jewel and Mr. Ball do agree in
their judgments about the Mass and Common prayer book, as you shall read
hereafter, then that Bishop Jewel and Plus ultra were both of one mind as to
the matters in controversy.

Sect. 10. But I shall go no further in showing than the Common prayer of the
Church of England is not Tantum non the Romish Mass, says Mr. Ball page 11.
The prayers and truths of God taught in the Common prayer pertained to the
Church as her Prerogative, the Mass and the abominations belonged to the man
of sin; and if a true man may challenge his gods which the thief has drawn
into his den, the Church of God may lawfully lay claim to these holy things
which Antichrist has unjustly usurped.

And that the Church of God may lawfully make use of those forms of prayers
recovered as it were out of their den, behold the reverend Mr. Ball bringing
the same quotation out of Bishop Jewel for to prove it, as Plus ultra does to
prove it altogether unlawful. Bishop Jewels Sermon on Joshua 6.1, 2, 3. The
things that may be reserved, viz. in the destruction of Jericho, must not be
dust, or chafe, or hay, or stubble; but gold, silver, iron and brass: I mean
they may not be things meet to furnish and maintain superstition, but such
things as be strong, and may serve either directly to serve God, or else for
comeliness and good order. Mr. Ball in the margin of page 11. part 2.

Sect. 11. In Plus ultra, page 28. you will find this quotation of Bishop
Jewel is brought to prove that all ceremonies are superstitious. But that it
is most grievously wrested and mis-applyed, as are most of his quotations out
of Jewel, in his discourse will appear, by that which Mr. Ball has set down
honestly, and the other altogether omitted.

For though dust and chafe, hay and stubble at the destruction of Jericho
might not be brought into the Lords treasury, that is, such things as were meet
to maintain superstition; yet such things as silver and gold, such things as be
strong and may serve directly to serve God, or else comeliness and good order.

These things in the judgment of both Jewel and Ball, which are strong and may
serve directly to serve God by, or elfe for comeliness and good order.

These holy things Mr. Ball says, page 11. Antichrist has unjustly usurped,
the Church of God may lawfully lay claim unto.

And therefore if our Book of Common prayer says he, page 12. please the
Papists, it is but in some things, wherein in reverence to Antiquity we come
too nigh them in some Rites and Ceremonies. But with the substance of the
ministration it self they cannot be pleased, unless they will be displeased
with their own service, and will renounce their own Religion.

Sect. 12. Surely, methinks the judgment of this learned and moderate man might
very much defend us against not only the fear of Popery, he having affirmed
that the Papists cannot be pleased with our Book of Common prayer as to the
substance of its Ministration, unless they will renounce their own Religion;

But may cause such a daybreak of light to shine upon some of our
understandings, as that we may be persuaded that it is lawful to declare they
will conform to the use of the Common prayer of the Church of England, it being
no false and Idolatrous Worship, as too many might apprehend from what has
been within this year or two written to exasperate men's minds against it.

But that I may make the lawfulness thereof to appear more evidently, I shall
proceed to consider of the English Liturgy and ceremonies, as they are by some
apprehended to symbolize too much with the Mass Book, and being too like the
same, and that therefore upon this account conformity is unlawful, it being
absolutely affirmed, Plus ultra, page 30. We say it is unlawful for the Church
of England to retain either in Doctrine, Worship or Discipline, any conformity
to the Church of Rome.

Sect. 13. I do profess before the searcher of all hearts out of any desire to
abstain from all appearance of evil. When I first saw this Book, I desired to
take great notice how this Authority did by the authority of the Scriptures
convincingly prove the same. For to conform to the Doctrine of the Church of
Rome is doubtless unlawful, to conform to the Worship and Discipline of the
Church of Rome, in statu corrupto, in that stace wherein it was before
Reformation, and is now in at this present time, is sinful and unlawful.

But that to conform to the Common prayer book of the Church of England, and
those few retained ceremonies, because that they symbolize with the Church of
Rome; That this should be sinful and unlawful, notwithstanding so confidently
affirmed, I leave to the determination of the wise and learned upon the
examination of the proofs of Plus ultra for the same.

Sect. 14. I do find indeed that Mr. Ball does speak to this purpose: That if
any have mistaken the book of Common prayer, because that it has too much
likelihood to the Mass Book, he says, that has not been the judgment of the
Non-conformists alone, others have said and written so much that never
condemned the use of the book, or all things therein contained, page 9.

From whence I observe, that there is a great deal of difference between the
disliking of a form that does in something as is supposed symbolize with that
form that is in a corrupt Church, and the condemning of it as sinful and
unlawful, as Plus ultra does: And yet that I may deal faithfully before I come
to speak to the arguments of Plus ultra, I think I should do a good work
tending to our healing, if I should offer but some honest inferences from Mr.
Balls conclusions and concessions, that may take off that dislike may be in the
minds of men, which may hinder an unfeigned assent and consent in declaring
their confo rmity.

Sect. 15. For it being granted that a form of prayer is lawful, and this of
the Church of England so much vindicated as you have heard, and may find
further in page 3. where Mr. Ball says, that the Non-conformists can prove the
Religion and the Worship of the Church of England to be of God, and that by
such plain Texts of Scripture, against which the gates of hell shall never
prevail.

I humbly conceive that the offense taken at its too much likelihood to the
Mass Book, page 9. may be taken away by the very reason that Mr. Ball gives
for the same, page 12. which he says is in Reverence to Antiquity. To avoid
the imputation of novelty in a Church it is necessary to keep to those
external modes, as to phrases of speech and rites for comeliness in Gods
Worship which have been most ancient in the Church.

But if this do it not sufficiently, deferring to answer what I find alleged,
but not proved by Mr. Ball, page 7. as exceptions against the said book, as in
some points disagreeing with Gods Word, page 7. for which they judge it
unlawful to subscribe as agreeable to the Scripture, which doubtless may
lawfully be done by Mr. Balls own Doctrine.

Sect. 16. I say, forbearing to speak further to these particulars, being but
the same objections made by Mr. Josias Nicholls and other Non-conformists long
before, which I shall through divine assistance speak more particularly to in
the next Chapter.

I shall desire that what Mr. Ball does declare in the name of all the
Non-conformists to his time, that did judge the book in the form thereof so
nigh the Papists, page 15. may be considered, who says, that herein they show
but what they judge most convenient, not condemning the book for the substance
thereof.

So that some of the Non-conformists of our time are gone much beyond this
pious and prudent man, who upon this argument does but only show what was the
judgment of the Authors of the Admonition, and others in this case, that it was
not convenient to use a form so near the Papists; but he says no such thing
himself, being more wise then to judge in a case already determined by the Law
of the Land, which God had not determined against by his Law in his Word.

Sect. 17. But though Mr. Ball is so modest, yet Mr. Plus ultra is more
magisterial; who, as you have read out of the place before quoted, affirms
that it is unlawful for the Church of England to retain any conformity to the
Church of Rome in Worship or Discipline. Come we therefore to examine his
grounds for it, page 30. And because we know (from whence I observe many heads
were laid together to form this argument) this will hardly down by any reasons
we can lay before you, we shall commend this argument to you under the credit
of your right learned Prelate Jewel, please you to peruse, page 325, 326. of
his Defense; The learned and godly men, at whose Persons it pleases you so
rudely to scoff, says Jewel to Harding, (Mr. Doctor;) Harding used to scoff
at Calvin and Zuinglius, and to upbraid Jewel with them; that refuse either to
go in your apparel, or otherwise to show themselves (note Sir!) like unto you,
have age sufficient, and can answer for themselves: notwithstanding thus much
I Will say in their behalf, neither do they commend any manner of apparel as
holy, nor do they condemn any apparel as unholy; they say not therefore that
the apparel is either holy or unholy, but they may truly say, the same apparel
on your part has been foully abused to filthy purposes; they may justly say,
they would not gladly in any appearance show themselves like unto them that
have so untruly and so long deceive the world: and herein they are not without
sundry authorities and examples of the godly Father St. Austin and Tertullian,
etc.

Sect. 18. Now because I observe that by these quotations he would make others
to apprehend that Bishop Jewel was of his mind, I shall crave leave to show
him, or others that have been deceived by him, how much they are deceived
themselves, in bringing this learned and pious Prelate to be the prover of
their assertion: And that I may clearly evidence this, I shall present you with
the occasion of these words before quoted.

The Church of England in their Defense of the Reformation from Popery, amongst
other things in their Apology mentioned, page 322. charge the Papists, That
some of them did put a great holiness in eating fish, and some in eating of
herbs, some in wearing of shoes and sandals, some in going in a woolen
garment, some in a linen, one called black, some white. This I observe to be
the doctrine of the Church of England, that to put holiness in a black woollen
garment or a white linen one, this is superstition.

Now to this charge Harding faintly replied, That they did put no great
holiness in linen garments, black or white: To which Bishop Jewel answers,
page 324. But withal Harding having by recrimination charged the Church of
England with the divisions that were amongst them even in those days by the
Non-conformists then; for it is not with Calvin or Zuinglius that he does
upbraid the Bishop there, but they were such persons as would not wear Gowns
with a Typpet, etc. but as he there says, Night-gowns of the most Lay-fashion
to avoid superstition. These things are indifferent, and may be yielded unto,
says the one Sect. They be the Popes rags, and may not be worn, faith the
other Sect. And therefore they will rather be justly put from that which justly
they cannot keep, then yield one jot; neither Her Majesty's commandment, nor
their Metropolitans decree they care for; they had rather seem to the people,
whom they use for their claw-backs, and to whose judgment they stand or fall
stout Champions of their own Gospel, then meek followers of Christ's Gospel;
such mighty Sampsons, such constant Laurences your Jolly Gospel breeds.
Defense of the Apology, part 3. page 323.

Sect. 19. Now in answer to this the Bishop makes this reply quoted by Plus
ultra, savouring of very much wisdom and charity; says he, the persons at
which you so rudely scoff, that refuse to go in your apparel, or otherwise to
show themselves like you, have age sufficient, and can answer for themselves;
(he makes no Apology for them:) Notwithstanding thus much I say in their
behalf, neither do they commend any manner of apparel as holy, neither do they
condemn any apparel as unholy, etc.

Here, before we go any further, I desire that these particulars may be
observed;

Sect. 20. First, that Nonconformity to these matters of apparel, and such
like indifferent things is matter of scorn and reproach to the Reformed from
the Papists, and has been so for these many years.

Secondly, that those persons that he would vindicate from Hardings revilings,
he could do it only in this; That in those days that he could say only so
much for them, that they did not condemn a Gown or Surplice as sinful or unholy.

Thirdly, that therefore why these should refuse to wear such apparel, and
thereby give occasion to the Papists to charge them with disobedience to the
Queen; he only says, that they have age sufficients and can answer for
themselves.

Though as it follows, They may truly say, that this same apparel has been
foully abused to filthy purposes, and they may truly say, they would not gladly
in any appearance show themselves like unto them, that have so utterly and so
long abused the world.

Now that by this part of the quotation Bishop Jewe ll does not argue against
the use of the Gown, Surplice, and such like apparel, as symbolizing with the
Papists because they did wear such; and that therefore they were to be
justified that did refuse to wear only upon that score. It appears thus, by
observing that the thing which was chiefly urged in the behalf of the
Nonconformists, that they would not gladly in any appearance show themselves
like them that had abused these Vestments to foul and filthy purposes; so that
his argment is not against the use, but the abuse of these garments, by which
they had so long abused the world.

Sect. 21. That I may help my weak Christian friends to understand this, be
pleased to take notice that the main thing wherein the Papists did deceive the
world as to Priests apparel was this, that they did possess them with this
superstitious opinion of inherent holiness in them, and very greatly merited.
Aquinas himself affirms that the wearing of Francis or Dominicks Cowle has
power to remove sins as well as the Sacrament of Baptism: and Bishop Jewel
tells us, page 324. that the Popish Bishops in hallowing the Priests Vestments
pray, that he wearing this holy vesture may deserve to be shielded and defended
from all assaults of the wicked spirit.

Now in this sense the Conformists and Non-conformists might justly say that
this apparel has been abused to foul and filthy purposes; for the Priests
would get a considerable sum of money of such as they had deluded with these
opinions for a Friars Cowle to be buried in, as that which would keep them out
of Purgatory; well therefore might the Bishop say in their behalf, that they
would not gladly show themselves like unto them in the wearing of that apparel.

But why they would not wear such and such garments which they did not condemn
as sinful, why not a Gown or a Cassock made after the fashion of a Minister in
the Church of Rome, when indifferent in it self? Why they cared not for her
Majesty's commands and their Metroplitans decrees in this case, I suppose the
Bishop means they are of age, let them answer for themselves; he had nothing
it should seem to speak in their defense of this practice.

Sect. 22. By all which I humbly conceive that it may appear, that it is not
the wearing of a Gown, or Surplice, or Cassock, whereby a person of one calling
is distinguished from another; and also for the use for which Aaron ( Exodus,
28.40.) and his Sons wore Cassocks, or Coats and Girdles, viz. for comeliness
and for beauty; though they should be made after the same fashion that the
garments of Popish Priests were, if they be grave, sober and decent: But the
placing of holiness in them, and the abusing of the people by them, this was
the evil in them that Bishop Jewel does condemn, but no the use of them.

This Reverend Prelate you may observe speaks confidently of the
Non-conformists of his time, that as they did not commend Ministers garments as
holy, so they did not condemn them as unholy or sinful.

And were the Non-conformists of these times but of the same mind, that they
did not condemn a Cassock or a Surplice as unholy, and that it were no sin to
wear such vestures when commanded, the case would soon be resolved, that to
wear a Cassock, Surplice, Gown, Canonical Coat etc. were lawful for distinction
sake and decency in Gods Worship.

Sect. 23. And thus now having showed, though somewhat at large, the true scope
of the place brought by Plus ultra to prove his argument by in page 30. and
that it proves no such thing for which he does produce it:

I shall only show how much he is mistaken in the reason that he gives, why
the Church of England ought to reject conformity to the Church of Rome in
matters of Worship and Discipline, that have renounced communion with her in
all material points of Doctrine, page 27.

Says he, the reason why we reject communion with the Church of Rome, is for
that the Popes Supremacy, Infallibility, Transubstantiation, Merit of good
works, Invocation of Saints, Purgatory, Latin-Service Worshippiag of Images,
half communion, and such like; which are the Pillars of the Romi^h Fabric,
cannot be proved and made good out of the Word of God. And is not this reason
of like force against the ceremonies of the Church yet in use amongst us? Is
there a scriptum est for one of them, etc.

Sect. 24 To which give me leave to say the reason is not of like force; for
the things before named which are the Pillars of Popery, Gods Word is expressly
against them, and the Scriptures of truth show the Doctrine to be faelse, and
so ne to be the Doctrine of devils. And if you could bring as clear Scriptures
against using a form of prayer, wearing garments for distinction and decency in
Gods Worship, as may be brought against Lain-Service, Worshipping of Images,
Merit of good works, etc. Then there were some show of reason in yours.

And as for your argument that there is not a scriptum est for one of them;

I shall give you a very ancient answer, that was given to your very objection
by the Reverend Martin Bucer to Joannes a Las^o, who argued against vestures
and other ceremonies, as holding conformity with the Charch of Rome therein:
and as having no scrip um est for them, says the said B^^^er in his Epistle,
page 6. If therefore you will not admit such liberty and use of vesture to this
pure and holy Church, because they have no commandment of the Lord, nor no
example for it; I do not see how you can grant to any Church that it may
celebrate the Lords Supper in the morning, etc. for we have received for these
things no commandment of the Lord, nor any example, yea, rather the Lord gave
a contrary example.

Sect. 25. Behold here you that have made a challenge in page 13. in the name
of all the Non-conformists, that if any learned men of our Adversaries be able
to bring one sufficient sentence out of the holy Scripture, or any one example
of any Bishop or Minister, in the time of King Edward the sixth, that do
directly or ex professo plead for the wearing of Caps and Surplices, etc. the
Zuinglian Gospellers will be then content to yield and subscribe.

Here is the authority of a great, learned and pious man in the time of King
Edward the sixth, defending the lawfulness of these vestures you so much argue
against, and also condemning your very argument, page 10. Says he, Many things
which the Antichrists have made marks of their impiety, may be tokens of the
Kingdom of Christ, as the signs of Bread and Wine, the water of Baptism, the
Laying on of hands, Preachings, Churches, Holy days, and many other things:
All these places of Scripture are of a great scope; The earth and the fullness
thereof is of the Lord; not of the Devil, not of Antichrist, not of the wicked.
This colorable craft of Satan, says he, must be taken heed of, by the which
he brings to pass oftentimes, that either we reckon those things which are no
sins, and those that be sins indeed we seem not to regard them in our selves,
etc.

Sect. 26. If the Authority of this holy man in King Edwards days satisfy not
your conscience, that these things may be continued, and prevail not with you
to prevail with all other Non-conformists, in whose name you made the
challenge, and also have promised to yield and subscribe.

I shall in answer to your challenge produce the Authority of Bishop Jewel,
whom you so much quote, ex professo commending the present Liturgy in the frame
of it. And this you will find written in page 162. of the Defense of the
Apology, occasioned by the reproachful speeches of Dr. Harding against it,
calling the Liturgy in Queen Elizabeth's days as you do now, A devised
Service, etc. but says Bishop Jewel to him, appealing to his own conscience;
You know that we serve God according to his holy Word, and the order of his
primitive Church; we administer the holy Sacraments in pure and reverent sort,
(though I suppose the sign of the Cross was used in one, and Kneeling at the
other.) We baptize in the name of the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, we receive
the Sacrament of Christ's body and blood from the holy Table, we make our humble
confession and prayers together, we pray with one heart and one voice, etc. And
of all these things what one is contrary to the Catholic Faith? Oh Mr.
Harding, is it not written, The man that lies destroys his own soul? and
Christ says, the Blasphemy against the Holy Ghost shall never be forgiven, in
this life or in the life to come.

Sect. 27. If Bishop Jewel did not plead for the present Liturgy in the frame
of it, his zeal burning so hot, that he accounts Hardings calumnies of the
Common prayer to be as a blasphemy against the Holy Ghost, I leave to the
consideration of all judicious Christians; and consequently, whether the
Authors of the challenge are not bound to conform and subscribe, especially
considering what the said Bishop Jewel says of the said Communion book or
Common prayer book, page 198. The holy Communion book and Order of the holy
Administration stands, and by Gods mercy shall stand still without any change.

Observe, I pray, whatever you have said of the Liturgy of the Church, that it
is Tantum non the Massebook; yet if you had searched into Jewel as you ought
for truth, you would have found the Jesuit frequently depravi g the book of
common prayer, and that for the very thing for which you plead the changing of
further reformation thereof, which occasioned this Reply of Jewel, which
clearly evidenceth that he did so much approve of the present frame of the
Liturgy, that he said by Gods mercy it should not be changed no more.

And therefore I pray remember your promise, yield and subscribe to the book of
common prayer, according as the Act requires.

Sect. 28. And that this may be done with an unfeigned assent and consent, I
do beseech you all who are zealous haters of Popery, se^iously to weigh what
is the judgment of the most judicious Jesuited Papists of this our present
Liturgy, as I find it published long since by their great champion Harding:
says he, (that which ought to be written upon the heart of every true
Protestant) Every good man and zealous keeper of the Catholic Faith, will
never allow the Service devised in King E^wards time, now restored again; not
so much for the Tongue that it is in, as for the order it self and disposition
of it, wanting some things necessary, and having some other things repugnant to
the Faith and the custom of the Carholick Church. Reply of Jewel to Harding,
page 162.

Let me entreat all Non-conformists especially to ponder upon this passage.

The Liturgy and Service of the Church of England, to which we are to conform,
though some account it Popish, Idolatrous, and at the best too like the Mass
book in the order and disposi^ion of it, which is the great exception of the
wisest Non-conformists at this day; yet this Harding, with the Separatists
against whom Mr. Ball has written, agree together in calling it a Devised
Service, an Humane Invention. Now consider what is predicated of this subject,
that the good men and zealous keepers of the Catholic Faith, viz. the hottest,
rankest, and most violent Papists, they will never allow of this devised
Service; I think very good news.

Sect. 29. But to proceed to the reason that he gives for this, not so much
for the tongue in which it is, being now English; whereas the Service of the
Romish Church is Latin to this day, which some make to be the only difference
between the Mass Book and the English Liturgy, grounded upon a politic
Proclamation in King Edwards time, to quiet an Insurrection about it. But says
Harding, for the order it self and the disposition of it; that which is a great
exception of the Non-conformists why they cannot allow it, is given as the
reason why the good and zealous Catholics cannot allow it also. But how does it
appear further that the good Catholics cannot, nay he says, will not allow
it, because that it lacks some things necessary; as prayers to Saints, to
Angels, to Images, and for the dead to bring them out of Purgatory, a thing
very necessary to make the Popes Pot boil; together with many of those Bables,
Trifles and Follies, which Bishop Jewel reckons up in his Sermon at S. Mary's
quoted by Plus ultra, to another purpose?

But to make our English Liturgy completely different from the Romish
Mass Book, he says, that it has many things in it repugnant to the Faith and
customs of the Catholic Church.

For these reasons the zealous Catholics will never allow of our book of
common prayer, and therefore for these reasons the Book of Common prayer
devised, as they say, in King Edwards time, restored in Queen Elizabeth's time,
confirmed since by King James, King Charles the First and the Second, should be
worthy of a better acceptance then yet it has received from those that
declare themselves to be the most zealous professors of the true Reformed
Protestant Religion.

Sect. 30. And thus now having proved it to be very lawful to declare
conformity to the Book of Common prayer; having by the help of an old
Nonconformist uncloathed it of that Idolatrous dress in which it has been
presented to the World by the Author of the Temperate Discourse and Plus ultra,
who having thereby but new-vam^t the arguments of the old Brownists, and
brought them forth as new lights to mislead weak people.

I shall, through the help of the said Mr. John Ball, give you but one general
answer to what the said Author of the Discourse of Liturgies, and others, are
very copious in cha ging the Common prayer with many particular defects and
errors, and so conclude.

Which answer you shall find part 2. page 22. Your long Catalogue of
corruptions to be found in our Liturgy is to small purpose, unless you could
prove so e of them to be sundamental, heretical, and really Idolatrous.
Suppose, says he, page 30. the seventy errors which you reckon up were all
true and justly taken against the Book, and as many more to them might be
named; yet the quotation that he gives out of Usher, de Success. Eccles.
Chapter 1. answers all; That the main truths which concern the very life and
soul of Religion be few, and the failings which may stand with the substance of
Religion many.

Sect. 31. To conclude therefore with this Memorandum to the Authors of Plus
ultra, who upon the Authority that I have brought in King Edwards time, from
the Reverend Martin Bucer in Q. Elizabeth's time, from the Reverend Bishop
Jewel, that they are under an obligation to yield to subscribe and turn
conformists, even all the Zuinglian-Gospellers, as he calls them, page 13.
And that it will be expected they should show themselves to be as good as their
words.

I shall be a further help unto them in endeavoring to remove what may be an
impediment to the subscribing of the 39. Articles of Religion, with what
follows in the Act for Uniformity, page 83. hoping in the following Chapter
to make it appear, that the particular ceremonies and rites of the Church by
Law enjoined; together with the Books of Ordination, etc. which are part of the
39. Articles, may lawfully be subscribed and conformed to.

CHAP. X.
That to subscribe to the 39. Articles of Religion, and to declare an unfeigned
assent and consent, etc. is not contrary to any command of Christ, but lawful
and warrantable, notwithstanding all the objections made of old by Mr. Josias
Nicholls against subscription, which are in this Chapter laid down, and
modestly removed.

Section I.

THat we may be the more clearly informed and more fully resolved in this case,
the matter of this question being the subject matter of that obedience, which
the Act for the Uniformity of public prayers, etc. does require. That we may
the better judge of the iniquity or equity of what is required; I humbly
conceive it would be worth our time to make a particular inspection into this
Act, concerning what is enacted about these things aforesaid: To which end I
shall offer these three particulars to your consideration.

First, what is required. Secondly, of whom it is required. Thirdly, after what
manner the things required are to be done.

Sect. 2. First, that which is required is a Subscription or Declaration of an
approbation to the nine and thirty Articles of Religion, mentioned in the
Statute of the 13. of Queen Elizabeth, and of the book of Common parayer, etc.
Act. page 85.

Secondly, who are to subscribe and declare, etc. The persons from whom this is
expected, are only scholars, men of more then ordinary parts and abilities,
such as shall be thought fit to be Governors of others in the schools of the
Prophets, in both the Universities, page 82. and all such as are thought fit to
be Ministers and Teachers of others in the school of Christ, the public
congregation, page 72, 85.

These persons are to be light to the blind, to be instructers of the ignorant:
Now our Savior tells us, That if the blind lead the blind, both will fall
into the ditch. And therefore should any such persons be ignonorant of what
they are to subscribe, o unwilling to it upon any fall e or erroneous
principles, it would prove of very dangerous consequence to the Reformed
Religion; and should not they be all of one mind, who are Tutors and Teachers
of others, it must needs occasion great confusion and division amongst their
Disciples and followers.

Sect. 3. All which being considered, Subscription and Uniformity is so far
from being a sin, as that it is a duty which is required of these persons
aforesaid.

An here, by the wa, cannot but have some ground of hope, that the strict
execution or this Act will keep out not only all Papists and Romish
Catholics, the professed Adversaties to the Reformed Religion of the Church of
England, from poisoning the fountains of Learning, and corrupting the Youth in
our Universities; but also any of their Emissaries from our public
Congregations, who have formerly in the disguise of Anabaptists, Quakers and
others, brought to many honest-hearted people into their present distempers;
for except they can do these things, and that after the manner prescribed,
Assent and Consent, unfeignedly and universally; they are neither to have
preferment or employment in the places aforesaid. And that they cannot do this,
what I have before quoted from Hardings own expressions does evidence the same;
for he says, No good Catholic can allow of the devised Service of the Church
of England.

Sect. 4. Now methinks this very consideration should calm our spirits to take
the same into our further thoughts: To this purpose I shall proceed to the next
particular, viz. the third, and that is,

Thirdly, the manner how this subscription or declaration is to be made. In
considering whereof I shall take in what the Act expresses as the End of this
Subscription after this manner, p. 72. To the end that Uniformity in the
public Worship of God, which is so desired, may be speedily effected.

Therefore this declaration and subscription must be made, the manner how you
shall find, page 73. with an unfeigned assent and consent, page 84, 85 to all
the Articles, to all the Prayers, to all the Rites and Ceremonies.

So that from hence it is evident, that this subscription and declaration, as I
humbly conceive, must be with a n assent, which is the Act of the judgment and
understanding, with consent and act of the will and affections, and it must be
unfeigned, and without guile or h^pocrisie; sincerity must attend both the
assent and consent. Thirdly, there is the universality of this unfeigned assent
and consent; it must be to all and every thing rescribed in the book of Common
prayer, page 73. to all the nine and thirty Articles, etc. page 83. To evidence
their agreement to that Doctrine, Worship and Discipline, which the Church,
whereof they are Members, does profess and practice.

Sect. 5. That we may now come to make a right judgment in this case, taking
for granted the manner here prescribed is no way contrary, but agreeable to
Christ's Laws, as the Scriptures evidently prove; the great inquiry will be into
the matter of Uniformity and Subscription, etc.

And those are the Nine and thirty Articles of Religion, the Book of Common
prayer, and all the Rites and Ceremonies of the same; which generally contain
these two particulars worthy of consideration.

Sect. 6. First, as to matters of Faith or Doctrine.

Secondly, as to modes and manner of Worship and Discipline.

Concerning the first of these, the Nine and thirty Articles of Religion are to
be subscribed unto, and approved of. Concerning the second, the book of Common
prayer, with all its Rites and Ceremonies, with the form or manner of ordaining
Priests and Deacons, is to be unfeignedly assented and consented to.

As to the former of these, what I have to say is chiefly to inform those that
are in my own station and capacity of the Lay sort, that being rightly informed
concerning these Nine and thirty Articles, they may not be offended at the
Subscription and Conformity of such Ministers whom they reverence and esteem.

Sect. 7. In the first place therefore be pleased to take notice, that the Nine
and thirty Articles of Religion, 13 Eliz. do in the general contain a
confession of the Faith of the Church of England, as to matter of Doctrine,
Worship and Discipline.

That I have not given it a new name I find a person much esteemed for his
piety, and very modest in his Apology or Plea for the Innocent, Mr. Josias
Nichols, an old Nonconformist; I say, in his Book so called, printed 1602. now
sixty years since, gives this term to the Articles of the Church of England,
The Confession of their Faith.

Sect. 8. Now, as I said before, that such as know little or nothing of these
Articles, and therefore may well be troubled if any of our good Ministers or
Lectures should be laid aside, as some have done already themselves, laid aside
Lecturing or preaching the Word of God upon this account, as I suppose, because
that they cannot subscribe these Articles amongst other things; I shall give
you an account of some of them, as I find them quoted by this worthy person,
whom I have often seen, Mr. Josias Nicholls aforesaid: says he, page 15.

Therefore as it becomes the true people and congregation of God, the Church
of England, humbly submitting it self to his Law, does meekly and constantly
confess, that it is not lawful for the Church to ordain any thing that is
contrary to Gods written Word, Artic. 20. And for this cause they describe the
visible Church of Christ to be A congregation of faithful men, in the which
the pure Word of God is preached, etc. Artic. 19. And dutifully and truly
affirm, that in our doings the Word of God is to be followed, which we have
expressly declared unto us in the Word of God, Artic. 17.

Sect. 9. I beseech you let us pause a little upon these Articles, who know no
more, and let us seriously consider whether our Ministers have any just cause
to lay down their Ministry, because they must not lay down subscription to
these Articles, which teach or profess amongst other things, the Church has
no power to ordain any thing contrary to Gods Word, etc.

I shall omit to fill up my paper with a particular recital of all the 39.
Articles.

But in the stead thereof I shall give you a general account of those
Articles, refetting to their Doctrinal part, as to faith and substantialls of
Worship, as I find them clearly expressed and acknowledged by some late
writers.

Sect. 10. For the Doctrine, says the Authors of Plus ultra, page 16. With the
Doctrine we meddle not, the blood of the Martyrs shed in the defense of it
alone by the Word of God has washed away the Romish silth cast into it.

And Reverend Mr. Richard Baxter in a Postscript of his Epistle to the Reader
before a Treatise of the Vain Religion of the formal Hipocrite, gives his
sense not only of the Doctrine of the Church of England, but also of the
Doctrine of the common prayer Book, if I mistake not, says he; For the
Doctrine of the Common prayer Book, though I had read exceptions against diverse
passages; I remembered not any thing that might not receive a good construction,
if it were read with the same candor and allowance as we read the writings of
other men. So that it was only the truth of the Doctrine that I spoke of,
against which I hate to be peevishly, quarrelsome, when God has blessed this
Church so wonderfully with a moderate and cautelous, yet effectual Reformation
in matter of Doctrine. The more pity it is, that the very modes of Worship and
Discipline should be the matter of such sharp and uncharitable discords; which
must one day prove the grief of those that are found to be the causers of it,
and of the sufferings of the Church on that occasion.

To all which I yield my unfeigded assent and consent to be true.

Sect. 11. Now, if I mistake not, what Mr. Baxter here publishes refers to the
subject matter of the 39. Articles, as to their doctrinall part, concerning
Faith and Worship, and affords us these instructions besides, viz.

That the matter of our sharp contentions and uncharitable discords are the
very modes of Worship and Discipline.

That Reformation may be effectual though but moderate and cautelous. If this
be a truth in matters of Doctrine, it holds good in reforming the modes of
worship and Discipline; and these instructions if they were well twisted about
our understandings, might exceedingly tend to humble all of all sorts; and to
make us jealous that we have been out of the way of a right Reformation, and
incline our minds to conform and yield to what is now required at our hands.

Sect. 12. Especially considering that the Doctrine of the Church of England,
which though principally is contained in the Scripture, yet in the 39. Articles
is there sum'd up as a form or systeme thereof; is as I have proved by these
quotations from Mr. Nicholls, Mr. Baxter, and Plus ultra, so pure and reformed.

Methinks it should incline all persons in the Ministry that love the Truth and
Peace, to resolve rather then not preach the Gospel, to subscribe and approve
of those Articles that teach, that it is not lawful for the Church to ordain
any thing contrary to Gods Word, whose Doctrine is washed from its Romish filth
by the blood of the Martyrs, and has arrived to an effectual reformation as
Mr. Baxter phraseth it.

Surely, these considerations should make us, as Mr. Baxter says, not only
hate to be peevishly quarrelsome as to the Doctrine against subscription to
these Articles, but unfeignedly assent and consent to them, and the use of the
Book of Common prayer, etc.

Sect. 13. And this now leads me to speak unto the consideration of the second
particular before named, comprehended in the 39. Articles, and also in the Book
of Common prayer, viz. of subscription to and appobation of the modes and
manner of Worship and Discipline.

By which modes, I principally mean the Rites and Ceremonies of the Church,
with all the forms and orders in the said book rescribed.

For having in the preceding Discourse proved by the judgment of Mr. Ball and
others, the lawfulness of an imposed form, and of the Liturgy of the Church
of England; I shall only add a testimony how far the Non-conformists in Queen
Elizabeth's days conformed to it, and then proceed.

Sect. 14. I find it declared by Mr. Josias Nicholls in the Plea for the
Innocent, page 20. even this Mr. Nicholls named for one of those Worthies that
did take conformity for a sin. Says he in the name of all the Non-conformists
in his time: We do willingly use the book of Common prayer and no other form,
unless sometime upon extraordinary occasion by public Authority some other
prayer be assigned, only we leave out some few things, or peradventure explain
other, page 21.

So that by the way the Common prayer was not then represented to the view of
weak Christians under that Idolatrous dress you find it either in Plus ultra,
or the Temperate Discourse of Liturgies.

But those old Christians used it and no other form.

Sect. 15. That therefore I may be instrumental in the healing of those
misapprehensions which are upon the minds of many, as a hinderance of their
conformity to the modes, ceremonies and rites of the Church; and that I may
speak a word in season as to the removing of the principal part of the scruple
or quaere, as to subscription or conformity to all the rites and ceremonies,
etc.

I shall humbly offer this argument to the consideration of all prudent and
peaceable Christians, whether of the Clergy or the Layety, viz.

That which our Superiors either in Church or State may without sin command;
that every Member of the Church or State may lawfully and without sin
unfeignedly, assent, consent and conform to.

Sect. 16. This proposition I have proved before in general, and could do much
more out of the sacred Scriptures, from the examples of Christ and his
Apostles, the Judgment of Reverend Calvin and others, all agreeing that
circumstantials in the Worship and Service of God tending to Uniformity,
Decency Peace and Edification of the Church; I say, that these circumstantials,
rites or ceremonies may be imposed by the Church or our Superiors.

But when we come to the assumption or conclusion from this proposition,
applying it to our present case; then here lies the great scruple about these
ceremonies and rites of the Church of England; these are superstitious, these
are insignificant, these are superfluous, and what not? and therefore no
subscription, no conformity to these without sin.

Sect. 17. That I may therefore come more close to the business, I shall with
much candor and faithfulness give you the objections that I find particularly
made against subscription in our present sense. As to the rites and ceremonies
of the Church, the ordaining of Priests and Deacons, etc. as I find them made
by Mr. Josias Nicholls Plea for the Innocent, page 21. We subscribe willingly
unto the book of Articles according to the statute 13. in that behalf provided;
namely, to those Articles which concern the confession of the true Faith and
the Doctrine of the Sacraments, as that statute expressly commands and
limitteth.

Now finding in examining those books ( contained, as he says, page 20. in
those two Articles they could not subscribe to) which are the book of common
prayer, and of ordaining Bishops, Priests and Deacons, and many things
doubtful in our consciences, we dare not subscribe, etc.

The reason given by him in general is this:

"If we subscribe we break the Canon of holy Scripture.

I will therefore show some two or three instances whereby it shall appear that
if we had subscribed, we had done contrary to this holy Canon of Gods written
Word.

Sect. 18. The instances that he gives are these following briefly.

First, we should subscribe that it is not contrary to the Word of God, to read
in the Church under the name of holy Scriptures; namely, such Books, as are not
holy Scripture, as namely the Apocrypha, etc.

Secondly, it is objected against subscription to these Books, That it is
ascribed to the Imposition of hands at the Confirmation of children, and
Matrimony to be Signs and Seals of the Covenant; which is proper to the
Sacraments, and that no man can make any Sign of such a Mystical and
Sacramental nature to signify Gods good will, unless he have Authority from
God. We therefore conclude that if we should subscribe, we should allow that
which is contrary to Gods Word.

The third instance is this, page 27. That in the book of Orders there is an
Office of Ministry called the Deacon, whose description is not to be found in
Gods Book; namely, consisting in helping the Priest etc. Seeing that this kind
of Ministry has no resemblance with the Office of the Deacon, Acts 6. or 1 Timothy 3. That he should preach and baptize, and not be of the Order of
Priesthood, as they call it: We therefore think that in subscribing hereunto
we should offend the holy canon of scripture, and allow that which is contrary
to the same by our subscription, page 28.

Sect. 19. These are the three great instances or objections against a
universal subscription to all the Articles, and the main grounds of that
Nonconformity then. Because I suppose, that had there been any more ponderous,
they would have been produced then; though as he says There were many other
doubts which some of us Ministers of Kent delivered to the Reverend Archbishop
of Canterbury, page 28.

Now laying aside all humane considerations of the piety and integrity of the
persons that then could not subscribe without sin; let us seriously weigh these
arguments by Scripture and reason, that so we may see what there is of truth in
them, and come to make a right judgment in this case, whether these things
excepted against, are so momentous as they are made.

Sect. 20. I shall therefore begin with the first argument against an universal
subscription, In so doing we should subscribe that it is not contrary to the
Word of God, to read in the Church under the name of holy Scripture, such books
as are not holy Scripture. viz. out of the Apocripha.

I must confess here was some appearance in those days of so doing, by the
misunderstanding the sense of the Rubric next after the order for the reading
of the Psalms. Because of these words, the order how the rest of the holy
Scripture besides the Psalter, is appointed to be read, some Chapters by the
same Rubric being appointed to be read out of the Apocripha; from thence I
conceive is gathered the objection as aforesaid.

Sect. 21. But who ever shall seriously consider of it, will find it to be weak
and groundless, there being scarce any point in difference between us and the
Papists so strongly followed, as this about Apocripha, which by the Church of
England is denied to be Canonical Scripture; and therefore it cannot be
imagined they should appoint it to be read as any part or portion of Gods
blessed book, This is contrary to the 6. Article.
to be the rule of Faith.

Now this must be clearly proved, otherwise the objection against subscription
signifies nothing.

For the reading only of the Apocripha, or any part thereof that is not
sinful, being no where forbidden; nay, being read in the public congregation
sometimes for matter of instruction, the Authors thereof being accounted wise
and holy men in their generations, is warrantable, and that by the practice of
the Primitive Churches; for I find quoted by Bishop Jewel, that long before
Popery these Books of Apocripha were read in the public Congregations.

Cyprian in Expositione Symboli, says he, Alii libri sunt qui non sunt
Canonici, St. Hierom in Praefat. Salomoni. says the like.
sed Ecclesiasti appellantur, etc. and hujus Ordinis est Libellus Tobiae, and
Judith, and Machabaeorum. And these were called Ecclesiasti, because that they
were allowed to be read in Churches.

Sect. 22. So that it appears the very Books that Mr. Nicholls excepteth
against, as Tobit and Judith, amongst the rest; these were allowed to be read
in Churches so many hundred years since, and it is observable the distinction
that Father there makes, would help us out of this very scruple. These
portions of the Apocripha appointed to be read, they are Ecclesiastical but not
Canonical Books; and therefore as we may lawfully in the public Congregations
read the writings of any wise and good men, so may we any portion of the
Apocripha, especially considering I find them not enjoined to be read but upon
one Lords day, but at such times when very few come to hear them; and also to
do is no where forbidden in the sacred Scripture.

And therefore to subscribe that they may be lawfully read, and to promise to
read the same is not contrary t Gods Word.

Sect. 23. I come now to the next place to consider the second great Instance,
why no universal subscription to all he 39. Articles, because that in this book
it is ascribed to Imposition of hands at the confirmation of children, and
Matrimony, to be signs and seals of the covenant, which is proper to the
Sacraments, etc. page 26.

Concerning which should there not be a very great mistake, it would doubtless
be contrary to the Word of God, yea, to the Doctrine of the Church of England,
who strongly affirm against the seven Popish Sacraments, that Christ has
instituted but two, viz. Baptism and the Lords Supper.

That therefore this mistake may appear, I desire the proofs of this Instance
may be well weighed, page 25. Plea. In the Rubric before confirmation it is
affirmed, That confirmation is administered to them that be baptized, that by
Imposition of hands and prayer they may receive strength and defense against
all temptations to sin.

Secondly, in the latter prayer of consecration it is said, That after the
example of the holy Apostles they lay their hands upon them, to certify them
by this sign of Gods favor and gracious goodness toward them.

And that Matrimony signify h to us the mystical union that is betwixt Christ
and his Church.

Sect. 24. To begin now with the examination of the first proof. Though this be
granted, that confirmation is appointed as a means whereby persons baptized may
receive strength and defense against all temptations to sin; does it therefore
follow, that it is ascribed to Imposition of hands to be a sign and seal of the
covenant? This is a very great mis-apprehension and huge mistake about this
ordinance of confirmation: To evidence this, I desire what I now offer may be
considered and compared with the holy Scripture.

Sect. 25. Imposition, or the Laying on of hands upon persons that have been
baptized, is not of mere humane invention, but of divine authority; and
therefore the Author to the Hebrews 6.2. he does reckon it amongst one of the
beginnings of the Doctrines of Christ, joining it with the initiating ordinance
of Baptism; I say, this Doctrine of Laying on of hands follows next in order
after the doctrine of Baptism.

Now for the warranting of this practice now in the Church I shall do two
things; first, give example from Scripture; secondly, from the practice of the
Christian Church in former Ages.

In Acts 8.14. when the Apostles at Jerusalem heard that Samaria had received
the Word, and were baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus, ver. 13. they sent
Peter and John, which were Apostles also, (from whence by the way, if Peter had
been the Prince of the Apostles, he would have sent some of those Apostles that
sent him) to Confirm the people of Samaria in the profession of the Christian
Faith. Now when they came thither, they prayed for those baptized persons, ver.
15. that they might receive the Holy Ghost both in its extraordinary gifts and
saving graces, by which they might be confirmed, and receive strength against
all temptations. Now after this prayer what did they? they laid their hands
upon then, ver. 17. Behold here a Scripture-warrant for Imposition of hands and
prayer, for the Holy Ghost the giver of all grace, whereby we may receive
strength and defense against all temptations to sin.

Sect. 26. Now that this Ordinance continued in the Charch of God after the
Apostles days, what I have read alleged by St. Jerome does prove the same:
says he in his book advers. Lucifer, cap. 4. I deny not the custom of the
Church was, that the Bishop should go abroad, and imposing hands pray for the
gift of the Holy Ghost on them whom the Presbyters and Deacons for off in
lesser City had al ealy baptized.

I desire that this proof may be well considered of, for it is serviceable,
besides the end for which I bring it, to inform also in that which is the
subject of the third scruple about Deacons; and that it may be the better
understood I shall make it into these Propositions.

First, that the Imposition of hands by Bishops was the custom of the Church
before St. Jeromes time.

Secondly, that this ceremony was attended with prayers, as in the Apostles
days.

Thirdly, that the persons thus confirmed by this sign and prayer, were such as
were already baptized by the Deacons and Presbyters.

To all which let me add but this observation, being of great use in what
follows, That in the Church of God in St. Jeromes days there were three
degrees of order in the Gospel Ministry, or Ministerial Function, viz. a
Bishop, a Presbyter, and a Deacon.

Sect. 27. And thus having communicated my thoughts upon a diligent search of
the sacred Scriptures, as to this ordinance of Consirmation by the Imposition
of hands and prayer; I suppose it will appear to be a great mistake in those
that are offended at what the Rubric mention; before Confirmation.

As to the second proof I shall say the less, for having so fully cleared what
is done by the Church of England, to be according to the example of the holy
Apostles, as they affirm in their last prayer at confirmation; and therefore
this sign of Laying on their hands being no sign or ceremony of their own
devising, but by divine right; it may charitably be concluded that such
persons, who are made partakers thereof, may thereby be certified of Gods
favor and gracious goodness toward them; that they have not only been
baptized but have had an opportunity to make profession of their Faith, and
have had the prayers of the Church for them to receive strength and defense
against all temptations to sin, etc.

Sect. 28. And thus now having examined the proofs brought by Mr. Nicholls, for
making the sign of Imposition of hands, and what is said of Matrimony, to be a
sacrament or seal of the covenant; I leave it to your serious consideration,
whether this were a ground sufficient for refusal of an universal subscription.

CHAP. XI.
That to subscribe to the use of those Ceremonies which have significancy in
them, as the Surplice and Cross in Baptism, is lawful and warrantable; proved
by the judgment of Foreign and our own Modern Divines, both Conformists and
Non-conformists.

Section 1.

BEcause that I find this Principle so well improved once, that this charge is
fastened upon all such rites and ceremonies as have any significancy in them, as
the Surplice and Cross in Baptism; and that to this day, though so much be
granted, That the civil power or Church besides the circumstances of time and
Place, may order an hundred things, which Reason and Nature it self teaches all
sober persons to be such, as that without some order to be observed in them,
the Worship of God would not be performed, or would be undecently performed.
Discourse of Liturgies, page 88.

Yet it is denied that they have any Authority to appoint significative
ceremonies, which are sensible signs to affect the understanding; this is to
give them Authority to institute Sacraments, as Mr. Nicholls said of old, Sect.
9. page 88.

For the proof of this denial I find not a word of Scripture, or any other
reason but this, against significant ceremonies, We believe them reducible to
no command; which is his great argument against an Imposed Liturgy, We find no
command of Christ for it.

Sect. 2. I am in great hopes that if I can by Scripture, or the judgment of
such as have been accounted for godly and learned, now above all interest or
right reason, prove the contrary; It may be a blessed means of inclining those
that are concerned unfeignedly and universally to assent, cons^nt and conform
to all the Book of common prayer, with all the rites and ceremonies according
to the Act for Unformity.

But before I begin I shall lay down this distinction concerning Rites and
Ceremonies, viz. of Moral and sacramental.

A rite or ceremony may be significative, and represent spiritual objects to
our understanding, and yet not be a sacramental ceremony.

Sect. 3. For a Sacrament, according as I learned when a child, is thus
defined, to be a sign to represent, a seal to confirm, and an instrument to
conveigh grace; and I humbly conceive that where any of these are wanting it is
no Sacrament. A Ceremony may be as a sign to signify or present to our
understanding a spiritual truth or moral duty; but being not affirmed of them
that they are appointed as instruments to confer Grace, or to be as seals of
the covenant of Grace; such a Ceremony though it may be of moral and
spirituull use, yet is it not a Sacrament. And I humbly conceive to use such,
are no additions to Gods Word or Sacraments: The sign of the Cross is no
addition of a Sacrament to a Sacrament, as is often said, but only a sign to
put us in mind of such a Christian duty; wherein if we fail, Christ, in whose
name we have been baptized, will be ashamed of us at the last day.

My argument at present is somewhat considerable; I believe that there is no
command of Christ forbidding any such mystical and significant ceremonies to be
appointed by the Church.

Sect. 4. I now proceed through divine assistance to offer to consideration
what I have propounded to prove concerning the power of the Church about Rites
and Ceremonies.

Desiring such as would be more fully satisfied to consult the judgment of
that godly and leaaned man, Mr. John Randall, who in his most Excellent
Lectures of the Church, published by that faithful Minister of Christ, Mr.
William Holbrooke and his Son-in-law Mr. Ithiel Smart late Minister of Ashby de
la Zouch, does most clearly and solialy discourse on this subject; whom though
you shall find very exact and strict in affirming the Church has no power to
decree any mattters of substance in Religion without or besides the Scripture,
XXV. Lecture of the Church, page 131. which he proves by clear and pregnant
Scriptures and strong reason; yet he grants, nay, lays it down as a Thesis
or proposition, which he proves by Scriptures, and gives four reasons for it,
page 145. viz. That every particular visible Church has power from God to
ordain some outward rites and ceremonies for the outward carriage of Gods
Worship.

Amongst which rites and ceremonies, speaking of the bounds the Church is to
keep in ordaining matters of ceremony under this head, that they must have no
opinion of Gods Worship placed in them, as the Surplice and the Cross if the
Church so enjoin them, it makes them unlawful if they have been abused so by
the Papists. That is not their sin now; take away the abuse, and the things may
still be imposed and put in practice.

Sect. 5. If this be not a sufficient proof or vindication of the Power and
Authority of the Church abou ceremonies in general, and these two significant
ones, the Surplice and sign of the Cross.

I shall presume to give you in my poor and weak observations from the
Scriptures of truth by way of furthe illustration. And I argue thus, That which
is a Christian duty may lawfully be done without Superstition or Will Worship,
and may be subscribed as agreeable to Gods Word.

Now if Christians might not lawfully make use of terrene and common things to
represent to their understandings spiritual and heavenly truths, and to mind
them of their duties, our blessed Savior would never have repeesented himself
to us by such things whereby his spiritual worth and usefulness might be the
more evidently presented to our understandings. How often does he by meat and
drink, by a Vine, a door, and such like, affect our understanding with his
usefulness and worth? Now that which Christ has sanctified by his own example,
is a sufficient warrant for us to observe and do.

Sect. 6. True it is, some things there are about Gods worship which are
particularly forbidden in the second commandment, as to the making to our
selves any graven Image, though to worship God by, or the second person in the
glorious Trinity. But any means that God has not forbidden whereby we may
signify our inward Worship of God, this is warrantable: We do not find our
Savior condemning the Publican for using that significant ceremony of smiting
upon his heart while he confessed his sin. Though doubtless it might signify how
angry he was with his wicked heart from whence all evil springs, by smiting
upon the place of its residence the breast; though I can find no command for
this in the holy scripture.

And the like might be said of that against which Mr. Josias Nicholls so
excepteth against as a Sacrament, that holy Ordinance of Marriage, because that
it signifies, as the Church expresses it, the Mystical Union that is between
Christ and his Church. Surely we may make use even of this representation by
Matrimony, to endeare our affections to Christ our spiritual Spouse, and yet
not be guilty of Will Worship or superstition, because the Apostle Paul does
from this very argument press husbands to love their wives, Ephesians. 5.15, 32. and
therefore what we know of matrimonial love, may teach us to love Christ with a
conjugal affection.

Sect. 7. And might we not lawfully use such common things in themselves to
affect our understandings with spiritual things, the Spirit of God would never
teach us by them. It is no superstition, calling to mind the affection that we
see in Mothers to their children, to strengthen our faith in the love of Christ
to us. If this might not lawfully be done without superstition and
Will Worship, God himself would never teach us by such representations; says
he, can a Mother forget her child, etc. yet will I not forget thee. In like
manner the consideration of the sign of the Cross, which is a representation of
all that Christ suffered for us, to mind us of our duty of confessing of
Christ, to which nothing can more engage us then the remembrance of what he
endured for us upon the cross, when he despised the shame thereof for us, as
the Apostle speaks. To subscribe to the use thereof in Baptism is lawful.

Sect. 8. Now though it may be objected that there is a particular Ordinance,
even that of the Supper, to remember us of his death and sufferings upon the
cross; and therefore the use of this sign of the cross, if it be not
superstitious, yet it is superfluous.

It may be considered of, that besides an Ordinance appointed of God for a
general use, it is warrantable to make use of particular reembrances of Gods
mercy and our duty, though we have no particular command for them.

Many instances of this might be given in the Church of the Jews, who were
most strictly tied to particular circumstances in Gods Worship in matters of
Religion; yet for to keep up particular remembrances of Gods mercy to them, and
their duty to witness that they were Members of the true Church, to avoid
contention in after-ages, and such like ends referring to Religion; they have
without any particular command from God instituted significant signs for the
purposes aforesaid.

Sect. 9. Passing by many, I shall only remember you of a very great remark,
Josh. 22.9. The Children of Reuben, Gad, and the half tribe of Manasses, they
build an Altar by Jordan, even a great Altar to see to, ver. 2. this the rest
of the tribes of Israel took for a rebellion against God, and like to be a very
great provocation, ver. 16, 17, 18, 19. beseeching them whatsoever they did,
not to rebel against God or them, in building an Altar besides Gods Altar.
Thus to do, I say, the rest of the Tribes did account to be a great sin, this
was to set up Posts by Gods posts, etc.

Now observe, though what was done here was done without any particular command
from God, nay, was seemingly contrary to it, for to build an Altar besides Gods
Altar; yet if you consult the story, you will find that though they do not deny
what their brethren apprehended about this significant sign, yet they did
justify their erecting or instituting it for a token or a witness to future
generations, that they were Members of the true Church, that they had a part in
the Lord, ver. 27. it was upon a religious account they did this; and yet it
was no Altar for burnt offerings or sacrifices, this they did utterly disclaim
ver. 29.

Sect. 10. I wish from my heart this Instance might be well considered of, and
what was the effect of it in those days.

For though before the children of Reuben had declared their true grounds and
reasons why they did set up this said token, sign or witness, the rest of the
Tribes were resolved to imbrue their hands in their brethrens blond, even for
building this Altar, ver. 12. it had very near occasioned a civil War; but when
they had understood their reason for so doing, and perceived they were not
guilty of Idolatry, which they feared, ver. 16, 17. they were content with what
the childen of Reuben spoke, ver. 30.

Sect. 11. They might, as we do now in cases of this nature, have charged them
with superstition, saying, Where is your warrant out of the Word for what you
have done? you have set up posts by Gods posts, is this according to the
pattern in the Mount? this is contrary to the precept you have so lately
received, Deuteronomy. 12.32. you have made an addition to Gods Word, have you not the
seals of the covenant, Circumcision and the Passover to remember you and your
children, that you have a part in the Lord, and are his people; but must you go
and make a significant ceremony of your own invention, nay, which is worse,
take Gods own Institution, his holy Altar, and design it for another purpose
then he intended it?

This and much more might they have said, had they been of the temper and
tenants that many good people are of in our days.

But Phineas said, ver. 31. This day we perceive that the Lord is among us,
because that you have not done this trespass against the Lord. Behold here they
clear them from sin, that they had transgressed no commandment of God. Nay,
this holy man does ingeniously confess, that had the children of Israel
proceeded to have made war with their brethren upon the apprehension they had
of Rebellion and Idolatry, etc. that they had offended God, and had fallen into
his hand who is a consuming fire: But says he now, you have delivered the
children of Israel out of the hand of the Lord.

And the people of Israel, when they were informed by Phineas and the Princes
of these things, they were also of so yielding a temper, that the Text says,
that the report that Phineas made had these two excellent effects, ver. 33.
They were very well pleased with what the Reubenites had done, and they blessed
God, who had kept them from committing of murder, upon a mis-apprehension that
their brethren had committed Idolatry.

Sect. 12. I have been the larger in glossing or paraphrasing upon this
practice, and all the material passages thereof.

Being persuaded that if God would but give to his people that are most zealous
against Idolatry and superstition, to be of the mind the children of Israel
were of then, that they would without passion and prejudice hear the defense
those make for themselves in commanding or doing things about Religion, and the
modes of Worship and Discipline; which may seem to others to be Idolatrous, as
the Altar at first did to the Israelites, and but charitably believe what the
Church of England declares in their Apology, chap. 17. division 1. and also in
their preface to the Common prayer concerning ceremonies in general, and of the
Cross in particular in her Canons; it would hugely conduce to heal us by
extinguishing our great heats and animosities, and by delivering us from
scrupleing our selves, and censuring others about the same: That so after all
our unbrotherly and unchristian differences and discords about the modes only
of Worship, as Mr. Baxter says, we may now serve the Lord with one shoulder,
and with one mind and mouth glorify God.

Sect. 13. In particular, did the most unsatisfied but believe what has been
written in the defense of the sign of the Cross in Baptism by the Canons of the
Church, or what I now write of it, that they do not by appointing or conforming
to it set up an Altar by Gods Altar, or add a Sacrament to a Sacrament
thereby. It is but Ed, as the Reubenites called their significant sign; it is
but a witness, or a token as the Church teaches, that persons baptized may not
be ashamed of Christ; a duty, as I said before, of high concern.

They do not place any worship or holiness in this sign, as the Papists do; but
that it may appear that they are not guilty of novelty, they do retain the
sign of the cross amongst them, as being of great antiquity in the primitive
Church, and used as a means to mind the Christian Converts then from Paganism,
that they should not be ashamed to confess Christ, nor yet of his cross, which
was foolishness to the Gentiles, as the Apostle speaks.

Sect. 14. But now finding that Mr. Baxter in his Five Disp. after he has
granted that it is in the power of men to determine of such modes and
circumstances, as are necessary to the performance of that Worship which God
has instituted in his Word; and therefore lawful governors may in such cases
bind us by their commands, page 400. Sect. 5. And thereby, I suppose, impose
them.

Giving for instance, that it is left to human determination concerning time,
and the Utensils about Gods Worship, page 401. whether we shall preach in a
Pulpit, and what shall be its shape? where we shall read, whether we shall
baptize in a Font or Basin? and of what materials, whether of Stone or Pewter,
whether we shall receive the Lords Supper at a Table or in our Seats? whether
it shall stand in the East or West end of the Temple, or the middle, whether it
shall have rayles or no rayles, etc. page 402. Sect. 9. and in page 405. having
granted that God has not tied us to any one particular gesture; but that it is
left to humane prudence to order our gesture by the general rules of order,
decency and edification in preaching, praying, hearing, singing, and whether
the Ministers habit be black or white, linen or woollen, or of what shape and
fashion; this he says is left to humane prudence, Sect. 21. page 405. and in
406. he that has commanded us joyfully to sing his praises, has not told us
whether we shall use the Meeter or any melodious tune to help us, or whether we
shall use or not use a Musical instrument, or the help of more artificial
singers or choristers, etc. and in Sect. 23. the use of the Ring in Marriage.
In all these cases it is no usurpation or addition to the word or institution
of God for man to determine; it is but obeying of Gods commands, all these are
necessary in their genus, and commanded us of God; and the species, no where by
the Word of God determined of, etc.

Sect. 15. Yet in page 417. he says, that of all our ceremonies there is none
that I have more suspected to be simply unlawful, then the Cross in Baptism.
The rest as I have said, I should have submitted to, rather then hinder the
Service or Peace of the Church, saying page 418. yet dare I not peremptorily
say it is unlawful, nor will I make any disturbance in the Church about it more
then my own forbearance, which I fear will not be a little, considering what is
published against the same by these following reasons, page 418. Sect. 53. This
is not, says he, the mere circumstance of a duty, but a substantial humane
Ordinance of Worship, etc. There must be some time, some place, some gesture,
some vesture some utensils; but you cannot say that there must be some teaching
symbols, some mystical signs, etc.

Sect. 16. To which I shall crave leave to reply, That I can say so, because
that I have read so much affirmed by your self, page 404. Five Disput. being as
much, if I mistake not, as the Church of England does declare. For there I find
Sect. 18. Though the tongue be the chief instrument, yet not the only
instrument to express the mind. And though words be the ordinary, yet not the
only signs, as the Prophets of old were wont by other signs, as well as words
to prophecy to the people, Sect. 19. And therefore I durst not have reproved
any of the ancient Christians that used the sign of the Cross merely as a
professing signal action, to show to the Heathen and Jews about them that they
believed in a crucified Christ, and were not ashamed of his Cross.

Sect. 17. Now I beseech the Christian Reader to consider whether the sign of
the Cross so used was not a teaching symbol or a mystical sign. And therefore
it seems strange to me, that though this worthy person durst not reprove the
ancient Christians for the use of the sign of the Cross, yet seems to reprove
the Church of England upon the same account and no other, who do use it only
as a professing signal action; who also grants significant signs warrantable,
page 410. secondarily though not primary, speaking of the Surplice, Sect. 40.
saying, he would use that garment if he could not be dispensed with. Though
secondarily, the whiteness be to signify purity, and so it be made a teaching
sign, yet would I obey; for secondarily, we may lawfully and piously make
teaching signs of our food and raiment, and any thing that we see, (And if so,
why not of the sign of the Cross?)

Sect. 18. Now that the sign of the Cross is instituted by the Church only as
a teaching sign, and that according to Mr. Baxters distinction secondarily and
not primary, not as a humane sacrament as is said before, Sect. 54.

I argue, first, from the words quoted by Mr. Baxter in the Form of
Celebration, page 421. We receive this child into the congregation of Christ's
flock, and do sign him with the sign of the Cross, in token that he shall not
hereafter be ashamed to confess the faith of Christ crucified, etc.

Two things I desire may be observed from hence, and then it will appear to be
no covenanting sign, as is said Sect. 60. page 420.

Sect. 19. First, the order of the use of this ceremony, it is after the child
is baptized according to Christ's own institution, by water, in the name of the
Father, Son and Holy Ghost; after that the Infant is externally admitted into
the covenant by the seal thereof, and thereby made a visible Church member;
Then it follows, We receive this child into the congregation of Christ's
flock, and do sign him with the sign of the Cross. But to what end, to be an
instrument to convey grace? No, but for the very end that Mr. Baxter durst not
reprove any of the ancient Christians that used this sign, viz. as a professing
signal action that they should not be ashamed to confess the faith of Christ
crucified, etc. So that the secundary end of this ceremony or sign of the Cross
being only a teaching sign to remember us of a moral duty, as I have said
before. The Sacrament of Baptism it self being the primary one, the investing,
the listing and the covenanting sign. The sign of the Cross, as I said before,
being only a teaching sign of a duty of so much moment; that if we perform it
not, Christ will be ashamed of us before his Father. Methinks this should
incline all peaceable minds to incline to the use of this ceremony when
commanded, it being only a sign and token to mind us of a moral duty.

Sect. 20. But secondly, that it is only and no other then a teaching sign, I
argue from what I find brought to endeavor to prove the contrary, page 419.
Sect. 57. by those words prefixed before the Common prayer Book of ceremonies,
where they say, That they be not dark and dumb ceremonies, but are so set forth
that every man may understand what they do mean, and to what use they do serve;
and that they are apt to stir up the dull mind of man to the remembrance of his
duty to God, by some notable and special signification whereby he might be
edifyed. This ceremony therefore amongst the rest is declared to be but of that
teaching significancy which is allowed in Five Disput. to the Surplice; and
therefore being only for the remembrance of so Christian a duty, being a means
no where forbidden may lawfully be used. The Ring in Marriage, though
acknowledged Five Disput. before quoted to be a symbolical sign and lawful to
be used, page 406. yet I humbly conceive that it is appointed for to remember
the party that wears it of the covenant of her God which she has entered into
with her husband, at the public celebration of Matrimony before many
witnesses. The engaging covenanting act, in the solemnizing of Matrimony lies
in the Promise, the Ring amongst other uses, is to be a token for to remember
the promise that was then made.

Sect. 21. Now that the sign of the Cross after Baptism is appointed for the
same use (and is no Sacramentum in Sacramento, as I have I hope fully proved
before) appears best by the Church, who declare it not only in her Preface
before the ceremomies, but also in several Canons of the Church, to which I
refer you.

If after all this it may be objected, that though this sign of the Cross have
only this signal professing signification, and so was lawful in the primitive
times, when the Church lived amongst Jews and Gentiles; but now the reason for
the continuance of the same holdethout, we live not now amongst Pagans,
Heathens and Jews, as they did.

Sect. 22. I answer; It is true, but do not many Infidels and enemies to the
cross of Christ live amongst us? I name them not, such as do still look upon
our blessed Jesus as an Impostor, the Gospel as a fable, and Christ's
crucifixion as a just demerit for his seduction of the people.

And therefore judge, I pray you, whether there be not the same, if not better
reason for the continuance in the Christian Church of this Ceremony of the sign
of the Cross at the celebration of Baptism; which ordinance of Baptism is to us
as circumcision was to the Jews.

Whether all be true in every circumstance concerning the sig of the Cross that
appeared in Constantines time, with this Motto, In hoc vinces, By this thou
shall overcome, I determine not.

Sect. 23. But considering this sign of it as used in the Reformed Church of
England, who can tell but that by an universal conformity to the use of it
throughout His Majesty's dominions we may In hoc vincere, by this very
significant sign overcome them into Christ's fold? It is not irrational to
think, but that the Jews observing how much we all from highest to lowest,
glory in the representation of that opprobrious instrument of death which their
Forefathers used, viz. The cross, so as that even at our Baptism, when we are
listed among the number of Christ's soldiers, we are by that sign and token to
remember, that we be never ashamed to own Christ before the Jews as well as the
Gentiles. Did I say, they? But understand it aright: it might be a great means
to make them ashamed of their obstinacy in which they continue to this day;
they being a people led so much by signs and ceremonies, for although, if I
mistake not, the manner how the Jews shall be converted is obscurely laid down
in the holy Scripture, yet if there be any truth in the opinion of the learned
Mead about it, who from 1 Timothy 1.16. makes the mystery of St. Paul's conversion
to be a Type of the calling of the Jews, showing that as Paul was converted by
an extraordinary means, so page 27. The Jews not to be converted to Christ by
such means as were the rest of the Nations, by the Ministry of Preachers sent
unto them; but by the Revelation of Christ Jesus in his glory from heaven,
whose coming then shall be as a Lightning out of the East shining into the
West, and the sign of the Son of Man shall appear in the clouds of heaven. Mat.
23.39. and 24. ver. 27, 30.

Sect. 24. I say, if there be any truth in this conjecture, who can tell but
this simple conjecture, also referring to what is said before, may not be a
Prodrome in this Kingdom, where it is supposed so many Jews are and prepare
for it?

But whether this be true or no, yet it is much to be feared, that the
divisions which are amongst Christians about the modes of Worship is a great
hinderance to their conversion. And therefore we should lay it to heart, and as
much as in us lies, to follow the things that make for peace, Romans 14.

Sect. 25. Hoping therefore that what I have written in the sincerity and
uprightness of my heart, may be useful to this end and purpose, and helpful
also to take away those scruples and doubts hindering an universal subscription
to the 39. Articles of Religion, the Book of common prayer, and all the rites
and ceremonies; whose sinfulness, as is supposed, lies in their
Sacramentality, by Mr. Nicholls, the Author of the Discourse of Liturgies, and
others.

CHAP. XII.
The general arguments against Subscription to the Book of making Bishops,
Priests and Deacons; because the Deacon we are to approve, his description is
not to be found in the Book of God, answered: The weakness of which argument
is evidenced from the example of Christ and his Apostles; also the great evil
of urging this argument at large, that nothing is warrantable but what is
expressly commanded.

Section 1.

I Shall proceed to the consideration of the third great instance presented by
Mr. Nicholls in the behalf of the Non-conformists of his time; why they could
not subscribe, because that in the Book of Orders there is an Office of
Ministry called the Deacon, whose description is not be found in Gods book,
page 27. and that he may Preach and Baptize, and not be of the Order of
Priesthood, as they call it.

We therefore think that in subscribing hereunto we should offend the holy
Canon of Scripture, and allow that which is contrary to the same Book by our
subscription.

Now for the removing of this scruple which remains in the minds of many I
fear at this day, and that very much increased since his time;

I shall make bold to weigh this general argument here brought against
subscription, viz. That the Deacon whom we are to allow of according to the
Book of Orders, his description is not to be found in the Book of God.

Therefore to subscribe is a sin.

Sect. 2. Now though it be a truth in general yet no general truth, That to do
or to allow of that which has no description or prescription in the Word of
God, that is, without a command from God is a sin.

Which is as you may observe Mr. Nicholls argument against Deacons.

Yet this truth taken without the distinction of Mr. Ball before quoted of
matters substantial and circumstantiall, not only of Worship but of our humane
converse; nay, in the very Function of the Ministry as you shall find from Mr.
John Ball, when I come to speak of the Deacon in particular; is not to be
approved of, the argument drawn from it being of dangerous consequence.

Sect. 3. Now observing this argument generally propounded, that I do not find
this or that particular command by God in his Word, was a principal pillar of
Nonconformity in Bishop Hoopers time and in Mr. Nicholls time, and probably
began the troubles at Frankfort, is also the Anabaptists great argument against
baptizing Infants, and the originals of the Quakers sad delusion, that would
therefore wear no lace or hatbands, etc. because not commanded in the Word; and
is also the great argument used to this day by the Author of the Discourse
about Liturgies and others, against a form of prayer imposed, the present
Liturgy or Service Book, and the significant rites or ceremonies of the Church,
as being reducible to no command.

I shall desire seriously that what I now offer to consideration, may be well
weighed by all; especially, such as may scru le an universal subscription as
agreeable to Gods Word, because they find no command for those rites and
ceremonies, they do thereby declare their approbation of.

Sect. 4. That I do not find our blessed Lord and Savior, who never sinned by
omission or commission, though he did often bring arguments from the written
Word of God to resist the devil, and to convince wicked men of their sins
against the express commands thereof.

Yet I do not find as to circumstantials in Worship or otherwise, that he ever
used this argument. I find no command for this or that in Scripture, and
therefore I charge you do it not.

In times of affliction our ears, as Job says, are open to ece ive Discipline,
and yet our dear Savior who was full of compassion to the souls and bodies of
men, being besought by Jairus one of the Rulers of the Synagogue to heal his
Daughter at the point of death. We do not find our Savior thus treating of him
at that time; Friend I fear this judgment is come upon thee for that you
execute an Office that has no standing in the Scripture, no description there;
where do you find any particular command either for your synagogues, or for you
to be a Ruler there, etc.

Sect. 5. Neither do we find it to be his practice at any other time to use
this a gument. And why it should be ours to lay so much stress upon it, as Mr.
Nicholls did in his time, and we since, I know not.

Sure I am, that which is contrary to the practice of Christ and his Apostles,
we are to forbear.

I think I have proved it contrary to Christ's practice, who was a severe hater
of men's superstitious traditions, that is, such as made void the Law of God;
but those traditions which make not void any Law of God, that is to say, are
not contrary to any command, and no holiness placed in them: These if I mistake
not Christ never reproved; the superstition of the Pharisees about their
external washings, he reproves sharply, but not upon this account, because
they were no where commanded, But because they placed holiness in them, and
censured those that did not as they did themselves, therefore he calls them
so often hypocrites; as you may find by comparing Mark 7.3, 4. with Mat. 15.
washing or not washings is indifferent except the hands be very foul. But to
account our hands more holy for washing, and to censure others for having
common hands that wash not as the Pharisees did the Disciples of our Lord: This
was the superstition of the Pharisees.

Sect. 6. I might be large in proving the weakness of this argument, that all
things because not commanded or prescribed in scripture are sinful: But as I
have showed we have no warrant to argue thus about circumstantials not
forbidden from the example of our Savior, so I conceive the consideration of
the practice of the Apostle Paul may somewhat clear what I say, who as if he
would have prevented the sad consequences proceeding from the want of
distinctions in this particular, 1 Cor. 7.7. As a Church-governor
distinguishes of what he enjoins the Corinthians by commandment from God, and
what he does by permission only enjoin, what he says of himself, and what not
he but the Lord, 1 Cor. 7.6, 10.

And this very distinction if considered, would deliver us from all our fears
that we have about circumstantial matters not determined by God in his Word. To
observe and do them, because not commanded is not sinful; because the Apostle
had then sinned in ordaining as he says in every Church such things for which
he had no commandment, but only permission. To subscribe therefore to observe
these commands is lawful, as being agreeable to Gods Word.

Sect. 7. As to what may be objected against Subscription to the Book for the
form or manner of making, Ordaining and Consecrating of Bishops, Priests and
Deacons; because that Gospel Ministers or Elders are there called Priests, I
shall say little, referring the Learned whom it concerns to the Learned
Discourse of Mr. Meade on this subject, Mr. Balls 1. Treatise answer to Can,
page 142. That Parsons, Vicars, Stipendaries, Parish Priests, etc. are but
various Titles given to the same kind of Ministry in diverse persons.
who plainly shows that Priest is but the contraction of Presbyter, and
therefore the fittest Translation for (...), according to the very Letters,
which Latin, Italian, French, and others have imitated; and also to what Mr.
Ball writes on this subject: And therefore shall proceed to the consideration
of the Deacon which is to be approved of by the Subscription aforesaid.

CHAP. XIII.
The Order of Deacon excepted against by Mr. Nicholls as exercised in the
Church of England, justified by Mr. John Balls argument for Lecturers. Together
with se eral directions from Mr. John Randall, what is to be done in this
present case of Conformity, as to persuading of the Conscience.

Section 1.

ANd thus now having spoken to the argument in general, which I desire may be
well thought on, I shall consider of what is alleged concerning this Deacon in
Mr. Nicholls Plea for not subscribing, page 27. Because in the Book of Orders
there is an Office of Ministry called the Deacon, consisting in helping the
Priest in Divine service, especially when he ministers the holy Communion,
etc. This Ministry, he says, has no resemblance with the office of the
Deacon, Acts 6. or 1 Timothy 3. neither any other Office described or instituted
by God in all the New Testament.

This objection still remaining in the minds of many who are to subscribe unto
this Book of Orders by this new Law for Uniformity;

I humbly conceive, that to help to remove it would be a very good work: To
this purpose I shall desire it may be considered, how near the Non-conformists
argument against Deacons comes to the Brownists against Lecturers, see page
88. second part of Mr. Balls Answer, Mr. Nicholls Plea 26, 27.

Now an answer therefore to one may answer both: I shall give you Mr. Balls
answer in the general, and do refer you to what he says more particularly,
page 89, 90. Says he, If you speak of the substantials and essentials of the
Ministry, it is freely granted that the true Ministry is by the Word of God;
but if you extend it to every circumstantial order, whereby in this or that
society the Minister is to execute that Function he has received of God, this
is not approved; this he may have from men, as he at large shows.

Sect. 2. Observe here how he distinguishes between the Function of the
Ministry and that particular Order, whereby in this or that society he is to
execute this Function: Which distinction, as I said before, serves not only
for a very good answer to the Brownists, that deny Lecturers to be true
Ministers; but likewise to justify against the Non-conformists the execution
of the Ministerial Function by this order of Deacons. And indeed if it be
considered, the very term (...) in Scripture does signfie one that ministers to
another in a degree above him. Says our Savior, He that will be greatest
amongst you, let him be your Deacon, in the Original. And in this sense the
supreme Magistrate being under God, and serving in a place below him, yet above
the people, he is called Romans 13. The Deacon of God. And there is some hint for
this even out of 1 Timothy 3. he that diaconiseth it well, gets himself a (...)
compared with the Arabic and Sy^ack does much confirm this sense.
good degree: Implying that this Order of Deaconship is preparatory to further
degrees of order in the Ministry, viz. such as I have before quoted were
executed in the Church in St. Jeromes time, that is, of Presbyter and Bishop.

Sect. 3. The ground therefore of this mistake, I humbly conceive, lies in
this, Plea 27. In that they call this order of Deacon to be an office of the
Ministry called the Deacon; whereas according to Mr. Ball in the title of
Lecturers says, it is only that order in which the Ministerial Function is
executed. Therefore it may be fitly said of the Deacon, the acceptance of
whose name in the Scripture does much justify his employment, according to the
practice of the Church of Engl. viz. what Mr. Nicholls says, is to be in
helping the Priest in Divine Service, etc.

And thus now having considered of these three great impediments to
subscription in Queen Elizabeth's time, with whatsoever I have met with in the
Writings of the ew Non-conformists in these times, I hope it will appear to all
sober Christians what I at first propounded to evidence upon inquiry, That
Subscription to all the 39. Articles, the book of Common prayer and to all the
rites and ceremonees there in, is lawful and warrantable, and may be done
without sin.

Sect. 4. As to all the particular exceptions not here spoken to, against
several passages in the Common prayer, and Rites of Administration, mustered
together in the Discourse of Liturgies, I shall for brevities sake forbear to
answer particularly, having answered all by taking away the nail upon which
they all hang.

For whosoever shall seriously review that Discourse, and observe his proofs,
may find that Mr. Nicholls argument against Deacons, because their description
in every circumstance is not to be found in the Word of God, is brought in not
only against forms of prayer in this present Liturgy, but all the
circumstantial and ceremonial parts therein, they are reducible to no command.
No warrant in the Word to use or stand up at Gloria Patri and the Creed, no
warrant to kneel at the Communion, for the people to answer the Priest in
prayer, as in the Letany and other responds, etc. with more of that kind; many
of which I believe might be warranted from Scripture particularly, and such as
are included in general Texts thereof.

I desire therefore this may be considered, that the Scripture is no way to be
accused of insufficiency, because that there are not particular commands for
every mode in Worship for every order, rite and ceremony in divine
Administrations; neither are they who command or they which obey and conform to
the use of them to be accused of superstition and Will Worship. My reasons for
it (besides what I have said before) being the same both from Reverend Mr.
Calvin and Mr. Ball before quoted, which were very good in their days, and are
like to stand so while Christ has a visible Church upon earth.

Sect. 5. Now before I go off from this subject, I hope I may do good service
in this momentous business to offer to your consideration the use that the
pious and Learned Mr. Randall in his Lectures of the Church, teaches us to
make, of what has been the subject of my Discourse, being co-incident with
his. Says he, page 148. If we live in a Church where such things are ordained
which are not simply unlawful, we must take heed that we resist not this power
or the things thereby ordained.

1. This is the first rule, and the Lord incline our hearts to keep it, as a
means to this follows another.

2. We must bridle our selves from distike, this is the second; unto which it
should seem we are naturally subject, even to dislike the commands of our
Superiors about things not determined by God in his Word.

3. But thirdly, says he, bridle thy self specially from refusal. Good men had
need to have an especial care of themselves, and that by the severe commands of
God they bridle themselves from disobedience to the lawful commands of men.
Write therefore this golden saying of Reverend Calvin upon your hearts, Nihil
humano ingenio magis adversum est quam subjectio, vere enim illud olim dictum
est, regis animum quemque intra se habere. Calvin 1 Pet. 5.5. There is nothing
to which the wit of man is more averse then subjection; and therefore do men
naturally bend their wits and parts in disputing the commands of their
Superiors, what is said of old is very true, Every man has within himself the
heart of a King, he would rule but not obey: Follow therefore let us the
counsel of this holy man, especially to bridle our selves from refusal.

But yet says he in the next place, which I name the fourth Direction;

4. Yield with some persuasion of conscience.

Sect. 6. For though we may not refuse to yield obedience in matters simply
lawful in themselves, yet every one is to yield with some persuasion of
conscience, it being surely a very dangerous thing for fear, or any carnal
respect to act doubtingly. Considering therefore that scrupulous persons about
doubtful things to them commanded by lawful Authority are in so great a strait,
that if they yield obedience doubtingly they sin, if they do not conform they
sin; some persuasion of conscience is absolutely necessary.

Sect. 7. Now that which must persuade the conscience of the lawfulness or
unlawfulness of an action, either sacred or civil as to the substantials of
Gods Worship and our humane converse, must be the Word of God rightly
understood and applied. And that which must persuade the conscience in
circumstantials referring to the duties of the first and second Table not
determined by God or left to our own liberty, must be the Laws and commands of
our superiors; which though they bind the conscience, yet not absolutely as the
Law of God does, but relatively with respect to those general precepts which
command us to yield obedience for conscience sake.

Now if upon a serious search into Gods blessed Book, we find no command of
Christ forbidding the command of our Superiors, in my poor apprehension the
conscience is set at liberty from doubts, fears and scruples, and the more
evidence we have thereof, the more persuasion; but some, you may observe from
Mr. Randall, is necessary.

And thus now having presumed to show how in my weak judgment this fourth
Direction of his may be practicable, I shall proceed to the next, which I
reckon his fifth.

5. Take such a course whereby thou may obey the Magistrate and the Church,
and yet not offend the weak; herein is wisdom.

Sect. 8. That this may be done, that weak Christians, that is, such who yet
know not their Christian liberty concerning these circumstantials in Worship
not determined by Gods Word, who are apt to judge and censure those Ministers
that do conform to the use of these indifferent things, which are of the same
nature with those matters of offense about meats, drinks and days, that were
Romans 14. that, I say, weak Christians may not be offended, and be delivered
from their fears and scruples about sinning against Christ in their own use of
the same.

I humbly conceive, that as this weakness has been much contracted, and is
much continued by what they have sucked in from the general exhortations of
their Teachers against Idolatry, superstition, and humane inventions in Gods
Worship; amongst which the things before spoken to have been baptized into that
name, because reducible to no command.

So the way to strengthen them is for such Ministers, who have not been clear
in their expressions, and whose Ministry has a command of their consciences
and affections in other substantial truths, plainly to instruct them and inform
them in the nature of these things to which they conform and yield obedience.

Sect. 9. I say, did such Ministers, who zealously in their preaching set forth
the excellency and necessity of Christ, of Holiness and Regeneration, and of
the sinfulness of sin, with the like faithfulness present their hearers with
the sinfulness of the sin of disobedience to the commands, of our Superiors in
matters not simply unlawful; faithfully showing them, that the best way for to
make these things not simply unlawful in themselves, not to be so to them, is
to rectify their judgments, and persuade their consciences as aforesaid. And
also

That the only cure for our contentions about these lesser things is to mind
the substantials of Christ's Kingdom indeed, Romans 14. directing them to
proportion their zeal more about these things, then these poor circumstantial
matters in difference.

Sect 10. I do verily believe, that did such Ministers who are holy and
unblameable in their lives, and powerful in their preaching, but make these
particulars aforesaid the subject matter of their information of their hearers
in the Ministry of the Word, and not confound things that differ, and in
general terms declaime against superstitious inventions of men, and additions
to Gods Worship, etc.

There would be great hopes through Gods blessing upon on this means, that
those who now speak evil of those things which they understand not, that cannot
say as the Apostle Paul in the like case, Romans 14. I know and am persuaded. But
they are persuaded against indifferent things as sinful, though they have no
clear and distinct knowledge of the nature of these things; and therefore are
but weak in knowledge whatever they may think of themselves. They would by this
means come to be enlightened, to be better informed to understand their
christian liberty; and so the grounds of their offense and scandal through
their weakness would be taken away.

Sect. 11. And in order to this, if I mistake not, what the Law of the Land now
requires every Lecturer to do the first time he preaches before Sermon, and
also upon the first Lecture-day every month, page 86. may very much comport
with the advice aforesaid, and together may much conduce to the practice of Mr.
Randalls Fifth Direction, viz. to take such a course whereby we may neither
offend the Magistrate or our weak Brother.

But what now if this cannot be done, but at some Ministers first conforming
according to the Act? Some Christians till they be better informed will be
offended, what is to be done in this case? This Reverend Person, whose memory
is precious with many old professors to this day, proceeds further, to that
which for methods sake I call the sixth Direction, page 143.

6. Yet rather obey the Magistrate, though with offense.

Sect. 12. And the reason that he gives is this, which I desire may be
seriously weighed; For here disobedience is the greater sin, and so takes away
the sin of offending the weak; and indeed in this case I give no offense,
because my hands are bound, and I have no liberty to do otherwise.

CHAP. XIV.
Contains the course that a Minister is to take as to conformity. Though
scandal be taken by weak brethren, in which Chapter the Doctrine of scandal is
considered, and what is alleged by the Author of the Temperate Discourse is
answered; and the Magistrate freed from what is charged upon him under this
consideration.

Section 1.

NOw because that much is rapt up in a very few words, I shall endeavor to let
it into the understandings of weak Brethren, by taking them into these
proportions.

1. First, that though to offend the weak in things wherein we are at our
liberty be a sin, yet when these things come to be commanded by the Magistrate
and I obey not; here disobedience is the sin to be laid to heart.

And the reason is, because that though the matter of the command be
indifferent; yet obedience to that command is an express Gospel-duty, 1 Pet.
Romans 13. etc. And therefore, as Mr. Randall says, takes away any just cause
of offending the weak.

2. Secondly, that where Christians are not at liberty, being not sui Juris,
but under the command of their superiors; to do those things which are not
simply sinful and unlawful, and in conforming to their commands. I give no
offense to my weak brother, this may be scandalum acceptum, but non datum. I
give no offense says Mr. Randal.

And the reason is, because my hands are bound where I am not at my own
liberty; but for the Peace of the Church, the propagating and honor of
Religion, which is weakened by differences and divisions about modes of Worship,
etc. I am commanded to do such things which may seem to be superstitious or
superfluous to weak Christians, and they may be scandalized thereat, and take
offense; yet observe what Mr. Randall says, I give none by so doing.

And therefore what I find concerning the judgment of the Doctors of Aberdeene
of old is very confiderable, That the scandal of brethren weighs light when put
into the scale with the command of Authority.

Sect. 2. This being the great argument used against Nonconformity in the
Treatise of the Discourse of Liturgies, why Ministers dare not use the Common
prayer, because of the scandal they should give to the weak, I have been the
larger upon this subject, to the end that I may, if possible, be instrumental
in helping some out of the Briars, in whose name this ^ucho professes, they
cannot because of scandal use the common prayer, page 47. 51, 107, etc.

Sect. 3. And to this purpose not daring to hide any thing that I know of, that
has any show of Exception against the judgment of this pious and learned man,
Mr. Randall, turning to those laces in the Discourse of Liturgies before named,
I find in page 107 thi^ seeming Objection against what I have observed, as
aforesaid, about scandals.

For there Authors, after the quoting of those places about scandals, Romans 14
13. 1 Cor. 8.3. 1 Cor. 10.34. Romans 14.15. 1 Cor. 8.3. do in page 107. say as
follows; We are not ignorant what is said to take off the edge of this
argument, viz. Concerning offending the weak we are told, first, that these
precepts only concern us where the command of our Superiors does not make the
thing necessary.

And truly I think I have told you so again, and consirmed it by the authority
of a wise and good man. What arguments you have against it, you keep to your
selves; for I find none. But whereas I find, you would gladly know as to this
particular, Whether those precepts of the Apostle be not reducible to the Moral
Law, and whether the Magistrate be not as much obliged not to command things
indifferent where such a scandal will arise, as the inferior not to do them?

Give me leave to tell you who so gladly desire to be informed, that these
precepts are not reducible to the Moral Law, they were only reducible to the
Ceremonial Law, or to such things which being abolished by Christ's death,
became indifferent. And so also are all the commands of conformity, under the
Gospel, reducible only to circumstantials in Gods worship, which God has not
determined against in his Word, as he has against stealing, adultery, and such
like scandalous sins.

Sect. 4. As to what is said further after the proposing of this Question,
which I hope I have resolved, there is this addition, but no argument still; We
humbly conceive that the Magistrate himself is by the Law of God restrained
from commanding any thing by which weak christians may be stumbled, offended,
or made weak. And I suppose this is the sense of Petition for Peace, page 18.

To which give me leave to answer, that I humbly conceive no such matter, and
that it had been exceedingly well done to have quoted a pertinent scripture, or
to have sh wed in which of the ten command^ments this precept thus restraining
our Governors lies hid.

But because I think it not sufficient to propound things by my own authority,
as I observe others do in this controversy, I shall offer to consideration
some scripture proof or instance to the contrary: But before I do it, now it
comes in my mind, I shall desire that this argument should not be slightly
passed over.

Sect. 5. Should this be granted for a truth, That the Magistrate himself by
the Law of God is restrained from commanding or executing any Law by which weak
Christians may be stumbled or offended, or take scandal; Consider, I beseech
you, the dangerous consequent thereof in all Governments, both Ecclesiastical
and civil: I shall instance only in the Law of this Land against theft, and
the penalties thereof.

Put case that a weak Christian, as some such we had within our memory, even in
Olivers days, that would have overturned the Laws of the Land, arguing against
the iniquity of this penalty of theft by death, as being not warranted by Gods
Word, and different from the judicial Law of Moses; for there the thief was but
to make restitution, whereas by our Law it is death, especially if
circumstantiated by that which may put a man in fear of his life, or in danger
of the same by others.

Sect. 6. Is the Magistrate an offender in enacting or executing this Law so
offensive to a weak brother? I leave this to your serious thought^; for should
this be granted in our Land, the sin of stealing would so abound amongst us, as
that scarce any persons would be secured, as to their lives as well as estates;
the remitting of this penalty for the reason aforesaid of scandal, would
occasion more great and horrid sins to be committed.

But if this be said to be nothing to the case in hand, in reference to our
Ecclesiastical matters in difference, though I think the end and reason of the
Laws are the viz. public peace and safety; I shall go off from this supposed
impertinency by some, and proceed to the consideration of some
Scripture-proofs, and show wherein the mistake lies in this point, if I be not
much mistaken my self.

Sect. 7. I find that there is an express precept in matters of scandal about
indifferent things, Romans 14.13. That no man is to put an occasion of falling or
stumbling block before his Brother. But I am apt to believe that the man here
forbidden is not the man in Office. True it is, every private person left to
his own liberty, is to beware of laying a stumbling block before his Brother;
in doing that which is doubtful in the presence of a weak Christian. In this
case as the Apostle says, Romans 14. If I have faith I must keep it to my self;
if I am persuaded things doubtful to weak Christians are lawful, yet I must
forbear them for the reason aforesaid, but not when commanded by my Superiors.
But that this command of not laying a stumbling block restrains the Magistrate,
I humbly conceive as I said before no such matter, and my ground for it is this.

Sect. 7. That the those who were superiors in the Government of the Church
assembled together, Acts 15. had sinned against this precept of Paul, Romans
14.14. for by what they imposed upon the Gentiles, viz. abstaining from blood
and things strangled, they might have given them matter of great scandal and
offense; who were weak and newly converted to the Christian Faith. They might
very well have been scandalized at this decree, as depriving them not only of
their Christian liberty, but likewise that natural liberty they had to eat
blood, and kill their Poultry as we generally do. But now these very things so
altogether unnecessary inse^ as you may perceive, being judged by them
necessary for propagation of the Christian Religion amongst the Jews, and for
the settling of that Peace which was so much disturbed by the Jewish Teachers,
that it amounted to the raising of a sedition amongst them, as the word is in
the original, Act. 15.2.

Sect. 8. Now if this had been a sin in these Church-governors so to do for
Peace and Unity, so to scandalize the weak Gentile as is said before, the
Imposition had been unnecessary, as is said in the Petition for Peace, page 19.
and the Holy Ghost who is the spirit of purity, piety and peace, would not have
been pleased with this decree or canon. But the Scriptures tell us, that this
seemed good to the Holy Ghost, Acts 15. and therefore no sin in them to command
it.

And certainly, had not this decree been yielded unto by the Gentiles, ver. 23.
who testified their conformity to it by their rejoicing at the consolation when
it was read, ver. 31. this very decree had occasioned as hot contentions and as
great scandal to the Gentiles as was before amongst the Jews.

Sect. 10. But these good hearts being peaceably minded, did not say, see here
these Jews which are the chief in Church Government, they have a mind to
promote the interest of their own Countrymen; and whereas we intended to be
purely the Disciples of Christ, they will have us to please the Jews, be
Disciples of Moses also. Our old superstitious Pagan Priests, never put such a
restraint upon us as this, surely if we observe this Canon, we shall soon find
them introducing more, and the pure Worship of Christ to which we Gentiles were
converted, will by degrees be altogether corrupted with Jewish ceremonies.

But we find instead of such perverse disputings, That such was their Primitive
Peace, Unity and Charity, that they did rejoice at this decree and cheerfully
observe it.

Sect. 11. And if God would give to us but the same humble, and peaceable, and
charitable minds, these discords and differences about modes of Worship and
Discipline, would hugely be healed by obedience to this Act for Uniformity.

And thus now having upon the occasion of this passage in this Book aforesaid,
viz. from the discourse of the wholesome counsel of Mr. John Randall,
endeavored to remove this great stumbling block out of the way to conformity,
viz. the supposed scandal that might be given to weak Christians thereby.

I shall proceed to what follows in Mr. Randalls counsel as a Remedy further
in this case; says he, page 148.

But what if a man be not persuaded of these things?

Sect. 12. It is too too evident that notwithstanding all that has been
written from the beginning of the said controversies to this day, it has not
had that desired effect, but many have and may be still unsatisfyed; not
because their arguments for their satisfaction are weak, but because they are
probably weak in their apprehensions of them; the light may shine but the
darkness not comprehend it?

But what is to be done in this case, if a man be not persuaded?

Must he separate from the Church? no, says he, this would be great
uncharitableness. But in this case he has three rules of direction.

First, he must labor to be better informed, he must not be tenacious of his
own opinion, nor yet rest too much upon the judgment of other Non-conformists
though holy and good men. But he must labor and take pains to be better
informed.

Secondly, he must resolve to bear with a great deal, rather then make a rent,
for schism is a great sin.

Thirdly, Suffer thy self to be overborn in things indifferent by the
authority of the Church, till thou be able to prove it simply unlawful, or
to prove that there is a greater scandal in the use of it, then in disobeying
the voice of the Church, and of the Christian Magistrate.

If both Ministers and People would but practice this Rule, the one not lay
down their Ministry, the other not censure and judge them for conforming, till
they be able to prove these two things aforesaid; some Lectures in the City had
not so suddenly been laid down, neither would many good Christians be in so
great a fear as yet they are, left for these modes of Worship and Discipline,
and their Conformity thereunto, they should proceed further.

Consider therefore, I beseech you, what this reverend person says further; I
know, says he, that it is a sin to disobey the christian Magistrate, except
that I know that God commands the contrary: Now in these indifferent things I
do but fear, I do not know, that God commands the contrary; but my conscience
is doubtful of it; and says he, should I run into a known sin, because that I
would avoid a sin only feared.

Sect. 13. I beseech you all therefore in the bowels of Christ Jesus, who shall
read these passages, seriously to consider of them; for were these counsels of
this holy man but believed and practiced, we who now are in very great straits,
some for fear of the loss of their Ministers, others perhaps doubtful lest that
in this hour of temptation they should either betray the Truth, as they
suppose, or their Ministry and Liberties; may be delivered out of all their
fears and dangers, and be preserved from sinning and suffering also.

Sect. 14. Now because that there lies a strong objection against all this,
though it were supposed that some Ministers could declare to conform to the use
of the common prayer, the 39. Articles of Religion, with a full assent and
consent, unfeignedly and universally: yet they cannot, according to the Act,
receive Ordination by the Bishop, having been ordained by Presbyters, lest they
should sin against their own souls; I shall according to my proposed method
proceed to discourse of this fourth Proposition, which follows.

CHAP. XV.
That to receive Ordination from the Bishop, though ordained before by
Presbyters, is lawful.

Section 1.

FOr the proof of this proposition I shall lay down this argument: in the first
place, that which makes the ordination of a Presbyter to be more complete and
conformable to the canon of Scripture, and the practice of the primitive
Church, that must needs be very lawful and warrantable.

But to receive Ordination from Bishops, though ordained before by Presbyters,
makes the Ordination of a Presbyter to be more conformable to the canon of
Scripture, etc.

Sect. 2. For the proof of this I find, that the right way of Ordination
according to the Scripture, and the practice of the primitive Church is
affirmed by the Ministers that answered Bishop Hall 1641. was to be by the
Bishop and Presbyters joint act.

They say, page 25. that by comparing these two places of Scripture, 1 Timothy 4
14. 2 Timothy 1.6. That Ordination of Ministers must be a joint Act, neither of
the Bishop alone or of the Presbyter alone; but of Bishop and Presbyter
together.

Sect. 3. And that this was the practice of the Primitive Church, I find
affirmed by the said Ministers, page 37. To be not only a matter of
Ecclesiastical custom, but of Ecclesiastical constitution, which bind the
Bishop and Presbytery also.

Consil. 4. Carthag. Can. 22. First, in all his Ordinations to consul: with his
Clergy. Secondly, in his Ordination to take the concurrent assistance of his
Presbyters. Cum Ordinatur Presbyter Episcopo, eum benedicente and manum super
ejus tenente, etiam omnes Presbyteri, qui presents sunt manus suas juxta,
manum Episcopi caput illius teneant. In which Canon we have the unanimous Vote
of two hundred and fourteen Bishops, declaring that the power of Ordination is
in the hands of Presbyters as well as Bishops.

Sect. 4. Now who these Bishops were, and of how long continuance in the
Church, that were thus to ordain by the counsel of Carthage, I find laid down
by the said Ministers in a quotation of Hieron. ad Euagrium, page 31. and also
by Mr. Baxter in Five Dispist. page 216. which place he says, Bishop Usher
told him he alleged to King Charles at the Isle of Wight, to this end, when
he was asked by him for an instance of Presbyters ordaining, Quod autem postea
unus electus est qui caeteris praeponeretur, in schismatis remedium factum est,
ne unusquisque ad se trahens, Christi Ecclesiam rumperet.

Nam and Alexandriae a Marco Evangelistae usque ad Hieraclem and Dionysium
Episcopos Presbyteri semper unum ex se Electum. In excelsiori gradu collocatum
Episcopum nominabant, quomodo si excercitus imperatorum facit aut Diaconi
elegant de se quem industriam noverint and Archidiacon. vocant.

Presbysers then made the first Bishop at Alexandria. They elected them as an
Army does a General, but a further act is required from others for his
Confirmations in that place. Now the general scope being to prove the original
of Bishops from the Apostles times, as appears by the conclusion of it in Five
Disput. 218. omnes Apostolorum successores sunt.

Sect. 5. From this quotation, I shall raise these Observations, very much
conducing to the Confirmation of what I have taken in hand.

First, that from the Apostles, as a remedy against schism, by the Election of
Presbyters one was elected from amongst themselves.

Secondly, that after his Election thus made by the Presbyters, the parity that
was before between them then was taken away, and he being placed in gradu
excelsiori, and by them called a Bishop, was as much above them as was a
General chosen by his Army, and the Lord Mayor of Land. though chosen by the
Livery of the city.

Thirdly, that the first Bishop thus chosen in Alexandria, Five Disp^t. page
218.
was S. Mark, even in the Apostles time, for Mark was martyred six years before
Peter and Paul, as the Ecclesiastical stories do record.

Fourthly, this first Bishop and his Successors continued in this gradu
excelsiori, and were not Moderators for a time over the rest of the Presbyters,
but as they were in Saint Marks time by the Electors named Bishops, so they
continued and were fixed in that Office, as appears by the said quotation,
which gives the same Title to Hieraclas and Dyonisius, as they did at first to
Saint Mark; which Dyonisius I find was the thirteenth Bishop of Alexandria
after him: and that you may the better perceive how long in the Church of
Alexandria it was from Saint Mark to Dyonisius, I shall give but a little touch
by two of Saint Marks Successors; The first after him was Anianus, made in the
eighth year of Nero's Reign, and he continued two and twenty years before that
Abilius succeeded him. Abilius governed the Church in that gradu excelsiori
before spoken of thirteen years, and dying, Cordo succeeded him. These three
succeeded one another, S. John yet living, neither had Alexandria any more then
two Bishops in 25. years after the death of St. Mark; Most confirmed, 5 Disput.
p. 218.
Eusebius. lib. 2. cap. 24. Idem. lib. 3. cap. 13. Idem. lib. 3. cap. 21.

Sect. 6. Now that the Bishop thus chosen to a higher degree in the Apostles
time, and the Presbyters did ordain altogether, neither of them alone, I find
by a quotation in Five Disput. page 211. from Bishop Usher, says he, Of the
many Elders who thus ruled the Church of Ephesus in common, there was one
President whom our Savior in his Epistle to this Church in a particular manner
styleth the Angel of the Church of Ephesus; and Ignatius in another Epistle
written about twelve years after to the same Church calls a Bishop. Between
the Bishop and the Presbyters there, what an harmonious consent there was in
the ordering of the Church Government, the same Ignatius does fully declare,
etc.

But that the Bishop was the chief over the rest appears by the Title that
was given him in Tertullians days, in the same quotation to be Summus Sacerdos.

From which quotation I observe, that in some of the Apostles days in the
Church of Ephesus, though some of the Presbyters were called Bishops in the
exhortation that was given them by Saint Paul, appointed (as Bishop Usher
notes) by the Church of England to be read at the Ordination of Priests, etc.
page 211. That yet amongst those many Elders who were there called Overseers or
Bishops, and commanded to oversee and take heed to themselves and to the flock,
over whom the Holy Ghost had made them Overseers; yet that there was one
amongst the rest by our Savior, in his Epistle to that Church, styled the
Angel of the Church of Ephesus; and it is observable what he speaks to him
alone by way of approbation, Revel. 2. I know thy works, that thou can not
bear with them which are evil, and have examined them which say they are
Apostles, and are not, and have found them Liars.

Sect. 7. So that it is evident that in those times there was a Superior in
the Ministry that did examine, try and find liars, such as said they were
Apostles, which must needs be such as did take upon them the Ministry of the
Word.

But yet notwithstanding, according to the quotation, if Bishop Usher, in the
Fourth Council of Carthage, agreeing with what is before quoted in the
Ordination of Presbyters, as the Bishop was to lay on his hands, so also were
the Presbyters then present. It was to be therefore a joint Act, and not singly
to be done by either in these pure and primitive times of the Church.

Sect. 8. Now to make a right judgment from this Discourse of the Ordination
that has been in use amongst us for these several late years past, as to
matter of fact.

I suppose it will easily be granted that contrary to what was propounded and
pleaded for as a great and necessary part of Reformation, that the Bishop
should not Ordain alone, but the Presbyters join with him.

The Ordination of Presbyters has been without any such Bishop described by
Hieron. ad Euagrium, that has had either the Name of a Bishop, or has been
exalted to a bigher degree then the rest of the Presbyters, or has continued
in the exercise thereof, as those Bishops did from Saint Marks time to
Hieraclas and Dyonisius.

Sect. 9. I must profess for my part, I have been at many Ordinations in the
City; but could never see any such Person, hear of any such Name, but both Name
and thing have been wanting as described by St. Jerome. The Classes ordaining
without any Bishop present alone by themselves, and therefore the Ordination
that has been in this manner, has been very imperfect at the best.

That this and other things also required to make a complete Ordination were
absent in the Ordination by the classes generally, I suppose you will grant by
what I further offer out of the Five Disput. page 204. to your consideration:
It is there said, Sect. 22. Argument 7. Where all these forementioned
qualifications of the Ordainer do concur, viz. That he be the Pasto^ (...) a
particular Church, and the chief Pastor of it, and the Pastor of a City Church,
and have Deacons and Presbyters under him, and be the fixed President of a
Presbytery, and the Moderator or President of a larger Presbytery of the
Pastors of many Churches; there according to the principles of the rigid sort
of Dissenters the Ordination is valid. But all these forementioned
qualifications do frequently concur to some of our present Ordainers in
England; therefore their Ordination is valid. The premises are so plain that
they need no confirmation.

Sect. 10. From whence I observe that where these qualifications have not
concurred in all that have been Ordainers of others for these several years
late past, there the Ordination that has been received from such is very
invalid and imperfect.

That these qualifications now have not concurred in all of the Ordainers of
others in this City, or elsewhere in their several classes, that they have
neither been chief Pastors of a City Church, that they have had neither Deacons
nor Presbyters under them, that they have not been the fixed Presidents of a
Presbytery, or Presidents of a larger Presbytery of the Pastors of many
Churches, is so clear and evident, that it cannot, I suppose, be modestly
denied.

Sect. 11. The Ordination therefore by Presbyters alone, being so incomplete
upon all these considerations, so contrary to the council of Carthage, the
practice of the primitive times, so defective of all these qualifications of
the Ordainer last mentioned.

To receive Ordination from Bishops by those that have thus received Ordination
from Presbyters alone without Bishops, must needs be lawful and warrantable,
and makes the Ordination to be more agreeable to what has been the practice
of the primitive Church by these quotations before alleged.

Sect. 12. But it may be objected, That to be thus ordained after Ordination by
Presbyters, is against that canon called the Apostles, Petition for peace, page
10. which deposes those that re-ordain, and those that be re-ordained.

For answer to which, The canon called the Apostles does indeed say somewhat to
that purpose, but that it may appear it does not reach the case, I shall set
down the words thereof; Siquis Episcopus, aut Presbyter, aut Diaconus, secundam
ob aliq o Ordinationem susceperit, deponitur tam ipse quam qui ipsum ordinavit,
nisi forte constet eum Ordinationem habere ab haereticis, qui enim a talibus
baptizati aut ordinati sunt, hi neque fideles neque clerici esse possunt.

Observe here in the first place this canon does allow of three degrees of
order then in the function of the Ministry, of Bishops, Presbyters and Deacons.

Secondly, this canon supposes that Ordination was chiefly to be made by one
in the singular number.

Thirdly, it supposes that Reordination is no crime, where the Ordination
has not been regular, if the persons ordaining have been but erroneous as to
this point of Ordination by Presbyters alone without Bishops. That this
Ordination was not sufficient, I hope I may without offense tell you, was the
judgment of the ancient Church, Epiphan. haeres. 69. Colluthus was a Presbyter
in one of the Churches of Alexandria, and falling away from the Bishop there
for some mis-likes, ordained himself certain Presbyters, for which this
Colluthus was convented in the general Council before Hosius and the rest of
the Athan. apol. 2. in literis Presbyter. etc.
Bishops, and commanded to carry himself for a Presbyter as he was before, and
all those that were ordained by him to return to their former state.

Sect. 13. If you please to read in Athanasius apolog. 2. you will find the
judgment of the primitive Church about Presbyters ordaining Presbyters alone,
to be such as required Reordination.

I beseech you therefore let me propound but this case to you; Suppose some of
those Presbyters that had in the time of Novatus sworn with him that they would
not return to their catholic Bishops, and in this time of their schism from
the Church had ordained one another, would not the pleading of the canon
against Reordination be interpreted a wilful continuance in that schism in
them, and that they had no inclinations to return unto their catholic Bishops?
I suppose you could not but look upon this as a great evil in them so to do,
and is an evil to be avoided wheresoever it hides it self, though under never
such good pretenses.

Sect. 14. Be perswasded therefore that this may be no impediment to your
exercise of the Ministry, that you will not observe what the Law requires;
that now you should come in before the 24. of August, and receive Ordination by
a Bishop.

And let not only what I have said prevail with you, but be pleased to
consider that to be ordained by Bishops is in it self so lawful, that Mr. John
Ball is very positive in his Affirmation, part 1. page 95. If they be not
lawful Ministers who receive their Ordination from Biships, the Church of God
throughout the World has been destitute of lawful Ministers for the space of
this fourteen or fifteen hundred years, which the Non-conformists will never
affirm.

Here take notice, I pray you, of what is affirmed by this Worthy person, viz.
First, that they which receive Ordination from Bishops are lawful Ministers,
Secondly, that Ordination by Bishops has been in the Church for the space of
this fourteen or fifteen hundred years. Thirdly, that the Non-conformists did
then never affirm that in all this time the Church of God had been destitute of
lawful Ministers, though ordained by Bishops.

Sect. 15. And surely these things considered, must needs quicken you to come
in and receive Ordination according to the Act for Uniformity.

For if Ordination by Bishops has been in the Church of God of so long
standing, and is of such Antiquity, it must needs follow that Ordination by
Presbyters alone in a classis must need be an Innovation in the Church;
especially considering the judgment of St. Jerome in his Epist. ad Euagrium,
who speaking of Ordination debars a Presbyter from it, says he, Quid facit
Episcopus quod Presbyter non faciat excepta Ordinatione? Mark the mood is
potential, he may not meddle with Ordination without a Bishop. And therefore
the best way for Ministers to be most completely ordained (in my poor
judgment) is to come in and b^ ordained by Bishops, though ordained before by
Presbyters; especially considering that they are now called upon by the Law of
the Land so to do, and the thing so lawful in it self as you have heard.

I shall but offer to your consideration as a motive to this work, what you
will find propounded by Mr. Baxter (though by him there used to another
purpose) in his Five Disput. page 4. after a worthy commendation of some of the
Bishops. So eminent in Gods graces and gifts, that their names will be precious
whilst Christ has in England a reformed Church; besides the godliness of their
lives and painful preaching. One Jewel, one Usher, one Davenant, has done so
much against the Romain usurpers, as they will never claw it off them; o the
last.

Sect. 16. Says he, that which I offer as a great encouragement to Episcopal
Ordination and Subscription, page 4. Moreoven, who knows not that most of the
godly able Ministers of England since the Reformation did judge Epscopacy some
of them lawful, and some of them most fit (for the Non-conformists were but
few) and that even before these late troubles and wars, etc. The most through
the Land did subscribe and conform to Episcopal Government, as a thing not
contrary to the Word of God; so that it is very evident that it is very
consistent with a godly life, to judge Episcopacy lawful and fit, or else we
should not have had so many hundred leanred and godly men of that mind.

Observe here if it bevery evident that it is very consistent with a godly
life, to judge Episcopacy lawful and fit; which are two of the most
considerable qualifications that can be in any Government, either of Church or
State.

Be persuaded, now laying aside our prejudices and perplexing fears, to become
of the same mind with those many hundred of godly and learned men that did
judge Episcopacy to be lawful and fit; eve^ for us who are under a mixed
Monarchical Government: Especially l^ying this close to our hearts, which Mr.
Baxter says, It is consistent with a godly life so to judge, which will not
only keep us from judging others who are of that persuasion, but may also very
much persuade all pious and peaceable spirits to be of their mind; who judging
Episcopacy to be lawful, did receive Ordination by Bishops.

And not only by their example be persuaded to receive Ordination from Bishops
as they did, but also to subscribe to the 39. Articles according to the Act.
Mr. B^xter here tells the Non conformists were but few. That most throughout
the Land did subscribe and conform to Episcopal Government, as a thing not
contrary to the Word of God. And will you now be singular again by your
Nonconformity and Non-subscription. I beseech you be pleased to what I have in
the former discourse spoken by way of argument for subscription, consider
seriously what you will find written by Dr. John Burges in his Defense of the
three Innocent Ceremonies, one that after some years deprivation for
Nonconformity, after some years practice of Physic, though he found it his
best employment for profit, yet returned to the Ministry, subscribed and writ
in the defense of conformity; I say, his whole Book may be of great use in this
juncture of time; especially what he writes about Subscription, page 23. of his
book.

To all which be pleased to consider of the quotation out of Mr. Baxter, it
being such a passage (in my weak judgment) that whatever may seem to be said
in the Five Disput. to the contrary, yet there is so much truth therein as may
engage all that love the truth and peace after all our divisions and sore
discords (which, as Mr. Baxter says, are not about matter of Doctrine, but of
modes of Wership, etc.) to come to settlement.

And in order hereunto be persuaded to come in and receive Ordination from the
Bishop, though ordained before by Presbyters, as being the way to make your
Ordination the more valid and complete, and thereby to continue you still in
the Ministry.

CHAP. XVI.
That for our Ministers to receive Ordination by Bishops, though ordained
before by Presbyters, will not conclude the Reformed Churches, that have no
Episcopal Ordination, to have no true Ministers, and consequently to be no true
Churches.

Section 1.

BUt it may be objected, That to receive Ordination from Bishops by those that
have been ordained by the Presbytery without Bishops, will make us to yield not
only that our Ordination is invalid, but also that the Reformed Churches in
France, and that other Churches beyond Sea, that have no Episcopal Ordination,
have not true Ministers amongst them, and consequently are not true Churches of
Christ, etc.

To this may be answered, That the case in England and in France, and other
Reformed Churches, is not alike; most of the aforesaid Churches, especially in
France and Germany, are under persecution; and that may be said of them, which
I find in a Letter of E. M. to Mr. Baxter, printed before his Disputation about
Ordination, which to the said E. M. was given in answer to an objection
somewhat of the same tendency; The Churches in those places were very much
under a cloud, being persecuted, and had not liberty to settle Diocesan
Episcopacy in that glory which the Apostolical Institution aimed at; and that
the Church was then what it could be, and not what it would be.

Sect. 2. I say, this is the case of the Churches in France, they being under a
Prince that professes the Roman Religion, and in a state of Adversity. Their
being without Episcopal Ordination does not null or make void their Ordination
of Ministers without them; the want of Bishops having not been through their
own occasion, having never put down any, or induced others by vows and other
violences so to do. And therefore they have been acknowledged by the Church of
England to be their Sister-Churches; and so have the Belgic Churches also, who
therefore sent over some from this Church to the Synod at Dort, which was a
great owning of them: And how much even in Holland they inclined to our
Church Government, if the Government by States did not hinder it, I find by an
Attestation published 1626. avowing that the Discipline of the Church of
England was not impeached by the Synod of Dort, page 6. the Attestators also
saying, That in our private converse with the most eminent of the Ministers
there, we found diverse times upon occasion of our declaring unto them the order
and manner of our Church Government, that they were more ready to deplore then
defend their own estate, and wished to be made like the flourishing Church of
England. But besides what is reported of the Belgic Churches I will give a
taste of the spirits of the French, by what I find in Zanchius these. de vera
reformand. Ecclesiae ration. Qui universalis omnium locorum and temporum usque
ad hanc aetatem, usum and sensum Ecclesiae, certum habet, sequiturque
interpretem; facile intelligit, diversos gradus Presbyterorum and Episooporum
in gubernatione ecclesiastica, esse secundum Dei verbum and srmper fuisse;
proinde ubi vigent non esse abolendos; and ubicunque iniquitas temporum eos
abolevit, aut non tulit, esse restituendos. He that will receive and follow the
use and the opinion of the universal Church in all times and places unto this
Age for a certain Interpreter, will easily understand that the several degrees
of Presbyters and Bishops in the Ecclesiastical government are and ever were
according to Gods Word; and therefore where they stand still they must not be
abolished; and where the iniquity of the times has abolished or not suffered
them, they must be set up again.

Sect. 3. By which (and other before) quotations it appears, that their
judgment was long ago for Bishops and their Ordination by them; and that the
several degrees of Presbyters and Bishops in the Ecclesiastical government are
according to Gods Word, that they were not the same, as is so strongly supposed.

Be persuaded therefore not only to stand and wonder at the counsel this holy
Zanchy gives, but resolve to follow it: where the iniquity of the times has
abolished or not suffered that Ecclesiastical government, he says, it must be
set up again; it must not be endeavored to be undermined or extirpated, for
this is contrary to a Scripture-Reformation, otherwise he would have ascribed
their abolition to be from the piety, and not the iniquity, of the times.

Sect. 4. I beseech you, Sirs, therefore take no care for the Reformed
Churches, as to their Ministry and Ordination; but take care of your own, and
take heed that you give no occasion of scandal or offense to them, by suffering
your selves to be deprived of the exercise of your Ministerial gifts, because
that you will not yield to that which may make your Ordination, which has
hitherto been by the classes, and so done but by halves, to be more valid, and
complete, and consonant to the practice of the primitive times.

Sect. 5. But if what I have said may not satisfy you as to your
thoughtfulness and great care for the Reformed Churches, lest by your being
ordained by Bishops they should be unchurched, as having no true Ministers
because not Episcopally ordained.

Be pleased to take but a View of the Government and Public Worship of God in
the Reformed Churches beyond the Seas. Wherein is showed their Conformity and
Agreement with the Church of England, as it is established by the Act of
Uniformity. A Book lately set forth by Mr. John Durel.

And herein you will find so much said by himself, and quoted from the learned
Spanhemius, late Professor of Divinity at Geneva, and of Ludovicus Capellus
late Divinity-Reader and Professor of Hebrew at Saumers, with others; that
will not only give a very satisfactory answer in this case, but also to a
serious question propounded in the Petition for peace, page 9. What judgment
all the Protestant Churches are likely to pass on your proceedings, meaning the
Bishops, and how your cause and ours, meaning the Petitioners for peace and
Nonconformity, will stand represented to them.

Sect. 6. And I hope withal will very much prevail upon you to be ordained by
Bishops, and to conform, lest that you should be a further scandal and offense
to them, and give them a further occasion to be confirmed in the mean opinion
that some of the most learned Pastors beyond Sea had of our work of
Reformation in taking away Bishops and Liturgy, and setting up the Directory in
the stead thereof.

You will find more then what I say employed in the great commendation that the
learned Spanhemius of Geneva gives of the beauteous face of the Church of
England, with her Reverence in public Worship before these late times: vide
his Epistle before the third part of Dubia Evangelica quoted by Monsieur Durel,
page 66.

And more then I will write in English, you will find Durell, page 15. quoted
Ex Ludovic. Capell. These. Salm. Th. de Liturg. part. 7. These. 6, 7. who after a
commendation of the Liturgy of the Church of England as free from all Popish
saperstition and Idolatry, and how happy we might have been, etc. he says,
Dorec tandem nuperrime exorti sunt in Anglia morosi, scrupulosi and delicatuli
nimium (ne superstitiosos plane dicam) homines, quibus Ecclesiae suae hactenus
usurpata Liturgia visa est multis, sed levissimis nulliusque pene momenti, de
causis non improbanda solum, verum etiam plane abrogan la and penitus una cum
toto Episcoporum Hierarchico regimine abolenda and obliteranda, etc.

Sect. 7. Now as by these two quotations you may, as I said before, easily see
how you have stood represented to the Reformed Churches of Geneva and others;
so also you may apprehend what judgment the Protestant Churches are like to
pass upon you for your Nonconformity, and for choosing rather not to preach
then to receive Ordination from the Bishop, whereby that of the Presbytery may
be completed, and to declare an agreement with them by your subscription.

Oh Sirs, be persuaded after all your doubts, fears and scruples to observe the
Act for Uniformity; and take more care of giving offense to the Reformed
Protestant Churches abroad by your Nonconformity, then of any offense they
will take at you thereat; how far they are from it you will find plentifully
proved in Mounsieur Durells Book aforesaid, to which I refer you.

Sect. 8. It is confessed, that in yielding to this seasonable Counsel there
will be some kind of self-denial, and a departing from that sentence and
opinion which many have taken up to the contrary:

Yet being lawful to be done, and conducing so much to the Peace of Church and
State, and giving an opportunity to many persons whom God has qualified for
the work of the Ministry to exercise the same;

Be persuaded for Christ's sake, if ever you will show your selves to be Christ's
Disciples indeed, deny your selves, and follow the wholesome Counsel of holy
Beza before spoken, that leaving all bitterness as long as the truth of the
doctrine and purity of conscience was safe, Bear one another with patience and
obey the Queens most gracious Majesty and all her Prelates with a free heart.
Beza 12. Epist. ue ante.

Sect. 9. That the Truth of the Doctrine is safe, I beseech you seriously to
consider what I have already quoted from Mr. Baxter, and what now follows
from that Revernd and holy Mr. Robert Bolton in his Saints sure and Perpetual
Guide, page 126. Says he, Certain it is that our Church in that most exquisite
and Worthy Confession of Faith contained in the Articles of Religion, does hold
and profess all substantial points of Divinity as soundly, as any Church in
the world none excepted either in this age, nor in the primitive times of the
Church.

Oh therefore subscribe unto these 39. Articles which the Act for Uniformity
requires, and that ex animo as Beza counseled in his time, the Queen and her
Prelates should be obeyed.

Sect. 10. Especially considering that not only the truth is safe, but that
whatsoever is required by this Act for Uniformity may be lawfully observed with
a safe conscience; if I be not mistaken.

This has been my work and endeavor to prove by the holy Scriptures, the
practice of the primitive Church, the judgment of the most Eminent Divines of
the Reformed Churches abroad, by the concessions of several pious
Non-conformists which are dead, and by what I have alleged from Mr. Baxter
Five Disput. First, that an Uniformity in Gods pulick Worship by obedience to a
form of prayer. Secondly, that to conform to the use of the Common prayer of
the Church of England, with the Rites and Ceremonies of the same. Thirdly, that
to subscribe to the 39. Articles of Religion. Fourthly, that to receive
Ordination from Bishops, though ordained before by Presbyters. Fifthly, to
declare against the binding power of the Covenant. That all these are lawful
and warrantable.

Sect. 11. Consider therefore I beseech you that the way to keep your
consciences safe and sound, is to yield obedience to the lawful commands of our
Superiors, Romans 13. It is given as the reason why we should obey our Superiors,
even for conscience sake. For

If conscience be truly tender, it will check and chide us for our
disobedience, and our hearts will smite us for the same. For

Take heed therefore as you love your souls of this delusion, in pleading
conscience for disobedience; for the heart being so deceitful, we are very apt
so to do.

I have in the integrity of my heart, I hope, made public that Christian
compassion and charity within me, to the end that what I fear are like to be
the sad effects of Nonconformity may be prevented. And surely except the
decree be gone forth against us for that general impenitency that is upon all
parties; for our new sins, since new, rare and unexpected mercies received, and
the continuance in our old ones.

Sect. 12. I should hope through the great piety, wisdom and moderation of our
Superiors in pressing more for the substantials of Religion, the Power of
godliness then the form, and by the obedience of Inferiors to their commands
in both, these black clouds of Gods anger, which I am apt to fear do still hang
over our heads, may be blown over; our discords and divisions about these
matters of mode in Worship and Government, which I believe are both our sin and
punishment, may be healed; and that spirit, which I fear in many, that at this
day lusts not after envy, but blood again, may be subdued by a plentiful
effusion of the Spirit of love and peace, anb of a sound mind.

Sect. 13. In order to all this I have in the first place laid before you the
consideration of this proposition, That obedience to the Act for Uniformity is
the way to Unity; I have endeavored to prove it: I beseech you once more, be
persuaded to improve it by your practice. I have, as I said before, showed what
is required may lawfully be done without sin;

I shall therefore desire you, that laying aside all prejudice, you would be
pleased to grant me these two requests, that I find made in Five Disput. page
271. First, that before you let out your displeasure against me for
contradicting any of your conceits, received opinions and traditions, you would
humbly, impartially, and with modest self-suspicion both study and pray over
what you shall read written by so weak and worthless an one, who can tell but
that what I now offer, comes to your view as an answer to your prayers, for
information in these doubtful matters?

Secondly, the next request of Mr. Baxters which I make is this, That you will
always keep the faith, charity, self-denial and tenderness of Christians upon
your hearts, and the great ends and interest of Christ and Christianity before
you, and take heed how you venture upon any controverted points or practice,
that contradicts the Churches unity, peace and holiness.

Sect. 14. Oh, Sirs, if you will be pleased to keep that faith, charity,
self-denial and tenderness of Christians upon your hearts, it will keep you
from setting your wits on work, as you are Scholars, in this juncture of time
to give a seeming answer to what I have said, not as a Disputant, having never
been so high as a Sophomore in the Schools, but as a compassionate Advocate for
the Churches unity, peace and holiness; which last cannot better be promoted,
then by the continuance of holy men in the Ministry.

I say, this faith, charity, humility, self-denial and christian tenderness
kept close to your hearts at this time, will keep you not only from
controverted points, which contradict the spirit of Christianity; but also from
such practices which may contradict the spirit of Christianity also, and
obstruct the progress of the Church in holiness, peace and unity.

Sect. 15. How much disobedience to the Act for Uniformity, together with the
deprivation of some Ministers thereby for the same, may obstruct the Churches
unity and peace, may contradict the spirit of Christianity, may hinder the
propagation of the Protestant Religion, may gratify the hopes and expectations
of the Romish Jesuits, I wish you may not see when it is too late to repent
thereof.

I conclude therefore with that pathetick cry for audience that came from
Jotham when he uttered his parable, Judge. 9.7.

Hearken unto Me, that GOD may hearken unto You.
FINIS.
Courteous Reader, These Books following, with others, are printed for Nath.
Brook, and are to be sold at his Shop at the Angel in Cornhill.
Excellent Tracts in Divinity, Controversies, Sermons, Devotious.
1. Catholic History, collected and gathered out of Scripture, Councils, and
ancient Fathers; in answer to Dr. Vanes Lost Sheep returned home: by Edward
Chesenhale Esquire Octava. 2. Bishop Morton on the Sacrament, Folio. 3. Grand
Sacrilege of the Church of Rome, in taking away the sacred Cup from the Laity
at the Lords Table: by Daniel Featly, Quarto. 4. Quakers Cause at second
hearing, being a full answer to their Tenets. 5. Re-assertion of Grace,
Vindiciae Evingelii, or Vindication of the Gospel: a Reply to Mr. Anthony
Burges's Vindiciae Legis, and to Mr. Rutherford: by Rob. Town. 6. Anabaptists
anatomized and silenced, or a Dispute with Mr. Tombs by Mr. I. Cragg, where all
may receive clear satisfaction. 7. A Cabinet-Jewel, wherein is Man's misery and
Gods mercy set forth, in eight Sermons; with an Appendix concerning Tithes, and
expediency of marriage in publicly assemblies: by the same Author Mr. J. Cragg.
8. A Glimpse of Divine Light, being an explication of some passages exhibited
to the Commissioners at Whitehall for approbation of public Preachers, against
J. Harrison of Land-chappel, Lancashire. 9. The Zealous Magistrate, a Sermon:
by T. Threscot, Quarto. 10. New Jerusalem, in a Sermon for the Society of
Astrologers, Quarto, in the year 1651. 11. Divinity no enemy to Astrology, a
Sermon for the Society of Astrologers in the year 1653. by Dr. Thomas Swaddling.
12. Britannia Rediviva, a Sermon before the Judges August 1648. by J. Shaw
Minister of Hull. 13. The Princess Royal, in a Sermon before the Judges, March
14. by J. Shaw. 14. Judgment set, and Books opened, Religion tried whether it
be of God or man, in several Sermons: by J. Webster, Quarto. 15. Isreal's
Redemption, or the prophetical History of our Saviors Kingdom on earth: by K.
Matton. 16. The cause and cure of Ignorance, Error and Profaneness, or a more
hopeful way to grace and salvation: by R. Young, Octavo. 17. A Bridle for the
Times, tending to still the murmuring, to settle the wavering, to stay the
wandering, and to strengthen the fainting: by J. Brinsley of Yarmouth. 18.
Comforts against the fear of death, wherein are discovered several evidences of
the work of grace: by J. Collins of Norwich. 19. Jacobs seed, or the excellency
of seeking God by prayer: by Jer. Buroughs. 20. The sum of practical
Divinity, or the grounds of Religion in a Catechistical way: by Mr. Christopher
Love, late Minister of the Gospel; an useful piece. 21. Heaven and earth
shaken, a Treatise showing how Kings and Princes, and all other Governments,
are turned and changed: by J. Davis Minister in Dover; admirably useful and
seriously to be considered in these times. 22. The treasure of the soul,
wherein we are taught by dying to sin to attain to the perfect love of God. 23.
A Treatise of Contentation, fit for these sad and troublesome times: by J. Hall
Bishop of Norwich, where all may receive full satisfaction. 24. Select
Thoughts, or choice helps for a pious spirit beholding the exeellency of her
Lord Jesus: by J. Hall Bishop of Norwich. 25. The holy Order or Fraternity of
Mourners in Sion; to which is added, Songs in the Night, or cheerfulness under
afflictions: by J. Hall Bishop of Norwich. 26. The Celestial Lamp, enlightening
every distressed soul from the depth of everlasting darkness: by T. Fetiplace.
27. The Moderate Baptist in two parts, showing the Scripture-way for the
administering of the Sacrament of Baptism, discovering the old error of Original
sin in Babes: by W. Brittin. 28. Dr. Martin Luther's Treatise of Liberty of
Christians; an useful Treatise for the stating Controversies so much disputed
in these times about this great point. 29. The Key of Knowledge, a little Book
by way of Questions and Answers intended for the use of all degrees of
Christians, especailly for the Saints of Religious families: by old Mr. John
Jackson that famous Divine. 30. The true Evangelicall Temper, a Treatise
modestly and soberly fitted to the present grand concernments of the State and
Church: by old Mr. John Jackson. 31. The Book of conscience opened and read, by
the same Author. 32. The so much desired and Learned Commentary on the whole
15. Psalm, by that Reverend and Eminent Divine Mr. Christopher Cartwright
Minister of the Gospel in York, to which is affixed a brief account of the
Authors Life and Work: by R. Bolton: with Mr. Edw. Leigh's Epistle annexed in
commendation of the work. 33. The Judges Charge, delivered in a Sermon before
Mr. Justice Hall and Sergeant Crook Judges of Assize, at St. Mary Overeys in
Southwark: by R. Parr, M. A. Pastor of Camberwell, in the County of Surry. A
Sermon worthy perusal of all such persons as endeavor to be honest and just
practitioners in the Law. 34. The Saints Tombstone, being the Life of that
Virtuous Gentlewoman Mrs. Dorothy Shaw, late Wife of Mr. John Shaw Minister of
the Gospel at Kingston upon Hull. 35. Gospel-Revelation in three Treatises,
viz. 1. The Nature of God: 2. The Excellency of Christ: 3. The Excellency of
man's Immortal soul: by Jerem. Buroughs. 36. The Saints happiness, together
with the several steps leading thereunto, in 41. Lectures on the fifth of
Matthew, called the Beatitudes of Christ: by Jerem. Buroughs; being the last
Sermons he ever preached; both put forth by the same testimony that published
his former works.
Admirable and Learned Treatises of Occult Sciences in Philosophy, Magic,
Astrology, Geomancy, Chemistry, Physiognomy and Chiromancy.
37. Magic and Astrology vindicated: by H. Warren. 38. Lux veritatis, Judicial
Astrology vindicated, and Demonology confuted: by W. Ramsey, Gent. 39. An
Introduction to the Teutonick Philosophy, being a determination of the
Original of the soul: by C. Hotham Fellow of Peter-house in Cambridge. 40.
Cornelius Agrippa his fourth Book of Occult Philosophy, or Geomancy; Magical
Elements of Peter de Abano, the nature of spirits, made English by R. Turner.
41. Paracelsus Occult Philosophy, of the mysteries of Nature, and his secret
Alchymy. 42. An Astrologicall Discourse, with Mathematical Demonstrations;
proving the influence of the Planets and fixed Stars upon Elementary Bodies; by
Sir Christ. Heydon, Knight. 43. Merlinus Anglicus Junior, The English Merlin
revived, or a Pdiction upon the affairs of Christendom, for the year 1644. by
W. Lilly. 44. Englands Prophetical Merlin, foretelling to all Nations of
Europe, till 1663. the Actions depending upon the Influences of the Conjunction
of Saturn and Jupitur, 1642. by W. Lilly. 45. The Starry messenger, or an
interpretation of that strange appearance of three Suns seen in London 19. of
Novem. 1644. being the birth of K. Charles: by W. Lilly. 46. The Worlds
Catastrophe, or Europes many mutations, until 1666. by W. Lilly. 47. An
Astrological prediction of the Occurences in England, part in the years 1648.
1649. 1650. by W. Lilly. 48. Monarchy or no Monarchy in England, the prophesies
of the White King, Grebner his prohesies concerning Charles Son of Charles his
Greatness, illustrated with several Hieroglyphics: by W. Lilly. 49. Annus
Tenebrosus, or the dark year; or Astrological Judgments upon two Lunary
Eclipses, and one admirable Eclipse of the Sun in England, 1652. by W. Lilly.
50. An easy and familiar way whereby to judge the effects depending on
Eclipses: by W. Lilly. 51. Supernatural sights and apparitions seen in London,
June 30. 1644. by W. Lilly; as also all his Works in one Volume. 52.
Catastrophe Magnatum, an Ephemerides for the year 1652. by N. Gulpeper. 53.
Teratologia, or a discovery of Gods Wonders, manifested by bloody Rain and
Waters: by I. S. 54. Chiromancy, or the art of divining by the Lines engraven
in the hand of man by dame Nature, in 198 Genitures; with a learned Discourse
of the soul of the World: by G. Wharton, Esquire 55. The admired piece of
Physiognomy, and Chyromancy, Metoposcopy, the symmetrical proportions and
signal moles of the body, the Interpretation of Dreams^ to which is added the
art of Memory illustrated with Figures: by R. Sanders, Folio. 56. The no less
exquisite then admirable Work, Theatrum Chemmicum Britannicum, containing
several Poetical pieces of our famous English Philosophers, who have written
Hermetick mysteries in their own ancient Language; faithfully collected in one
Volume, with Annotations thereon: by the indefatigable industry of Elias
Ashmole Esquire illustrated with Figures. 57. The way to Bliss, in three Books; a
very learned Treatise of the Philosophers Stone, made public by Elias Ashmole
Esquire.
Excellent Treatises in the Mathmeaticks, Geometry, of Arithmetic, Surveying,
and other Arts or Mechanics.
58. The incomparable Treatise of Tactometria, seu Tetagmenometria, or the
Geometry of Regulars, practically proposed after a new and most expedious
manner, together with the Natural or Vulgar, by way of mensural comparison, and
in the Solids, not only in respect of magnitude or dimension, but also of
gravity or ponderosity, according to any metal assigned; together with useful
experiments of measures and weights, observations on Gauging, useful for those
that are practiced in the art Metrical: by T. Wybard. 59. Tectonicon, showing
the exact measuring of all manner of Lands, Squares, Timber, Stones, Steeples,
Pillars, Globes; as also the making and use of the Carpenters Rule etc. fit to
be known by all Survyeors, Land-meters, Joyners, Carpenters and Masons: by D.
Diggs. 60. The unparalled work for ease and expedition, entitled, The exact
Surveyor, or the whole art of Surveying of Land, showing how to plot all manner
of grounds, whether small Enclosures, Champain, Plain, Wood-lands or Mountains,
by the plain Table; as also how to find the Area, or content of any Land, to
protect, reduce, or divide the same; as also to take the plot or chart, to make
a Map of any Manor, whether according to Rathburae, or any other eminent
Surveyors method; a book excellently useful for those that sell, purchase, or
are otherwise employed about Buildings: by J. Air. 61. The golden Treatise of
Arithmetic, natural and artificial, or Decimals, the Theory and Practice
united in a sympathetical proportion betwixt Lines and Numbers, in their
Quantities and Qualities: as in respect of form, figure, magnitude and
affection, demonstrated by Geometry, illustrated by Calculations, and confirmed
with variety of Examples in every species: made compendious and easy for
Merchants, Citizens, Seam^n, Accomptants, etc. by Thomas Wilsford, Corrector of
the last Edition of Record. 62. Semigraphy or the art of Short-writing, as it
has been proved by many hundreds in the city of London, and other places, by
them practiced and acknowledged to be the easiest, exactest and swiftest
method; the meanest capacity by the help of this book with a few hours practice
may attain to a perfection in this art: by J. Rich Author and Teacher thereof,
dwelling in Swithins lane in London. 63. Milk for Children, a plain and easy
method teaching to read and write, useful for Schools and Families: by J.
Thomas, D. D. 64. The Painting of the Ancients, the History of the beginning,
progress, and consummating of the practices of that noble art of Painting: by
F. Junius.
Excellent and approved Treatises in Physic, Surgery, and other more
familiar Experiments in Cookery, Preserving, etc.
65. Culpeper's Semiotica Uranica, his Astrological Judgment of Diseases from
the dec^mbiture of the sick, much enlarged; the way and manner of finding out
the cause, change and end of the Disease; also whether the sick be likely to
live or die, and the time when recovery or death is to be expected, according
to the judgment of Hippocrates and Hermes Trism^gistus; to which is added Mr.
Culpepers Censure of Urines. 66. Culpepers last Legacy left to his Wife for the
public good, being the choicest and most profitable of those secrets in
Physic and Surgery, which whilst he lived were locked up in his breast, and
resolved never to be published till after his death. 67. The York shire Spaw,
or the virtue and use of that water in curing of desperate Diseases, with
directions and rules necessary to be considered by all that repair thither. 68.
The art of Simpling, an Introduction to the knowledge of gathering of Plants,
wherein the definitions, divisions, places, descriptions, differences, names,
virtues, times of gathering, temperatures of them, are compendiously discoursed
of: also a discovery of the lesser World: by W. Coals. 69. Adam in Eden, or
Natures Paradise: the History of Plants, Herbs, and Flowers, with their
several original names, the places where they grow, their descriptions and
kinds, their times of flourishing and decreasing; as also their several
signatures, anatomical appropriations, and particular physical virtues, with
necessary observations on the seasons of planting and gathering of our English
plants. A work admirably useful for Apothecaries, Chirurgions, and other
ingenious persons, who may in this Herbal find comprised all the English
physical simples, that Gerard or Parkinson in their two voluminous Herbals have
discoursed of; even so as to be on emergent occasions their own Physicians, the
ingredients being to be had in their own Fields and Gardens: published for the
general good, by W. Coals M. D. 70. The complete Midwives practice in the high
and weighty concernments of the body of mankind: the second Edition corrected
and enlarged, with a full supply of such most useful and admirable secrets
which Mr. Nicholas Culpeper in his brief Treatise and other English Writers in
the art of Midwifry, have hitherto wilfully passed by, kept close to
themselves, or wholly omitted: by T. Chamberlain, M. P. illustrated with Copper
figures. 71. The Queens Closet opened, incomparable secrets in Physic,
chyrurgery, preserving, candying, and cookery; as they were presented to the
Queen by the most experienced persons of our times: many whereof were honored
with her own practice. 72. William Clows his Chirurgical Observations for those
that are burned with the flames of Gunpowder, as also for the curing of wounds
and Lues Venerea. 73. The work of that Famous Surgeon Mr. John Banister.
concerning Tumors, Wounds, Ulcers, etc. being a storehouse of all sorts of
medicines belonging to the Chirurgions use. 74 The expert Doctors Dispensatory,
the whole art of physic restored to practice, with a survey of most
Dispensatories extant; a work for the plainness and method not to be
paralleled by any; with a Preface of Mr. Nich. Culpepers to the Reader in its
commendation: by P. Morellis, Physician to the King of France. 75. The perfect
Cook, a right method in the art of Cookery, whether for Pastry or A la mode
Kickshawes, with 55. ways of dressing Eggs: by M. M.
Elegant Treatises in humanity, history, description of Countries, Romances and
Poetry.
76. Times Treasury or Academy, for the accomplishments of the English Gentry
in argument* of Discourse, Habit, Fashion, Behavior, etc. all summed up in
characters of Honor: by R. Brathwait. 77. Oedipus, or the Resolver of the
secrets of Love and other natural problems, by way of Question and Answer. 78.
The admirable and most impartial History of New England, of the first
plantation there in the year 1618 brought down to these times: all the material
passages performed there, exactly related. 79. America painted to the Life, the
History of the Conquest, and first Original undertaking of the advancement of
plantations in those parts, with an exact Map, by F. Gorges, Esquire 80. The tears
of the Indians, the History of the most bloody and most cruel proceedings of
the Spaniards in the Islands of Hispaniola, Cuba, Jamtica, Mexico, Peru, and
other places of the West Indies; in which to the life are discovered the
Tyrannies of the Spaniards, as also the justness of our War so successfully
managed against them. 81. The illustrious Shepherdess. The Imperious Brother,
written originally in Spanish by that incomparable Wit, Don John Perez de
Montalbans, translated at the request of the Marchioness of Dorchester, and
the Countess of Strafford: by E. P. 82. The History of the Golden Ass, as also
the Love of Cupid and his Mistress Psyche: by L. Apulaus, translated into
English. 83. The Unfortunate Mother, a Tragedy, by T. N. 84. The Rebellion, a
Comedy, by T. R^^^^^^. 85. The Tragedy of Mossali^a the insatiate Roman
Empress: by N. Richards. 86. The Floating Island: a Tragi-comedy acted before
the the King by the Students of Christ Church in Q^^^. by that Renowned Wit, W.
Strode; the Songs were set by Master Henry Laws. 87. Harvey's Divine Poems, the
History of Baalam, of Jonah' and of St. John the Evangelist. 88. Fons
Lachrymarum, or a Fountain of Tears, the Lamentations of the Prophet Jeremiah
in Verse; with an Elegy on Sir Charles Lucas: by J. Quarles. 89. Nocturnal
Lucubrations, with other witty Epigrams and Epitaphs: by R. Chamberlain. 90.
The admirable in genious Satyr against Hyppocrites. 91 Wit restored, in several
select Poems, not formerly published by Sir John Menis and Mr. Smith, with
others. 92. Sportive Wit, and Muses merriment, a new Spring of Drollery, Jovial
Fancy, etc.
Poetical with several other accurately ingenious Treatises, lately Printed.
1. Wits Interpreter, the English Parnassus; or a sure Guide to those admirable
accomplishments that complete the English Gentry in the most acceptable
Qualifications of discourse or writing. An art of Logic, accurate Complements,
Fancies, Devices, Experiments Poems, Poetical Fictions, and A la mode Letters:
by J. C. The second Edition; to which is added these several Courtly games,
viz. Ombre, Piquet, Chess, Gleek and Cribbidge, etc. 2. Wit and Drollery, with
other jovial Poems, with new additions: by Sir J. M. M. L. M. S. W. D. The
second Edition. 3. The Conveyance of Light, or the complete Clerk and
Scriveners guide, being an exact draught of all presidents and assurances now
in use, as they were penned by diverse learned Judges, eminent Lawyers, and
great Conveyancers, both ancient and modern; whereunto is added a Concordance
from K. Richard the third to this present. 4. Th^mis Au^^a, the Laws of the
Fraternity of the Rosy Cross, in which the occult secrets of their
Philosophical Notions are brought to light: written by Couat Mayerus, and now
Englished by T. H. 5. The Iron Rod; a prophetical Treatise. 6. Medicina
Magicatamin Physi^a, Magical but Natural Physic, containing the general cures
of Infi^mities and Diseas^s belonging to the bodies of m^n, as also to other
animals and domestic creatures, by way of Transplantation, with a description
of the most excellent Cordial out of Gold: by Sam. Boulton of Salop. 7. J.
Tredescant's Rarities, with the varieties of his Gardens published by himself.
8. The proceedings of the High Court of Justice against the late King Charles,
with his speech upon the Scaffold, and other proceedings, Jan. 30. 1648. 9.
Natures secrets, or the admirable and wonderful History of the generation of
Meteors, describing the temperatures of the Elements, the heights, magnitudes
and influences of the Stars, the causes of Comets, Earthquakes, Deluges,
Epidemical Diseases, and Prodigies of precedent times; with presages of the
weather, and descriptions of the weather-glass: by T. Wilsford. 10. The
mysteries of Love and Eloquence, or the arts of Wooing and Complementing, as
they are managed in the Spring-Garden, Hide-Park, the New-Exchange, and other
eminent places: a work in which is drawn to the life the Deportments of the
most accomplished persons; the mode of their Courtly entertainments, treatment
of their Ladies at Balls, their accustomed sports, drolls and fancies, the
witchcrafts of their persuasive language in their approches, or other more
secret dispatches, etc. by E. P. 11. Helmont disguised, or the vulgar errors of
impartial and unskilful practisers of Physic confuted, more especially as they
concern the Cures of Fevers, the Stone, the Plague, and some other Diseases,
by way of Dialogue, in which the chief Rarities of Physic are admirably
discoursed: by J. T. 12. The so well entertained work, the new World of English
words, or a general Dictionary, containing the Terms, Etymologies, Definitions,
and perfect Interpretations of the proper significations of hard English words,
throughout the Arts and Sciences liberal or mechanic; as also other subjects
that are useful or appertain to the Language of our Nation. A work very
necessary for strangers as well as our own Countrymen, for all persons that
would rightly understand what they discourse or read: collected and published
by E. P. for the greater honor of those learned Gentlemen and Artists, that
have been assistant in the most practical Sciences, their names are presented
before the book. 13. The modern Assurancer, the Clerks Directory, containing
the practick part of the Law, in the exact forms and draughts of all manner of
Presidents for Bargains and Sales, Grants, Feoffments, Bonds, Bills,
Conditions, Covenants, Joyntures, Indentures, to lead the uses of Fines and
Recoveries, with good Proviso's and Covenants to stand seized, Charter-parties
for Ships, Leases, Releases, Surrenders, etc. and all other instruments and
Assurances now in use, intended for all young Students and Practicers of the
Law: by John Hern.
Books very lately Printed.
1. Moor's Arithmetic, the second Edition, much refined, and diligently
cleared from the former mistakes of the press; a work containing the whole art
of Arithmetic, as well in numbers as species, together with many additions by
the Author, is come forth an Excellent piece. 2. Likewise Exercitatio Eleiptica
Nova, or a new mathematical Contemplation on the Oval Figure called the
Eleipsis; together with the two first Books of Mydorgius his Conicks Analyz'd
and made so plain, that the Doctrine of Conical sections may be easily
understood; a Work much desired and never before published in the English
Tongue: by Jonas Moor, Surveyor General of the great Level of the Fenns. 3.
Naps upon Parnassus, a sleepy muse nipt and pinched, though not awaked: such
Voluntary and Jovial Copies of Verses, as were lately received from some of the
Wits of the Universities in a Frolic; Dedicated to Gondiberts Mistress, by
Captain Jones and others. Whereunto is added, for Demonstration of the Authors
Prosaick Excellencies, his Epistle to one of the Universities, with the Answer;
together with two Satirical Characters of his own, of a Temporizer, and an
Antiquary, with marginal notes by a Friend to the Reader. 4. Culperers School
of Physic, or the Experimental practice of the whole Art, so reduced either
into Aphorisms, or choice and tried Receipts, that the freeborn Students of
the three Kingdoms may in this method find perfect ways for the operation of
such medicies, so Astrologically and Physically prescribed, as that they may
themselves be competent Judges of the Cures of their patients: by N. C. 5.
Blagrav^'s admirable Ephemerides for the years 1659. and 1660. 6. J. Cleaveland
Revived: Poems, Orations, Epistles, and other of his Genuine incomparable
pieces: a second impression, with many additions. 7. The Exquisite Letters of
Mr. Robert (...) are admired Translator of the Volumes of the same Romance
Cleopatra, for the perpetuating his memory, published by his dear Brother, Mr.
A. L. 8. Englands Worthies, Select Lives of 47. most Eminent persons from
Constantine the Great to the late times: by W. Winstanley, Gent. 9. The
Accomplished Cook, the mystery of the whole Art of Cookery, revealed in a more
easy and perfect method then has been published in any Language; expert and
ready ways for the dressing of Flesh, Fowl and Fish, the raising of Pastes,
the best directions for all manner of Kickshaws, and the most poinant Sauces,
with the terms of carving and sewing: the Bills of Fare, and exact account of
all dishes for the season, with other A la mode Curiosities, together with the
lively Illustrations of such necessary figures as are referred to practice:
approved by the many years experience, and careful industry of Robert May, in
the time of his attendance on several persons of honor. 10. The Seals of
Commerce and Trade, the mystery revealed as to traffic with a Debtor and
Creditor, for Merchants Accounts, after the Italian way and easiest method; as
also a Treatise of Architecture, and a computation as to all the charges of
building: by T. Wilsford, Gent. 11. Arts Masterpiece, or the beautifying part
of physic; whereby all defects of Nature of both sexes are amended, age
renewed, youth continued, and all imperfections fairly remedied: by B. T.
Doctor of Physic, fitted for the Ladies. 12. A Discourse concerning Liberty of
Conscience, in which are contained proposals about what liberty in this kind is
now politically expedient to be given, and several reasons to show how much
the peace and welfare is concerned therein: by R. T. 13. Christian Reformation,
being an earnest swasion to the speedy practice of it: proposed to all, but
especially designed for the serious consideration of my dear Kindred and
Countrymen of the County of Cork in Ireland, and the people of Riegate and
Camerwell in the County of Surrey: by Richard Parr, Doctor in Divinity: a
practical piece. 14. The Character of Spain, or Epitomy of their Virtues and
Vices. 15. The Character of Italy, or the Italian anotomized by an English
Surgeon. 16. The Character of France, to which is added Gallus castratus, or
an Answer to a Pamphlet called The Character of England, as also a fresh whip
for the Monsieur, in answer to his Letter: the second Edition 17. No Necessity
of Reformation of the public Doctrine of the Church of England: by J. Pearson
D. D. 18. An Answer to Dr. Burges's his Word by way of Postscript, in
vindication of No Necessity of Reformation of the public Doctrine of the
Church of England: by J. Pearson, D. D. 19. A Treatise of peace between the two
visible divided parties, wherein is enquired, What peace is intended, who the
parties that differ, wherein the difference consists, how they fell out,
wherein they ought to agree, how they may be persuaded unto peace, by what
means reconcilation may be made between them. 20. Dr Daniel Featly revived,
proving that the Protestant Church, and not the Catholic, is the only visible
and true Church; in a Manual preserved from the hands of the Plunderers, with a
^uccinct History of his life and death: published by John Featly, Chaplain to
the Kings most excellent Majesty. 21. Scotch Covenant condemned, being a full
answer to Mr. Douglas his Sermon, preached at the Kings Coronation in Scotland,
wherein His Sacred Majesty is vindicated: by a Loyal and Orthodox hand. 22.
Englands Triumph, a more exact History of his Majesty's Escape from the Battle
of Worcester, with a Chronological discourse of his straits and dongerous
adventures into France, and his removes from place to place till his happy
return into England, with the most remarkable memorials at his Coronation,
continued till this present November, 1661. 23. Euclids Elements in 15. books
in English, completed by Mr. Barrow of Cambridge. 24. (...), or God made Man. A
Tract proving the Nativity of our Savior to be on the 25. of December: by the
learned J. Seldom. 25. An Elenchus of Opinions concerning the cure of the Small
Pox and French Pest: by T. Whitaker Physician to His Majesty. 26. Englands
Glory, an exact Catalogue of all the Nobility, viz the Lords of His Majesty's
most honorable Privy Council, Dukes, Earls, Viscounts, Barons and Baronets,
and Knights of the Bath; as likewise of this Parliament, Bishops and
Convocation, since His Majesty's most happy Restoration. 27. The Royal
Prerogative vindicated, in the converted Recusants convinced by
Scripture-reasons, Fathers and Councils, that the Oath of Abjuration compared
with those of Allegiance and Supremacy, contains nothing but what may be
taken by every pious Christian and lawful Subject: with diverse other things
annexed in relation to the Kings Supremacy: by J. Cragg; a learned piece. 28.
Manual of Miscellaneous Meditations, Apothegms, Sentences, Observations,
Characters and Essays, worthy the consideration of all: by R R. 29. Christ^
gracious intention for peace and mercy toward sinners, in a Sermon at S. Paul's
before the Lord Mayor and Aldermen: by R. Parr, Minister at Camerwel in Surrey.
Several Plays newly printed.
1. Thrasian-wonder, 2. Spanish Gypsy. 3. Gamer Gurtous Needle. 4. The merry
Milk-maids. With very many other sorts.
Books in the Press and now printing.
1. Geometry demonstrated by lines and numbers, from thence Astronomy,
Cosmography and Navigation proved and delineated by the Doctrine of plain and
spherical Triangles: by Tho. Wilsford. 2. The English Annals, from the Invasion
made by Julius Caesar to these times: by T. Wilsford. 3. The Fool transformed,
a Comedy. 4. The History of Lewis the eleventh King of France, a Tragi-Comedy.
5. The chaste Woman against her will, a Comedy. 6. The To^^h drawel, a Comedy.
7. Honor in the end, a Comedy. 8. Tell-tale, a Comedy 9. The History of Dun
Quixot; or the Knight of the ill-favored face, a Comedy. 10. The Spanish
Captive, a Tragi-comedy. 11. Sir Kenelm Digby and other persons of Honor,
their rare incomparable secrets of Physic, Surgery, Cookery, Preserving,
Conserving, Candying, distilling of Waters, extraction Oils, compounding of
the costliest Perfumes, with other admirable Inventions and select Experiments,
as they offered themselves to their observations, whether here or in foreign
Countries.
These Books newly printed.
12. Historia plantarum, by Abrah. Crawley: an ingenious poem in Latin. 13.
Gregorus Horsty Operum mediocrum and institutiones medicas intres Tomus, Folio.
14. A new English Grammar, prescribing certain rules for foreigners to learn
English; as also a new method to learn the Spanish and Portugal Tongue, fitted
for all that desire to know the Ling, by James Howell. 15. The Works of that
Reverend Prelate Joseph Hall, late Bishop of Norwich, collected into one
Volume, being the third Tome, in Folio. 16. That new and Famed Romance,
entitled Pharamond the Great, composed by the same hand that wrote Cassandra
and Cleopatra, now faithfully rendered into English, by a person of Honor,
being latest; in Folio.
FINIS.

