Levett, Mayor. Jovis tertio die Octobr. 1700. annoque Regni Willielmi Tertii,
Angl. etc. duodecimo.
THIS Court does desire Mr. Lardner to Print his Sermon, preached at the
Cathedral Church of St. Paul, on Sunday the Two and twentieth Day of September
last, before the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of this City.

Ashhurst.

Of earnestly contending for the Faith.

A SERMON Preached at the Cathedral Church of St. PAUL, BEFORE The Right
Honorable the LORD MAYOR AND ALDERMEN OF THE CITY of LONDON, On Sunday, Sept.
the 22th.

THERE Being that Day an Ordination By the Right Reverend the Lord Bishop of
LONDON.

By JAMES LARDNER, M. A

LONDON, Printed for B. Aylmer, at the Three Pigeons in Cornhill, 1700.

To the Right Honorable Sir RICHARD LEVETT, Knight. LORD MAYOR; TO THE COURT of
ALDERMEN; And the Right Worshipful Sr CHARLES DUNCOMB, AND Sr JEFFREY JEFFREYS,
LATE SHERIFFS OF THE CITY of LONDON.
Right Honorable and Worshipful;
WHAT open Defiance has of late been given to all the Sacred Mysteries of the
Gospel, what barefaced Opposition has been made to the Christian Faith, is
well known, and is sadly Lamented by every serious and considerate Man. The
laboring Press does, almost every day, produce some sly Pamphlet or other; the
design of which, is to Undermine our most Holy Religion, and Ridicule and Scoff
at all the Professors of it: Nor do these things steal secretly into our Hands,
or by their Privacy betray an inward Shame in the Author, but every Page does
publicly declare, that the Publisher of it is a professed Enemy to the Faith
of Christ. The Opposition is made with so much Courage and Boldness, that a
mere Stranger would hardly believe Christianity to be the Religion of our
Country, or that the Gospel had the Protection of the Law to guard it. The
design therefore of the following Discourse, is, to point out and discover some
of these Adversaries, and by showing how dangerous they are, to raise our
Spirits, and call up that Courage which so well becomes those, who ought to be
the Assertors of it, and whose Duty it is to contend earnestly for the Faith.
That God would please to assist and protect those who stand up vigorously in
Defense of our most Holy Religion, and at last bring us all to an Unity in the
Faith, is the hearty Prayer of,

Right Honorable and Worshipful, Your most Obedient, and Most Humble Servant,
James Lardner.

Epist. of St. Jude, Ver. 3. latter part. -- And exhort you, that ye should
earnestly contend for the Faith, which was once delivered to the Saints.
THAT ye should earnestly contend for the Faith! Can then that Gospel which was
once delivered by the Prince of Peace meet with any so hardy and obstinate as
to gainsay and oppose it? That Gospel, the very design of which, is to promote
an universal Love and Charity; to join us all (as it were) into one common
Household, one Family: That Gospel, which teaches me to look upon every Man as
my Neighbor, my Friend, and my Brother; that obliges me to allow every Man a
share in my Heart, and admit him as Partner in my Love and Affections: That
Gospel, which is so well fitted for the Advancement of every Man's true
Interest and Advantage, and which gives us a blessed Assurance, in consequence
of our Obedience, of an immortal Crown of Glory hereafter. Can any one be so
obstinately, so wilfully blind, as not to see those things which make for his
eternal Peace, and not upon first sight close in with, and embrace 'em? It Is
strange, that the effect of the Son of God's coming into the World, should be,
St. Mat. 10.34.
not to send Peace, but a Sword; that the most tender and obliging offers, that
even infinite Mercy did ever make, should prove the occasion of Strife and
Contention, and set one Man at variance against another.

Yet this is our case, and every one who is admitted within the Pale of the
Christian Church, engages himself in a continual Warfare; he enters, and lists
himself into the Service of him, who is described to us under the Character of
the Captain of our Salvation, the Head of the Church, that Army of the living
God; he obliges himself to wrestle, not only against Flesh and Blood, Ephesians. 6.12,
but against Principalities and Powers, against the Rulers of the Darkness of
this World, against spiritual Wickednesses in high Places; and his Adversaries
have so many ways to beset him, that he must be continually upon his Guard; and
to secure his Innocence, take to him the whole Armor of God, 13.
that he may be able to withstand in the evil day, and having done all, to
stand. The Christian Profession is represented to us as a State of Warfare; and
a manly Courage, Resolution and Constancy, are qualifications which are
necessary for every Professor to carry constantly about him; we are not, in the
least, allowed to be Careless, Negligent and Supine, but are to sight the good
sight, to endure hardships, to be strong in the Lord, and earnestly to contend
for that Faith, which was once delivered to the Saints.

Which was once delivered to the Saints; for there is no other Gospel now to be
expected, no other Rule by which we are to square our Actions; we are not to
look for any strange, new Light, nor for any other Methods of Salvation. It Is
true, Heb. 10.1.
the Law was indeed a shadow of good things to come, but now, since the
Substance of the Faith has been once fully revealed to us, by that Gospel,
which has brought Life and Immortality to light, we are modestly and humbly to
embrace it, and take it as the only Rule both of our Faith and Practice; and
though we, Gal. 1.8.
or an Angel from Heaven, preach any other Gospel to you, than that which we
have preached unto you, let him be accursed.

It would (I presume) be altogether needless, to go about to prove, that by
that Faith in the Text, which we are exhorted thus earnestly to contend for, is
to be understood the Christian Religion in general, viz. all those Doctrines
and Precepts, as well as Articles of Belief, contained in that Gospel which
has no less than the Son of God for its Author; for so is the word used Acts
6.7. 1 Timothy 4.1. and in several other places. The Faith of a Christian, is the
Religion of a Christian; and to believe in Jesus, is to become his Disciple,
and a Follower of his Doctrines; and, I doubt not, but that seeming difference
between St. Paul and St. James, when one speaks of Justification by Faith
alone, and the other asserts good Works to be necessary in order thereunto, may
very easily be adjusted, by a serious application of Mind, and by considering
the drift and design of each Apostle, in his several Epistle. So that all those
Controversies, which have for a long time employed the Pens of several (I hope
well-meaning) Men, may be easily reconciled, and made up; for a truly pious
Christian Faith, will undoubtedly be productive of all those good Works, to the
performance of which our most holy Profession obliges us. To proceed therefore
further upon this Point, would be altogether needless; and I heartily wish it
were as needless to enlarge upon those several Adversaries, who set themselves
in opposition to, and are the professed Enemies of that Faith which was once
delivered to the Saints. Ver. 4.
Ungodly Men (as our Apostle speaks) who either turn the Grace of our God into
Lasciviousness, or positively deny the only Lord God, and our Lord Jesus
Christ, even who deny the Lord that bought 'em. 2 Pet. 2.1.
But we are obliged to observe,

First, That when the Apostle exhorts us, to contend earnestly for the Faith,
there are necessarily implied some Persons who will be constantly gainsaying
and opposing it, some Adversaries which we are to encounter and conflict
withal: Which being considered, we shall be naturally led in the

Second place to enquire how, and after what manner we are to deal with these
Adversaries, and what peculiar Weapons we are to make use of, whilst we
endeavor earnestly to contend for the Faith. And then, lest any one should be
discouraged in the discharge of his Duty, by the greatness of the Work, or the
many Difficulties which he is to encounter, it will be requisite in the

Third place, to show what mighty Encouragements we have to persuade us to a
constant perseverance in our Christian Warfare, what blessed Assistances are
offered to us, and what glorious Rewards they shall be Crowned withal, who
sight the good Fight, and do inviolably keep the Faith.

First, We are obliged to observe, that when the Apostle exhorts us to contend
earnestly for the Faith, there are necessarily implied some Persons who will be
constantly gainsaying and opposing it; some Adversaries which we are to
encounter, and conflict withal. A Consideration, as melancholy as it is serious,
and every way as sad as it is true. To be either Persecuted, singled out for
Destruction, or at least slighted, and laughed at, has (in some measure) been
the Portion of the true Professors of the Faith, in all Ages of the Church: And
to be mocked at, and derided, seemed to make up part of the Character of a
Believer in the Infancy of Christianity. Nay, we may go further, even to the
Fountain Head, and we shall find that the very Author of our Faith himself, the
Blessed Jesus, met with the same Usage: No sooner had he left that humble
Retirement, in which he past the first Thirty Years of his Life, to enter
publicly upon his Prophetic Office, but that Divine Charmer, who so spoke, as
never Man spoke, met with such as contradicted, and opposed him; the proud,
haughty Pharisee thought himself too great to listen to the Doctrines of
Meekness and Humility, and being big with an expectation of a glorious Messiah,
a Temporal Prince, who should rescue their Nation from the Roman Yoke, could
not discern a Deliverer, under the appearance of a Carpenter's Son, nor imagine
it possible, that he should redeem Israel, whose Condition was so low, mean and
despicable, that, (according to his own Expression) he had not where to lay his
Head. The proud Insulter would not see the Finger of the Almighty in those
daily Miracles which he wrought, nor confess him to be the Son of God with
power, though the Glories of his Divinity were visibly displayed in all his
wondrous Works: But still is the Holy Jesus scoffed at, and derided, and in an
impudent manner taunted at, Is not this the Carpenter, the Son of Mary? And
when they found that many of the People (convinced by his mighty Works) began
to adhere to, and embrace his Doctrines, lest their beloved Moses should be
brought into disrepute, they resolve to Persecute both him and them, and
Lazarus was designed to be put to Death, because that by reason of him (i. e.
his being miraculously raised from the dead) many of the Jews went away, John
12.1^, 11.
and believed on Jesus. Nor did their Malice admit of any Abatement, 'till they
had nailed him to the Cursed Tree, and see him there expire, and die; when his
Doctrines, they thought, would have died with him, and the Faith of Jesus, they
hoped, would have been heard of no more.

And since his Usage was thus very hard and severe, it could not afterward be
expected that the Disciple should be above, Mat. 10.24.
or fare better than his Master, nor the Servant above his Lord; and when the
Apostles were sent out upon that weighty Business, viz. to publish the same
Gospel which Jesus had Preached, Mat. 1^.22.
no wonder if they should be hated of all Men for his name sake. And indeed
thus it proved, for when the Christian Doctrine revived, and rose again with
it is Blessed Author, it no sooner made its public Appearance in the World, but
it was as publicly contradicted and opposed. That Doctrine which was so
repugnant to those Notions, and Prejudices which had been generally
entertained, could not undoubtedly without a great deal of difficulty, make its
way into the Hearts of Men, and be received as a Rule of Faith. That Doctrine,
the embracing of which at that time, tended to the lessening Men's secular
Interest, and Advantage, would assuredly meet with a great many Enemies; and
it is not much to be admired, if, not only the Ephesian Silversmiths should be
against it, Acts 19.
whose Craft was in danger to be ruined and set at naught, but every Man
likewise elsewhere, whose Interest it threatened to diminish, would make a Party
against it, and raise a Body of Adversaries to oppose it: And when the Rage of
such a Man as Herod had urged him to kill James the Brother of John with the
Sword, Acts 12 1, 2, 3.
it was easy to imagine, that he who loved popular Applause, and prided
himself in the Acclamations of the Crowd, should (when he saw it pleased the
Jews) proceed further, not only to take Peter also, but lay violent Hands upon
all the Preachers of the Gospel, and vex the whole Church.

I need not in this place, for I consider before whom I speak, I need not here
proceed to the next Ages consequent to that of the Apostles, and lay before you
a large Catalogue of that noble Army of Martyrs, who suffered for the sake of
Christ, during those several Persecutions which successively raged, and laid
waste the Church of God. I need not lay before you an account of those several
Kings and Emperors, under whom the Faithful Servants of the Blessed Jesus chose
rather to suffer Afflictions with the People of God, than deny their Master,
and desert their Savior; who were tortured, not accepting deliverance; who had
Trials of cruel Mockings and Scourgings, yea moreover of Bonds and
Imprisonment, and yet amidst all their Troubles and Afflictions, showed
themselves more than Conquerours through him that loved them.

'Twould be needless to carry your Eyes backward to those Times, when to
embrace the Doctrine of our Lord, and to follow him was the sure and ready way
to take up the Cross in a literal Sense, when he that would live the Life of a
Christian, must expect to die the same Death with his Master: These things are
sufficiently known, and evident to any Man who has but looked into the History
of the Church. It is very true, will some Men be apt to say, There is no doubt
to be made, but the first Planters and Publishers of the Gospel met with very
great Opposition, and both they and their Followers, in the first Ages of the
Church, were very severely and cruelly handled; and their adhering to the
Christian Religion did hourly expose them to the hazard of their Lives. But
what then? We are now quiet, and at ease, and the Exhortation which the Apostle
gives in the Text, to contend earnestly for the Faith, has no place at all
amongst us; the Christian Faith (say they) is now not only generally received,
and the Gospel quietly enjoyed, but Kings themselves are become the Nursing
Fathers of the Church, and Queens its Nursing Mothers: That Vine which God's
own right Hand has planted has now taken Root, and filled the Land, and every
one has the Liberty, and the blessed Opportunities of setting under its Shadow
with great delight.

Is it so then? If the Amalekites, with all that belonged to 'em, be utterly
destroyed, what means the bleating of the Sheep, and the lowing of the Oxen
which we hear? If the Christian Profession be so quietly and securely settled,
if that Faith which was once delivered to the Saints be so generally received
and embraced, that the Professors of it have no occasion to strive and contend
for it, what mean all our Sects and Divisions? What means that open, that
barefaced opposition which is daily made? What should be the reason, that,
instead of believing, and without Controversy assenting to the great Mysteries
of Godliness, we meet with Men now adays who can in one breath reject all the
Mysteries of the Gospel? And these Men, whose Unstandings are not looked upon
as of a low, inconsiderable Size, but such as pretend to the most extraordinary
Parts, the most refined and subtle Wits; such, as, if it be true that the
Gnostics, (those Heretics who in the first Ages of Christianity infested the
Church of God) had their Name given 'em from their pretensions to great and
extraordinary Knowledge, may come under the same denomination with them. If
Christianity be settled upon so sure a Foundation, how comes it to pass that
these Men should not blush at what they do, especially if it be considered,
that our most holy Faith being guarded and protected by the Circumvallation of
humane Laws, those Men who in a Christian Country dare openly write against,
and oppose the Christian Religion, are guilty of an instance of the highest
Impudence to aggravate their Crime, and come into the number of those whom our
Apostle here speaks of, who despise Dominion, and speak evil of Dignities.

If the Faith of Christ, if his Gospel be so generally, so universally received
amongst us, what mean all these late pretensions to new Light, and immediate
Inspiration? What do they mean who go about to persuade the World, That all
those Expressions of Scripture which relate to the Incarnation, the Birth, the
Death, and Resurrection of the Blessed Jesus, are to be understood in a
metaphorical and figurative Sense? Who instead of modestly and devoutly
receiving the holy Scriptures as the only Rule both of their Faith and
Practice, shall impiously, nay blasphemously, call it a dead Letter, by this
means overthrowing the Authority of the whole written Word of God, perverting
one of the great designs of our Savior's coming into the World, and
overturning the whole business of his Prophetic Office. For to what purpose
should the Son of God take upon him our Nature, and come into the World to be
our great Lawgiver, when he might through all succeeding Ages have instructed
his People by the Voice of the Spirit within 'em: I say, to what purpose should
he do this, if he did not design that the Gospel should be a standing,
perpetual Rule to his Followers? if he did not intend that when this substance
of the Faith was once delivered to the Saints, the Saints should not only
thankfully embrace it, but most earnestly contend for it?

If the Gospel be received, and its Doctrines so generally embraced, what mean
all these Fruits of Unrighteousness, of which every day produces so plentiful
an Harvest? Whence comes that Atheism and Infidelity which has overspread so
great a part of this Nation? Why are our Ears so ungratefully filled with
Swearing and Cursing? Why is the sacred, the tremendous Name of God blasphemed?
why are his Sabbaths unhallowed? why are the Festivals of the Church slighted
and disregarded, and the most solemn Ordinances neglected and contemned, even
by those very Men who at the same time call themselves by the name of Christ?
Have we no Enemies to encounter? Is the Faith so securely settled, that we have
no occasion to contend for it? Most assuredly when our Adversaries appear so
open and barefaced on the one hand, and those who call themselves our Friends
(but falsely so called) on the other hand, shall by their wicked Lives, their
horrid and impious Practices, give occasion to the Enemies of the Lord to
blaspheme. I say, whilst Matters stand thus, we have the highest reason to be
upon our Guard, to be always in a readiness and a posture of defense, and
whilst we fight in our Master's cause, 1 Cor 16.13.
to quit our selves like Men. Proceed we now in the

Second place, to enquire how and after what manner we are to deal with these
Adversaries, and what sort of Weapons we are to make use of, whilst we
endeavor earnestly to contend for the Faith.

And here be pleased, in the first place, to give me leave to look back a
little upon the first Ages of the Church, those dismal Times of Heat and
Persecution, and see how the Professors of Christianity then contended; for
though (blessed be our most merciful and indulgent God) we do at present enjoy
a great measure of Peace and Tranquillity, though our Church Doors are now
always open, and the pious Votary has a ready admission to the Throne of
Grace; yet who knows what severe Judgments and Calamities, our many crying Sins
may provoke the just Governor of the World to bring upon us; and should we
ever be in their Condition we are to follow their Example, and contend for the
Faith, as they did; look back upon the first Martyrs and Confessors, and in
perilous Times you shall find them, (...) earnestly striving and contending for
the Faith, in the utmost stretch of the words, resolved to hold it fast, and
keep it inviolable even to the end. It Is very plain that the Apostle here, as
likewise St. Paul in several of his Epistles, alludes to those ancient Games,
and Exercises in use amongst the Greeks, and particularly here to that of
running a Race, wherein the (...), or (...), the Reward of the Conqueror was
set at the end, over the Goal; and the pious suffering Christian may here be
considered at the approaches of the last solemn hour, pressing forward toward
the prize of his high Calling, come (as it were) within fight of the Goal,
fully resolved (notwithstanding the Conflicts and Fatigues which he undergoes)
not to slack his pace, or be diverted by any thing that may court him in his
way. He presses forward, and endeavors to grasp that Crown of Glory which
stands in view, though tortured will not accept of Deliverance, nor quit his
Master's Service to gain inglorious Ease: He relies upon the sure word of
Promise, Job 27.5.
and till he die will not remove his Innocence and Integrity from him. And
should it please God to draw a Cloud of Persecution over his Church again, it
is our Duty (I say) to follow the steps of those pious Confessors, to maintain
our Innocence even to the Death, to strive earnestly for the Faith; and whilst
we keep our Eye upon the promised Reward, the unspeakable Glories of the other
Life, to possess our Souls in Patience, to be easy, and contented too, through
much tribulation to enter into the Kingdom of God. A truly pious and courageous
Christian, who is strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might, will
consider, that though he be cruelly used, yet it is for the sake of his Master,
and thinks it but reasonable to lay down his Life for his sake, who died for
him, he will not value the troubles or inconveniences of the Wilderness, so
long as Canaan, the Land flowing with Milk and Honey, stands in view at his
Journey's end. But then,

Secondly, Let us see how we are to deal with, and contend with those other
Adversaries which we have been speaking of, in Times less perilous, and hard;
and here we may consider our selves, either,

First, As private Men, of ordinary Capacities, and endued with a moderate
share of Understanding: Or,

Secondly, As Persons peculiarly set apart for the Service of God, endued with
more than ordinary Abilities, and whole business consequently it is to stand up
vigorously for the Cause of God and Religion: Or,

Thirdly, As Magistrates, God's Vicegerents upon Earth, to whom is entrusted
the Management of the Sword of Justice.

First, Consider we how we are to deal and contend with the Enemies of the
Faith of Christ, supposing our selves private Men, of very ordinary Capacities,
and endued with but a moderate share of Understanding.

Now here we are to consider our selves as such, whose Conversation (generally
speaking) lies among Men of the same Rank and Size with our selves, but yet by
reason of the number of those with whom we converse, we must have to do with
Men of different Principles, and different Lives. Take we therefore care to be
diligent, and frequent in reading the Holy Scriptures, consulting the Oracles
of God, and by this means furnishing our selves with all saving Knowledge, and
enriching our Souls with that Wisdom which is from above; and if any thing of
difficulty does occur, any thing too knotty for us to resolve, our most holy
Church has provided us Spiritual Teachers, who are of Abilities to inform and
direct us, and to whom in these Cases we are obliged to repair: By this means
we shall arm and secure our selves from that Poison, which does often
insensibly steal into us from a mixed Conversation; evermore observing that we
put in practice what we read, and take care that our Conversation be such as
becomes the Gospel of Christ, that by a truly pious exemplary Life, we
endeavor to adorn the Doctrine of God our Savior in all things: Thus shall we
influence not only our Children, and Servants, and those who belong to our
Family, but probably bring others over by our good Example; thus shall we
increase our Numbers, and double our Forces against our Adversaries, whilst we
take care by a constant perseverance in Holiness to perform all those necessary
Duties, which are made the indispensable Conditions of our Salvation, whilst we
let others see that we really are what we outwardly pretend to, viz. the
Servants and Disciples of the Holy and Immaculate Jesus; this, I say, will be a
means to increase our numbers, and consequently lessen and weaken the contrary
Party, by bringing Deserters over to our side.

Secondly, Consider we how we are to deal with our Adversaries, and contend for
the Faith, supposing our selves Persons peculiarly set apart for the Service of
God, furnished with more than ordinary Abilities, and whole business it is to
stand up for the Cause of God and Religion.

Whose Business I say it is; it is our Calling, our Profession; the promoting
the Honor of God, and the Interest of Religion, is the one great Work which is
to take up all our Care, and be the Subject of our constant Endeavors.

First then let us see in the General, how we are to contend with those who
practically deny the Faith, and live in constant opposition to those Laws which
the Son of God has been pleased to prescribe: These Men are to be sharply
dealt with, and we are to show 'em the Terrors of the Lord, and not any way
desist from our Duty, though it must be confessed, that to reclaim a stubborn
and obdurate World, is a Work which is attended with a great deal of Difficulty
and Hardship. To tell a Man of his Faults, and discover to him his Miscarriages
does very often prove an unthankful Office; to lay open his Follies, and at the
same time rebuke him sharply for 'em too, may very likely make him uneasy;
it is like touching a Man to the quick, and probing a Wound to the very bottom:
But what then? why should the Skilful Surgeon be concerned, or dismayed at
the uneasiness of the Patient, when he is sure that what he does is out of an
honest design, and that he acts only in order to a Cure? And why should the
Ministers of the Word be frighted from their Duty, because the peevish World
are uneasy when they tell 'em the Truth, so long as they are satisfied in
their Consciences that they act upon a good Principle, and endeavor as much as
in them lies to promote the Eternal Interest, Health and Salvation of Mankind.
It Is our Duty to be bold and daring in a good Work, and not sneakingly stifle a
Reproof, when it may be seasonably given, out of a fear to displease another,
and put him out of Temper, when at the same time we are assured that it is our
Duty to Rebuke him sharply?

Secondly, As we are thus to reprove, and rebuke with all Authority in our
Exhortations, so are we likewise to do it in our Practice, and let others see
that we are ashamed of all those abominable Practices which they every day
repeat. We are to show the World that our Faith is a practical one, continually
producing the Fruits of Righteousness, and discovering it self in all holy
Conversation and Godliness; that our chief Endeavor is to be like our great
High Priest, Holy, Harmless, Undefiled; that our main design is to shine like
so many Lights in the midst of a crooked and perverse Generation, and to keep
our selves unspotted from the World. This is an effectual, convincing way of
Preaching, when we not only instruct others how they ought to walk, but visibly
set a Copy before their Eyes for them to Transcribe; and who knows but many of
those Men may be won over by a good Example, whom a positive Precept will not
work upon. What a mighty Force! what an almost irresistible bias does a good
Example lay upon the Minds and Actions of others! This carries not only Light,
but Heat with it too; for a truly pious Zeal for God and Religion will kindly
dispense its warmth to all that come within reach of it. But then,

Thirdly, To be more particular, there is another sort of Adversaries, who are
not content to be wicked in their Practices, but are (if I may so speak)
debauched in their Faith, and Principles: And with these Men they are
particularly concerned to deal, whom the Holy Ghost has made Overseers of that
Flock, which the Son of God has purchased with his own Blood: They are timely
to forewarn those who are committed to their Charge, of these sorts of ungodly
Men, who by false Glosses, and forced Interpretations of the Text, wrest the
Scriptures to their own and others Destruction: For these Men are not satisfied
in being deceived themselves, but have the boldness to spread their Errors,
openly proclaim defiance to all the Mysteries of the Gospel, publicly oppose
that Faith, which was once delivered to the Saints; and by publishing their
Notions to the World, slily insinuate, that they have reason on their side:
Thus whilst by cunning Craftiness they lie in wait to deceive, they catch the
ignorant and unstable, who are convinced often by a show of Argument, and have
not Genius enough to distinguish between a color of Reason, and a
Demonstration. These are Wolves, which in considerable numbers have lately
crept into the Flock, and are indeed Enemies of a very dangerous kind; and
therefore it behooves us earnestly to contend, and as publicly oppose, and
confute their Errors as they dare to Print 'em: To discover the Trick, and
Sophistry which they use in the Management of their Arguments, not suffer them
by any false Interpolations to add to, nor by any false Pretensions from the
Authority of this, or that ancient Copy to diminish from the Text. We are to
take care that they do not impose upon the World by any false Citations out of
the Primitive Fathers, or by misquoting any other ancient Authors, and so make
the World believe, that the Doctrine of the Church in former times was
consonant to what they teach. This is our Business, this ought to be the Fruit,
and result of that studious sedentary Life, to which we are designed. By this
means we shall not only be able to confute those Heresies which at present
infest the Church, but prudently provide against any that may be broached
hereafter. This, I say, is our Business, thus are we to contend earnestly for
the Faith; and give me leave to add, that we are under one of the strictest
Obligations imaginable so to do, no less than a solemn Vow and Promise before
God, in the Presence of some one, or other, of the Reverend Fathers of the
Church at our solemn Ordination; they who are admitted to the lowest Degree of
the Ministry to the Office of Deacons, do promise, Office for the Ordaining of
Deacons.
That they will apply all their Diligence to frame their own Lives, and the
Lives of their Families according to the Doctrine of Christ, and make both
themselves and them wholesome Examples of the Flock of Christ. And when
afterward they are advanced to the Dignity of the Priesthood, they engage
themselves to be ready with all faithful Diligence, Ordination of Priests.
to banish and drive away all erroneous and strange Doctrines which are
contrary to the Word of God. But,

Thirdly, How those that are Magistrates are to contend for the Faith; how they
to whom the Sword of Justice is entrusted, are to deal with these Adversaries
of God and Religion, the Time will not admit me to enlarge upon, but give me
leave to say thus much, That they are obliged to take care that they bear not
the Sword in vain. There are some sort of Weeds springing up even in the Garden
of the Lord, the Church of Christ, which cannot be cut down, or at least not
totally rooted out, without the assistance of the Civil Power, and therefore it
is to be hoped (especially considering before whom I speak) that whenever such
assistance shall be desired it will be as readily granted. There are a sort of
bold, obstinate Wretches who seem to have made a Covenant with Sin and Death,
who are Reprobate concerning the Faith, who are positively resolved to shut
their Ears against all Advice that may be offered, who will not give themselves
leisure to reflect, nor are ever cool enough for a serious, Morning Thought,
these must be given over to the Management of the Civil Power; and as on the
one hand, in the Administration of Justice and Discipline, we are not
altogether to forget Mercy; so on the other side, when we are inclined to be
favorable, we must take care to be so favorable as not to be too remiss.

And now having already said thus much, I have prevented my self from enlarging
upon the Third Head, viz. to show what mighty Encouragements we have to
persuade us to a constant Perseverance in our Christian Warfare, what blessed
Assistances are offered to us, and what glorious Rewards we shall be Crowned
withal, if we fight the good Fight, and do inviolably keep the Faith. But no
one surely can doubt, but that God who in the performance of all our Religious
Duties has promised us the blessed Assistances of his most Holy Spirit, who
has promised that in all our Afflictions, and Temptations, his Grace shall be
sufficient for us, will likewise more particularly assist, and support us
whilst we are fighting the Lord's Battles, and courageously standing up for his
Cause. And as we are assured that none of all our Labors shall be in vain in
the Lord, so undoubtedly the brightest Coronets of Glory shall be reserved for
them, who after a mighty conflict with all their potent Adversaries come off
Glorious and Triumphant. To him that overcomes (says the Blessed Jesus) will
I grant to sit with me in my Throne, even as I overcame, and am set down with
my Father in his Throne Amen. Hallelujah.

Now unto him that is able to keep you from falling, and to preserve you
faultless before the Presence of his Glory, with exceeding Joy, to the only
wise God our Savior, be Glory and Majesty, Dominion and Power, both now and
for ever.

Amen.
FINIS.

