Scotland against Popery, Being a particular Account of the late Revolutions in
Edenborough, and other parts of that Kingdom, the defacing Popish Chapels, and
Palace of Holy-Rood-House; the Levelling to the Ground the Chancellor's Chapel
and House, etc. and all other Popish Chapels; with the Opposition, which
occasioned the loss of Five Hundred Men on each side; with the Duke of
Gourdon's seizing the Castle of Edenborough for the Papist Interest, and the
Protestant Nobility and Citizens Besieging it.
In a Letter from a Merchant in Edinburgh, to his Friend in London.
NO sooner had the News of the Kings Private Departure Arrived at the City of
Edinburgh, but all Parties looked on the general Settlement of the Kingdom, to
be so far shaken, that it was high time for each of them to make an early
Provision for their future Security: But the Prince of Orange's speedy Advance
to London, being once Published, the Papists began to look on their Cause as
wholly desperate, if not already undone; nor were they in the least mistaken;
for as if the Signal had been generally, though privately, given the Rabble
from all Parts immediately gather together; and first, declaring for the
Protestant Religion in general, next for the Prince of Orange, they lastly
resolve unanimously to take this Opportunity of rooting both Popery and Papists
out of the City and Kingdom, protesting with Oaths they would no longer suffer
under the apprehension of that Slavery which they had long since, to their
Sorrow, seen growing too fast upon them: Whereupon, after many Shouts, being
Armed, some with Clubs, some with Swords, and others, to a great number, with
Pistols, Carbines, and Muskets, they Marched directly to Holy Rood-House, where,
after some Violences offered to the Out-parts; the Governor, who Commanded
there at that time, one Captain Wallis, a Roman Catholic, came upon them with
his Guards, without either demand of the meaning of their Assembly, or the
least admonishment to desist, he Fires upon them, and Kills several of them;
the Multitude being much more Enraged than Allayed, by this Proceeding, run
with fierceness and resolution on the Guard, slaying and wounding every Man,
not without the Loss of abundance of their Own, though the Council then sitting
had sent to the Captain to forbear on any Account to come to extremities with
the Rabble, well imagining, and fearing the consequences likely to ensue; but
he, as is supposed being too Zealous in his own Cause, and relying on his
little Authority, presumed rather to endanger the Safety, or Peace of the
Kingdom, than submit to a present Necessity; for which he dearly paid, being
himself, as was supposed, Mortally Wounded, and his Company quite Overthrown:
The Multitude, in the mean time, remaining Victorious, marched with loud
Huzza's to the Lord Chancellor's House, which they in a moment pulled down to
the Ground, not sparing both Reproaches and Wounds on his Person; some
reproaching him with his Designs to Betray his Country to Popery and Slavery,
others casting in his Teeth private Injuries, and all reviling him as a base,
malicious, and unjust Man: By this time the Council and Lord Preast, had
ordered the Militia to endeavor the Suppressing these Irregularities, who, upon
their first Approach used fair Words and Entreaties, but that not prevailing
(the Rabble being extremely exasperated for the loss of their Fellows) they
were forced to be rough, though before they could be dispersed, there were above
Five Hundred of both sides Killed: The Duke of Gourdon, in this juncture,
thought it the safest way to retire into the Castle, and has declared his
resolution to defend and keep it against any Opposition whatsoever: What the
result will be is uncertain, though the better part of the Nobility and Gentry,
and all the Commonalty in general, have declared their resolution to stand by
the Prince of Orange, in Defense of the Protestant Religion, as by Law
Established: The said Prince's Declaration (for restoring the Religion, Laws,
and Liberties of Scotland to their Ancient Grandeur) having bin publicly read
in Edinburgh, and several other parts of Scotland, with Acclamations of Joy.
The general expectation, at this present Writing, is the Affair of the Duke of
Gourdon, (who, if he persists in keeping Possession of the Castle,) you may
expect a particular Account in my Next, of the Siege of that Important (I had
almost said Impregnable) Fortress.

SIR, Your ready Friend, and humble Servant.


