LOVE VICTORIOUS OVER FORTUNE.
FORTUNE is a Goddess so Capricious, that Love with all his charms, could never
yet gain her entirely to his party, or under constantly favorable Her, ^^t
takes pleasure only in change. Inconstancy is so much her Char^cter, that if to
day she seconds tho^^ favors, wherewith that God gratifi^ his Devotes, to
morrow she will ca^^ them into a thousand Misfortune and often makes no
difficulty, (...) destroy those by a mischance, who^^ she has preserved in a
thousand dangers. The following Novel w^^ let you see the whole truth (...)
this, and I flatter my self, that y^^ will receive no small satisfaction when,
having deplored the fate (...) two Lovers, you shall have an o^portunity to
rejoice at their pr^sperity, and to share the happy su^cess of their loves.

Oronces was a Gentleman, of o^ of the best Families in France, a^^ of a
Province, that acknowledg^ his Father for its Governor: (...) was endowed with
all qualiti^^ that render Nobility recommen^ble, and it had been hard to dr^^ a
true resemblance of beaut^ without having recourse to his fa^^e had more
Courage, Wit, and a ^etter Mien, than any in his Coun^y, and love could not
make a fairer Conquest, then to be assured of the Heart of this Adonis.

He was but sixteen years old, when he received the first touches, and when his
Soul first resented ^he tender Motions, and sweet sal^es of that Passion, in
its beginning; and since it was Impossible for him ^ong to resist Charms, so
powerful, ^s those were, which attracted him, ^e gave himself up to them
without ^esistance, and became desperately ^morous of a young Beauty, of the
^me age, who was a most accom^lish't creature.

Eugenia, so was the Young Lady ^amed, was obliged to Nature, for ^ll
advantages desirable by her Sex, and endebted to Fortune, who to ^obility of
Blood, had joined a ^ast Estate.

Love, fearing, that the long Court^^ip, which Oronces was to make, to convince
Eugenia of his Flames might give him some distaste, and make him quit his Party;
with the same hand, and with the same arrow, that he struck his heart, h^
wounded the Fair ones; and rendered them so Amorous one of the other, that the
very Moment o^ their first Enterview, was that o^ their Engagement.

It was at a Ball, wherein these two Lovers met, that they were mutually
smitten by looks, and that one half hours Conversation made them sensible of
inclination to love each other Eternally.

Oronces, who had a most agreeabl^ Voice, was desired by the Company to Sing,
but he handsomely excuse^ himself, because he knew one Present, who was more
capable of satisfying it, than he. Eugenia, (...) whom it was he spoke, after
some small resistance, ravished all their Hearts with her Music; her Lover
followed her, and sung with (...) much Grace, that he equally char^ed all
those, that composed the Assembly: It was hard to judge where to bestow the
Prize: Ma^y were for the Spark, and thought that the sweetness of his Voice,
even excelled the Fair ones; but Our Lover, to benefit himself of ^he
opportunity, loudly gave her his applause; and so obliged the rest to confess,
that she had the advantage over him.

The divertisement being over, Oronces desired of his Mistress, that she would
permit him the Honor, of waiting upon her home: This he did, with a design of
delaring himself more openly, than he could hitherto have done, and of drawing
from that Fair one, some words, that might prove advantageous to him. Ah Madam,
said he, unto her, as they went, how ashamed am I of my Age, since, I am as
yet, methinks, too young to be believed in Love: Nevertheless, continued he, I
am, and that with the mos^ fair and amiable Person, that Heaven even created.
Alas, if you have the curiosity of knowing, who she is, I will immediately tell
you. Is i^ some Beauty unknown to me (...) Said Eugenia. Ah, Madam, replied our
young Cavalier, you know he^ well, and you alone have the absolute power of
making her favorable to me. But I dare not discover her. Very well, said she
smilingly, inform me within three days, who she is, or you shall not be assured
of my service with her.

This Order, so gallantly given, caused no little joy in our Lover; he parted
from his Mistress, after having shown her a thousand Civilities, and having
conjured her, to mind the Promise, which she made him, of doing good Offices,
in order to procure for him, her favor, who created all his Passion.

Love causes more disorder in hearts, newly wounded, then in those, ^ho for
some time have experien^ed his smart. Oronces, and Euge^ia did nothing else,
but think of ^^ch oth^^, and he cursed his bash^^lness, which had hindered him
from speaking to her, whom he ^oved, after a manner, that might ^iscover, what
he truly self for her. The term of three days appeared ^o him an Age, and what
embar^assed him yet more, was how to ^cquit himself of his promise, without
displeasing the Fair one, and to do things with that air, as should not be
disagreeable unto her. In fine, the Excess of his passion transported him above
all those measures, which ordinary Prudence would have dictated unto; he
believed that he could not speak too plainly to one, in whom, he had observed
some dispositions to receive his Love, and that the fire of Youth would be an
excuse for his rashness. Therefore he writ unto her the following Letter, and
sent it by one of his servants.

I Must confess, Madam, that my wi^ is very shallow, and capable (...) little:
It is said, that there is nothing sweeter, easier, or more agreeable the^^ to
declare ones Love: But for m^ part, I have not found any thing tha^ causes
more pain, trouble, and confusion. Three days are past, since the Order, which
I received, of telling you her name, whom I adore, make^ me sweat Blood and
Water, and give^ me a thousand inquietudes, I do not even yet know, how to
acquit my se^^ of it. Ah (...), how vexatious is i^ to be without Experience:
But (...) will tell you, that she is the mos^ charming that can be seen, that
she has all qualities necessary to render her most accomplished. In sine, that
she resembles you so much, that without being deceived, I could take you for
her. This is enough, assist the Letter, and divine the rest. I am ready t^
expound it in case of necessity.

Oronces.


Eugenia was full of Impatience, to ^ee after what manner, her lover would
declare himself, when she ^eceived that Billet; and as in love, the most
negligent Style is always the most persuasive; so she could not take ill that
way of writing, but she was overjoyed, that that she had an occasion of
answering him upon that Subject, and of letting him know, that if he loved her,
she had no Indifference for him. But alas, this was to prescribe to themselves
bounds too close; an Enterview transported them much farther, and three hours
of entertainment put them in such disorder, that they no longer kept any
measures in their declarations, but discovered to one another, what they really
resented in their hearts. As soon as Oronces was arrived, he, with a Gallant
air, told Eugenia, alas Madam, I am come to know, whether I have sufficiently
performed my Commission, and whether my expressions be not so obscure, as to
need an interpretation? You have done well, answered the Lady, in coming to
explain your self a little more clearly, for in truth I knew not, whom you
meant, nor has your Letter made me any wiser, than I was before. Oh Heaven!
Replied Oronces, how full of dissimulation are you, and what pleasure do you
take, to see a Young Lover before you, whom bashfulness restrains from telling
you, how much he loves you? At these words he cast his Eyes to the ground, and
then lift them up to Eugenia, with an air, that might let her understand, what
he felt in his Soul. She appeared a little amazed, and in a serious Tone said
to him, that she was much obliged to him, but that she plainly saw, that he
intended to divert himself with her, and that she had reason to take, what he
had said, rather for a Complement, then for a convincing Truth; as to the rest,
that ^^e went a little too fast. Ah Ma^am, continued he, great Passions ^ever
go slowly; they immediately p^oduce great Effects; and you ^ught not to be
surprised, that even ^n the first minute, in which I saw ^ou, I became so
Amorous of you, ^^at it is now to no purpose to en^eavour to dissemble it, my
Eyes and all my Actions would discover, that my Heart would fain conceal; and
this dumb Language would ^^ew it, as much as if I declared it ^ut aloud. You
must then (persu^d he, with a sigh, see the bottom ^f my heart, and I must tell
you, that there is not any thing in you, which charms me not; that I have ^o
other Ambition, then That of en^ying you, and that your Will a^one shall
hereafter Govern all my ^ctions.

Eugenia, during this discourse, af^ected a great deal of Modesty, and ^eemed
much astonished. As her soul was agitated by the most violent passion, that a
fair object could inspire, so her answer made appea^ the confusion of her
Spirit, and le^ Oronces know, that her heart wa^ no less wounded, than his.
Then he used all the Arts, which a passionate young Spark is capable of, to
assure his Conquest, and to benefi^ himself of the disorder, which he had
caused in his Mistresses soul, he expressed his regards with so much
languishing, he pressed his sighs to so much purpose, that he reduced that
innocent thing, to be no longer able to defend her self from a thousand
Complaisances, which enflamed them yet more, and obliged these two hearts, who
never had loved any thing before, to confess to one another, that they were
taken.

Ah Oronces, said Eugenia, after having received a kiss from her Lover; do you
believe, that we can be so happy as to love successfully? The fear that I am
in, that it cannot be, makes me already represent to my self a thousand
Obstacles, which may oppose our Love, and fancy a number of Mischances, which
ill Fortune may expose us to.

We must not be so fearful, replied our Cavalier, we have cause rather to hope,
than fear; for I dare tell you, that I am resolved, to to neglect all
Considerations whatever, but those of pleasing you; and there is no difficulty,
which I will not overcome, to attain and preserve a Good, that I prefer before
all the Treasures in the World. These words were followed by a thousand kisses,
and other favors, which although they were not incompatible with virtue, yet
were rather stolen, then freely granted. One embrace followed the other so
closely, that it seemed as if they designed to render them Eternal, and as if,
finding nothing else grateful to their Hearts, they intended to live only upon
tenderness, sighs, and affections.

In Effect, this life was very pleasant, its being was only in the most tender
Amity, that ever had united two hearts, and its nourishment was seasoned with
the most innocent delights, that could charm an excellent Soul.

Our Lovers past some time, by favor of their great Youth, in this amiable
tranquillity, for as much as that their Parents did believe, that an age, more
advanced, would make them change their Sentiments; but they were deceived in
that; for time, far from diminishing that Love, which they had entertained in
their tender years, made it the stronger for their weakness, and rendered it
incapable of receiving any alteration by inconstancy.

Our Lovers, to make good use of this interval of Liberty, neglected nothing
that could contribute to their Common satisfaction; their visits were no longer
formal; ^^r they hardly ever quitted each ^ther; and they past whole days in
^alking of the Excess of their passion; ^ut in terms so tender, with re^ards
so languishing, and sighs so ^morous, that their behavior had ^een enough to
raise Love, even ^n the most unsensible Heart.

There appeared fire, as well as ^anguishments, in these amorous
Entertainments; they resented nothing but tenderness, and transports, and their
Caresses were like those of innocent Doves, who never are tired with their
Courtship, and always find new Charms in the tender Object of their Pleasures.

The good Intelligence, which had always accompanied the agreeable moments of
those lovely young ones, was disturbed to the quick by extraordinary
Prohibitions, which they on either side received, to see one another any more.
Oronces his Parents, perceiving that his assiduities to Eugenia, might draw
afte^ them such Consequences, as would oblige him to consent to his marrying a
Person, very rich indeed but whose Nobility was much inferior to his, pushed
on with Ambition desired to break the Course of these Amors, and, in order to
it, at the same time, resolved to send him out of the Province. On the other
side, Eugenia's Mother, being informed of what had past, and having learnt from
her Daughters confession, that without raillery she loved the Governor 's Son,
and was also beloved by him, she reprehended her very severely, for having so
long suffered his visits; and told her, that she had higher designs, than to
engage her to a younger Brother, who never should have any other Estate, but
what Fortune, or the chance of War, could procure him; that she ought to
consider; that she was the only Child in the Family, and that she esteemed her
Nobility as good as Oronces his Fathers, w^^^ was only considerable for
Government.

One must have loved, equally with our Lovers, to conceive their Affliction;
Oronces abandoned himself entirely to Sorrow; Murmurs and complaints came only
from him, and he even called his Father inhumane, and assured him, that he took
away his life, if he did not moderate those rigorous Orders, which he had given
him.

Eugenia, for her part, was inconsolable, and being of a softer Sex past whole
Nights in weeping, and breathing forth sighs, able to soften Rocks, and change
the Sentiments of any, transported with Motions more reasonable, then those of
Interest.

There wanted little of our Cavaliers disobeying his Father's commands, but
having reflected on his severe humor, that never commanded the same thing
twice, h^ with impatience expected the following Sunday, which only could give
him an opportunity of seeing her at Church, whom he cherished more than his own
Eyes.

Although this was not directly against the Orders, which had been given him,
yet it was not perfectly to obey them: And any other* less passionate, would
have fear (...) a Father, who with difficulty admitted of Excuses; but his
Spirit being quite filled with Love, there was no place left for Reflections of
that nature, and he would have esteemed himself over Scrupulous, had he
demurred upon such thoughts.

In the Morning he was happy enough, to find, as he proposed, Eugenia at
Church, busy at her devotions; he placed himself near her, and after a few
words, he gave her a Letter sealed, and told her, that it would instruct her
farther: He ^as even rash enough to make use ^f that place, to authorize his
passi^n, and made no difficulty to con^^rme by Oath, and before the Altars, ^is
perseverance in his Love to ^er. He also received all Protesta^ions of an
Amity, answerable to ^is, and after a thousand amorous Glances, which they gave
one ano^hor, they parted the most conten^ed in the World.

Our Cavaliers Father, who knew ^y experience, what Love is, and ^ow hard it
is, to destroy the first ^entiments, which that passion engraves in a heart,
resolved to send his Son to the War, to the end that the employment of Arms,
which requires a young man's whole ^pplication, might give him no leisure to
think of other things.

To dispose him to receive these News, as he would have him, he ^mplified it is
advantages, he represented to him, that, Nobility, without that experience, was
base, and without Virtue, and nothing being more charming than Glory, tho^^
exercises were not to be neglecte^ wherein it was to be found i^ all its
Splendour, and by which (...) might be easily acquired.

Oronces understood well enoug^ his Fathers design: He had courage, but he did
not believe, tha^ Honor could give him pleasure^ as solid as those were, which
Lov^ had made him taste: Therefore h^ did his utmost endeavor, to turn^ aside
that blow, which he looked upon as the most Fatal, that he could ever receive.
But alas it was to n^ purpose, he must resolve to part, and he received, as a
favor, permission to bid his Mistress adieu, whom apparently he was to quit
for ever.

Eugenia's Parents, who never had any design to give their Daughter to Oronces
were overjoyed to hear, that he was sent away to the War, to the end that he
might be otherwise employed, then in making love: But the News created in
Eugenia an inconceivable Melancho^y. The reading of the Letter, which ^e had
put into her hand, afflicted ^er yet more, and but for the ^trength of Youth,
she had without doubt fallen sick with sorrow conceived at her Lovers departure.

During these restless Moments, she was advertised, that Oronces was come to
take his leave of Her, and as he had received permission from His, so her
Parents likewise made no difficulty of granting, for her consolation, this last
enterview.

It would be difficult to describe here with what Mien, our new Warrior was
received by his Dear Eugenia. Looks, Sighs, and Tears had as great a share in
their entertainment, as Words, and the sweet overture of Hearts, made in that
moment, gave them a sense of pleasures, not to be expressed.

Ah my Dear Oronces, said ou^ poor afflicted Lady, how happy should we be, if
we were not opposed in our innocent Divertisements? But alas we must part and
it may be never to see each other more. Ah, what will that absence make me
suffer? What pains do I foresee, I must endure? And what do I apprehend for
your Person? Fear not, my Dearest, replied Oronces, I am too much concerned to
preserve my self, not to do it. And the thought only that I cannot destroy my
self, without losing you at the same time, will restrain me in my most furious
transports. As for the rest, either of us are to our Comfort so much Masters of
our own wills, that in spite of all the World, we can love on, and, by our
Constancy, weary out those, who would prevent the success of our Designs. As
for me, continued he, in kissing her, I dare swear, that I will love ^ou
Eternally, that there is nothing, that I will not surmount, to bring about our
pretensions, and that my ^^deli^y shall be proof against the ^oughest and most
pressing attaques.

These words were followed by a ^housand Protestations; on Eugenia's part, her
Eyes and Sighs confirmed ^ll that was said: she was besides ^er self, and
thought of no other thing, than the object of her Love, which she saw before
her; She sunk ^morously between his arms, and conjured him with languishing
regards, to pity her weakness, and pardon the excess of her Passion, which
transported her after that manner.

While our Lovers resented these pleasant Motions, and employed these ^ast
Minutes, in tenderly expressing ^ure Evidences of their Love, one advertised
our Cavalier, that his people, were a horseback, and that his Equipage
expected him at the Gate.

Ah now, he cried out, it is, that we must part. He was not able to speak one
word more; but tenderly embracing his Dear Eugenia, he mingled his tears with
hers, and made appear, that his Love was very violent, since it made him guilty
of so great a Weakness.

This departure put the Lady in the greatest perplexity in the World, she told
her parents, that they would be the cause of her death; that she could not live
without him, whom they tore from her; and that one day, they would repent being
averse to an alliance, which could not be otherwise than advantageous, if they
thoroughly considered it, that for the future they should have little
satisfaction from her person, and excepting the respect due to them, from which
she could not rationally dispens^ with her self, she would have bu^ little
complaisance, to answer their wishes and desires.

All these complaints were received as they ought to be; that is ^o say, there
was more regard had to Eugenia's weakness, than to terms, which she made use
of in her ex^ressions: Her Parents did believe, that something was to be
allowed ^o her resentment, and that absen^^ would make her lose the Idea of
^im, that caused all this disorder. They put every thing in practice to ^raw
her out of the Melancholy, ^he was in; they made her take all ^anner of
divertisements, and by ^ew acquaintances, with whom they would engage her, they
unprofi^ably endeavored to restore her to ^er former Humor.

They then perceived, that all things were to be referred to time, and that a
Passion, so violent, could ^ot be cooled by Ordinary means. ^n Effect, she by
little and little ^eemed to have lost the Memory ^f her Lover; she talked not
of ^im, so frequently as before, and in ^^e, it was believed, that she had
recovered her former liberty. But the^^ appearances were deceitful, an^ though
she thought fit to compo^^ her outward behavior after tha^ manner, yet her
heart was still ^qually wounded, and was not sensible to any Love, contrary to
the faith, which she had sworn to h^ Dear Oronces.

There is usually no better rem^dy for Love, than Love it sel^ Therefore
Eugenia's Mother, name Laurentia, proposed to her the d^signe, which she had,
of makin^ by her means, an alliance with t^^ Family of Dorimont, who was a
han^some and well behaved Gentleman and whose Nobility was support^ by a
considerable Fortune, whi^^ rendered him one of the Princi^^^ men in the
Province. Therefo^^ she was not to be surprised, t^^ she had, in prospect of
her advanta^^ been crossed in her first inclination which could not be
reasonable; si^ they proceeded from a blind Pass^ without reason.

Although those Propositions infinitely displeased Eugenia, and that she had no
design to obey them, yet, she did not let that appear presently; but contented
her self with answering, that she no longer had any sensibility for Love, and
that she did believe, no Lover could sigh for her with success; however to
satisfy Her, she would receive his Visits, whom she spoke of, and if she
foresaw, she could live happily with him, she would not oppose his good fortune.

Though that answer was sufficient to let them know, what the Fair one's
Sentiments were: Yet they persuaded themselves, that so witty a Lover, as
Dorimont, could manage her spirit, and by his Diligence and Assiduities, blot
out the first impressions, which love had engraved in her heart. But alas, how
difficult is it to deface strokes, so deeply cut, and extinguish fires, that
draw their nourishment from ^ur Inclination? This new Cavalier had much merit;
but he succeeded another, which had yet more.

He then began to show his love for her, by all the complaisances imaginable;
he desired nothing, but what pleased her, and did nothing but what he believed
agreeable to her Humor. She on the contrary answered all this, with civilities
which denoted only her indifference and were enough to let this poo^ Lover
understand, that he laboure^ in vain, and that all his presents his Promenades,
and this Regale would be more successful, bestowe^ on some other Mistress. He
sighe^ but his sighs touched not Her, h^ languishing seemed to Her, affected
and all his Gallantries loathsome^ and improper; in a word, even t^^ best
thing, he did, offended Her, a^^ she wished for nothing more, th^^ to be freed
from these Visits, whi^^ were already become insupporta^^ torments to her.

This unhappy Lover made Courting in vain. He could obtain no love, and his
perseverance was followed only by a stubbornness, which he found invincible in
Eugenia, never to love any thing, but her Dear Oronces.

When he knew perfectly, that there was nothing to be done, and that the Fair
one could never be reduced to favor him, he thought of a retreat, and
acquainted Eugenia's Parents, with the little success of his enterprise, and
his design of leaving her.

Then it was that the Combat grew rough, and that Laurentia, to little purpose
making use of a Mothers Authority, would force her Daughter, to do that,
thorough Obedience, which she would not do by Inclination; and knowing, that
she had a great aversion for a Cloister, she threatened to shut her up in one,
if she persisted in her stubbornness. But all these frights were unuseful, and
Eugenia protested, that though she had a great Antipathy for a Monastic life,
yet she would embrace it, rather than do any thing contrary to the Faith given
her Lover, that all these false Alarms should work no effect upon her, and that
the only way to retain her in the world, was not to perplex her in an
Honorable Love, which might prove Glorious to her Family: That in all other
things, she would have for her Mother all the respect possible; but in an
affair, that concerned the Liberty of her Person, she desired, that she might
not be made unhappy, by any evil engagement.

Laurentia said to her, all that anger could inspire a provoked Mother: She
threatened her with the loss of her Favor, and gave her only one whole Week to
resolve upon the choice, either of a Cloister, or of Him, whom she had proposed
to her for an Husband. That afflicted Mother had no real design of forcing her
to quit the World, she was ^ather entirely averse to it; but she ^lattered her
self, that the only means to be obeyed, was to act after that manner, and that
she would sooner make choice of a Marriage with Dorimont, than of a Voluntary
confinement in a place, which she could never approve of.

While these affairs past thus, Oronces had an Employment in Flanders,
conformable to his Age and Birth, he acquitted himself of it, with the
approbation of all those who knew him, and they admired that courage, which he
made appear in the most dangerous assaults, and which accomplished the most
difficult Enterprises. Whatever diversions these Exercises might give his
spirit, yet he could not lose the memory of his Dear Mistress. He thought of
her night and day, and the excess of his Passion made him long for a Peace, so
that there might be a possibility of his enjoying her, whom he loved, more then
his life.

As soon as the time, given Eugenia to determine her choice, was expired.
Laurentia would have he^ openly declare, which of the Two proposed to her, was
the least disagreeable. She, having had leisure to think thereon, told her
Mother that she had not changed her Opinion, that the Affection, which she had
for Oronces, was not at all diminished; and, that she might no^ fail in the
fidelity due to him, she had rather enter into a Cloister, i^ it must be
absolutely so, than give her Heart to another, in prejudice of her true Lover.

Laurentia, who was enraged a^ these words, told her, that she might then
prepare her self, for that she her self would conduct her to the place, where
perhaps she should, a^ her own expenses, learn, how mischievous are the
consequences o^ such a Disobedience. Eugenia mad^ no other answer, but that she
believed, they could not in Conscience engage a Free person, to a Course of
life, for which she had a Repugnance; but that she hoped, she might one day
take advantage from the Constraint, which she received.

All this was alleged in vain, she must enter into Religion, and hide from the
Eyes of men a Beauty, which seemed not to be created with so much perfection,
to be Enclosed. Laurentia and Eugenia dissembled the true cause of this
Retreat, and gave out, that it was only for a Trial, whether her Vocation was
not there, or if Heaven would call her otherwise.

All the Religious admired with astonishment so sudden a change, and were yet
much more surprised, when they saw that it was real, and that Eugenia did
earnestly demand the favor, of being received into the number of Novices, and
that they would grant her the habit of the Religion.

She had not any real design to engage her self; but did this, only to make
her Mother believe, that no other return was to be expectted from her, nor any
thing else to be hoped for; for, unless she should be replaced in her former
liberty, she would perhaps lose it forever, by Professing in that house.

Her Solicitations were so earnest, and her fervor so surprising, that the
Superior invested her in the habit of the Religion, and believed that she
could not, without opposing the will of Heaven, refuse it to the extraordinary
Zeal of the Demandant. This young Novice made a Friend-ship with the whole
Convent: She was Fair, like an Angel, and her voice, which, as I have already
told you, was charming, ravished the hearts of her Companions, when her Office
obliged her to sing.

Laurentia, who knew well enough, what aversion she had for a Monastery, did
believe all these ^utward appearances of Devotion ^ere false, and counterfeit,
in which ^ertainly she was not mistaken; ^or Eugenia thought of nothing less,
^hen of engaging her self by any ^ow, but she was persuaded, that what she did,
would convince her Mother, that she was not at all dis^osed to follow her will,
and that ^he would sooner make choice of (...) Monastic life, then suffer
con^traint in an affair, which, as she ^udged, ought to be entirely free.

There was nothing more agree^ble, then to consider Eugenia in ^his new habit;
her Eyes, half hid under the obscurity of her veil, ^ast Flames, which
penetrated the hearts of those, that beheld her. She performed all her
Exercises with so much Grace, and with such Ease, that she seemed never to have
lived out of a Cloister, and all her behavior was so winning, that, were the
things she said never so indifferent, she gained the Affections of those, that
conversed with her.

In the mean time, her Mother, who saw no change in her Daughter, informed the
Superior of all that past, and knowing that the Religious have a wonderful
address in the managing our Spirits, she entreated her assistance, to reduce
Eugenia to the Obedience, due unto Her; and also, that she would not be
ungrateful for her cares therein, especially if they produced some happy
success.

But the Nun was too much interessed, to declare this to her Novice. She
therefore concealed from her, all that Laurentia had informed her of, and
applied her self only, to incline her to make Profession, when time should come.

She had already borne the habit of Novice ten Months, when her Lover, who knew
nothing of all this, writ to her from Flanders, where having found no
particular opportunity to send his Letter, he committed it to the Hazard of the
Post, not mentioning any thing in it, which was unknown to her Parents, or that
might be prejudicial to Her. It was in these terms.

MEthinks, my Dear Eugenia, that it is an Age, since I parted from you,
nevertheless I fail not to possess you; for Night and Day you are present in
my mind. Those, who did believe absence would be a remedy for my Love, are much
mistaken; for since I parted from you, I fancy, that I love you as much more,
and that my Ardour gathers force from my Exile. I am every day exposed here to
a thousand Perils; but that God, that made us love, takes care of my Person,
and preserves it in the midst of dangers. All my Friends here are surprised at
my way of living: they call me Solitary, and Hermit, and say, that I do not
know what Gallantry means, since that no Mistress could as yet make me put it
in practice; but I excuse them, because they know not, that those, who are
banished from what they love, take little care to gain Hearts, and that I have
need of all mine, to support the assaults of our ill Fortune. Adieu Dear Heart,
Comfort your self, and believe that we shall one day be happy.

Oronces.


This Letter was directed upon the cover to a Chambermaid, now gone away, and
by that accident fell into Laurentia's hand, who having, out of Curiosity, read
it, conceived a thousand Malicious designs of using it for her advantage.

When she had for some time meditated, wherein it might be useful unto her; the
News of the Battle of Seneff, gave her an opportunity, of executing an
Artifice, which might in probability have drawn after it an effect,
conformable to what she could desire, from her Daughter.

To bring her enterprise more successfully about, she endeavored ^o
counterfeit the writing of the surprised Billet, and, in few days, became so
skilful in that deceit, that the one could hardly be discerned from the other.

To the end, that nothing might be wanting to her Stratagem, she caused a Seal
to be cut, like Oronces's, and counterfeited the following Letter, to be sent
to our fair Recluse.

I Can no more, my dear Eugenia, I am wounded even to death in the Battle of
Seneff. The Surgeon, who has care of me, is Ordered by me, to write unto you
more at large. Adieu, my heart fails me: I can say no more, unless it be, that
I should have died contented, if it had been in her service, whom I will love
even to the last Minute. Have compassion upon the unfortunate

Oronces.
Adieu.

This was accompanied by a supposed Letter from a Surgeon, which was filled
with all the Circumstances of the Fight, and the nature of his wounds; it
showed, how he had expired three Hours, after he had writ the Billet, and how
he had received Commission to send it to Her, to whom it was directed.

Laurentia doubted not, but that this Artifice would succeed to her advantage,
and that her Daughter, seeing her self disengaged by her Lovers death, from all
Protestations made to him, would make no difficulty of accepting, whom she
desired and giving her heart to second Affections; but alas, that poor Mother
had the displeasure of seeing all her Projects without success, and this
innocent deceit had no other consequence, than her loss by the very means,
that were intended for her preservation.

The time of Eugenia's Profession approacht, when she received the Letter and
Billet spoken of. She had no sooner read them, but she fell into a Swoone, and
made those, who were present, take notice, that she had not entirely quit all
worldly Inclinations, by entering into a Cloister. She was so readily relieved,
that she soon came to herself again, but it was only to abandon her self to
tears and sadness, and to deplore his death, who was still alive.

In this deplorable Estate, she raised the compassion of all her Companions,
they heard, with a great deal of feeling, all the complaints, that proceeded
from the heart, but they were not able to comfort her in that extreme sorrow.
This News made such a disorder in her mind, that she remained for some time as
it were senseless, and then it was, that she resolved not to part from the
place, where she was, but to bid Adieu to the World, since it had now nothing
in it, that she ought to Love; and to carry all her life, under the habit of a
Cloister, the Mourning, which she owed her Lovers Memory.

The Superior of the Monastery made use of that vexatious minute, to speak to
her Novice of her Vows. She told her with a mild and engaging Air, that she
shared very much in her Affliction, and that she did not blame the Tears, given
to the remembrance of an Honorable amity, which she had had for the Person
whom she lamented; but that she ought, after having considered that accident
with the Eyes of the Body, regard it also with the Eyes of the Spirit, and
think, that it was only a blow from God, who intended, by that means to
withdraw her from the World, and make her one of his Chaste Espouses.

Our Eugenia, having already taken that resolution in her self, answered the
Venerable Dame, that she had no other thoughts, that she ^ished with all her
heart, that the ^^me were already expired; and that she could do nothing with
grea^er joy, then augment the number ^f so holy a Company. Moreover, ^he
desired her, not to acquaint her Parents, with the weakness, which ^ad appeared
in her, and altogether, ^o conceal from them the Excess of her grief, because
then they could have no pretense to oppose her good fortune; but would be
obliged to give their consent to her engagement, which otherwise they would
have right to deny, if they might have place to believe, that ^t was more
through a Humane, than Supernatural motive.

In the mean time, Laurentia, being impatient to know the success of her
Stratagem, went to the Superior to be informed of it, and to bring Eugenia
back along with her, not thinking to find any more resistance; but all that she
learned from her, was, that her daughte^ had been received by the whol^
Convent, that she had had all their Voices, and that she seriously prepa^red
her self by a holy Retreat, t^ make her Vows. the week following Moreover, that
she had, with admiration, seen the indifferency, which appeared at her reading
the News which, according to the world, should most sensibly have touched her
that she was a Girl of Prayer and of great Virtue, and that he^ Spirit had no
other Conductor, than God.

This discourse surprised the poo^ Mother the more, in that she expected
nothing less from a Person whom she had made a Confident of her Designs; and
whom, she did believe, she had engaged to her side. She expressed her
astonishment, and declared to her, that she would be Mistress of her own
Daughter, that she should not make any Profession without her consent, and that
she would disinherit her, ^f she would any way oppose her will.

The Superior made answer, that she had seen in Eugenia so great a disposition
to the life, she would embrace, that she thought it impossible to dissuade her
from it, without opposing the Ordinance of Heaven; that she had no other
Prospect, and that Human Interest had the least share in it. This said, she
took leave of Laurentia, and called her Daughter to her, whom she left alone in
her Company.

The Afflicted Mother was quite transported at the sight of Eugenia, and with
tears asked her, if it was true, that she would continue in that Monastery? If
she did, that it was the way to kill her with displeasure, and that she ought
to consider the great obligation, which she owed her. She used the strongest
Arguments, that tenderness could inspire her with, to move the heart of that
Rebel (it was so* that she called her) but it was without effect and all that
she could get from her was, that it was by her Order only, that she entered
that place. That she was resolved never to quit it, and that she desired to
make her Vows only, that she might not be far from her Vocation. These words so
contrary to her Mothers wishes were followed by a thousand Menaces, and made
Laurentia understand, that we often hazard the loss of all, when we would gain
too much.

Then she retired very much discontented, and went to take counsel of the
Learned, how she might bring about her enterprise. They represented to her,
that she had no great cause to be troubled; for the Religious never do any
thing for nothing, and that she need only give her Daughter no Portion,
infallibly to prevent her Professing.

This Proceeding was indeed the best, according to the Ordinary Rules; but she
good qualities of the Novice, together with a considerable sum of Money, which
her kindred, who, by her engagement, would become Heirs to her Estate,
underhand gave, did break all these just measures: They prevailed above all
other considerations, and Eugenia Professed after the accustomed manner.

While these things past, Our Cavalier began to be tired with the War: He an
hundred times a day called to his mind the amiable qualities of his Mistress:
He remembered all the Amorous favors, which he had received, and in that
agreeable contemplation, he almost died with a desire, of seeing her again.
Whilst he thus sighed, they brought him a Letter which, after reading, almost
drove him to despair. One of his Friends acquainted him, that the report of his
Death was every where spread abroad, that Eugenia, to avoid constraint from her
Relations, who would force her to marry Dorimont, had embraced Religion, and
had made her Vows, and that it were proper, he should write himself, to let her
understand of his being in health, least they might prevail by the falseness of
the first News, which they had Published of him.

I leave you to Judge the excess of grief, which touched the heart of our
Lover, when he understood, that he had lost his Mistress. He could not imagine,
that she ought to fly to that Extremity, for any reason whatsoever.
Nevertheless he could not be persuaded, that she wanted fidelity to him. In
this perplexity he thought it necessary to have some clearing of the Matter,
before he declared her Guilty: Wherefore he writ to her the following Letter
which he gave a Gentleman, one o^ his Friends, who was to be the Bearer.

IS it possible, fair Eugenia, that the news which I hear, of your entering a
Cloister, and Professing, should be true: I am told, that it was to avoid
Dorimont; but then, you should have preserved your self for Oronces. I cannot
dissemble with you, I know not what Opinion, I ought to have of all this, and
whether, I should regard you, as a Person insensible, who please your self at
the misfortunes of others, or as a weak inconstant creature, passionated for
some trifles of Devotion, who love every thing, that you see, who forget that
which is no longer in sight, and give up your Heart, to every one, that demands
it. I know very well, that absence is a dangerous thing, but alas! if I were
absent, it was for loving you, you know that my passion was Innocent, and Pure,
you should not then have rendered it Criminal, by infidelity, while on my side,
I render it Illustrious by an inviolable constancy; acquaint me, as soon as
possible, if my complaints are unjust, and deliver from his Pain, the
unfortunate

Oronces.


This Letter, was put into her own hand, by the Gentleman, we mentioned; it
produced, in the Soul of our young Professed, very very different Motions, for
she was equally touched with Grief, and Joy, and in that moment, perceived the
Relics of the Fire, to rekindle in Her, which were almost extinguish't.

If her Joy was great, to understand, that He, whom she loved, was living, she
conceived no less displeasure, to see her self tied, and bound, and, according
to all appearance, a Captive for the rest of her days; that Reflection caused
in her, an extreme Melancholy, and raised troubles in her Spirit, which
tormented her to the Quick.

She endeavored to get out of that confusion, and to enjoy her former
tranquillity, by overcoming her Nature, and mastring her Inclination for her
Lover; She believed, that Meditation, and the Devout Contemplation of several
Pious Mysteries, and the exercise of a severe Virtue, might take her off from
these Sentiments of the World, and Terrestial thoughts, by approaching Heaven.
She therefore made a Trial of this for some days, but it was without any
profit. Devotion was to her, an Insipid Dainty, which she could not at all
Relish. She in vain forbid Love an entrance into her heart, ^e so constantly
crept in, and made (...) greater ravage then before. He cau^ed a thousand
distractions in her ^ost fervent prayers: He malici^usly led her into all
Places, where ^er Lover had been. He obliged her ^o stop in the place, where he
had ^iven her a thousand Kisses, and ^here she had received a thousand
Caresses, and where he had assured ^er of his Constancy. In fine, he o^ercame,
and constrained her to yield and still to nourish in her Soul, the same
Passion, which had made her sigh so often heretofore.

Eugenia, then finding her self too weak to resist this little God, that
attacked her, abandoned her self entirely to his conduct, and writ to Oronces
the most passionate Letter, that her Genius could dictate; she informed him of
her Mothers deceit, and conjured him to seek some remedy, for an evil, that in
its self seemed irrecoverable, that she was altogether His; and that Love of
him only had obliged her to embrace the Condition, wherein she saw her self
unhappily engaged.

I leave you to judge, how this Letter was received by our young Lover; without
reflecting upon his Mistresses condition, he was excessiv^ glad to hear, that
she had been faithful to him, and that He only wa^ beloved; and though there was
n^ cause for it, yet he flattered himse^^ with the hope of some good fortun^
whereof the thought only transported him wih Pleasure: Nevertheless, this
Ecstasy, being ill grounded, continued not long: it gave place to more serious
considerations, and was followed by an extraordinary Melancholy, which
represented to him, that the loss of Eugenia was without recovery, and that it
was impossible to repair it.

While this inquietude afflicted his mind, he wholly applied himself to find out
means of getting Eugenia into his possession; He presently thought of stealing
her away, which would have been without doubt easy, since she, without any
great difficulty, would have consented to it; but many considerations dissuaded
him from it; and made him reject that Expedient, for fear of not being able to
make use of it, but with prejudice to his Mistress.

At length after much consideration, Love inspired him with an Artifice, which
at the same time, was the most pleasant, and most rash in the World.

He understood, that a young Gentleman, one of his intimate Friends, called
Camillus, had made a close Familiarity with a young Nun of that Country, who
had conceived for him so great an affection, that she would have followed him
all the World over: her name was Aurelia.

Oronces made a confidence to this Cavalier of his ancient Passion for a
Mistress, who by a Mothers Stratagem was blindly shut up in a Cloister for the
rest of her days; he entreated him to serve him, in that affair, from which he
himself could draw nothing, but advantage.

Then he proposed to him his design, and told him, that to bring it
succesfully about, he must obtain leave, for sister Aurelia to change her
Convent, so that she might go and remain in that, where Eugenia was, and that
if this could be done, as it was apparently possible, they Two should be the
most happy Lovers, that ever were in the World.

Camillus became of his Friends opinion, and told him, that he would speak of
it to his Mistress, without whom nothing could be performed. But alas! how weak
is a young heart, when it suffers it self to be conducted by Love.

Aurelia, far from examining, with the Scruple, which she ought, the
Proposition made to her, immediately consented unto it, and approved of the
project; admiring, that Oronces, in so tender an age, should be capable of
imagining so witty a contrivance.

Then our two Lovers met again, and Camillus gave an account of his visit to
our Cavalier. Both obtained from their General upon a decent pretense, leave to
withdraw, and they seriously applied themselves to succeed in their design. It
being unfit, that they should appear to have any interest in the retreat of
Sister Aurelia, they left her to act all alone, and supplied her with the sure
means of obtaining her request, feeing underhand the persons, employed to
solicit the fair Nun's Petition.

The Town, wherein she was, had been conquered from the King o^ Spain, and
thereupon it was, that she grounded her request. She represented with a great
deal of Spirit, and Ingenuity, that she had ever born an inclination to the
French interest, and more particularly since His Majesty became Master of the
Town, wherein the Monastery stood; but that, sarr from gaining the love of her
Superiors, by the Obedience which she paid her Prince she was become the hate
of the whole Convent, that they respected her as a stranger, and that those
that Governed, being still Spaniard in their hearts and affections, mad^ her
suffer a thousand torments, from which she could not be delivered, but by
quitting the place, from whence she humbly prayed to retire.

This pretense, being specious enough, and these reasons having some
appearance, she easily obtained her wish, but not without special regard being
had, that Eugenia's Convent, to which she was to go, was governed by the same
Rule, as That, which she was to quit; and there was no other difference, but
that in This, wherein Aurelia was, they wore a little white scarf upon their
Habit, which the others observed not. But this distinction, not being
essential, they without difficulty, gave her all the necessary Orders for her
departure.

In the mean time, these two Lovers consulted together, of what they had to do
Oronces, following the Genius that pusht him on, resolved to take Aurelia's
Habit, and to go in that manner, to shut himself up in a Cloister, with his
Mistress; and Camillus, making use of the opportunity, and good will of his
Mistress, designed to conduct her into a Castle of his own, and to live there,
as Lovers, as long as Destiny would be favorable to them.

This so bold a Metamorphosis was performed, as it had been projected. Aurelis,
having departed by the way of the Coach, and knowing the place where the two
Cavaliers waited for her, did on the second day pretend to be distempered with
that way of traveling, and seemed not able to continue without danger her
journey, without some other convenience. She played her part so well, that
nothing was suspected, and the Coach arrived at the place, where Oronces and
Camillus had already taken up their Lodging, There our Nun, having agreed for a
Litter, did on the morrow dismiss the Coach, after she had satisfied the
Coachman.

It was here, that both parties made a Voluntary change of Habits, Oronces was
but eighteen years old, he was fair like Aurelia, and almost of the same
Stature, so that there was such a resemblance between them, that the disguise
was never known to any, but those who were privy to it, who could not
sufficiently admire at their behavior, which appeared not more unnatural, then
if both the one and the other had been born in the Estate, in which they were
at that time.

Oronces, thus travestied into a Nun, and furnished with all the dispatches
necessary to his new condition, prepared himself to depart in the Litter,
accompanied only by a Girl, whom he took in the Town, to render his conduct
irreproachable; he was instructed in every thing, necessary for his knowledge,
to appear before the Superior, and having a Voice very sweet, and very
pleasant, he persuaded himself, that he could easily live in that House, and
perform all the Exercises, conformable to the Habit, which he wore.

Camillus, for his part, conducted the fair Aurelia into a very pleasant
Castle, where he proposed to himself to enjoy with her solid Pleasures; and,
wishing to his friend all content, never to be disturbed by any unforeseen
misfortunes; they parted, after having exchanged a thousand Marks of Affection,
and settling a sure means of holding a correspondence with one another. Our Fair
Nun, impatient to see her, whom she loved, so hastened her departure, and
continued her journey with so great diligence, that within three days she
arrived at the Town, where she was to remain.

She went immediately to make a visit to the Bishop of the place, who was the
Chief Superior of Eugenia's Monastery; she showed him her Obedience, and her
other Patents, wherewith she was furnished; She did him reverence with so much
Grace, she spoke to him with so much Modesty, and always entertained him so
wittily, that the Prelate was charmed with her, and was overjoyed with himself,
that so Fair a Person rendered her self subject to his obedience, and came to
place her self under his direction.

He was too much taken with the fair qualities of our Metamorphosed Cavalier,
(whom for the future we shall call Aurelia) to permit her so suddenly to shut
up her self in the Cloister, he would for three or four days have her walk in
his Coach about the Town, and make her acquainted with other Monasteries, with
whom she might, for the future, have some Communication. Aurelia, who had
reason to fear every thing in a place, where she was so well known, did for a
while refuse those marks of goodness, which she received from her Prelate,
telling him, that she desired nothing, but a retreat, and that, being entered
into Religion very young, she had no manner of Relish for affairs of the World,
whose fashions she was even ignorant of. Therefore she entreated him to excuse
her, and to grant her Leave to retire to her Cloister, that she might there be
at leisure for exercises, more conformable to her Profession.

This young Prelate had no regard to the entreaties of our Religious. He did
not believe, that her heart had any share, in what she seemed to desire, and he
could not persuade himself, that a Lady, so fair, so witty, and whose Eyes were
so filled with fire, did despise that which others, with such earnestness, seek
after. He therefore showed her all the fine things, and curiosities of the
Town. In all her visits she gained a general applause; her behavior in them
appeared so free, and disaffected; her words so noble, and elevated; and her
judgment so solid, that she gained the hearts of all the companies, she came
into.

The time of his absence from the Province, having a little changed his Mien,
and the disguising of his Sex under a Petti-coat and Vail, being not imagined
by any, he preserved himself from being known, even by those, who had been his
intimate acquaintance, and ended all his visits, without being discovered, or
in the least suspected by those, who were his nearest relations.

This will not seem incredible to those, who shall reflect on the many
adventures, happening every day, by which we are so easily surprised; and if,
in a Comedy, a Player, whom we have already seen, becomes afterward unknown,
by the change of his Part and Garments, why should it be difficult, to believe
the success of a Stratagem, perfectly contrived, and executed with a mavelous
audacity?

The Bishop, having spent three days in walking up and down, as well for his
own particular content, as for the satisfaction of Aurelia, he himself
conducted her into the Monastery, and did himself the Honor, to represent unto
the Convent a person so amiable and accomplished.

The Abbess, who had heard the News of her departure, and arrival, received her
with incredible transports of Joy; and the other Nuns, at the sight of so much
Beauty, conceived, for her presented to them, an interior Friendship not to be
expressed. She thanked the Prelate, with much respect, for those testimonies of
his goodness toward her, and he, for his part, giving her a Pastoral Kiss, and
taking her into his protection, recommended her, as his own Daughter, to the
Superior, and left her with her Companions.

It was then, that Embraces were redoubled, and Kisses given without Number;
never was Reception accompanied with so many Caresses.

Aurelia was all on Fire, and the color, which enlivened her Countenance,
added an agreeableness, which rendered her so amiable, as that she ravished
their hearts. In the mean time, Eugenia appeared not in the Troop; she was
become so solitary and melancholy, after the News, which she had received
about Oronces, that she was indifferent for all things, and employed her
thoughts only in Vexation and Displeasure, for having unhappily engaged her
self by a solemn Profession, and public declaration of her Vows.

Her Lover was no less unquiet, not to see Her, whom he loved so tenderly. She
had no manner of notice of his designs, and therefore, when some of her
Companions advertised her of the arrival of Sister Aurelia, she made no other
answer, but that she should have time enough to see and salute her, since she
was to remain in the House.

In the mean time, the Superior, according to custom, caused all the Sisters
to be called together, to the public reading of Aurelia's Patents, and to
receive her, according to Form, into the number of the Religious. Eugenia was
then present with the others, and while one of the Ancients red the dispatches,
and that the other Formalities were observed, she had her eye continually upon
this new Commer, but she little thought, that she beheld her Lover.

After the Ceremony was over, Oronces received fresh kisses from the Company,
but he found none so sweet, as that which his Mistress gave him. He could not
refrain from clasping her more amorously, than he did the others, and although
he did not design to discover himself so soon to her, he could not forbear a
certain whisper, followed by some glances, which penetrated the heart of that
lovely Creature.

The poor Lady, agitated with a thousand thoughts, retired immediately into her
Chamber, to meditate of what she had seen, and to reflect upon the resemblance
of Aurelia's face to her Dear Oronces. Nevertheless, she durst not be convinced
of what, her heart declared to her, and though she had been moved with an
infinite tenderness, at the time she was embraced, yet a design, so hardy and
surprising, could not enter her thought. In this embarras, and confusion of
Spirit, she slumbered, and her mind, being filled only with the resemblance,
that was between Aurelia and Oronces, she continually dreamed of that Subject.
Let us leave her in this moment of repose and tranquillity, to see what her
Lover does.

Aurelia was all his time entertained by a Nun, who finding in her self a great
inclination to love her, resolved with the first to gain her Heart, and
Friendship. She was young and fair, and Oronces was not insensible, but, his
Affections being already placed, he made no return of real Love or Tenderness,
but only of a little outward Complaisance.

This Nun, who was called Pamphilia, never found in her self so ardent a desire
to love one, of her own Sex, as she did in respect of this new Commer; and this
Love, appearing to her innocent, and impossible to have in it any thing impure,
she pusht it on, as far as she could, and, knowing by experience, that the
Night was more proper than the Day for a thousand amorous declarations and an
infinity of engaging wantonnesses, she proffered Aurelia to pass it with her,
in one of the Common Chambers, because as yet there was no particular one,
provided for her.

All these Caresses, enough to have transported with joy, any other, that had
sense, gave Aurelia but a slender satisfaction. She did indeed find her self a
little warmed but she needed only think upon Eugenia, to quench immediately
those Flames, which begun to blaze. Nevertheless, she could not forbear telling
Pamphilia, that her company would be very agreeable unto her, and that she
received extraordinary pleasure in her conversation: But that which gave her no
small content, was, to hear from this Religious, a recital of every thing that
had past, concerning her Mistress, who being one of Pamphilia's intimate
Friends, had made her a Confident of it all, and had prayed her to keep it
secret, and impart it to none.

Oronces, who almost died with a desire of speaking to Eugenia, took thence an
occasion of asking Pamphilia, where was her Chamber? and told her, that she
would be glad to go along with her, and visit that amiable Nun. Then Pamphilia
conducted him thither, and immediately left them together, to the end, that
they might be the more easily engaged in a Common amity, wherein she might have
a part.

Our Metamorphosed Cavalier, for all his Mistresses Melancholy, found her
fairer, then ever, he had seen her, even in her richest Garments. Her youth
inspired him with Joy, her Beauty with new desires, and what she had done for
him with admiration. He at first dissembled, who he was, and understood from
her, that she was newly risen from sleep, and that she had had a Dream, which,
while it continued, gave her a great deal of pleasure, but, after awakening,
created nothing in her, but disquiet. He pressed her to declare it, and told her,
that he would show the true meaning of it, if it had the least conformity with
reason. She immediately gave him a look, and their Eyes meeting together, said
in their Language, that Love was very ingenious, and that they could not ^ong
be unknown to one another. Nevertheless Eugenia, being the more fearful, did
not dare to declare her thought first, and Oronces, who took pleasure in seeing
her in that confusion, made no great have to draw her out of it.

In fine, Love overcame Affection; Aurelia, or rather our Cavalier, could no
longer resist those tender motions, which the presence of his dear Mistress
made him resent. He ^ast himself about her neck, and embracing her with
transports of extraordinary joy, he cried out, yes, ^tis I, Eugenia; and Love
has given me the Habit, which you see. That word, chasing all doubt from
Eugenia's mind, replenished her with an ^nconceivable satisfaction, and for
^ome moments deprived her of the ^se of her senses, that she might ^he more
peaceably enjoy within her ^elf, that excess of pleasure, which ^he felt.

As soon as they had recovered their surprise, they began again their Caresses;
and Oronces, to take Eugenia out of pain, related to her, how every thing past,
and that they had no cause to apprehend any thing, as long as his youth would
leave his chin unfurnished, and as the sweetness of his voice would continue.
She for her part, acquainted him, with the Artifice, which her Mother made use
of, to abuse her, and conjured him to behave himself discreetly in regard of
the Convent, least that, by some wrong step, he might spoil an enterprise, that
required all the good conduct imaginable, to make it succeed.

She instructed him moreover i^ all the ways of living in a Cloister and she
fashioned him so well, tha^ he was in a little time, as skilful, (...) the
ancientest Dame in the house and he performed his Duty so well as shall be seen
hereafter, that h^ merited to have the direction of the Novices, when their
ordinary Mi^tress, who was very Aged, could not attend that exercise, by reason
of indisposition.

In the mean time, the promise, which he had made Pamphilia to pass the night
with her, troubled him not a little. He told in Eugenia, who could find no
surer means to prevent it, then by offering the same thing in the others
presence; an opportunity so to do presented it self immediately, for Pamphilia,
impatient to see Aurelia again, went and rejoyned them in a Friends Chamber,
who told her, as soon as she entered, that she would not quit Aurelia before
the morning, and that, being for that day exempted from assisting in the Quire,
she would keep her company.

Pamphilia for her part alleged, that she had made the first proffer; that the
Bed, wherein they were to ly, was too little for three, and that she must yield
to her, as to one who was her elder. But Eugenia was too much interessed, to
let her gain that point, Therefore the conclusion was, that they should
accommodate themselves as well as they could, and that both should take care to
divert the new Comer.

In the mean time, nothing was more embarrassed than our Cavalier he was so
fearful, of giving his Mistress some apparent cause of Jealousy, that he
thought himself obliged to prevent her, and to intrea^ her, not to make any ill
construction of the Amity, which she should outwardly show, in return to the
Caresses of the other Nuns-: tha^ he would abstain altogether from so doing, if
she absolutely desire^ it; but that he believed, that the best way to conceal
their Game was to live outwardly alike with al^ the world.

Eugenia, who had a good wit^ and was perfectly convinced of the great Love,
which Oronces had for her, told him, that he might a^ in all things without
Constraint, that, although she loved him much more then he could imagine, yet
she did believe, that no jealousy could ever trouble her: That he might really
upon these words and hereafter use all the liberty, he would do, were he that
in Effect, which he was only in Appearance.

There is nothing that agrees with Beauty better, or gives it more luster then
joy; Eugenia, being rid of her vexation, and a gay humor succeeding her
Melancholy, recovered in a little time, together with a good plight, those
charms, which formerly rendered her so lovely, and were now sullied with the
trouble and disquiet of mind, to which her retreat had reduced her. She supt
with her Lover, and Pamphilia, who was become jealous of the Caresses, that all
the young Nuns made to sister Aurelia, flattered her self, with the sensible
pleasure of lying, and passing the night with a Person, whom she loved with an
Extraordinary tenderness, and affection.

Eugenia, that she might have an opportunity of being sometime alone with
Oronces, undertook her self to go, and make the Bed, and put in a readiness the
Chamber, wherein he was to remain, until another were provided in the Common
Dormitory of the Convent. The disguised Lover followed her, and was
sufficiently perplexed, to satisfy all the questions, which were asked him in a
quarter of an hours conversation. She immediately asked him, what were his
sentiments, when he received so many kisses from the youngest, and fairest in
the house. Alas! my dear Eugenia, he answered, I will dissemble nothing from
you. It Is true, that two or three, who acquitted themselves with a great deal
of heat, caused in me some slight emotions; some Sparkles of the Fire,
wherewith they seemed to burn, did warm my heart, and touched it with some
sense of sweetness, which did a little tickle me.

How, said she to him, did you not resist that springing Affection, and condemn
in your self a Love, which could not be lawful, since you conceived it to my
prejudice? Ah, he replied, you ought to excuse me for several reasons, faults,
that we committed in spite of our selves, should easily be pardoned. Besides I
can assure you, that if these Embraces have raised in me any passions, they
were but wandering ones, which only disturbed the soul, but possessed it not for
any long time. My reason is not become irregular upon their account, and the
extreme love that I have for you, has suffered no alteration, for your
presence only has driven out of my mind, all the Idea's, formed therein by
these strange Beauties. I must believe you, interrupted Eugenia, and I foresee
well enough, that I must prepare my self to pardon you many of the like faults,
while you remain here; but for the rest, continued she, have a care of
favoring the weakness of any in this Convent, or of making your self known,
and no less of requiring from me, what I will never grant, but according to
Form. All other favors for your comfort, shall not be denied you, and we will
live together, as a Brother would with a Sister, whom he cherishes, and by whom
he is equally beloved. Especially, since that we shall be obliged to ly
together this night, to avoid the wantonness of Sister Pamphilia, who otherwise
will without doubt discover you; behave your self discreetly, and consider,
that your fortune and my Life and Honor, ly upon your following these
measures, which I give you. Your Father, who is the Principal obstacle to our
liberty, is very old, and the manner, that I entered this House, is known to
many, who can upon occasion bear witness of it, and I hope, that by the
assistance of some powerful friends, we may at length bring about our first
pretensions, and then pass the rest of our days in pleasures, by so much the
more pure, as that they will be lawful, and shall never more be disturbed by
any Accident, from the long enjoyment of them in perfection.

They were in this Discourse, when Pamphilia entered, who finding them all on
fire, demanded how they had overheated themselves? Eugenia replied, that they
were forced to righten the Chamber, for it was quite ought of Order. Truly,
said Pamphilia, you are not very conscientious, to cause sister Aurelia, to
work thus, could you not stay for company, but must tire a poor girl, just
arrived from a long journey, and in saying that, she cast her arms about
Oronces his neck, and gave him a kiss. Eugenia, who in spite of all her
precautions, did believe, that her Lover robbed her of every thing, that he
granted another, could not restrain her self, but would be a sharer, so that
our new Nun, was the most embarrassed in the world, to satisfy these
passionated Creatures.

But this was but a Prelude, or slight Attack, if compared with what was
apparently to follow. As soon as the retreat was rung, and that all the Nuns
were retired each one into her Cell, the two Sisters, together with the young
Nun, began the evening with a thousand little divertising Sports. Oronces, who
had no experience in the greater part of these Cloysterial Games, was almost
continually out, and was condemned to an hundred wanton trifles, which would
infinitely have pleased him, had he been at liberty.

These pastimes were followed by a Collation, where Marchpanes, and other
delicacies grateful to the taste, appeared with profusion: The most tender Airs,
out of Operaes, were also sung, and Sister Aurelia, who had a great deal of
skill, performed her part to perfection.

After having spent much time in these divertisements, they began to talk of
going to bed. Eugenia had before hand acquainted her Lover, with all the
fooleries he was to endure, if he lay near Pamphilia, besides, that it would be
impossible to do so without discovering his Sex. Therefore he was to place
himself by his Mistress's side; do not imagine, that this was any pleasure to
him, but quite contrary; for she had imposed upon him such rigorous Laws, that
he never past a night with less repose, or more disquiet than that.

Pamphilia, who was almost ready to ly down, told Eugenia, that although she
only had right to ly with Sister Aurelia, having made the first proffer; yet
she was willing to admit her to a share in the bed, so Aurelia lay in the
middle.

Though, according to Rules, a Proposition, so reasonable as this, ought to be
received without dispute; yet Eugenia would not agree unto it, foreseeing as a
thing infallible, the discovery of her Lover, if it should happen so. Pamphilia
also for her part, being unwillng to yield, had however Complaisance enough, to
offer to decide the Question by some kind of game, which was done, but to the
disadvantage of Eugenia, who lost and no longer knew, what Saint to invoke,
that she might escape the danger, wherein she was.

In the mean time, her naked Companion, after kissing Aurelia, went first to
bed, and left the two Lovers busy, at Prayers in appearance, but indeed in
contriving some Artifice to deliver themselves from the Winners persuites. At
length after having meditated some time, Eugenia resolved to put out the
Candle, before she lay down, and to creep readily into the place, appointed for
Oronces, and then to suffer him by her side. She advertised him of it, and
seeming to search for something with the light, she let it fall designedly, and
extinguish't the Flame, so as Pamphilia could observe nothing, to make her
suspect, that it was done purposely to deceive her.

Oronces, who was near the Bed, and undressing, was called upon by her, who was
impatient of being alone, I will come unto you presently, said he, but I desire
you would not trouble my repose, it will be in vain to talk to me; I shall not
answer one word, for I am already half asleep.

He had hardly ended these words, when Eugenia threw her self into Bed, and
placed her self in the middle, and Oronces soon after lay down by her.

Pamphilia no sooner felt Eugenia by her side, but mistaking her for Aurelia,
did most straightly embrace her, and demanded of her, if she would not be her
Friend? Eugenia answered not, but with a kiss, which she could not soon get rid
off, and which was followed with all the Caresses, and wantonness, which the
poor Recluse are wont to put in practice, to assuage the heat of their fire.
It Is very true, that Eugenia did expose her self to her Companions fury, only
to deliver her Lover from it, and that she rather sought his safety, then any
satisfaction, which she took therein.

While the two Sisters were exercising these wantonnesses, the Poor Oronces
suffered more pain, then they could taste pleasure; he was like Tantalus,
condemned to die with hunger, in the sight of several dainties, he was Poor in
the midst of Wealth, and what seemed sufficient to complete his joys, was now
become the cause of his pain and sorrow.

He could not reflect upon the condition wherein he was, without becoming
sensible of a thousand importunate thoughts, which tired his Imagination, and
burnt him with a Fire, that he was not permitted to quench, even upon the brink
of a Fountain. He was so filled with the Idea of his Mistresses attractions,
that all his desires were fixed upon that amiable Creature; all his sighs half
stifled, were for her; and all the motions of his heart had no other cause then
her Charms.

He perceived sometimes his Reason growing weak, and without Heroical
endeavors, he would never have been able to resist such forcible temptations:
Alas! what did he not think? What did he not say to himself? what torment said
he, is this I feel? and whence proceeds the unquietude and disorder, wherein I
am? What? must I be the most unhappy man in the world, for lying by the fairest
Creature in it? Can so fine an object, accustomed to inspire me with nothing
but joy, put me now to so much pain? Ah! how dangerous a passion is Love, and
to what rough Trials does it expose us, before it imparts unto us, even the
least of its pleasures.

While he thus thought, Eugenia, defending her self from her Companions
embraces, did without considering it, approach him with a great deal of
precipitation, it was then, that he being ignorant, whether Chance or Love
threw her so into his Arms, did almost forget all the Laws, prescribed him, and
there wanted little of his committing a fact, contrary to his duty. This
approach did sensibly augment his Fires, and the Heat, received from it,
consumed him even to the very heart, insomuch, that though she was retired, yet
the remembrance of that surprise did continually redouble his Affliction; that
is, if it were possible to imagine any addition to a Grief, which, from the
first moment, that he conceived it, had been extreme and insupportable.

At length, Pamphilia cloyed with kisses, and wearied with the violence of her
exercise, found her self overcome with sleep. She bid her Neighbor Good night,
by the name of Aurelia, who also counterfeited sleep, though it was impossible
for her to rest one moment. She had much ado to constrain herself, and on what
diversions soever she employed her mind, she could never take it of from her
Lover, her imagination represented Him so forcibly, that all the various
reflections, to which she applied her self, proved too weak to prevail over the
violence of her Passion; and loving Oronces no less then she was beloved by
him, she was sensible of all the motions, concerns, and transports, which Love
made him resent.

In the mean time, Oronces, seeing these two Companions quiet, believed, that
they were really asleep. So that to ease a little of the extreme heat, which
consumed him, he laid his hand upon Eugenia's Body, and for some time ran over
it with extraordinary transports, which made him forget himself, and gave him a
taste of pleasures not to be equalled, to his wonderful Satisfaction: His
Mistresse's fear of his being discovered by some unhappy word, was the Cause,
that at first she durst not say any thing to him, to rebuke him; but at length,
he became so importunate, and his toying provoked her in such a manner, that
she could no longer endure it, but seizing his hand, she put it off from her,
and whispered him, as softly as she could, that he should consider the danger
whereto they were exposed; He took that warning, and giving Eugenia a kiss, he
let her understand, that he would no more.

There is nothing more vexatious to Lovers, than to spend the nights after that
manner: Eugenia would not have Oronces to ly there, until the appearance of
day, but, least the light should discover him, she made him rise, and dress
himself, and gave him the key of a neighboring Chamber, where he threw himself
upon a Bed, to take a little repose. After which, she lay in his place, and
left the middle empty, to the end to make her Companion believe, that it was
Sister Aurelia who had filled it up.

In effect, Pamphilia was convinced of it, as soon as she awaked, and Eugenia
acquainted her, that she had so tired and overheated that poor Girl, with her
embraces, that she was obliged to withdraw into another Chamber, for a little
rest, it being impossible for her to sleep with so great heat, and importunity.

As soon as our two Lovers saw each other, Eugenia smilingly asked Oronces, how
he had past the night? Ah! malicious Creature, he replied, have you the heart,
so to insult over an unfortunate man? Know, that I never gave you greater
proofs of my Love than last night, and without extreme Affection, my Obedience
could never have been so perfect. You made me dye a thousand times by your
continual motions, and I still admire, how I have been able to observe with so
great submission, those rigorous Laws, which you had given me.

By this, the time was come, wherein they were to attend all the usual
exercises of a Monastic life. Oronces was instructed in them by his Mistress,
and performed them with so great success, especially those that regarded the
business of the Quire, that in some time after, she who had the care of forming
the Voices of the Novices, being fallen sick, that charge was given to sister
Aurelia, who took pleasure in the Employment, and did execute it to the
satisfaction of all those, put under him.

The truth is, that he so behaved himself, as that under the Countenance of a
Venus, he made Virtue it self, and Modesty shine out. He seemed unmoved with
any ambition. His Beauty gave him not the least pride or affectation. He was
simple or witty according to occasion, and so plain a sincerity appeared in
him, that even the most penetrating were deceived.

Under the Veil of an easy and attracting Devotion, he gained the hearts of all
the World; and his Mistress, and himself following the same Rules in their
Conduct, and being endowed almost with the same qualities, they were esteemed,
as Persons, that one day would fill up the Chief Places of the Convent.

Eugenia was of a tall and slender stature, her face round, and of a wonderful
complexion; her black Eyes were filled with Fire, which she tempered with a
great deal of sweetness, and modesty, her teeth were white, even, and well
ranked. In fine to give a perfect Idea of Her, it may be said, that her Veil
hid more beauty then outwardly appeared, and that it was reserved for him only,
who one day was to enjoy her, to admire at its Perfection.

Oronces had already remained almost a year in the Monastery, and lived there,
with the Approbation of the whole Convent, when an unlucky Accident made him a
thousand times repent of his rash entering into that place, and of trusting
himself so long to the inconstancy of Fortune.

A Nun of the house, called, Lucia, having been a little too familiar in
private with at Directour, who would conduct her into Heaven, by ways very
different from the Gospel, so resented his devout Instructions, that she could
not hide the fruits of it; but appeared big with Child in the sight of all her
Companions.

There is nothing that destroys the esteem, which the world has conceived for
these kind of People, more then the knowledge of their Crimes, and Offenses.
They therefore kept the business as secret as they could, and the Superior
forbad them, under great penalties, to say any thing of that disorder. In the
mean time, the poor Lucia was examined, and because, she had read in a Book,
containing several Fabulous Stories, that a Vestall had conceived by a Spirit,
She thought, that she also might deny her having any communication with a man.
In effect, she so stubbornly persisted in the denial, that the Superior,
fearing that there might be some Hermaphrodite among her maids, ordered ten of
the most Ancient, to search all the Nuns of the Convent without exception, and
then to make a true Report to her, of what they had seen.

I leave you to judge, what extremity, this Order reduced our two Lovers to:
Eugenia, who feared all things for Oronces, councelled him to withdraw, and
depart that night, through a place in the Garden, where the passage was not
difficult. There was so little probability of saving himself otherwise from the
danger, whereto he was exposed, that he resolved to follow the Countel of his
dear Mistress, whom he bid adieu to in the evening, and took leave of her,
without having time to reflect upon the means of recovering her, thus abandoned
by his departure.

He was not yet arrived at the place, by which he was to make his escape, when
he met a Nun, whom chance, or the desire of taking a little fresh air had
brought thither. She immediately perceived Sister Aurelia, by reason of her
Habit, being white mingled with black, which reaches the sight, sooner then any
thing else, and joining with her, retained her in spite of all the Artifices,
which she used, to get rid of her.

She entertained her with what had past in the House; and with what was to be
done, on the morrow, according to the command of the Superior. These
discourses put Aurelia upon Thorns. Nevertheless it was impossible for her to
get from that Impertinent, and to add to his misfortune, she, who had the
charge of locking up all the Gates, came to advise them to retire, that the
retreat was rung; and that she came to perform her office.

This unhappy rencounter broke all the Measures of our poor Lover, he was
forced to reenter the Cloister, and go to his own bed, thinking continually how
to secure himself from the storm and tempest, which threatened him. But alas!
that Wit, that suggested to him his former Stratagem, failed him upon this
occasion.

Eugenia, perceiving him in the morning, in the Quire among the rest, was in
the greatest amazement in the world. The search was to be made in the
Afternoon, and there was no possibility of escaping by day the sight of so many
people. She spoke to him, and understood, what had hindered his departure, she
thought, she studied, she meditated, but still in vain, and in that disquiet,
she remitted her cause to the God of love, whom she conjured, not to abandon
them in so dangerous an extremity.

In the mean while, the time appointed for the execution of the ordonnance
being come, all the Nuns had fresh notice, to go and present themselves, one
after another, to the old ones deputed to search, and several had already
undergone that mortification, when Eugenia came thither, and retired as soon as
she could out of the hands of those old Matrons, whose fashions would have made
her laugh, had she not had so much cause of affliction.

Oronces his turn approached, when Eugenia perceiving her self all of a sudden
transported, went to find him out and readily changing Habits with him (which
differed from the rest) as we have already told you, she bid him not to torment
himself; and said, that she hoped, that with this disguise every thing would
fall out to their advantage.

In effect she went again, to present herself, with her Veil dow^n before these
Venerable Dames, who took her, by the White and Black Habit, which she wore,
for sister Aurelia. She being esteemed very virtuous, they believed that it was
modesty, obliged her to be so Veiled, and therefore they would not vex her with
any demand, but putting their spectacles upon their noses and taking their
candles in hand, they visited that fair place with a great deal of diligence,
which they could not know again, though they had exactly viewed it just a
little before. Being so escaped from the danger, she went immediately to
Oronces, and restored to him his Garments, assuring him, that there was nothing
more to be feared: then he gave a thousand Kisses to this witty Lover, and at
the same time, they both resolved, to go together to Rome, to the end, to annul
the vows by which Eugenia was engaged, and to have her remitted in her former
liberty.

The good Matrons made their report to the Superior, and said, that although
they had seen great matters, yet that they had perceived nothing capable of
giving Sister Lucia the Tympany, that incommoded her; that the mischief must
have come from without, and that by using a little cunning to convict her, they
might discover, who had been the Author of so great a scandal. This advice was
followed with success, for Lucia fell into the snare laid for her, and became
obliged to confess her fault without any disguise.

A little time after his had past, Oronces's Fathers death was published over
all the Town, though our Lover saw himself by it, at more liberty than before,
yet he resented it very much, and his natural tenderness made him, in secret,
shed abun^ance of tears, to the Memory of him, who had given him life.

In the interim, his elder brother^ hearing that he was no longer in the Army,
caused him to be enquired after on all sides, and the report of it being come
to the Monastery, where he was, upon the account of his Mistress shut up in it,
they thought it time, to contrive their retreat, least some Misfortune should
discover them to those, who made such curious enquiries after their Persons.

Nothing is more industrious than Love, Eugenia found a way to have two Gentile
suits of man's apparel, by the means of a Confident whom she had abroad,
telling her, that she had a design to make presents of them to two of her
Cozens, who were almost of the same stature, but because she would surprise
them with that liberality, she purposed to keep the matter secret. This Friend,
not knowing any thing considerable of her Amors, could not imagine the use she
would put these Garments to, but did unfeignedly believe what was told her, and
within three days she delivered them ready made and finished, into her hands,
who had given her Orders about them.

As soon as these two Lovers had wherewithal to shift their Habits, they
thought of nothing more than of their departure. Oronces had brought with him
two hundred Pistolls, which the war had enriched him with. These he had always
preserved for a time of necessity, and it was wisely done, for they were of
great use to him in the journey, which he now undertook. After that both had
made themselves ready, and taken with them what was necessary, they departed
about nine of the clock in the Evening, through that place, already mentioned,
in the Garden, and went immediately by favor of the night to put on their new
Equipage.

The fear they were in of being known in the Town, made them walk a quarter of
a league a foot, after which they arrived in a Village, where having taken
lodging under borrowed names, they hired two Horses, to depart on the break of
day. Though the young Eugenia was not accustomed to this kind of riding, yet
her address was mavelous, and she would have given those, who did not know
her, reason to believe, that she had performed all her exercises in the
Academie.

Whilst our two Fugitives made all the have they could to Marseilles, the
whole Monastery, from which they ran away, was in disorder. It seemed that all
the Furies were let loose against them, by reason of the continual misfortunes,
that assaulted them, and of the irregularity that became so public. In this
conjuncture they knew not what to say of the present scandal, nor think what
might be the cause of it. They never dreamt of Oronces, and the manner, that he
and Eugenia had behaved themselves in the House, added to the surprise of all
the Religious.

Several People were sent after them, but in vain, for besides that they had
taken a way quite contrary, to that by which they were pursued; they were
already emb^rq^ed at Marseilles, where they arrived, before their departure,
which was for some time concealed, had been published abroad, and before it
came to the knowledge of Secular Persons, who caused the pursuit after them. I
cannot express, how great was L^^^rentia's sorrow, it was so much the more in
that she knew, that she her self had occasioned by her constraint all this
irregularity, and had forced her Daughter, to enclose her self in a place, for
which she had never had any inclination. Let us leave her to deplore the loss
of her dear Eugenia, and follow the way of our Lovers.

Oronces having been so happy as to find at Marseilles a Vessel ready to sail
to Civita Vecchia, he embarked therein, together with his Mistress, and made
provision of all necessaries for their voyage. The wind was so favorable, that
in two days they arrived at Gen^a, where after taking some refreshment, they
departed, that they might not lose the opportunity of the fair weather. But
alas! the more they advanced, the nearer they approached their ruin. The
weather changed in a moment, and a storm succeeded the fair day they had had,
and the violent agitation of the Waves threatened nothing less, than an assured
Shipwreck. It was in vain that in this disaster, the Pilots and Mariners
endeavored to recover the Coast, which was too far off. They must yield to
the Tempest, and place all their hopes in him, who alone can command that
fierce Element, and be obeyed. In the interim, Eugenia, more dead than alive,
lay extended between her Loversarms, who, though he himself was no less
afflicted, endeavored to comfort her by all the reasons, which his troubled
Spirit could afford him, in this lamentable confusion.

But the night, which the Pilots dreaded most, proved not so vexatious, as was
feared. The wind suddenly abated, and the Sky, disclosing some Stars, gave
them a little comfort, promising them according to apparencies, weather proper
to pursue their voyage. In effect they weighed anchor in the Dawn, and having
fitted the Ship, they sailed away, singing a thousand songs of joy, which made
them forget their past dangers.

But alas! how short was their joy, and what hardship did their ill fortune
still provide for them? They scarce began to enjoy that interval of fair
Weather, when they saw themselves exposed to a danger, a thousand times more
tormenting, than that which they had so luckily escaped. They perceived from
far a Corsaire, who, rightly guessing that the Tempest would scatter some
Vessels upon their Coasts, lay in wait for them, and already made appear by his
motions, that he looked upon this Ship, as an infallible Prey.

Those, who guided the Vessel, where our Lovers were, gave them notice of the
misfortune threatening them, and of the slavery, to which they should be
reduced, if they fell into the hands of the Corsair, whom they perceived out at
Sea. Captivity is an evil a thousand times more insupportable, to a well born
Soul, than death it self. Now cries and lamentations only were to be heard, and
this news began to put all things in disorder, but this as yet was nothing, in
comparison of what past, when they saw that the Barbarian bore up with full
sail toward them; and that it was impossible to save themselves. Had Oronces
not been there, Eugenia would have flung her self into the Waters; the evident
loss of her liberty and honor, made her esteem death much more agreeable, than
the rude constraints, and infamous violences, to which, she apprehended, she
was going to be subjected.

Though in this to be pitied condition, her Lover was nearer death than life,
yet he comforted her, with giving her hopes, that she might escape undiscovered
in the Habit, which she wore, since it was not conformable to her Sex. That it
was not without example, that captives have found clemency from those kind of
People, and that Love, who had drawn them out of a infinity of troubles, would
not now forsake them in a rencounter, where his succor was absolutely
necessary.

In the mean while, the Cor^air came up to them, and obliged them to lowre
their Sails, and shot of several pieces of Cannon, to fright them, the others,
not being in a condition to defend themselves against such powerful Enemies,
were constrained to yield to their force, and to receive into their Ship those,
who were about to enslave them. As soon as the Barbarian was entered, he was
ravished with the beauty of our two young Cavaliers; he enquired of what Nation
they were, and whither they designed to go. They answered, that they were two
Brothers, born in France, and that they had departed thence to travel into
Italy. The African, who understood the Language, was charmed with the engaging
and respectful air, wherewith they had answered him; he preferred these fair
youths before all the rest of his Prey, and for their sake, all those of their
Company were treated with less, in humanity, than is usual in the like
accidents. Nevertheless they were forced to put on Irons in order to prevent
all designs, that despair might inspire them with, in so vexatious a
conjuncture. Oronces and Eugenia, being more favored by the Barbarian, and
having dissembled their affliction, were exempted from the Chains, and took for
a good Omen, these first favors, which made them, as it were, still enjoy an
entire liberty.

These poor unfortunate creatures, were brought to Tripoly, and were all
exposed to sale, except our two French men, and to change their their Master,
as soon as they arrived there. The Corsair, knowing by the Carriage, Manners,
and Habits of the two Brothers, that they were not of the common sort, would
keep them himself, and always treated them, as Persons of the first Quality,
and from whom, he expected a considerable Ransom. So that it might be said,
that they were free in their slavery, and that they might relish the same
sweets, as they heretofore found in their entertainments, when they were
without imprisonment or constraint.

Nevertheless, all this good usage was capable only of lessning their trouble,
but not of freeing them altogether from it. The remembrance of what they were,
and their shame and confusion to discover to their Relations what had happened to
them, tormented their mind more than I can express. They even resolved not to
send them any account, or news of themselves; but chose rather to resign
themselves to Fortune, that does often please it self in delivering the
miserable out of Dungeons, to raise them up to Thrones, than have recourse to
persons, who would not relieve them, until they had past severe censures upon
their conduct.

In the mean while, the Corsair, who expected suddenly to receive money for
their deliverance, began to grow impatient at the delay, and he had already
entertained them four Months, without obliging them to any employment,
disagreeable unto them. He again demanded, whether there were any thing to be
expected from them? Oronces answered him, that they acknowledged him for their
Master, that they were at his discretion, and that they did believe, that none
were disposed to ransome-them.

The Barbarian, whom the Hopes of Gain, rather then the Luster of Beauty had
moved to the clemency used toward them, was very much surprised with that
answer, and told them coldly, that they might then dispose themselves to change
their dwelling, since that, they being unfit for any labor, he would not any
longer maintain unprofitable people in his House. In effect he exposed them to
sale in the first Markets.

For you must know, that amongst these Infidels, men are not in a much happier
condition, than beasts; and that they are there bought and sold, after the same
manner, as Animals void of reason are with us.

As soon as our Pirate had exposed the two Young French men to public sale,
they were encompassed by a number of Persons, who, judging by their mien, that
they would be sold at a dear rate, approached them more to admire their Beauty,
than to make any proffer. Nevertheless, there were some, who endeavored to
become Masters of them, but the Corsaire, who took them, desiring to be
reimbursed of the Expenses which he had been at in their Entertainment, put so
high a prize upon them, that they still stuck upon his hands.

Whilst that the African was in pain, to be with advantage rid of his
Captives, he received news of the arrival of a Ship from Alexandria, sent by a
Beglerbeg or Governor of the Country, to transport Slaves, that were to be
bought at Tripoly, but above all he was overjoyed, when he understood from the
Captain, that he had order to search for all the Fair Youths, that he could
find, to carry to his Master, who had a design to make a Present of them to the
Bassa of Egypt.

He imparted these news to our two Lovers, telling them that they were very
much favored by Fortune, in that they had fallen into no other hands than his,
from whom they had not received any ill entertainment, and that they parted not
from him, but to be yet more happy, since they were destined for the pleasures
of a Prince, who acknowledged no man above him, but the Grand Seigniour.

Eugenia, who understood not the Barbarians meaning, received much joy at these
news, but when Oronces, who was a little more knowing, had told her what he
conceived, she was not to be comforted, and wished that an excessive Ugliness
might succeed her great Beauty, and that by some happy Metamorphosis, the
charms of her Youth might be changed into the horrid wrinkles of old Age. Her
Lover did not differ from her in his wishes, but these were all in vain. Appear
they must before him, who was to buy them, if he approved of them.

Though they stood in no need of Ornaments, to please those who looked upon
them; yet they were clothed in Vests of Silk, branched all over with Gold, and
wore upon their heads a Turbant after the Ottoman Fashion, and in that dress
were brought to the Alexandrian Captain. These Garments, which were very
splendid, did not a little set of the Beauty of our two young Captives; and
they received from them so great advantage, that the Captain was charmed, and
gave the Tripolin his own price for their Persons.

See here Oronces and Eugenia ready to sail for Egypt, and in all appearance,
for ever deprived of the happiness, which they hoped for, in once more seeing
their own Country. Yet they durst not discover their Melancholy, for fear of
rendering themseves more miserable. They gave the night only to their tears, and
some secret Moments which they as it were stole, to ease their hearts of those
Pains and Tortures, which they felt within.

They being destined for the Bassas pleasure, you may be sure that they were
not ill treated by the Captain, who considered them, as men one day likely to
become Favorits to his Prince, rather then as unhappy Slaves: he granted them
every thing they desired, and forgot nothing that might contribute to their
satisfaction. They eat at his Table, which he caused to be served with the most
delicious dainties, and meats most proper to preserve them fresh and fair.

But alas! all these favors did not at all touch the hearts of our Lovers,
they stifled a thousand sighs within themselves, when they outwardly appeared
any thing joyful; and the reflection, which they made upon their Fate, fretted
them with horror, and inspired them with nothing, but sentiments of despair,
to which, without particular Grace, they had without doubt abandoned themselves.

They were fifteen days in the Port of Tripoly, ere the wind stood fair for
their departure. This gave them much joy, but it continued not long for on the
sixteenth, it changed and became favorable. The Egyptian Captain, who desired
nothing more, than to return presently to Alexandria, to make his Merchandise
be there admired, caused the Anchors forthwith to be weighed, and with full
sails departed, not designing to go far until they had attained the sight of
the neighboring Promontory of the small Isle of Lea.

The beginning of their voyage, was so prosperous, that on the first night they
came within sight of Pontia, which is more than an hundred and fifty miles
distant from the place whence they set out. All who were in the Ship, rejoiced
at this good speed. Our Lovers alone continued sad, and regarded themselves as
poor Victims, who were to be sacrificed to the Brutality of a Prince, if God by
some extraordinary effect of his power, did not deliver them from the evident
danger that came every moment nearer and nearer to them.

In fine their Tears and Prayers scended even to Heaven; the Wind changed in an
instant, and became so fierce, that the Pilots were obliged to turn their
Course back again, and to seek out some harbor, to shelter from the Storm,
wherewith they were menaced. But the danger pressed them on all sides, for they
could not stay at Pontia, without exposing themselves to Banks of Sands, that
encompassed them: They could not also go far from thence, without approaching
Malta, which belonged to their most untractable enemies. In this confusion,
they judged it more proper to retire from the sands among which it was
impossible to avoid Shipwreck, and to advance toward the Isle, where nothing
was to be feared, if they could escape unperceived.

But they had hardly shifted Sails that way, when they were discovered by three
Galleys and a man of War, belonging to the Island, which having deceived them
with a false Flag, attack't them so unexpectedly that the Egyptian Captain,
being unable to defend himself against so great a Force, was obliged to yield
up himself, his Slaves, Ship and all.

Then our Lovers began to breath again when they saw themselves in the hands of
Christians, and at the disposal of a Nobility so generous, as are the Knights
of Malta. Oronces, who had a Kinsman in that Order, made himself known
immediately, and received from the Great Master, and all the French Knights
then present, all the Honor and fair entertainment, which his good Fortune had
prepared for him. He told them a part of his adventures, and declared the
design the had of going to Rome, along with the Gentleman that bore him
Company, yet he could not prevent staying some days among those of his own
Nation, who had a desire to retain him for a longer time; but the opportunity
of departing in a Galley, which had lately transported an Italian Prince,
separated them, after returning a thousand thanks to the Great Master, and
taking leave of the other Knights, who had so kindly entertained them.

It was in this Voyage, that Love, victorious over Fortune, happily conducted
these two delivered Captives. They past the straights of Messina, and after
having coasted part of Calabria, and past within sight of Naples, they arrived
at the Port of Ostia, from whence they went to Rome, with Letters of
Recommendation to a Cardinal, who was Brother to the Italian Prince, we
mentioned.

As soon as they were arrived in Town, they earnestly solicited their
business, and Eugenia having made a declaration of the manner, that she entered
into Religion, and of the surprise, that had caused her to make her Vows,
Oronces presented it to the Cardinal, that he was recommended to; he gained his
favor, and related to him every thing that he had done, for that Lady, and the
hazards which he had run through. The recital of so many misfortunes so moved
the heart of this Lord, that he caused all the proceedings of her Profession to
be made null and void, and replaced her in her former liberty.

After this they returned into France, where their Marriage was celebrated,
with so much the more joy, as that the Elder brother of Oronces, having been
killed in a Duel, left him the only heir to all the Estate of his Family, and
so obtained Laurentia's consent, (who was overjoyed to see again her dear
Eugenia) yet she never would have given it, but that she could no longer refuse
it, without opposing her Daughters advantage. Pomp, sports, and mirth
accompanied the Nuptials of our Lovers. The Feast was public and the Pleasures
of successful Love was to both of them the more grateful, in that they had
strugled with infinite obstacles, which now they had happily overcome.

FINIS.

