GODS Wonderful MERCY IN THE MOUNT of woeful EXTREMITY. OR, The Recovered
Captive, BEING A plain Relation of Gods unspeakable goodness in rescuing one of
the meanest of his flock from the paw of the roaring Lion, and pangs of
unconceivable horror through long and strong temptations and spiritual
desertions.

Published 1. For the encouragement of poor distressed consciences, worried
with temptations, and almost quite wearied with waiting. 2. For a caution to
secure sinners, lest they also come into such or sorer torment. 3. For a call
of all (in whose hearts are the ways of God) to bear a part in the high praises
of him whose wonders are in the deep.


By Charles Langford.

I will sing of the mercies of the Lord for ever,

Ps. 89.1.17. Knowing the terrors of the Lord we persuade men,

1 Cor. 5.11. Thou have turnea for me,

Ps. 30.11.12. London, Printed for Anna Brewster at the Golden bellows in
Fore-street at Moor-lan^^end. 1672.

To the Reader,
THe ensuing Narrative is intended for the good of all, and therefore may well
expect freedom from the scornful censures of any: But it is primarily published
for the benefit of such who are apt to think (feeling the weight of their own
sin, as of an heavy burden, Psalm. ^8.4. or the wounds of their own Spirit, made
by the Arrows of the Almighty, sent from the Devils bow, and poisoned so that
^hey become fiery darts drinking up the spirit, Job 6.4.) that never any man
was in ^uch a case as they, none ever went so far unto the Valley of the shadow
of death and ^eturned alive, as they are gone, for the ^roken in Spirit, those
whom the terrors ^f God have (to use Hemans words) distrac^d and cut off, Ps.
88.15.16. for the good of these are the ensuing pages penned, and therefore
from these may they expect the cho^^est entertainment, it is no small favor
Heaven shows, that (besides those fixed monuments of mercy, erected in the word
o^ truth, such as David, Job, He^^an, yea and the blessed Jesus, all which as
they were plunged in the depths of Terrors, so were they delivered from their
fears) every ag^ of the Church should have some living test moneys of deep
calling unto deep, and that as Satan's malice, so Gods mercy endu^eth for ever,
that some have deep gashes made upon their peace, and those unhealed so long
till hope seems to be cut off, and the cu^ed at the last, I am sure will be
thy me^cy, O thou afflicted, tossed with Tempest and not comforted, however
others look upon it.

Examples in this, as in other cases make the deepest impression; the
understanding, here, (being ever annoyed by the loud and hasty clamours of a
misgiving conscience) may not be able to make so long a stand, as to hear all
that the tongue of the Learned have to say for the relief of their weary Souls,
the judgment must needs be weak, when passions are strong. Now, for such a one
to hear that others hunted by the terrors of the Almighty set in array against
them to the very brink of desperation, and hope (even just ready to quit the
field) have yet through the mercy of the Most High put Satan to flight, won
the day, recovered their peace, and lived in the sweet possession of the Spirit
of a sound mind, and all this after many a doubtful combat, and in a time they
looked not for it. I say to hear of this exemplefyed in the case of others
will, at least, do thus much service for tottering spirits as to persuade not
to make too much have to run away to hide themselves, and that yet there is
hope in Israel concerning this thing.

If in every circumstance of the following Narrative thou find not thy self
concerned, yet thou will in many (if thou be one that have had any experience
of the Spirit of Bondage) yea and in the main of all, thou art troubled in
Spirit, thy everlasting welfare fare stands bleeding, thy hope is giving up the
Ghost, blasphemous injections (the very spirit and humor of hopeless damned
Souls) haunt and affrighten thy wracked mind, thy flesh trembles for fear of
Gods wrathful Judgments, all his waves and his billows pass over thee, thou
art weary of thy life, and yet tormented at the thoughts of death; this was the
case of the Author of these following lines, it is hard to conceive a more
dangerous condition, or that the God of his Salvation should suffer his
Faithfulness to thee to fail. Wait on the Lord, be of good courage! Let Satan's
sugg^stions be what they will, hold this for a certain truth, established in
the very heavens, and irreversible by the gates of Hell, Blessed are all they
that wait for him, Isaiah 30.18*

That any should look upon discourses of this kind, as matter of scorn and
reproachful contempt, is matter of sorrow and lamentation, that the common
enemy to the Race of Adam should find so much Friendship and Folly in the
hearts of men, yet, such there are, men that side with their greatest Foe,
accounting all experiences of this sort as mere Fictions, and the issue of a
melancholy brain. But poor Souls, the hour of trembling will come to you at
last, when you have slept out your sleep upon the lap of lust, the Philistines
will be upon you, and your pleasant dreams of security shall bring you to the
King of Terrors, let the ensuing narrative be your preservative, happy, they
can discern the vileness of sin and devices of Satan in the clear glass of
another Man's Soul confounding terrors: one main end of this, is thy warning,
if unhappily thou shall despise it, and thy Faithful Monitor seem to thee as
one that mocketh, it is no new thing, thus it was in the days of Lot, Genesis
19.14.
even those whose Office should oblige them to better things have been
sometimes ignorant in the case of Gods withdrawings, Cant. 5.2.
smiting and wounding and taking away the Vail, have been their work, when
sympathizing has been their duty. However to be of the Family of Abraham, to
inherit the blessing, is more then sufficient Armor against the persecuting
scoffs of Ishmael.

As for such as truly fear God it is hoped they will not be offended to see that
done by any which is incumbent upon all, to declare the works of God with
rejoicing and to tell what great things he has done for our Souls, Mark 5.14.
is a Law shall stand in Force when the Heavens and Earth shall reel into a
change, nor will they stumble at the plainness of delivery, all have not alike
abilities to express themselves, Exodus 18.5.
gaudy paints of eloquence may sometimes be taken for Ornaments, but they are
best put off when we have so nearly to do with God. Goats Hair and Badgers
Skins, Exodus 25.45.
where there are no better, are a good offering for the Sanctuary. And to speak
truly it is not in well set words and sentences, but in clear experiences true
learning does consist

To say any thing of the Author is needless, read him, a man he is of long
standing in profession, a Follower of God both up-hill and down-hill for many
years, one who has not lived so ill as to have all men speak well of him, nor
(common frailties excepted) as to deserve the contrary. If his zeal for God
has exposed him to the reproach of some, well may he bear it. He desires to
let the World see nothing in him but his infirmities, the rest is God's, and
not his. A man whom long diseases of Soul and many Paroxcisms or heights of
distemper have annoyed, but not left by the great Physician. How he came at
first to any sense of Religion in truth, and with how much difficulty (through
the strong temptations of Satan) he attained to a comfortable hope of the love
of God, what was the course taken by him for his relief, how Faith in the
promises, and submission to all Gods dealings were, and are to be exercised,
are the chief things here spoken of. The Lord make it as profitable to thee in
reading, as he testifies they were to him in the experiencing, who after many
weak fits of Faith, and Faithfulness in weakness, rejoices in hope of the
glory of God. That thou may be bettered by this publication, is the Authors
design and the hearty prayer of

To the Saints of the Most High God, especially the afflicted in Conscience,
lying under sad desertions, and groaning for deliverance. Grace, Peace and
Victory, be given to you from the Lord Jesus Christ our Savior,
HAving received so glorious a mercy, as to be delivered from many delusions
and temptations of Satan, under which I lay for many years, I look upon it as
my great duty, to manifest Gods gracious dealings with me to the Sons and
Daughters of Men, and so much the rather do I thus judge because the ways of
God to me have not been common or ordinary ways, they are but a few of Gods
Children (as the Author of the book entitled, Dr. Tho. Goodwin.
A Child of Light walking in darkness, witnesses) whom their Father casts into
the belly of Hell, deep Waters, where they feel no bottom, letting out Satan
upon them, and the manifestation of his glorious grace in saving such to the
utmost is the main end (one of them) he aims at in dealing thus with any,
it is no wonder Satan should have an access to and converse with the spirits of
men (and many times when they know it not) for he is a Spirit, or that with so
much vigor and terror, his temptations, in times of desertion, should be
accompanied, for by the evidence of Gods word ana his own ways, it is certain
that his work and business is to drink up and devour, his nature is not only
that of a Roaring Lion for power and terror, but also of a subtle Serpent for
policy and poison: his season and opportunity is when we are weakest and at
the worst, and night and day does he keep watch and ward for taking all the
advantage that may be, if God (for needful ends) turns but his back upon his
child, hides his face from him, forsakes him but for a little moment: the enemy
waits at the door to break in as a mighty flood. If by Feavor, Melancholy,
or other bodily distempers, the natural spirits (which are the ^ursitors
between the body and the Soul) are made incapable of performing their Office
aright; then is he sure to be up and doing; every affiction is an hour of
temptation the dark is his delight now is the time for him to lay his delusions
upon the fantasy, and to charge sin upon the Soul, when he finds it most
unable to resist and ready to embrace and believe it.

To bring the Soul in to inextricable troubles is his design; to accomplish
with more then conceiveable policy, cruelty, and malice are set at work, for
he is the red Dragon who has all along traded in persecution of the woman and
her seed, Christ and his Church.

For the space of forty years or thereabouts has it pleased the hand that
took me out of my Mothers Womb to train me up, and lead me along in this
uncomfortable Wilderness of temptation, though I cannot say that in all these
years he has left me to the violence of spiritual conflicts (for then the
burden had been too heavy for flesh to stand under so long) yet must I needs
say my clearest day all that time was but dark, and however I seemed to others
in point of comfort outwardly, sure I am my soul enjoyed not her rest, nor
could I ever say I was all that while any more then a Prisoner of hope, still
subject unto bondage and not discharged of the debt, nor delivered from my
fears. 'Twas but an hard shift I made to hold up my head when I was at best, my
worst cannot be expressed, until now at last, that God for whom I w^ited in the
way of his Judgments, and from whom were my expectations in the use of
appointed means all this while, came and was found of me when I looked not for
him, delivered me from my strong Enemy, set my Feet upon a Rock and established
my goings. The same God that was my stay in the day of calamity, is now my
Glory and the lifter up of my head, he is my strength and song, and is now
become my Salvation.

Upon the whole I may truly say (as once Job said) I have heard of God by the
hearing of the Ear, but now mine Eye has seen him, now has he made known
himself to me by his sweet Spirit, and by the manifestation and operation of
his glorious power in giving me deliverance, And I can say by experience more
then ever that; now I know there is a God; so also, now I know there is a
Devil, such have been the delusions; cursed injections of blasphemous
thoughts, and dreadful temptations wherewith he has endeavored to fill my
Soul till the day the Lord by his great power delivered me out of his hands
that I have cause to know him, and to make him known as far as I am able to the
World, which is the endeavor of this ensuing Relation.

Every Child of God, I am persuaded, is somewhat acquainted with the wounds of
conscience, but God (who best knows the frame of his people and what they can
bear, and for what work they are intended) measures not to all alike. Some are
made to sip, only, of the Cup of Trembling, while others are made to drink
down larger draughts, every Soul has his taste, To much as will serve to make
an experiment of the evil and bitter nature of sin, but some have more then
others, and though every man is apt to magnify his own miseries into a Non
such, because the heart knows his own bitterness, and a wounded Conscience who
can bear, yet without breach of modesty, I think I may bolaly affirm that few
of the Sons of Men have been in greater danger, or more beholden to the
Deliverer. To have God deserting a Soul, and permitting Satan to Rage and Rule
so far that it believes all his suggestions and is not able to believe the
contrary, expecting nothing but the lowermost Hell. This was my condition, and
when I have told you so though you might perceive something of my sad and
wearysome Life, yet cannot the misery be expressed by me, nor conceived by you;
a thousand worlds, had I been owner, would I have given for a Free Spirit, a
heart enabled to shake off the meditating and pondering upon Hell torments as
the things that methoughts; I should for ever dwell with Now I say when all
this lay upon my Soul, and I expected no deliverance, then for the Lord my God
to surprise and break in upon me with so glorious and unexpected a mercy who
can but set forth the loving kindness of so gracious a God and Savior.

I may therefore boldly say to any poor Soul let his distress be never so
great, yet if he have but so much faith as to believe the Scriptures and that
Jesus is the Son of God, and died for sinners, though he has no assurance for
himself, no more hopes then I had not a spark of Grace in his own apprehension,
Is. 50.10.
Yet let him trust in the name of the Lord and stay himself upon his God. Let
him wait for the Lord will come. Is. 8.17.
And such a faith is sufficient for such a Soul in that condition:

In my distress before my God gave me experience of Light, Love, and Salvation,
I engaged by promise that if my God would give me deliverance I would declare
to his Saints abroad what he had done for me, and that as Satan suggested to me
before, that I should be a shame to Professors: so would I declare his wiles
and devices and what a lying unclean and murdering Spirit he is, that in what I
could, his designs of ruin against poor Souls might be frustrated, and the
Lord having heard my vows, setting me at liberty a strong temptation fell upon
me to pray that God would assist me in performance of them, nor were my prayers
single or alone, I had the help of such as feared God about me, my body at that
time was very much disordered.

Yet he that prepared my heart to pray inclined his Ear to hear, enabling with
speed and ease, to the wonder of some, to Write the ensuing discourse I here
present to open view, with much hope, that the same hand that made it easy to
me, will make it useful to many who may be troubled in Spirit. For the comfort
of such, and the discovery of Satan's subtilty: the good of them, and hurt of
none but Him, are the ends I have in publishing this experimental Relation,
begging that the Lord would exalt his great and glorious Name in magnifying his
Mercy to all Eternity, by dealing thus with many poor Souls, as he has done
with his poor servant.

Charles Langford.

The Captive delivered, Or a Relation of the great things which the Lord the
mighty God of Heaven and Earth, did for his poor Servant C. L. in delivering
him out of the midst of violent and dreadful temptations. April. 16. 1669.
witnessing to his Soul the greatness of his mercy in the midst of his sins, and
magnifying his free grace in sealing it with the comfortable persuasion of his
being one of Abrams believing seed, and this when under great unworthiness and
unbelief, all which he now desires in thankfulness, and according to his vows
in the day of his distress to declare to the people of God, and to as many as
shall read it.
CHAP. I. Of the Original cause of all troubles, what share the Author had
therein: Why seeing all men are by nature the children of wrath, do not all
thus feel the weight of it, the particular occasion of his first awakening.
Satan's design in it. Gods overruling and turning it to good.
When I consider the sad estate wherein all the sinful Sons of Adam lie, how
(through the most righteous judgment of God for our wilful transgression of
his holy Law, (which he gave for a rule and trial of our obedience) miserably
they are deprived of a most blessed estate. Gods Image and blessed presence,
once had and enjoyed, and how dangerously depraved and swollen up into an
enmity against God their Maker; their nature is: I am so far from wondering at
the horror that sometimes here and there one is surprised withal, that I must
confess it is a far greater wonder to me that any are found to live at ease.
Dread and horror are the best fruit that can be had for eating of the forbidden
tree. If mere justice ruled the world the thickets would be every man's
habitation: Magor Missabib might be the fittest name for Adams race, Jer. 20.3
fear round about.
now degenerated into a brood of vipers. It Is a wonder sin has not found out
and frightened the sinner upon earth, that caught him in and cast him out of
Paradise. If it spared him not there, how should it pass him by here: if it
turned him out of his walk, his most delightful walk with the God of bliss
there, why has it not tumbled him down into a bed of fire ^ere? sure I am
sorrow, and distress of conscience is as much an attendant upon sin and guilt,
as the shadow is of the body, as hear is of the fire, as dark shadows were of
the night by this the children of the day are transformed into those of the
night, and the heirs of God into haters of God, and children of wrath, and such
are all men without exception in a natural condition.

These considerations make it less to be wondered at I say, that any man should
groan under the burden of sin which lies so heavy upon all; it being a far
greater wonder, as I said before, that the just, holy, and righteous God should
so long suspend the execution of the ancient sentence past upon Adam and his
posterity, or that any of the inhabitants of the earth, should not sear their
dropping into Hell, and dread their danger.

I, for my part, must (to the honor of my strong Redeemer) take to my self the
guilt of that first transgression, and acknowledge that from the loins of the
first Adam has a venomous empoisoned nature been conveyed unto me. Let no man
say or think that any part of my past misery sprung from any other fountain
then this evil nature. I know that amidst the numberless number of Satan's
artifices, this is one of his main engines, whereby he would keep poor captive
souls from the ways of life and peace. He labors to bring up an evil report of
such ways, representing religion as the great incending as well in the
Consciences as in the Kingdoms of Men, and with as much confidence avers it as
wicked Ahab did of the good Prophets that profession of the Gospel attended
with it is required strictness is the grand trouble of the world. 1. Kings 18.17.
Insomuch that I think 'twould be no mistake should I affirm this for a certain
truth. That Satan's furious attempts made most what, upon the inward peace of
Gospel professions (who having escaped the polutions that are in the world
through lust, and committed the keeping of their souls into the hands of an
able preserver) are not always raised by him in hope of bringing them back
into their former bondage, or undoing their souls by desperation. But that he
may stir up a greater dislike in the hearts of his Vassals to the ways of
purity. Offenses are the trade that Satan sets up and drives. The miseries of
us are the mirth of him, But woe to him by whom they come, and woe to the world
because of them. Let the Reader know for a certain truth, that however carnal
hearts conceive of the way that is called Holy, branding it by the names of
melancholy, mopish and m^d wisdom is justified of her Children, all her ways
are ways of pleasantness and all her paths are peace, Prove. 3.17.
carnal and sensual delights are not in the least to be compared with spiritual
and divine, Ps. 46.4.
the River that makes glad the City of God is more deep more durable, more
delightful; then the Egyptian Nilus; the waters of Siloam run but softly, the
consolations of God found in the way of holy obedience make no great noise in
the ears of common observers, who are meet strangers to such joys, but they
are therefore the more deep and solid. My long experience has taught me in the
midst of all the intricacies of providence to hold this for a certain truth,
that godliness never took away any man's peace, nor ungodliness never gave it*
The closest conformity to the commands of God never did any man harm, nor did
the pleasures of sin ever do any man good, the wise lord of all has thought
fit to train me up under many spiritual afflictions and sore temptations, I am
now arrived at the borders of Death through age, of much of my part life may I
truly say in the words of the distressed Psalmist, that in it my Soul has been
full of troubles, Ps 88.3.
by reason whereof my life has often drawn nigh to the grave, yet in the
greatest of my extremities, have I ever seen a real-worth in holy strictness,
such a worth have I seen in that; that I may truly say, not it, but Satan
taking advantage of my want of it, was that which did me harm, the bitter cup
of external, internal or eternal evils receives it. Fullness from an evil
nature, a naughty heart, whoever is employed in the filling of it, the fountain
for fetching of it is within our selves; destruction when it comes as a
whirlwind, suddenly, surroundingly, and on every side, so that to determine
from what particular point it blows may seem impossible, yet must it be granted
that its ingendring was in the deep and deadly Caverns of an earthly and an
evil heart, whatever instrumentallity, Men or Devils have in the infliction of
our troubles, our destructions are undeniably not from them, but from our
selves. Oh! then let none say or think that it is Religion, but irreligion;
preciseness, but dissoluteness, drawing nigh unto, but departing away from, the
living God, much reading, praying, hearing, searching the Scriptures,
consorting with the godly, etc. But the contrary, have been the causes (though
the other sometimes the occasions) of hellish horrors and disquietness of mind.
Romans 7.8.11.
Oh! no, no, it is sin that is the root of bitterness springing up into
troubles? a sinful nature, a sinful life, or the least sinful omission, any one
act of sin though never so small is enough to infuse that horror into the soul
that all the pleasures of time shall never be able to claw off.

Thus that sinful nature, which I brought along with me into the world, and by
which (as soon as I had attained to my ripeness of years I began to manifest
whose child I was bringing forth such fruits whereof I am ashamed: This I say
was the root of all the bitterness I have hitherto tasted of, 'twas not too
much preciseness, which the enemies of true Godliness falsely so call, that
wrought this disturbance in me. For at the time when my troubles began I had
neither affection to, nor acquaintance with; any other way of serving the God
of heaven, then what was common carnal and external.

Q. How then comes it to pass that the whole Earth, upon the matter lies
still, and is at quiet not troubled themselves with such strange kind of
doubts, fears, and distractions of thoughts about their Eternal state as you
speak of, nor troubling others with their complaint about them? Sure, coming
too near the heels of Religion, is the cause of such fractions of the bones of
inward peace, or else why should not others be thus perplexed?

Ans. I answer that however the Objection is manifestly rooted in the minds of
carnal men, who by reason of their fondness of their false peace, not willing
to raise disturbances within themselves, like no worship of God save that which
biteth not, but contrarily bite and devour such as do yet so false and ground
less is this Objection that in few words I shall only say.

1. That however it is true (de facto) that, most of those who engage in the ways
of God meet with great troubles and distress of conscience at the first
entrance, yet (de jure) no sort of men are more the sons of consolation than
they.

2. Such distresses are most needful: most profitable things, and such as
commend the wa^es of God above all others. For consider.

1. How else should the heart of man who (by nature) drinks in iniquity as a
thirsty man water, be put out of his seeming* delightful way of sinning, it is
the way that Heaven has pitched upon to save men from Hell, this to acquaint
them with the bitterness of sin here.

2. How else should the heart of a sinner be prepared to entertain the terms
and tidings of a Savior, Christ believed in, Christ relied upon, Christ owned
and embraced and submitted unto, 1 Timothy 3.16.
is one of the greatest mysteries of Godliness in all the world, and nothing
prepares the heart more to hearken to, and embrace the tidings, the tenders,
and the terms of so sweet a name as Jesus is then spiritual distress souls
weary and heavy laden, Mat. 11.28.
and none but such have to do, or will have to do with Jesus Christ.

3. How should the Law of God be found powerful to kill, or the Gospel of
Christ powerful to quicken any other way.

We read of Gods magnifying his word above all his name it is his aim, and
delight to do so, he will have men to know his word to be a word of power, an
instrument of life or death; a two edged sword, and therefore not to be jested
with, and the ordinary way of effecting this, is, by raising the benumbed Souls
of sinners from that natural Lethargy and carnal security that lies upon their
whole inward man, understanding, will, conscience, affections, the Soul, and
all that is within the Soul of an unregenerate person stands not in awe of
divine precepts, promises, or threatenings till awakened by divine power. God
may speak once, yea twice, yet man perceives it not, until in a dream, in a
vision of the night. when deep sleep falls upon men, in slumberings upon the
bed, then he opens the ears of men and seals their instruction* Job. 33.14.
etc. it is usually some rough dealing that is required to rouse the sinner out
of his pleasant but false dreams of peace. Sometimes he is chastned with pain
upon his bed, and the multitude of his bones with strong pains so that his life
abhors bread, and his soul dainty meat. His flesh is consumed away that it
cannot be s^on, and his bones that were not seen stick ou^, his Soul d^aweth
nigh to the Grave and his l^fe to the destroyers. Thus God ruineth and
tortureth Sinners into the way of Life, and makes room for the Messenger, the
interpreter the One among a thousand to show unto Man his uprightness. verses
20.21, 22, 23. Mount Sinai's terrible thunderings did not more powerful make
way for the reception of the Law, then the conviction of sin by the Law, does
for the embracement of the Gospel, and the embracement of it for the settlement
of inward distractions.

In a word. The wounds of conscience, plainly show not only the power of the
Law by which sin is strengthened, armed, and enabled, to work death: but also
the power of the Gospel in setting poor distressed Souls at freedom from The
Law, Sin, and Death.

3. It Is a most senceless imagination to judge any man's person or way to be the
more excellent because less troublesome in it.

By this crooked rule the unblushing forehead of an Harlot may pass for an
hopeful sign of her future happiness, the Bedlam may boast of his better
condition then others because he feels not those prickings of pins and needles
which if others had they would cry out of. And yet

4. How many instances have the records of time given us of the confounding
terrors that wicked men on the sudden have been overwhelmed with? how often may
it be observed how God distributeth sorrow to such in dreadful measures, and
how from the height of censuall delights God casts them down into destruction
how are they brought into desolation as in a moment? they are utterly consumed
with terrors. Ps 73.18, 19. God has appointed a day wherein he will make known
his wrath upon all the vessels of wrath eminently. And this is called in
Scripture, Romans 25. The day, The great and terible day of the Lord, The day of
wrath. But alas how few fear this because it is future? the heart of man fears
not wrath to come though no wrath like it. Things present affect most. And the
Apostle has told us why, because such are blind, and cannot see afar off. 2
Per. 1.9. But now let such remember, the stoutest siners have been unhorst and
perished even in the very way. God puts not off all to the great and last
desires, he has his petty fessions sometimes., some are tormented before their
time. They fall into the hands of a loving ^od when they little thought of it.
Job. 21.17. How often is the Candle of the wicked put out. Genesis 4.14. Who would
have thought that that heart of Cain which feared nothing, should so suddenly
be smitten with the fear of every thing! Dan. 5.6? Or that Belshazzar who just
now could boldly bid defiance to the God of Israel; should upon the first sight
of what he understood not, be surprised with such an hellish fit of quaking?
Chapter 4.32? Or that great Nebuchadn^zzar now feeding his fancy with the splend
our of his own works; and swelling himself into a conceited Deity, should in
the same hour, yea while the word was in his mouth became as a Reast? v. 37.
How easily can God abase such as walk in pride? should the Lord commission our
own thoughts against us no need of any other enemy to make us miserable, and
this he has often done, as in the cases already mentioned. Stories both sacred
and profane afford us a large account of many more ^ragicall overthrows of the
enemies of holiness. And few ages pass without some drops of wrath ^mminently
falling upon the heads of one siner or other which (were we but wise to
consider them) would fully inform us that Gods dealings with his Saints and
servants in desertion of comfort and permission of Satan to agonize them in
this world. However it seem tedious and tiresome for a while, and they apt to
speak, as once Job did, he teareth me in his wrath who ^ateth me: he gnasheth
upon me with his teeth. Yet weighing in an equal Balance these dealings of
God with his Children, with those earfull cruptions of wrath that seize upon
the ^ngodly, and it will soon appear, that the ways of God to his people are
not severity but lenity, not fury, but mercy, tender mercy and loving kindness.

Thus distress o^ conscience is not so concomitant to profession of the Gospel
(as the enemies thereof feign. Luke 15.7. but that sometimes it may be found
among the jovial crew of unrighteous men needing no repentance, and whenever
it falls upon such, it is much more lamentable then that which is let out
upon poor, humble, bruised, obedient Sinners. Because when the Lord rises up
against the Souls of those that hate and forget him, he comes.

1. With greater fury. Ps. 11.6. An horrible tempest is the portion of their
cup. Is. 54.8* Now when he troubles his Children for sin he hides his face
from them in wrath, but then it is but in a little wrath, Hab. 3 2. and his
wrath makes him not at any time to forget his love, he can remember that in the
midst of it still.

2. With sewer advantages, there is less hope of such a ones recovery.

Distresses of whatsoever sort are like violent purges to the body,
preparatives must be had, or else a body full of humors and unaccustomed to
such means is beset with dangers, who knows which way dreadful convictions of
divine displeasure may drive the amazed and affrighten'd Soul? it is possible to
God, but very improbable to man that he who has hardened his own heart against
God and his fear, and been forging arguments, and studying offenses, and
picking quarrels against the ways and worship of God, should ever take to those
as his proper remedy in times of temptation. Satan will do all he can to keep
up a dislike in such a One against those things that make for true peace, or if
peradventure Satan be cast out of the outward conversation; and the man seems
to recover his peace by a partial reformation, yet how truly has our Lord set
forth the doleful doom of such half begotten Christians. Mat. 12.33, 34, 35.
The latter end of such is worse (for sin and sorrow) then their beginning,
wounds skinned over will become ulcerous at last, the sting of the old Serpent
(like that of the Ta^antula) dispatcheth this kind of sinners into hell
laughing.

5. Moreover, the proper time of discovery is not yet come, judgment passing
before the last act is ridiculous ^olly.

Mark but the end of wicked men, patiently stay but a very little while; and
tell me then what you think of all their pleasures. Follow them to death or at
the furthest to judgment, then will the blackness of their countenance, and
the loudness of their howling cries confirm the truth of that passage; now,
little thought of. Eccles. 8.12.13. Though a sinner do evil an hundred times
and his days be prolonged, yet surely I know that it shall be well with them
that fear God, which fear before him But it shall not be well with the wicked.
He that seriously lays to heart the sure and sore miseries that come stealing
on upon the sinful, sensual, merry world, Ez. 32. And how even they who have (
Pharaoh like been stout hearted oppressors, and reproachers of the distressed
remnant of Jacob, though they have caused their terror in the land of the
living, are nevertheless gone down to hell and how heavy their iniquities ly^
upon their bones, I say, he that observes these things and lays them to heart
will find there was a reason for Balaam; wish. Number. 3.10. L^^ me dye the death
of the righteous, and my la^^ end b^ like to his. Heb. 11.24. And that Moses
was (...) child when he refused to be called the Son (...) Pharoahs Daughter,
choosing rather to fuss^^ affliction with the people of God, then to (...) joy
the pleasures o^ sin for a season: estee^ing the reproach of Christ greater
riches the the treasures of Egypt, to rush upon the po^^ of sufferings when a
man may choose, to account pleasures to be no more then pressures, reproaches to
be renown, and treasures to be but trash. Oh! what folly does the world judge
this to be? and yet such a fool was Moses, and so must he be, that would be
wise, it is the highest wisdom to shun those short pleasures that breed long and
eternal pains, an eternal weight of glory will make afflictions that are but
for a moment seem but ^ight and little when heaviest and greatest, it is this,
the end, the duration of good and evil that wisdom considers, before it
bestows it is names on any thing. And oh! that men were wise in this, to employ
their thoughts more upon the end of their way, and the wages of their work,
then upon the way and work it self, then would not the present delights of sin
make the life of a sinner to appear delightfu^; because such pleasures are but
for a season, the pleasures are but false and fading, but the torments are true
and eternal ones.

We are told concerning Witches that the Devil appears not to them in any
terrible shape at the beginning of their contract but in the shape of a man and
with many fair promises of wealth, long life, and power to revenge their
wrongs, with many pleasures besides. That the hook being bid, it may go down
the better, 2 Cor. 4.4. were but the seals of ignorance (by which the God of
this world blinds the eyes of them that believe not) taken off, the life of
sinners would quickly prove a weary life, and the Ministers of Christ who now
are wearied with silence, would find work enough to answer the question, Acts
11.16.30. Sirs what shall we do to be saved.

There is but a thin seal over thine eye and that will not always there abide.
Death or the day of judgment will ferch it off. And when that drops, all thy
comforts drops away from thee; sin will find thee out, then, be sure no place
shall privilege thee from its arrest. Is. 32.2. To be found in Christ will be
the best hiding place and covert from the Wind and Tempest. Sions heights, and
shows of holiness will stand in little stead, when, Is. 33.14. The sinners [in
Zion] are afraid fearfullness has surprised the hypocrite: who among us shall
dwell with the devouring fire? who amongst us shall dwell with everlasting
burnings? sincerity. real Christianity will be the best Religion then: when
shows and shadows shall flee away. Then they that fear God, walk in darkness,
that are wounded in spirit, laden with the spirit of heavyness, whose faith of
adoption lies open to manyfold temptations, trodden underfoot of Men, and not
sp^red by the rod of God: these, these I say, then will have a merry day: a day
of redemption from sears, and deliverance from every particular of their
complaint. Mark well, Mat. 4.2. But unto you that fear my name shall the Son of
righ^eousness arise with healing in his wings, and ye shall go forth, and grow
up as Calves of the stall. Chapter 3 17. And they shall be mine says the Lord of
hosts in that day when I make up my Jewels and I will spare them as a Man
spares his own Son that serves him.

Let all the world then know, that if the unchecked pleasures of time be
attended with eternal displeasures, there is but small reason why any man
should become sins advocate because of that pleasure that attends it,
concerning which that may as truly be said which St. James asserts concerning
the life of all Men. What is it but a vapor, which soon appears and
presently disapeareth, leaving its possessor ^n an interminable irrecoverable
gulf of dismal horror and confounding distraction?

This is the fifth branch of my answer to those that think the troubles of mind
which ^arnall professors are freed from, is an argument strong enough to
persuade men from intermedling in the stricter and purer ways of holiness:
Eternity is before us. Mal. 3.18

Then shall ye return and discern between the righteous and the wicked, between
him that fears God and him that fears him not.

6. Let me also add this; that as all Gods people are not so happy as to enjoy
the height of assurance of the love of God without fits of intermission so
neither are they also miserable as to be cast into the depths of terrors the
belly of Hell, without hope of coming thence. Or, this is that I would say,
depths of terrors among professors is altogether as rare as heights of
assurance. It Is but a few that fall into such temptation as may render them the
wonder of others. The rod of correction is as needful among Children in a
family, as bread its self: and of this all that belong to God are one way or
other partakers: but to be whipped with Scorpions, to be chastned in wrath or
rebuked in hot displeasure, is a thing rarely to be seen among the thousands of
Israel.

7. Those whom God thus puts upon the wrack of unusual ^errors have none to
thank but an evil nature in themselves and that evil^ One that is in the world.

The razor that he shaves his people with i^ an hired one: Is. 7.20. Acts of
punishment ar^ called strange acts. Is. 28.21. God has none that he thinks fit
to own. Sin and Satan, it is that he must blame if any thing; the one for
procuring the other for promoting wrathful dealings against the Soul. All this
while God and his ways are free.

8. Though the just God should lengthen the chains of the devouring Lion so far
as that grace and peace seem to be lost for ever: yet the purposes of God to
preserve his Elect shall stand fast for ever.

Such is the wisdom power and love of God to his own that though Satan has an
allowance to disturb them yet shall he never be able to destroy them. All his
labor shall become fruitless, and his thoughts but vain. The overruling power
is still where it was. God (that I may alude to that of the Apostle) never
sends forth any single-warrant against his people. If the Devil, Gods servant,
be at any time employed upon a message to tempt, to trouble, to buffet: God
has ever some messenger or other at hand commissioned to support, to comfort,
to succor and save his endangered ones: 1 Cor. 10.13. this double warrant
bears an equal date, and holds an equal pace. This may very well pass for one
of the wonders which are wrought in the deep.

In a word. God frustrates the councels of Satan, turns his furious attempts
into tokens of favor, overshoots him in his own bow, makes that serve for a
means of conversion, which was intended for nothing but subversion and
perdition.

I hope the Reader will not account me impertinent in all that is here said. My
design is (oh that I were able) to do all the mischief that may be to the
Kingdom of darkness, I mean, the wiles of the Devil, whereby he endeavors to
represent the ways of open sin, or formal Religion, as the only pleasant way
and desirable to walk in, because not observed to trouble its Passengers with
fears, doubts and distresses about spiritual and eternal things.

To all which give leave to sum up my answer briefly, which is this.

1. The ways of God are the only ways that give a true right to solid peace and
comfort.

2. Sometimes the ways of God may not aford that joy which is desired, but then
it is both needful and gainful to have it so.

3. It Is senceless to imagine any Man's person or way to be the better because
not troubled in it.

4. And yet no age wherein God does not visit some one or other of the stoutest
of his enemies with confounding terrors.

5 But the best time to judge whether strict piety, or dissoluteness, and
formality be the most undisturbed way will not be till time is at an end.

6. There are but very few of Gods people, that are under long and strong
disertions.

7. All that are so find cause enough to charge their present sufferings upon
their former sinful security, and the Devil-their enemy but to acquit God and
his ways.

8. Whom God suffers Satan to rage violently upon, he sends help unto, and
turns all into good.

This last particular is clearly exemplified in Gods dealings with my self at
the first.

It pleased the Lord who drew me out of my Mothers Womb to lay upon me a
violent sickness, and that in the days of my ignorance and while under a mere
natural and unregenerate state, as I said before, in which sickness (being a
Feavor) God, who is rich in mercy, began first to fri^hten my secure Soul into
serious apprehensions of its eternal concerns. I had under that distemper
clearly, to my apprehension, heaven in its glory, hell in its misery and
confounding torments set before me, and (which was that, that filled me with
anguish) I lay under strong apprehensions of Christ's forsakings, and that my
portion lay in that lake of fire, this made so deep an impression upon me, that
to this day I still retain the memory of it; nor could any thing but wonderful
grace in God have freed me from the terror of its remembrance. To what a
fearful stand such impressions must needs bring poor Souls possessed thereby
cannot be expressed by me, nor understood by any one who is a stranger to such
passages within his own breast, only this I must declare, that such was the
dread and horror that then I lay under, so strong the delusion of the Devil at
that time, that Satan made no small advantage thereof in the whole course of
his temptations.

This way which God was pleased to use for my first awakening out of my natural
estate, wherein I never dreamed of any danger at all; gives me occasion to
speak a word to these three things.

1. The nature and usefulness of such means. 2. The desperate design that Satan
the common Enemy has in them. 3. The merciful overruling hand of God that
appears therein for the frustration of Satan's malicious design and the
furtherance of his gracious purposes for his elect
As to the first of these, I would have none to understand me as if I took such
occasions and accidents to be a necessary or proper institution for revealing a
man's condition to himself. Such things may not be called properly converting
Ordinances, they have no sufficiency of their own to beget any saving
apprehension of the misery of sin, and excellency of Christ.

Nevertheless God can and does many times make use of such ways as preparatory
to the Ministry of Christ by the Gospel. Acts 9. As in the case of Paul, such
providence may astonish, confound and fetter ^he sinner, and by fear bring him
into a willingness to entertain the message of the Gospel.

The preaching of Faith; is the settled, fixed, ^nstituted means to convert and
free the Soul from its fears.

God speaks not by visions and Revelations, Heb. 1.1. but by his Son. His
Ordinances not ^rovidences are the means of grace; yet so as that the one may
make way for the other when and in whomsoever he will.

2. Touching the design that Satan has in those tumultuous disquietments
raised upon such occasion, I have learnt that among the rest these are some of
the principal ones that he mainly in ends.

1. Present overthrow, utter shipwreck, and destruction of all hope, he would
dash and split the soul against the rock of damning desperation.

2. And as a consequent thereof, help on the bodily distemper, dry up the
humors of the body by the hurries of the Soul, and so if it be possible drag
the Soul laden with fears and not yet relieved by faith before the seat of
judgment where he that believes not is sure to be condemned. Jon 3.18.

3. Or if this fails, by recovery out of sickness, then his design is, to make
such wearied ones willing to cast off all thoughts of that which so much
troubles them in the remembrance of, and glad to flee to the pleasures of sin
to seek for a Remedy. He hopes by that heavy hand of temptation which lies
upon them to draw the natural principle of self-love to a composition, and
rather then remain a close prisoner in such bondage, to change it for a
Vassallage to one of these common principles of Hell.

1. That there is no such thing as Heaven nor Hell, it is a mere fixion, and
therefore but a mere folly to trouble our selves about them. Or else.

2. It Is better for a Man to take his share in the pleasures of the flesh,
allowing God and our selves so much service and care as our Forefathers and
others have done. And not concern himself so deeply in the affairs of eternity.
If I am elected I cannot be damned; if reprobated not saved.

To these or some such prisons the Devil shifts souls wearied with terrors. And
it matters not him much in which they are, may he but be the keeper.

4. Or lastly if all these fail yet Satan has a further design. If he find,
that the Garrison cannot be won by storm; that still there is a resistance made
against all his attempts. He cannot drive the soul to utter despair of mercy,
or to yield its members servants to diverse lusts and pleasures. Yet
nevertheless he hopes that the breaches, the wide gashes, that he now makes,
may be a way for entrance in times to come. That a long life shall not be able
to make them up again; he knows that upon every falling into sin he shall have
a f^ll blow at the soul thus troubled; and that the greatness of the doubts now
raised may prove a mighty impediment to the hearts closing with Christ by faith.

This last have I found most true in my own case. This first delusion ministered
much strength to every following temptation.

3. Satan the great enemy intended nothing but my final overthrow* not the
least good, but the greatest evil, and yet shall I here make bold to tell the
world how much I stand bound to fear the Lord for his goodness, in delivering
me and disposing my fears for good. For.

1. As soon as it pleased God that my body recovered out of its distemper, I
lay under much trouble by reason of the great fears before men^^o^ed and this
made me seek out for some advice now for my wracked mind. And acquainting that
blessed Man of God Dr. (...) with my trouble he gave me to understand that i^
was a mere delusion of Satan.

2. I found i^ my self serious thoughts of my eternal state, of Heaven and
Hell, attended with endeavors to seek the one, and avoid the other.

3. And I sound not only the Lord coming i^ by his b^essed spirit with
conviction of sin: but also re^sing in my soul an high estimation of his love
and favor.

4. I found my self stirred up to pray. God enabling me by his blessed spirit
therein, so that now it might be said, as once of Paul, behold he prays. I
could then have spoken to God as one speaks to his friend.

5. Open profession of the truth of the Gospel followed hereon. Gladly bearing
the reproachful name of Puritan, which was the name in fashion in those days
to revile professors withal.

6. Prayer in my Family was set up also by me when young and unmarried.

7. Former sins did not only dislike me but also former pleasures and pastimes.
As Bowling, and Cocking, etc. And.

8. Association with the godly was my delight, the Men that feared God were the
Men of my choice but especially with much content did I embrace acquaintance
with, and was much helped by one Mr. The. Hibben of Rowton above others, a
Gentleman eminently worthy for profession of the Gospel.

9. Frequent was my attendance upon the word preached. Often went I to Brompton
Brrian to hear that holy Man of God Mr. Peirson. So that by this time
methoughts I could discern a work of God wrought in me whereby I found the new
Man as well as the old.

10. Going to Brompton I not only foun^ much help for my Soul by the Ministry
of the word but it pleased God also to bring me into acquaintance with a noble
Family eminent in those days for Religion Sr. Robert Harleigh. Out of which he
gave me a meet helper, both for body and Soul.

Here was the first conflict wherein Satan's malice was over matched by the
super-abundant grace of God.

CHAP. II. Victory in and over temptation matter of admiration Satan
disappointed in particular temptations. Does not cease them, but suspend them.
Security the unbeseeming consequent of spiritual deliverance. The Mother of
more and greater miseries. Satan's Art may vary, but his Aim that same the
writers experience herein.
WHo can but admire the Wisdom, Might, and Mercy of God clearly manifesting it
self in holding up poor weak and worthless Man under any one of all those heavy
conflicts he has with the powers of darkness? Oh: what policy? what power?
what poison? is every stratagem of the Devil managed with* all? how does that
evil one set his All at work that poor Man might be caught, kept, and
confounded by him at once. And that temptation might not rise up a second time.

But such is the heart of God toward Man in misery that he stands not by as an
idle spectator of our sufferings; but teaches our hands to war and our singers
to fight. He makes us to understand what we could hardly believe. 2 Pet. 2.9.
That he knows how to deliver out off temptation. That there is no desperate
case with him. That our unbelief cannot render the faith of God of none effect.
2 Timothy 2.13. That though we believe not yet he abides faithful and cannot deny
himself, such may be the anguish of spirit and cruel Bondage under disertion
that (as the Children of Israel could not hearken to the words of promise
spoken to them by Moses. Exodus 6.9. Though no condition more needing it, so)
faith of Adoption may be much decayed, the Breasts of promise may not let down
their wonted consolations. The Soul seems to be in a languishing condition by
reason of its dissability to embrace the promises. It Is brought to its wits
end, come to the utmost of faith and patience. And yet for all this, our God
abides faithful he cannot deny himself, he is the only wise God.

And a Savior of such as are gone to the utmost end of faith, ready to drop
away into total unbelief. He that can but place Affiance in God the Savior;
though God has not planted Assurance of Salvation in him; may yet abide
confident of deliverance. Dwell in, stay thy self upon God, by this faith: and
thou shall find the want of Assurance may damnifie but cannot damn thee. Mark
well that passage of the Psalmist, Ps. 91.1. He that dwells in the secret
place of the most high shall ledge under the shadow of the Almighty. Give him
the honor of his being The most high. And Almightiness shall be thy defense.

Trust in his mercy and thou shall not need to tremble at his power. But
remember (says blessed Mr. Bradford) it must be such a trust as may be called
a Dwelling. Here you must stay, here you must abide, not suffering your Souls
to be outed by violence of temptation, nor voluntary giving up the possesion.

^ is a wonder (I say again) that when the wind of temptation blows high and
strong: Psalm. 62.9. Poor Man, lighter then a feather, lighter then vanity,
should be any note found. Or that grace should ever be able to show its head
when fiery scorching heats of temptation smite the heart. Yet so it is. The
secret of the most high is a place above all destructive storms; the shadow of
the Almighty is no Jonahs Gourd, but a thick, a safe shelter from the scorching
beams of temptation, the fiery darts of the Devil. Wait on the Lord, oh: my
Soul! hope in his mercy! here stay, here wait, here dwell in waiting! let no
force nor fraud of Hell persuade thee to depart hence, and thou art safe for
ever.

I have showed already how Satan missed of his design which he had upon me in
his first delusion. He would have had me (being greatly afrighted at the
thoughts of Hell) to give up my hopes of Heaven, and as a means to effect that
did (to my apprehension) present to my view the Lord Christ departing from me.
This he did whiles I was under bodily weakness, from which God mercifully set
me free. But as I said before, and find since, by long and lamentable
experience, his malicious purpose in that delusion did not end when the terror
of it was abated. His practice upon me so filled my thoughts for many years
after that it wonderfully hindered me from receiving my Lord Christ in that
faithfulness as I should have done. He departed from me so as that the violence
of his temptations were nothing so great as in the time when he first was let
loose upon me: but so much of them still stuck and staid behind, as did make me
drive on but heavily in the ways of God, filling me with many slavish fears
and doubts, and thereby making my closure with Jesus Christ upon the offer of
the Gospel the more difficult; and his own entrance at another season more
possible and easy. The Lord indeed gave me a gracious deliverance, but Satan's
war with poor souls is not ended after the first battle. His hopes are that
that fort which is not won at first onset may be conquered at last. He was not
out of hope of finding a fitter season to renew his temptations against Christ,
the head, though he found he had enough of him in the first Combat. Luke.
4.13. The text says when the Devil had ended all the temptations he departed
from him: for a season.

How little does the thoughts of this affect our hearts? we are apt to fall
asleep as soon as the fit of trouble is over; as if our enemy were afraid to
show himself any more, or as if his second attempts would be no worse then the
first, or we our selves in a better posture for resistance. Whereas there is
nothing more true then the contrary, nor any thing more unbeseeming a Christian
then to forget his past dangers or remit his dillige^ne and slacken his hand in
services of his God and his precious soul. To grow careless negligent and
secure after such deliverances, or indeed at any time, Is

1. Sinful. 1 These. 5.6. Let others sleep as they will, Jesus Christ will not
have his people do so. Math. 26.41. To watch is a duty then which none more
frequently enjoined. A duty that carries much mercy in the bowels of it. A
watchful frame will beget and maintain a praying frame wherever it is. And both
together will be a good means, if not to keep off, yet (at least) to keep up
the soul under, the heavy load of temptation our blessed Lord who himself has
suffered being tempted, and is able to succor us who are tempted: Heb. 3.18.
Has yet thought it fit to employ poor souls this way during their lucid
intervals and quiet hours. Encouraging us thereunto by this. It may be a
preservative from entering into temptations. Watch and pray and pray, least ye
enter into etc. Math. 26.41.

2. A careless behavior after deliverance is not only sinful, but foolish. The
folly of it appears in these considerations.

1. The Devil himself is not at quiet, he is rallying up his forces after every
Conquest, he is renewing his war again with greater fury. What he does in this
matter he knows he shall gain nothing by but the fulfilling of his malicious
and revengeful pleasure in the downfall of our immortal souls. And shall he be
thus active in a matter of so small advantage to himself, and we remain stupid
when the gain is an immortal matchless gain, and that our own gain too? oh how
unbeseeming! how foolish a thing is this? we may well collect how Satan takes
his ejectments out of the souls and bodies of Men by the account that the
Disciples brought back to their great Master touching the success of their
ministry. Luke. 10.17. Lord say they even the Devils are subject to us through
thy name. This was the return they made and the text says 'twas with joy.
Christ allows it to be matter of rejoicing because hardly effected. v. 18. And
he said unto them I beheld Satan as lightening fall from Heaven. To be
permitted to rule in man is the Devils Heaven. To be cast out thence is a
torment next to Hell. It is not more contrary to the nature of flame to move
downward, then to that evil spirit to be removed out of his place in man: mere
force, mighty force must fetch him thence. his fall is as the fall of
lightening.

2. It animates and arms our enemy for a sooner and sorer onset.

Satan needs not stay long to find advantages against a sleepy soul. The bed
of sloathful security will aford room enough for him, but none for Jesus Christ.

And the onset is like to be more sore as well as more soon. Old sores not
healed, every touch goes to the heart. Cant. 3.1, 24. Chapter 5.2 etc. The spouse
had more a do to get ^id of her second disertion then of the first, although
victorious in both. Security and unwary walking in a time of peace when there
is liberty and leisure to fortify our selves, is but a sorry posture for such
especially, whose enemies are upon the march. Of all enemies none carry greater
dread or greater danger then those that come on the sudden. Genesis 49.17. As Dan
(that Serpent in the way and Adder in the path) dealt with the men of Laish who
dwelt careless, quiet, and secure. Judge. 18.7.10.27. So the Devil that old
Serpent, the fiery red Dragon, abours to do with souls negligent to secure
their spiritual peace.

In a word an heart so stupid after deliverance as not to be deeply and durably
affected with its past danger, and future duty (of love to Jesus Christ, and
pressing after a more distinct and full assured understanding of him) But
contrarily walking unevenly or carelessly; must needs be a sinful and foolish
thing. For such a frame of heart as this is inviteth a departing Devil to
return. When holy diligence and watchfulness will enforce an approaching Devil
to depart. He rallyeth up his forces while we slight the pursuit: whereas in
the hottest onset resist him and he will fly from you.

This was my own folly after my first deliverance. Sins and miscarriages
against my good God cost me dearly. For after many years patience of God it
pleased him to withdraw his presence from me and cast me in a more horrible pit
of soul distress then I had known.

This second violent impulse of the Devil (though many years past between it
and the first, and the way he used in them both were somewhat unlike) I now
find to be no other then a more subtle artifice of his, aiming at the same
thing. Which now to the best of my abillity I shall plainly declare.

It pleased the Lord to suffer the enemy Satan to break in upon my soul in so
fearful a manner that he forced me to blaspheme my God though unwillingly. And
(taking the advantage of my weakness) laid another delusion upon my fantasy,
persuading me that I had betrayed my Lord Christ, and so caused my own tongue
to exclaim against my self, that my sins were so great that I thought Judas's
sins were nothing to mine, and that I had overthrown the world

In this delusion (the Lord suffering him, mine enemy, to have a strong power
over me) he presented to me as though I had committed some bloody murder
(which afterward he endeavored to have had me acted) tending to revive and
with greater fury to set on the first temptation; that Christ had forsaken me.

In all this he managed his design upon me so, that I apprehended the
suggestion not to be of Satan, but of God, insomuch that being asked who told
me these things which I uttered with so much dread against my self, mine answer
was, that it was God.

By all this Satan took advantage to confirm his first delusion, which indeed
was no other then a forelaying the way for the better effecting of his accursed
purpose and practice aagainst me. For in the first he acted as if it had been
Christ: and now, the Lord permitting it for good ends, which at last he
accomplished, suffered him to tempt me, and by that temptation to prevail so
far that my tongue spoke something against my Lord Jesus and this sin he made
use of to persuade me that now I was indeed forsaken of God.

I cannot say but that Satan might have been discovered to have been no other
then Satan; that this impulse was his, not Gods; if men under such desertions
had not their judgments much darkened; for herein he acted like himself with
violence and at unawares it was a surprise on a sudden.

Nor can I say but that I had at that very time hopeful signs of the grace of
God within me, could I but have seen it. For it was not a sin committed with
full consent of my will, or without horror. 'Twas my unregenerate part that was
prevailed over only. And so grievous was it to me that in my confession of
sins to the Lord afterward, I acknowledged that he might justly make me an
amazement to Angels and men; and such thoughts carried about me many years.

Nevertheless the hour of temptation being an hour of darkness, and the Lord
permiting the enemy thus to prevail, and not only so, but also to assault me
with blasphemous thoughts, this helped forward my doubtings and raised fearful
thoughts in me that the first apprehensions I had of being forsaken of Jesus
Christ, were not the delusions of the Devil but the certain persuasions of God,
because I thought now I had committed a sin most answerable to it.

After certain days being under this sad condition, it pleased the Lord to stir
up the hearts of diverse of his people to keep a day of fasting and prayer at
the place where I lay, among whom was that blessed man of God Mr. Pierson, who
prevailed with the Lord for my deliverance out of the violent extremity of this
temptation.

But alas: the sting of that fiery Serpent, the Devil, in this delusion had so
far entered, that much pain and anguish remained still. I could not get rid of
many fearful thoughts arising from the remembrance of the sin committed, and
also from the credit I too much gave to that suggestion [that upon the
discovery and bringing to light of this notorious sin (...) should be a shame
to all my Friends and to Religion, and be brought also to some shame ^l end]
which my deadly Adversary (as (...) shall show in its place) by another
stratagem would indeed have brought me unto.

My fears thus abiding and doubts growing on still as though Christ bad
sorsaken me: and Satan with all his might laboring to carry on his design to
spoil me of the comforts which the Lord had formerly given me: as I had
oppertunity I would still be speaking to godly Ministers and enquiring, whether
the disertion I lay under were not a final forsaking, and laboring to resolve
my doubts whether I had not finned that unpardonable sin against the holy
Ghost? all this while ashamed to disclose the sin I had, as before, committed,
it being so strange a fin, and so damnified my self by not discovering of it.

And from those to whom I made known my condition I received some comfort,
thenceforth I followed the preaching of the Word, constantly, entertained the
Ministers and people of God at my house, kept many days of humilliation and
prayer for the pardon of my sins, and through the course of about twenty years
the Lord bare me up in his arms that I f^ll not into any great dep^h of
continued ^^rrors.

CHAP. III. He holds on his profession. Walking remisly und der long peace, is
awakened by aflictions, more dangerously wounded with temptations, but
mercifully rescued.
NOw being so graciously delivered out of the paw of the Lion and Bear, from a
first and second combat with monstrous delusions: 'twas high time to begin to
put on for assurance of the pardon of sin. To arise and ak^ the staff of faith
and hope in hand and march along after the Ark of the Covenant through this
weary land, this wilderness of temptation, in which I had been led so far
already. But many inward doubts and fears I had within me still; faith though
it held me up in the way of profession, yet was it not so strong as with
others, it administered not an abundant entrance into the Kingdom of our Lord
and Savior. I could approve the things that are excellent: but wanted greatly
those consolations of God, arising from the Faith of Adoption, which are the
strength of passengers through the vale of Baca.

Notwithstanding my assurances of pardon were thus wanting, and I subject to
re-enslavement thereby, I held it my duty and safety to become partner with the
people of God in all the divine ordinances and providence that should be
imposed upon them, the sense of which duty made me tie my endeavors with
theirs to draw the Ark of the God of Israel to its own place. 1 Samuel 6.12. And
although (like the Kine) went on lowing all the way yet (to the best of my
understanding) I kept the strait ways of the Lord and did not wickedly depart
from my God.

After the intestive broils of those times were somewhat abated, and leisure
with liberty lay common for any man to be as good as he would. Though I
thankfully embraced the freedom of the Gospel as a singular favor from Heaven,
yet I must confess (as matter of much sorrow) that neither the many afflictions
nor mercyes under which I was exercised, were so well improved as they should.
But contrarily I forgot to return to. God according to his benefits.

Not long after this I found my sins growing to so great a bulk that I could
not look up.

My former sin began to grow fresh in my remembrance, and the Lord to withdraw
the light of his countenance which I had now for a good season, and in a good
measure enjoyed, my communion with him began much to abate, and his rod of
affliction, such as I had not known before, began to smart upon my back.

In my former trials (then which I thought once none could be greater) I was
not brought so near the brink of utter ruins as I was in this and what followed.

First the Lord began to lay on a load of sore and gauling afflictions upon my
loins mainly. By bringing a day of silence upon his Ministers from whose lips
I had often received sufficient drops of that water of life to quench the
thirst of my heart panting after God. And blocking up the solemn assemblies of
his Saints, permitting things so contrary to my judgment to be introduced and
added to his worship. These together with some other heavy afflictions at home
from some of mine own relations did so concur with my former trials, that I now
concluded more then at any time before God had withdrawn himself from me.

Hereupon he was pleased to suffer that cruel enemy Satan, that old Serpent to
break in upon my soul with such dread and terror that he made my body to quake
upon my bed, so that I was fain to have one to lie upon me to keep me from
shaking, thinking then he had an opportunity to accompl^sh his hellish tragedy
(my self being so abused by his former delusions and still entertaining
thoughts that God had forsaken me) that cursed enemy to the most glorious and
ever blessed God would have tempted me (as once Jobes Wife d^d her husband) to
curse God, and this he pressed with much violence: but through the mercy of God
was not able to accomplish his wicked design though he seemed to me to affirm
(with as strong affirmations and as bloody oaths as ever were heard from any
swearing wretch) that I was damned; territ^ing me in the night with fearful
dreams and visions of a spiritual nature which were most dreadful to my
apprehension^ and not being be through the goodness of God) to make my tongue
his cursed instrument departed for a season as though he would have rented the
Heavens and the Earth.

But reviving again his temptations, she whom God had given me for a meet
helper, fighting against him by earnest prayer to Almighty God, and likewise
many Christian friends that came to see me, he now began to desist and fail in
that way, and therefore began to try another, viz. In relation to the former
delution as though I should do some murtherous act. And now showing himself to
be according as our God has said of him a murderer from the beginning he with
strong temptations endeavored to make me imbrue my hands in the blood of my
dearest friend, who had been so helpful to me against his former temptations,
which was most grievous to my poor soul, and fearing least his violent
temptation might have overcome me, I (being so much in his hands) desired her
that she would withdraw her self, telling her the temptation. But she
(something amazed thereat) undauntedly lifted up her soul to the Lord by holy
ejaculations, and resolved she would not give that enemy one inch of ground.
But casting us both upon the protection of the Almighty with a lively faith in
the Lord Jesus vanquished the enemy at that time.

Yet this temptation continnued about two months, in all which time my poor
soul being most dreadfully afflicted, I did again earnestly desire my Wife to
get some company in the house by night, but having little help or comfort from
others, she the more uncessantly acted faith and prayer until our gracious God
had given us deliverance.

CHAP. IV. His struggling under and against temptations. The means most used and
blessed for his support. Cast again the fourth and last time into the furnace
of fiery hot instigations to blaspheme the means used and owned for coming
thence. An happy issue.
ANd having now passed some five or six years since the last grievous
visitation all this time laboring for the pardon of sin in the use of means
appointed of God to get out of that sad condition, wherein I was still haunted
with blasphemous and horrible injections and cursed instigations to curse and
swear which that wicked enemy could not after his utmost endeavors bring any
further then my tongues end. Now, I say, laboring under these temptations and
making my condition known to my Godly acquaintance they affirming; that these
were not my own but Satan's suggestions, some comfort I had from them laboring
in the word of the Lord and prayer. This was one good stay.

Making use also of those blessed streams flowing from the word of God, I mean
the works of those blessed servants of Christ who have labored much in writing
upon such subjects. As namely Dr. Preston upon the attributes (which I read
above twelve times over) Dr. Thomas Goodwins Child of light walking in
darkness. Mr. Bridges's lifting up of cast down. Mr. Simonds his deserted soul.
And that precious piece of that worthy Mr. Buroughs. Saints walking by faith
without sight and sense. And Mr. Bax^ers thirty two directions, traversing
these books over, through the Lords blessing. Were a great comfort and support
in bearing up my soul against the enemies cruel attempts, and wearisome
afflictions under which I strugled, having no assurance of the pardon of my
sins, and lying still under the guilt of that great transgression so long past
committed, and under many more since.

Moreover though I could not pray with a free spirit, yet, under all this heavy
load, I still followed the Lord by earnest prayer that he would come and take
away both guilt and filth of sin, and destroy that cursed nature from which
Satan took his advantage against me, and help me (though he tarry yet) still to
wait for him, in the way of his judgments.

And now public assemblies (which were wont to be a great solace to me in my
distress) being not to be enjoyed in that purity I expected, and the practice
of the public ministers being so contrary to my judgment and conscience, I
neither could nor would upon any terms become a hearer of them; and thereupon
did rather choose to expose my self to the scorn and displeasure of men, in
keeping meetings every Lords day in my Family. Spending that day in prayer and
praises, and as occasion was offered, days of humiliation.

These duties having most of them been my practice for many years, wherein I
served the Lord withal my might, though sometimes under much dejection, about
the beginning of April, my good God (through the purchase made by the blood of
his Son, that blessed seed of the Woman, through whom he had covenanted with
out first Parents immediately after the fall to give eternal life) having (by
earnest prayer and intercession I humbly claiming this from the Lord that he
would account and make me righteous, through that purchase and redemption made
by Christ) now resolved to take up and put an end to the quarrel which he had
against me for all my sins (yet to let me know my deserving and to manifest a
further work upon me) did suffer the enemy to break in again upon me in most
dreadful manner. Charging upon me that one sin as formerly named above others
with such violence and power. That I believe I was in as great despair for the
time as ever man was. My soul, by that malicious enemy to mankind, being
stuffed with all abominations of hellish thoughts, injections, cursed
instigations, with other base and abominable vile immaginations, he at last
infused into me as much malice against my blessed God as possibly he could. I
thought now I was utterly forsaken, living in expectation of nothing but the
lower most hell, and brought now again almost to blaspheme.

When I saw that I was in this most dreadful case, fearing I should I have
wilfully blasphemed I could have been well content that God should have damned
me, and thrown m^ into hell, fear of being over tempted and thereby to
blaspheme God made me weary of life. When my Wife would put me on to pray for a
blessing upon my meat I did it feignedly being willing to be starved if I could.

And now in this dreadful condition (so dreadful that I believe few Sons of
Adam were ever in a worse, that did not do the things that I feared, i. e.
blaspheme God and destroy himself) I say being in such a condition, and the sin
so often spoken of, lying still heavy upon me, and shame withholding me from
revealing it for many years, it pleased God to overruled my spirit that I sent
for a worthy Minister of Jesus Christ who coming to me the day before my
deliverance I acquainted him with that sin which did so lie upon my Conscience,
and never was revealed before. Well remembering how holy David Ps. 32.3.5. (who
while he kept silence his waxed old through his roaring all the day long) did
but say he would confess his sin and the Lord forgave his iniquity. So the Lord
the very next day came and set my soul at rest.

The comfort and help that I found from my natural relations and friends this
woeful condition was none at all, but instead of pity I met with reproach from
many, only my dear yoke fellow was my fellow sufferer, of whom I can say the
Lord gave her to me for such a day as this to be his blessed instrument of my
deliverance, for when I was even distracted she laid the glory of the Lord
deeply to her heart, and did daily bring the word of God to my soul, reading
with great diligence the holy Scriptures. Which being done then pouring forth
her soul to the Lord with ardent affections and with a mighty faith in our
gracious God who had manifested his great love to her in former troubles, the
experience of which encouraged her to go on still in earnest and frequent
prayer and expectation that the Lord would accomplish the work of deliverance.

And upon the sixteenth day of April, 1669. (a day for ever to be solemnized as
glorious and honorable to the Lord by me his poor creature) she, going on in
her constant course of prayer, after she had given the Lord his holy and
reverend titles, using Moses his arguments brake forth into these words.

My Father! my Father! what will thou do with mine husband? he has been
speaking and acting still in thy cause, oh! destroy him not for thine own
glory. Oh! what dishonor will come to thy great name if thou do it. Oh! rather
do with me what thou will! oh! do with me what thou will, but spare my Husband,
etc.

Thus laying hold of that word of God in the Prophet. With a lively faith
(concerning your Sons and your Daughters, command you me and striving mightily
in prayer the duty being e^ded, the Lord immediately appeared: and then that
Lion of the tribe of Judah, that blessed seed of the Woman, that second Adam,
that promised Messiah, the Son of the living God who had formerly broke the
Serpents head, he who in a single duel had disarmed the Devil in the
Wilderness, t^od the Wine press of his Fathers wrath alone, this Jesus the
Savior who knew how to succor tempred souls) made hare his holy arm and his
own right hand brought d^liverance, he delivered me from my strong enemy and
saved m^ from him that hated me.

He that is pleased to style himself a God, hearing prayer, and in most of his
great works delights to advance his own power by using small and unlikely
means, after long tarrying and in* a time when I looked not for him, came now
and owned his own ordinance, crowned the cries and faith and patience of a poor
Woman with such success, that my praise shall be continually of him. The proud
may scorn, but the humble shall hear there of and be glad:

That roaring Lion, mine adversary the Devil: that old Serpent; that
red-Dragon; that unclean Spirit that Liar, Accuser, Murderer from the
beginning: that Apollion to the Geeck^, Abbaddon to the Jews, and destroyer to
all (for as are the names given him by the word of truth, so is his nature, and
so has he labored mightily for a long season to show himself in me) even now
(when he thought himself almost seated in the p^ss^ssion of his long sought
Dominion, and that there was no casting of him out of my soul, which ^e abused,
making it his dunghill whereon he laid all the filth of hellish thoughts and
abominations that he could, wanting nothing but my will (that Fort-royal) to
have put me under an eternal vassalage to his long laid desig^s now, I say, was
that accursed enemy to God, and me, his poor creature, sent to his own place,
by my dear Lord Christ that holy Son of the blessed God, who took upon him my
nature, that he might become my Lord and King; Savior and Redeemer; who brake
the doors of Brass, rescued me from the Rape of Hellish furies, cast them out,
delivered my darling soul from the power of the Dog, and barred the Gate, that
he could enter no more to stuff my thoughts with his detestable injections,
although he attempted a return.

Thou have thrust fore at me (oh mine enemy that I might fall but the Lord
helped me many a time (may I now say) have these things afflicted me from my
youth, many a time have they afflicted me from my youth, yet they have not
prevailed against me. The Plowers plowed upon my back they made long their
furrows, but the righteous Lord he has cut asunder the cords of the weeked
one, I was brought low and the Lord helped me. He has delivered my soul from
death, mine eyes from tears, and my feet from falling.

Oh Lord my God I will give thanks to thee for ever.

CHAP. V. Concluding the whole experiment with an account of the unconceivable
sweetness of divine consolations (the usual consequent of long and sort
temptations) a more then abundant reason to abide Gods leisure under the heavy
load of d^sertions. Of the cause of writing.
ANd now at last when the Lord, my Lord* of whom the Father said sit thou at my
right hand until I make thy enemies thy foot-stool^ had set my soul at freedom
by his mighty power, he sent his blessed spirit, the holy Ghost, that most
glorious self evidencing and sweet comforter, whose sweetness no heart can
conceive but he who has tasted how good he is, who showed me from the Father
and his blessed Son, that all the miseries before mentioned, pressing me down
were the delusions of Satan: and whereas he intended to have made me a shame
and reproach to all that should know or hear of my overthrow, that now my God
has taken advantage of the greatness of my sins thereby to magnify his mercy
in pardoning thereof, according to my cry in the day of my distress; and that
now I was of Abraham's Family, numbered among the spiritual Children of Abraham;
a privilege which I often, especially under my troubles, prized highly and
desired earnestly to be partaker off.

The blessed spirit bearing witness of these things, wrought in my soul such
unconceiveable joy, that in the words of Thomas I cried out my Lord and my God,
so ravishing were the (kisses of those divine lips of love that my heart was
silled with joy unspeakable and glorious, my mouth with laughter, my body (much
weakened by the anguish and horror of my soul so that I kept my Chamber for
many days together) was now revived, and my youth renewed as the Eagle that
casts her Beak, so that I became as lightsome as if I had not known sorrow,
to the great admiration of my Friends who had known my long confinement to my
Chamber by reason of sorrow and heavyness. My heart, my sorrowful heart, of
which I was wont to cry out. None so fad, none so disquieted as thou; was now
(through the joy of the Lord) quite altered. The spirit of my God now covering
me with the glorious robes of his Sons righteousness turned my mourning into
dancing, put off my Sackcloath and girded me with gladness, gave me a garment
of praise, for the spirit of heavyness, so that then (and since being upheld by
the same hand) I could say I carry about me a cheerful heart, and a much more
healthy body, notwithstanding the great disappointments I (in my worldly
condition) then met with, and still lie under.

Being now enabled by faith to apprehend my self justified through the
righteousness of God, even the righteousness of Jesus Christ, imputes to poor
sinners; the guilt, the obligation of my sins to punishment, being taken away;
I can now (through the tender mercy of God whereby the day spring from on high
has visited me) comfortably give a challenge to Death and the Grave. Oh Death
where is thy sting: oh Grave where is thy victory? my dear Lord having ransomed
me from the power and fear of the grave, and helping me in despite of him that
has the power of death, that is the Devil to look upon my self as one of those
whom God the Father has given to the Son as part of the travail of his soul,
so that the Lord Christ delights in me as the gift of his Father and the
purchase of his own blood. And my God loves me with the same love wherewith he
loves his Son and all the promises of grace made to sinners in the holy word,
through Jesus Christ, I have an interest in, and expect to have fulfilled to me
as far as it shall tend to his glory and my good. He that gave me his Son will
freely also give me all good things.

Well may I therefore take up the words of the Prophet. Oh Lord I will praise
thee for though thou wast angry with me thine anger is turned away and thou
comfortedst me. For the iniquity of my soul thou wast wroth with me and smot^st
me but now thou have healed me, and restored comforts to me, the Lord Jehovah
is my strength and song he also is become my sal^ation. I waited patiently for
the Lord, and he enc^^ned his ear to me and heard my cry, he drew my feet out
of an horrible pit out of the miry clay and has set me upon a Rock and
established my goings. What shall I render unto the Lord for all his benefits.
I will call upon him as long as I live. I will pay my vows unto the Lord now in
the presence of all his people.

When the Lord Jesus is pleased to go away (to withdraw the comfortable warm
beams of his love and presence) from the sight and sense of his poor people.
Joh. 16.6 (like the Apostles) their hearts are filled with heavyness, they
think every day a week, and every week a month, and every month a year, the
time seems tedious till he return, till he lifts up the light of his
countenance, till he restores comforts to them (like the mother of Sisera) they
are putting forth their heads crying why are his Chariot wheels so long in
coming? But oh that such would remember (what I now find) that it is expedient
for them that he should sometimes go away from them withholding his
consolations; for the holy Ghost the Comforter shall one time or other come to
such as wait for it with such joy and peace that passes all understanding of
eye, ear, and heart of man. And then long time spent in waiting shall seem but
a little moment, Is. 40 2. and they shall receive double pay for all the
punishments of their iniquities.

The Children of this world (in this) are wiser in their generation then the
Children of light, no discouragement of wind or rain can make them forbear
their seasons of sowing in hope, nor can the interposition of many perilous
months delay, work a dissolution of the hope that is conceived. Jam. 5.7. And
yet the ground they go upon affords no such footing for hope and trust, as does
that of a Christian; Mic. 1.6. how of have they sown much and brought in
little? whereas a Christian (under all the improbabillities of outward sensible
appearance) has sufficient cause to be confident of a plentiful harvest. Under
the furrows of dark providence lie the seed of faithful patient endeavors
which shall spring up into light and joy. Psalm. 126.5. And doubtless they that
sow in a w^t weeping season shall meet with a welcome harvest. The smallest
seeds of faith and patience, shall stretch into certain Sheaves of joy. When
the earth over-wet with showers is become a standing pool who would adventure
to bestow his seed. Pains and patience had a^ such a time the Plowman calls
imprudence. Be it what it will, sure I am he never lied, who has pronounced
Is. 32.20. Blessed are ye that sow [the seeds of pious endeavours] beside all
waters [of deep and drowning afflictions] that send forth thither the feet of
the Ox and the Ass.

Venture then to hold on your way, keep hope and trust a going in the paths of
duty. Deep mire shall one day prove a fruitful soil to thee, and the joy of the
harvest, which is a shouting joy, shall so fill thy soul that many years of
wearisome waiting shall seem no longer then the shortest night.

This calling to mind those engagements which I had made unto the Lord in my
low estate. viz. that if the Lord would deliver me. I would declare it to the
Sons of men, and and whereas the wicked enemy had suggested to me that I should
be a shame to my friends and a reproach to religion, if the Lord would redeem
my soul out of his hands then would I declare abroad the glorious and renowned
works and wonders of the lifter up of my head, and what a great impostor,
deceiver; destroying and lying Spirit the Devil this enemy to mankind is.
Hereupon (having had help from God) I have adventured these few pages into the
world, may the Lord inherit the praises of his people hereby, I ^rall not value
the reproaches of his enemies. May poor dropping souls understanding how Satan
has dealt, come to the sight of the net which he has laid for them, and be
persuaded to an holy constancy in resistance I shall be much rejoiced in the
success.

Let the Lord do with me and it, as seems good in his sight I have enough. My
true Joseph is yet alive, I hope shortly I shall go up to see him, here I
shall leave this Pillar of remembrance in the land of the living, it is mine.

Eben Ezer. Hitherto has the Lord helped me.

A Postscript.
BEfore I withdraw my hand, my earnest desire to promote the welfare of all men
in general, but espeacially of such who (having given up their names to Jesus
Christ) lie under the furious assaults of the Devil that common enemy, does
mightily engage me to speak a few words more by way of humble and hearty
request. That man who has obtained mercy and cannot show pity to others in
misery, is such a monster that has no mention in the holy Scriptures, nor
other reason then to call in question whether his seeming deliverances be not
real delusions. I would gladly leave a testimony of my dearest love to my
Redeemer by laying out my once-doleful, now-joyful experience of inexpressible
horror of mind for the benefit of three sorts of Christians espeacially.

1. First such as at present lie groaning under the heavy burden of a wounded
Spirit ^onging for deliverance. 2. Secondly such as have once had experience of
that sad condition, but are now mercifully delivered. 3. Such as God has dealt
more gently with, not suffering them to fall into those horrible depths of
disertion and temptation.
Into the hands of some or all of these it is possible these lines may come, and
then my first and main request (which I earnestly beg) is this; that they would
offer up at least one freewill offering of thanksgiving to the mighty God of
Jacob, the hope of Israel and the Savior thereof in the time of trouble, when
they shall read, what great things he has done for me poor sinner. My poor
stock will never reach to furnish the Alter with sufficient Sacrifices of
praise, oh help me by glorifying God on my behalf. As his mercy has been
abundant toward me: so oh that it might be abundant to the glory of him by the
thanksgiving of many.

This being the general request I shall make a few more particular ones to
those three sorts of Professors briefly in order.

1. To the poor doubting distressed and almost distracted Conscience.

Precious Soul! my dear fellow and companion in spiritual tribulation! the
purchase of the precious blood of the Son of God! conformist to Jesus Christ in
his sore agonies of temptation! whom the Devil envyeth, hates, and seeks to
destroy! I know there is no condition under the Sun has more need of pity and
supplies of comfort then this of thine. and yet I know no condition more rarely
pityed or more hardly comforted, thy heart knows its own bitterness. Thou
think so much of this, that thou can relish no sweetness in (and therefore
wilfully refusest) the Cup of sweetest and divine consolation. Oh poor soul!
what weary some hours thou art made to possess, how tediously thy dismal nights
of terrors pass over thee, and thou in them reduced to such confounding
streights, that whither to fly from, or how to stand in the face of Gods
conceived displeasure, the Devils furious representations, or thy own fearful
apprehensions, thou know not. These things having been mine old
acquaintance, I hope with freedom I may be permitted to beg two or three
things at your hands.

1. That thou would not let this mercyful dealing of God with my soul pass
without some thankful acknowledgement of thine. Lay aside thy sable weed a
little, and cloth thy self with the Garment of praise. Praise the Lord for his
goodness and for his wonderful works to the Children of men.

Conclude not henceforth thy sores to be incurable, nor Gods long stay to be a
sign that he will never come. Consider what he has done for me and let that
put a little heart in thee to conclude, that it is good to continue yet in a
waiting posture, for surely he can and will at last do so for all such as wait
for him.

I know how apt such a soul as this will be to vary the case, tempted souls
shall never want arguments against themselves nor skill to manage them while
the Devil has any. Thou will be ready to say the case is not the same with
thee as 'twas with me. Either the sin thou art troubled for or the manner of
thy troubles seizing and the Devils handling thee under temptation, is not the
same with mine. Something or other will be still found as matter of objection
against thy self.

To run over particulars would be long. In a word thou think, possibly, as
once good David in another case that all men are liars, thy temptations may
beget such hasty expressions as to say* the case has not been with others as
they represent it; or to doubt their deliverance to be but feigned at the best,
or else a short parrole, a meet reprieve, not a discharge from the like or
worse enthrallment. Or if things have been truly related, it only proves what
God can do not what Hell will do, as if the mercy of God did not bear an equal
proportion with his power. Think of what thou will or can that may make
against thee, and yet I shall continue to beg.

Give not up your hopes, hold on seeking after God you have not yet waited
forty years, he will come in a time when you look not for him. Your case is not
yet desperate. It Is not so bad with you but 'twas as bad with me.

2. My earnest suite is also that in stead of regarding dreams, visions,
voices, and other delusions: you give credit to the un-erring word of God and
oppose that against them all.

The general drift design and scope of the book of God is to persuade man,
unbelieving man that God is mercyful. That sin never damned any man yet, simply
and of it self: but as qualified by wilfulness, and unbelief. That though God
be a consuming fire a jealous God, yet fury is not in him. Is. 27.4. His
jealousy he puts upon him as a Cloak, a mere covering a loose garment: and
this he never puts on till provoked by the obstinate refusals of love and
mercy. Even under the dark and terrible administrations of the Law how clearly
did this doctrine shine forth. Exodus 34 6, 7. The Lord, the Lord, gracious and
merciful long suffering and abundant in goodness and truth. Keeping mercy for
thousands forgiving iniquity transgressions and sin.

This is his name for ever this his memorial to all generations. This the
strong tower of souls hungring and thirsting after righteousness. Oh lets not
be beaten out of this persuasion by any Hellish suggestion. What great
advantage the Devil makes of dreams, visions, and the like now under the Gospel
wherein God speaks to us only by his Son, Heb. 1.1, 2. the woeful experience I
have does in some measure manifest. The overmuch credit I gave to the delusion
laid upon me in my first sickness was the root of all the rest.

This is my second request oppose the word of God against all such Hell-hatcht
conceits as would put you upon the wrack of affrighting doubts. Fly from these
to that least you suffer as I have done.

3. Moreover let me beg this that you stand not to hear what every one says
about Religion, but fall thou upon the profession and practice of real
Godliness with all the speed thou can.

He that is a professor in truth and not in hypocrisy (to which conscience it
self is able most commonly to bear witness) has the name and glory of the Lord
engaged for his relief. He that bears his testimony for G^d and his truths in
sincerity, God cannot find in his heart to do by him what in justice he might.
The sins of such as these strike high at the honor of God, and therefore well
might the Lord destroy and blot out their names for ever. But yet he will not.
Dan 9 18, 19. They bear his name upon them, what would the more wicked part of
the world say if God should arm himself with fury against his own? would they
not say where is now your God? what is become of all your prayers and all your
services which you pretend were done for his glory. The merciful Lord foreseeth
this, and his own glory restrains the hands of the destroyer. Deuteronomy. 32.26,
27. I said I would scatter them into corners, and blot out their remembrance
from among men were it not that I feared the wrath of the enemy. God will not
do against the Professors of his name as much as he can: for fear least the
enemy should say and do more then he ought. Our God is seldom employed in long
and wrathful rebukes of his own, when they are exposed to the outward rage of
their enemie^. He spares them then however they escape at another time.

Oh! then let me entreat thee to make choice of the ways of holiness as the
best and safeest ways to walk in. Run not to seek for shelter from your fears
and sorrows amidst the profane rout of merry worldlings. Their sparks of joy
cast but little light, and how soon shall that be put out? alas! poor souls the
way of peace have they not known. City of refuge.
The horns of the Alter is the likeliest place for security against the Avenger
of blood. Consort thy self with those that walk in the truths of practical
piety according to the mind of God plainly revealed in his holy word.

My deliverance God wrought for his own name sake. There were sins enough in
me, fuel enough to maintain the fire of divine displeasure for ever. But the
name and glory of God are precious to him. If thou have made profession in
sincerity and truth thou may expect deliverance more then others. A sincere
professor under teoubles has more reason to hope then others, for the glory of
the Lord is engaged for his defense.

4. I have this further to add from my own experience. That though thing
expectation of deliverance must be from God, yet not without the use of means.

It Is the God of peace alone that can make peace in thy troubled soul, or else
all thy labor will amount to nothing. The lips and labors of the most learned
are but fruitless, Is. 57.19. till the Lord create the fruits of them both, and
make them yield peace.

Cent. 1.18. And yet it is good to feed by the Shepherds tents. A faithful
Gospel ministry is an unvalluable mercy. Their gifts in preaching and writing
are the purchase of the blood of Christ. From the fountain of sacred truths are
these Buckets filled. And all for the use of poor weak souls that want skill
and strength of their own. God has crowned the labors of such and made them
men of renown for conversion of souls, their labors are the issue of the
blessed spirit. Ob then lets not rob the Lord of his glory in raising up such
lights who have spant themselves in guiding our feet in the ways of peace? by
their precious labors the word of God has been so unfolded, and the glorious
attribute^ so explained and sweetly applied, that if poor souls have not been
much advantaged the fault has been too much their own. Let me beg of you then
to praise the Lord for, and to make use of, and show all the due respect you
can to these, they are the horsemen and the Chariots of the Gospel-Israel, the
best visible assistance that Earth can afford for management of our spiritual
war against the powers of Hell.

By the blessing of God upon my long use of the labors of those worthy men
have I found much encouragement to hold up to this day under various trials, a
short account of which may conduce to my end in this particular which is to
stir you up to get, and give the Lord the glory of such comfortable assistants.

Time was when I lay under darkness, deprived of the light and comfort of Gods
Countenance. I thought he acted toward me as an enemy, one affliction came in
upon the back of another, that my hands began to flagg. My sins I apprehended
to be so great that my prayers brought me in but little comfort or none at all.
I was ready to cry out the decree is past. I conceited that his mercy was clear
gone for ever.

In reading Dr. Preston upon the attributes it pleased God to give me some
satisfaction by reading there that there is a certain decree concerning the
time appointed for every man to dye yet do not we forbear to eat or take
physic. and though there be a time when God does reject a soul and cast him
off (as he did Saul) yet this decree being unknown to us there is a door of
hope opened for sinners yet to come to God for though the day of death be
determined yet who does neglect the use of means to preserve life? and page 93
he says O thou poor soul would thou repent and pray? would thou change
thy life if there were any hope? why, if there be no more grace in thee then
this, and thou do pray and repent well as thou can: God cannot but hear
thee. For he is an immutable God who has styled himself a God hearing prayers.

And from reverend Mr. Bridges who in his lifting up of down casts among many
other things says -- Did you ever read in all the book of God that ever God
did forsake a man finally that was sensible of it, and complained thereof,
simply for its self, and thinks the time long and tedious till the Lord comes
again (...) such a one he concludes in the word of the Lord is not fallen
totally or finally.

So likewise when under those horrible instigations to curse, to swear, to
blaspheme, and in the very act of duty or speaking of the blessed God,
injections to the contrary. How has the Lord graciously met with me and
supported me by the hearing and reading of the labors of Gods faithful
Ministers, Mr. Bolton in his comforting of afflicted Consciences, who tells us
these are not ours but Satan's sins, and will in the day of reckoning be laid
upon his score, and some comfort have I met with from Mr. Baxter in his thirty
two directions and others.

Under all my troubles God directed me to one or other of his Servants, who by
speaking or writing gave much ease to my troubled mind.

Above all others I am bound to thankfulness to God for the Comfort I received
from two, one is that learned blessed man Dr. Th. Goodwin, in his Child of
Light walking in darkness. The abundance of refreshment that I found from those
ten directions of his in that book was such, as I am much bound to bless God
for him.

The other is Mr. Buroughs in the book I mentioned before, where especially
these things were a great stay to me.

1. That God tenders himself to all to whom the Gospel comes in a Covenant of
Grace and not of works. 2. All the good that God does his Creatures, especial
in relation to eternal Life, is for his Names sake. 3. There is no
qualification in the Creature, made by God himself, as a^ condition for
believing. 4. That it is the great glory of God, and the design that he has in
this world, to glorify himself in the way of his free grace, and faithfulness
toward the Children of men. 5. That it is as delightful to Jesus Christ to
have the end of his death fulfilled as it is to us to have our own Salvation.
6. God leaves his own people sometimes without sense of his love for many good
ends. 7. God has more glory in saving a poor Soul then in casting him off.
When such a one comes in to God, freely confessing his sins, judging himself;
God has more glory in the salvation of him then in his damnation.
That Sermon likewise of Mr. Bridges, Christ in travel, helped me much against
my fears of Apostasy, and falling away, where Use 2. p. 141. he says, if
Christ will see the travel of his Soul and be satisfied, here we may see the
reason why we cannot be satified with that opinion of the Saints Apostasy. This
also being unsatisfactory to the heart of Christ, can a man be satisfied to see
one of his members torn from him? can a man delight in it or endure it? surely
then this Doctrine of falling from grace must needs be false if Christ
travelleth for the salvation of his people, he shall see their perseverance.

Thus have I acquainted you with part of the great advantage I found in making
use of the labors of the Ministers of Christ, oh love them, lay out for them,
look upon them as the gift of Christ for the good of you, and the Lord enlarge
them, and multiply such laborers in his harvest.

To conclude what I have upon experience to say to thee, poor sad soul; you
have seen how touch misery I have felt, and how the Lord drew me out of it,
therefore look upon thy condition as a mourner in Sion, Is. 61.3. chap. 33.18.
to be much better then the most jovial sinner in Sion, let those dreadful
chastisements of God laid upon you by the hand of Satan, either in the way
spoken of, before, or in any other whatsoever, never pass with you as
sufficient cause of doubting of the love of God. Learn to make a difference
between matter of humilliation and matter of doubts and desperation. 2 Cor.
12.7. 1 John 3.23. Satan's buffetings may well beget humblings in a Paul. But
cannot dissolve the Commandment of believing in the name of the Son of God. Be
thy troubles what they will remember. The Mount is the place of vision. When
you are at the highest top of troubles you are nighest to deliverance. Genesis
22.14. In the Mount will the Lord be seen, has been a fruitful place of
comfort to me often in my distress.

Thou will keep him in perfect peace whose mind is stayed on thee; because he
trusts in thee. Trust ye in the Lord for ever: for in the Lord Jehovah is
everlasting strength Is. 26.3, 4. For the vision is yet for an appointed time
but at the end it shall speak and not lie: though it tarry, wait for it,
because it will surely come, it will not tarry. Hab. 2.3. There has no
temptation. 1. Cor. 10.3. God shall tread Satan under your feet shortly. Romans
16* 20. It is good that a man should both hope and quietly wait for the
salvation of God, Lam. 3.26.

2. (...) word or two to you that have been in deep waters, at Hell Gates, and
yet are delivered. Let me put you in remembrance of these two or three duties.

1. Oh see that you engage your hearts unto the Lord! I will love the Lord with
my whole heart. I will love him dearly. Ps. 103.1, etc. Bless the Lord oh my
soul and all that is within me bless his holy name. Bless the Lord oh my soul
and forget not all his benefits, who forgiveth all thine iniquities who heals
all thy diseases, who redeemeth thy life from destruction who crowns thee
with loving kindness and tender mercies. Oh pray that your love to him who has
delivered your souls from the snares of cruel death, and pulled your feet out
of the miry Clay where there was no bottom may increase and abound more and
more. Josh. 24.14, Sincere affections and dissobedience are the only returns
that God looks for. Deny not these in the highest degree.

2. Give up your lives for the Lord. Be content he shall dispose of them in the
way he knows best for his glory. If he shall call you forth to suffer death
for a testimony of your love to him and the Gospel of his Son, think it not too
much for him. Well may thou undergo ten thousand natural deaths, were it
possible, for Jesus Christ's redemption from the hands of thy spiritual enemies
is cause enough for thee to serve him without fear of what man can do unto
thee. Look upon thy past deliverance as things never, no never to be forgotten,
nor sufficiently to be required by thee.

3. Take care, now thou have found him whom thy soul loves, oh take care for
his undisturbed residence.

You know what it is to want the comforting presence of Jesus Christ, let
those, who know not the terrors of the Lord, and the fearful consequents of his
forsakings, venture the displeasure of him, by their slighting of his precepts,
and slothfulness in his paths, but let not us do so, we that know what it is to
be thrown into the depths of horror, and how hard, as well as sweet, is our
recovery thence, oh let not us dare to sleep upon the top of the mast, but
rather keeping fast hold upon our beloved by the hand of Faith, beg of him that
he would not depart out of our hearts, lay a strict charge over all the cares
and comforts, and companies, and conditions of this life, Canticles 2.7. by the
Roes and by the Hindes, that they stir not up nor awake our Love until he
please.

4. If the Lord Jesus Christ shall please for his own glory to walk a while out
of your hearts again, if he shall at any time withdraw the comforts of the Holy
Ghost, loose not in Satan again by unbelief, distress not your selves overmuch
by giving way to the least mistrust as if he would never return, Ps. 77. and
more remember his loving kindness and his works and wonders of old, think, he
never goes away but when it is expedient for us, Joh. 16.7. and having already
sealed us by the holy spirit of promise, given us eye salve, enlightening our
understandings in the knowledge of his love, whereby we are persuaded our names
are written in the book of Life, R^m. 11.29. The gifts and calling of God are
without repentance, 2 Cor. 1.10. He that has delivered may well be trusted,
that he will do so again, John 10* 29. No Man or Devil can take us out of the
hands of God, John 13.1. Whom be loves he loves to the end, Phil. 1.6. He
that has begun a good work will carry it on to the day of Christ.

5. You have been delivered from the violence of temptations, but remember that
yet we carry about us such sinful natures, the Fruits of our first Parents
transgression, that would again put up his head against God and his most
righteous Laws, yea and take part with Satan against him, and our selves too,
there is yet an unregenerate part, the remnant of the old Adam remaining in the
best and holiest of m^n, after all the forty years temptations of Israel in an
howling wilderness and when they are brought into the Land of rest, Judge. 3.
yet there the Amorite will be found, nothing but dissolution will fetch the
leprosy of natural corruption out of our earthly tabernacles, Lev. 14.45. and
especially will this cursed corruption annoy us with offers to do the same
things, that Satan before he was dispossessed would have done, my experience
tells me some of the old filth still sticks behind. The wise God will have it
so, that the vileness and greatness of our old sins, might not be forgotten,
that we may be poised down with humility, and put a longing after natures
dissolution, till which time sin (now twisted with our nature) will not be
removed, this remnant of the old man, with its stirrings cannot choose but be
an heavy burden to the new, Romans 7.24. it is such a body, that it made the very
soul of a Paul groan and cry out for a deliverance, Ex. 17.16. This ^malck God
has sworn it, that he, will have war with it for evnr.

As good Soldiers of Christ our Captain, let us be persuaded to hold on our
war against this party of corruption yet abiding in our natures, and in so
doing, we have the comfort of these ensuing considerations.

1. That this remainder of cursed nature, though it be not utterly destroyed
yet shall it not have dominion over us, so as to bring forth Fruits unto death,
or to be charged upon our persons to condemnation.

Romans 8 2. For by Christ our Lord we are dischargea and set at freedom from the
Law of sin and death, being under the Covenant of grace, we have received the
spirit of life and power, even that blessed spirit that raised our Lord Jesus
Christ from the dead, which has quickened us and put life and power into us, in
a good measure enabling us to crucify the flesh with its affections and lusts,
Gal. 5.24. so that its dominion is taken away though its life be continued for
a season.

2. And it is but for a season that its life is continued in us, the war will
not hold always, there is a time coming when we shall be delivered from this
bondage of corruption into the glorious liberty of the sons of God, Romans 8.19.
etc. 23. and not only we but those very Creatures, the Heaven and the Earth
shall be set free from that bondage of corruption, which lies upon them by
reason of the sin of man, in that day we shall be made like unto the Son of God
in our measure.

The transfiguration upon the Mount seems to be a resemblance of that glory,
wherein Jesus Christ shall appear (as he was the Son of David) when he shall
come to take the Kingdom unto himself, then shall the poor benighted Sons of
the day welcome in that joyful morning with a new Song and Psalms of tryumphant
victory in their hands, Rev. 15.3. then shall all the enemies of our Souls be
totally subdued, and even this Amalek of inbred corruption, against which we
have been fighting with the sword of the Spirit many a weary day, Numb. 24.20.
I say then this Amalek the first of the nations that warred against Israel (our
souls) his end shall be that he be destroyed for ever.

3. Such a sense of sin remaining in us, as hinders our rejoicing in
expectation of the future glory, or joyful thanksgiving for our present
deliverances is not our duty, but our sin.

God will not be robbed of his glory under a pretense of mourning for his
dishonor as soon as God the Father has delivered us from the power of
darkness and translated us into the Kingdom of his dear Son. Col. 1.12, 13.
It Is then our duty to give thanks to him who has made us meet to be partakers
of the inheritance among the Saints in light.

He that reads the book of the Acts and considers how the holy Ghost takes
notice of the affection of joy in the converts of those times, Act. 2.46. Act.
8.8.39. Act. 9.31. Act. 16.34.
may readily conclude that it is as natural for babes in Christ as soon as they
are born to rejoice, as it is for others to cry. The life of a real Christian
should be a continual holy day. And therefore let us keep the feast according
to that of our Apostle. 1 Cor. 5.8. And follow the advice of that holy man Mr.
Downam to that purpose in his Christian warfare (who himself was not only
troubled with this old man, but also with blasphemous suggestions, as he
himself told me many years past when I went to seek comfort in my condition.)
Let us submit, lie down, acquiese, and be satisfied in the wisdom and goodness
of God whose providence is every where and over rules all things in Heaven and
earth for his own glory and his peoples good. And rejoicing in our hopes of
glory, and interest in all the blessed promises of the word of God: so go on in
our Christian warfare with good courage, not feating men or Devils, as to
perform out duties toward God, and reach out after the end of our faith the
salvation of our souls. Christ in his word has given us good assurance of our
obtaining this. In fidelity is the Devils greatest engine to destroy our
rejoicing of hope. Would the Lord but go on with his Conquest over unbelief,
and raise our faith into a more sollid substance of things hoped for, Heb.
11.1. And a clearer evidence of things not seen. Would he but teach us how to
live by faith, how rich a living would it afford us? how sweetly might we in
the contemplation of the truth and worth of that promised glory triumph over
all adversities.

That state wherein poor man shall behold the face of the blessed God in such a
fullness that the glorious Angels Heb. 2.16. are not capable of the like (man
who has a nearer relation to Jesus Christ has also a nearer standing to the
very throne then the blessed Angels themselves. Rev. 4.4. etc.) is so
transporting so ravishing in the foresight thereof that we may well take up
that triumphant song.

Oh Death where is thy st^ng oh Grave where is thy victory, 1 Cor. 15.55.

Behold what manner of love the Father has loved us withal that we should be
called the Sons of God. Now are we the Sons of God. And it does not yet appear
what we shall be: but we know that when he shall appear we shall be like him:
for we shall see him as he is.

Oh! the length the height the breadth and depth, the fullness of that love of
Christ that passes knowledge.

Now I come to the third sort of Professors and they are such as have never
been greatly ^roubled: who though they have been scared and lightly touched by
the Arrows of the Almighty: yet cannot say they have stuck fast ^ithin them,
and that the Poison thereof ^ath at any time drunk up their spirits. To ^hese
my request is that they would suffer a lord of warning from one who has more
^^eply drunk of the Cup of trembling. That ^^up which his Lord and master drank
to the ^ottom, that so in a little he might be con^^rmable to his head and
having obtained ^ercy might be found faithful.

The main of all I have to say to such is ^^at my hearty prayer to God for them
is, ^^at they all may be strengthened with all might according to his glorious
power unto all patience and long suffering with joyfulness. Col. 1.11. That
they may walk worthy of the Lord in all well pleasing. Remembering.

1. The gentler dealings of the Lord with them then with others, calls for
hearty acknowledgement of thanksgiving. Judge. 8.16. He might have taught you
with the briars and thorns of the Wilderness, whereas he has led you with the
gentle cords of a man, Hos. 11.4. Spared you as a man spares his Son that
serves him. Mal. 3 17. He has made you free without serving a long and hard
Apprenticeship under the yoke of bondage. He has gone an easier way with yo^
then the way of the Philistines, Exodus 13.17 you have not seen war as others
have done Let the miseries of me and others provok^ you to thankfulness and
fruitfulness in ever^ good work.

2. Remember your condition is not yet (...) safe, your danger is not so far
over, but th^^ you have need of caution, your great ca^^ should be that your
latter end might be pea^^ Prize the peace of your Conscience, a^^ while you are
in with God, oh! keep in wi^^ him still, if you let sin in, you drive God (...)
of your souls. And when he is gone, all yo^^ peace is gone, all your comfort of
hope is gone too. A privation of the light of his countenance will beget a
dismal night of horror, sin will tumble you down from your Heaven of Communion
with God, and then the valley of the shadow of death will be your walk, and
Hellish fiends shall frighten you there with continual alarums of your falling
lower into the depths of Hell. And how long it may be thus with you who can
tell? oh! how will you be able to bear such changes as these are? learn of me,
and others in like case, and be wise? think not that your present favor of men
or gain of Silver and Gold, or flattering pleasures of vanity will make you
satisfaction for the harms done by sin. Or that the remembrance of these will
ransom you from, or purchase you the least gentler usuage under, the hand of
terror. Your profession is no privileged condition. Sin can find out the
sinner even when he has taken Sanctuary in Sion. Is. 33.14. Nothing but
righteousness can deliver from death. Prove. 10 2. Be found any where or doing
any thing else and be sure your sin will find you out. Number. 32.23.

Those things that appear to thee to be plainly sinful, or of the lawfulness
whereof thou make a doubt; peremtorily refuse the one, and patiently forbear
till thou art well satisfied in the other; or e^se thou playest the Bedlam in
hazarding the light of Gods countenance.

Hazarding? nay, if thou belong to God, sure, sure suffering one time or other*
and in some degree or other under the sad forsakings of the peace of thy own
Conscience, and the grieved blessed spirit thy Comforter. Near relation to God
will not carry thee an inch the further from his sore chastisements. Judgment
begins first at the house of God, 1 Pet. 4.17. You only have I known of all the
Families of the Earth -- therefore will I punish you for all your iniquities,
Am^ 3 2.

Christians advanced to greater heights of gifts and grace then others, Mat.
11.23. had need look better to their standing then others, for if they fall it
will be lower then others. Such falls though it may not break the neck 'twil be
sure to break the bones, Psalm. 51.8. He said well but not all. That it is better
for a man to loose a whole estate then to tell one lie. But I say were the
whole world a man's own estate twere better bid an everlasting adieu to it all,
let Wife and Children fare as they will; then provoke one single God to be gone
in his displeasure. If he goes I partly can tell you what that is; it is that
which I am not able to tell you for the greatness of its misery. This is thy
Benjamin. If thou art bereaved of this, then thou art bereaved indeed. Genesis
43.14.

3. Be ready to speak and spend, to say and do, all that you can for God.

Your goodness cannot extend to God but there are Saints in the Earth, Ps.
16.2. let these be to thee the excellent ones, in these take thou thy whole
delight. By liberal things you may be made to stand Isa. 32.8.

God will not cast them out of his favor who have room in heart and house to
entertain his Ministers cast out of all for Conscience sake. Even Moab might
look for a stability of his throne upon these terms. Isa. 16.4, 5.
Unmercifulness to the Ambassadors of Christ will turn his love into
displeasure. Luke 10 16. He that troubles Kingdoms for unkindnesses showed to
these, Ps. 105.15. will not surely be behind with thee for thy love to them.

To see godly rich men miserable in the da^ of their bretherens calamity is
such a fight that the times of the Apostles had not the like. Acts 4.32. Nor
can disability to spare for such uses be well aledged, while needless,
feasting, unnecessary attendance costly apparel, rich presents to great men
purchasing of Lands are found among them. Lets take a measure of the greatness
of this sin by the proceedings of the day of judgment; Where sins of omission
make up the whole indictment. Mat. 25.41. etc. Christ in his Ministers, Christ
in his members, may be poor, and sick, and in Prisons, and in want of
Clothing. Slight him now, and it shall not be forgotten.

You may hear of it when you would not, consider well, has the long enjoying
of the Gospel taken away the sweetness of it? should it not be as sweet to you
now as ever it was? are not we as much concerned in it, as they were in
primitive days? expect we not now as great rewards as they did then? and have
we not as good security for the rich returns of such disbursments as ever they
had? a Disciple of Christ, a Prophet of God, though but so nominally, melted
into wants and misery by the scorching beams of persecution, is excellent water
to cast your bread upon. Eccles. 11.1. When harvest comes you shall see what
mighty Sheaves, what full measures, heaped and pressed down your small expense
of bread-corn will amount unto. He that cannot give a little how will he be
able to sell all? Mark 10.21. Let him that would have a Heaven of peace within,
here, and peace above for ever, think of these things.

4. Pray. oh! pray, and add to prayer watchfulness that he enter not into
temptation. Mat. 26.41.

Fervent Prayer can do much with God: and watching conduces much to the fervor
of our prayers. Watchfulness will prevent the terror and danger of sudden
surprises. It gives a seasonable alarm to the sleepy soul to stand to its
arms. He that knows what it is to pray in the Spirit, Ephesians. 6.18. and how, to
watch thereunto with all perseverance, has such a jewel of grace that will
preserve all other graces safe. This is the Lifeguard while our King walks
in his Galleryes. Cant. 7.5. It Is that which (though it cannot absolutely free
the soul from the plots of the World Flesh and Devil) will enable it to
withstand them all, Ephesians. 6.13. and stand fast after all. This is truly the Wine
of Angels and Poison of Devils.

In brief then. Remember that you never suffer Satan to prevail with you for
the laying aside of this blessed duty, he will set hard upon you for that end.
Unworthyness of Person, want of comfort, weakness of faith, unsuccessfulness
after all one thing or other will the Devil plead to make thy tempted soul
restrain prayer before God. If he can but bring thee to let fall thy hands, he
knows what will be the issue of the battle. Amalek did not more surely prevail
against the Armies of Israel then he will against thee. Exodus 16.11. Oh! then
pray, and pray again, lead us not into temptation. My woeful experience bids me
tell you that it is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God. It
may be by these means you may be kept from entering into the terror of
temptation.

Having now ended all that I have to say to those who, in sincerity making
profession of the ways of God, are called by his name. My tender love to the
glory of God, the God of my salvation, and my compassion of the souls of poor
impenitent sinners puts me upon an adventure to write a few more words. Who
knows but some one or other of these may read what I have here written, and
in so doing see the case they stand in to be an evil case. And what cause they
have (hearing what the sense of sin has wrought in others) with all their
might and main to turn back from their eager persuit of perishing pleasures and
^^y to Jesus Christ's Person, promises, and paths, to save themselves from the
wrath that is to come.

Poor sinners! be not offended at the name, I could be willing to purchase a
better title for you, even the worst of you all, with the expense of prayers
and tears, I reproach you not while I thus bespeak you, nor factiously and
proudly would I insinuate as if I or any upon nature's account deserved a
better name: or as if different sentiments about lower matters in Religion were
a sufficien^ cause to give out such wide distinguishing titles, alas! it is no
such matter, I mean no other then such, whose sense and feeling of the heavy
weight of sin has been so little that to this day they have not seen any cause
to cry out of their danger, and amend their doings, and with all speed and
diligence to enquire for, and accept of salvation offered by Jesus Christ in
the ministry of the Gospel. Such as these, who (making light of the matters,
the weighty matters of God and of their own souls, of the Scriptures, of
Heaven, of Hell, of sin, and of holiness, of death, and of judgment) can
content themselves with such and so much Religion as will secure them from the
lash of humain Laws, and the disquieting guilt of a natural Conscience; in the
mean while spending their precious hours and days, and years, in the
unprofitable works of darkness, serving diverse lusts and pleasures, using the
members of their bodies as servants to all unrighteousness, living in the lust
of uncleanness, adding drunkenness to thirst, speaking all manner of evil of,
and despightfully using, and persecuting such whose lives are not of the same
fashion, thinking it strange that an^ should not run into the same excess of
riot with them, and least by the reproofs dropping from the lips and lives of
such, their sinful pleasures should fail them, they make new sins, such as God
never made, and search out iniquities, accomplish a dilligent search, that
somewhat might be had to throw in the faces of faithful reprovers if there be
no more then the matters of their God, it is these I mean.

To you Poor sinners, would I fain speak a few words. Oh! bless God that you
are yet in a capacity to hear, and that your case and condition is not quite
hopeless. Yet, whilst you live, we may hope that the filthyest Adulterer the
most swinish drunstard, prophanest sinner may obtain mercy. You have a
Peradventure left you yet, 2 Timothy 2.15. that God may give you repentance to the
acknowledging of the truth, and that yet, you may recover your selves out of
the snare of the Devil. Yet, you may avoid the most sure and fore rewards of
ungodlyness, unconceivable dread and horror, which first or last he will power
out in merciless measures upon poor souls that now are Prisoners at large; and
(methinks they should have little heart to hold up their heads a day would they
but seriously consider how as birds in a string) they are taken Captive by
Satan at his will.

Let me beseech you for the sake of whatsoever is dear to you that you would
but heartily believe, consider seriously, and remember

1. That all that I have here written concerning the dreadfulness, and
confounding horror arising from my apprehensions of Gods displeasures is true;
it is not a thing feigned, but really felt, by me. You think, it may be, that
God cannot be angry; or if he be that you can stand under the ftowns of him,
and that your tranquillity and present quiet in the ways of your ignorance, and
dissobedience, is a Mountain that cannot be removed. But alas! you are utterly
mistaken. A League with death and Hell is not to be trusted, Is. 28.15, 18. the
Devil will break his promise with you one time or other, after his fair
promises he will fall fowlly upon you. You think to be troubled for sin, is
nothing; to have Satan and Conscience let loose upon a man, and the Lord
withdraw himself from such a soul all the while, you think these things are
nothing, and such thoughts make you venture to hold on in your evil ways: and
it is hard to drive them out of you. The Law and the Prophets cannot do it
easily. If you believe not these the testimony of Dives arising from the dead
would be doubted to be a mere delusion, Luke 16.31. you have had my experience
delivered you in fasthfulness. I have certainly found that Gods permission of
Satan to rage upon the Soul, is a woe, then which there is not a worse on this
side Hell.

2 Consider that though what terror I have already felt was intollerably
great; yet that which impenitency and impiety will bring upon poor sinners
hereafter will be incomparably more.

This at present is but whipping with Rods, that with Scorpions. This but a
painted Fire, that a real burning Fire. This has its mixtures of mercy, that is
without mixture. This is a state of darkness, but that utter darkness. Mas.
8.12. This departure of God from the soul may be in love, but that is go ye
cursed. Chapter 25.41. This is made sad by the presence of the Devils, that
infinitely worse, for there are none but Devils to torment, no Saint, no Angel,
to give the least ease. Here time may make a better change, Eccles. 9.4. and
hope may be a good anchor to preserve the Vessel from present shipwreck: but
there eternity admits not the least spark of hope that things shall ever mend,
and desperation shall so press down the sufferer, that nothing but allmighty
power can bear him up in his beirg under such eternal dread and pains.

3. When terrors begin to arise the height of all your present confidence
cannot keep you up, under the weight of sin set upon the Conscience do but
consider how have the mighty fallen? those who have been bold as Lions,
committing iniquity with greedyness, not afraid to put affronts upon God or
men, speak loftily, setting their mouths against Heaven and their tongues
walking through the Earth; Ps. 72.3. insomuch that the confidence of, them has
almost made a David diffident to observe it, and yet how are these brought into
desolation as in a moment? they have been utterly consumed with terrors. v. 19
ah poor weak man thou will never be able to stand under that burden of guilt
which sank the mighty Angels that excel in power from Heaven into the
lowermost Hell. That which makes the whole frame of nature, the whole Creation
to groan, alas how will it squeeze thee into confusion? that which the Creator
the mighty God was found able only to bear, and in bearing it, was not able to
forbear crying out my God, my God, why have thou forsaken me* Mat. 27.46.
Think thou that this will not be too hard and too heavy for thee? poor
finner! oh think of this in time, now thou are confident and bold to commit sin
but what will thou do in the end thereof? will the boldness of thy countenance
and the height of thy confidence abide the same for ever? where is the courage
of Cain? the confidence of Judas? the craft of Achitophel? and the stout hearts
of thousands from the days of Cain? what is become of all these? how have these
sturdy Oaks been when terror came, but as stubble before the wind, and as Chaff
that the storm drives away? are you stronger then these.

4. Are not your sins as great as mine, and others of whose miseries you hear?
are not your sins as great and as many as ours have been? you think (it may be)
to fare better because you presume you are better then those whom God has
plagued with his displeasure. If the sayings of Christ may be your guide, he
tells you nay, Luke 13.3. but except you repent you shall all likewise perish.
And moreover let me tell you that if gross grievous and scandalous open
sinners, or secret falsehearted hypocrites were the only sufferers in this
kind; the whole book of Job, the 73. Psalm, and other places of Scripture might
have well been spared out of our Bibles. Oh no! I for my own part must needs
say my sins, my unthankfulness, my unprofitableness, the great unsuitableness
of my heart and life to the purity required by the Law and love of my blessed
Redeemer are such, as that I have had, and still have abundant cause to lay my
mouth in the dust and to cry out unclean, unclean, my spot in regard of these
has been very grievou^, my grapes have had too too much sowerness in them to
put my teeth an edge as indeed they have done: but yet (to the glory of the
free grace of God) my spot has not been the spot of the wicked. Your Vine has
been the Vine of Sodom and your Grapes are Grapes of Gall their clusters are
bitter. Your drunkenness Whoredoms hellish Oaths Cursings, and the like sins
have been such as make it wonderful that the Almighty should spare you and
punish such as mourn under their far lesser sins. I do not justify my self
thereby though I must declare I know none of those things by my self. Only I
repeat the question to thee again. Can thou think God will always pass by
thee unpunished seeing be has not spared such as desire to fear his name? oh!
no he will not, be confident, he will not. If he distribute sorrows in anger,
if he puts his own willing people on the rack of an accusing tormenting
Conscience. Where oh! where shall the ungodly and the sinners appear.

5. Or do you think that it is not sin nor the Devil that are the cause of all
those sad things that are here related: but a mere mellancholly distemper of
body? do you think they are but the issue of a mellancholly brain, and no more.

Briefly to this give me leave (poor sinner) to say.

1. For my self, if these two things speak any thing in the case, then surely
thou ar^ quite out in thy conjectures. For.

1. When I had my troubles of mind growing upon me. I often used the means
appointed for prevention or correction of that distemper and yet my condition
was the same still.

2. When deliverance came it came suddenly. Such changes as I have felt from
midnight to midday without any interposal of twilight demonstrates my
distemper to have been occasioned by another hand, and for other causes then
that of mellancholly.

2. For others; I go not about to deny but that it is possible and ordinary to
meet with persons, whom the hand of mellancholly has marvellously dejected,
Learned experienced men have said so. And to say otherwise (in me) may well
pass for presumptions folly. Only I would express my fears least it should
prove in the ears of carnal men a Doctrine provoking to unwarrantable mirth:
and in the ears of weak troubled believers an impediment to faith. I fear while
good men ascribe so much of the troubles of our souls to the humors of our
bodies, the care of the body should exceed that of the soul, and thereby the
glory of God and quiet of our own hearts should at once be dangerously
assaulted. Sure it is not for nothing that a deep silence lies over all the
holy Scriptures as to this matter; that many are the troubles of righteous, and
that those troubles lie most about the heart, one design of the Holy Ghost in
those writings is to set forth; examples of which are abundant there; but not
the least hint at any time as if the black and bitter waters of a disturbed
mind sprang from the jarring humors of the flesh. Gods anger for sin (either
by way of dissertion of comfort: or infliction of temptation, by permission of
Satan to tyranize over the soul) are the only causes of every trouble; the
hiding of his face begets trouble: Ps. 30.7. the causing of that to shine again
is the only remedy. Job, 34.29. This is all the wisdom of God has thought fit
to publish. Ps. 4 6, 7. If we must needs say more, lets look to our inferences.
Whatever hand this gross and heavy humor may have in the troubles of the soul,
let the finner (willing to hold fast his iniquity by refusing to entertain hard
thoughts of it) but plainly answer these things; thou think that melancholy
is the cause of troubles.

1. What is the cause why any man is thus troubled with melancholy? is it not
because of fin? is it not the conceived anger of an all-powerful God? or if the
party troubled find no sense of divine displeasure within himself, yet who but
an Atheist will deny, the wounds made upon the natural spirits or those made
upon the spirit, to be both of them a punishment for sin? as nothing proves a
Deity more plainly then the argument which profane Atheists most urge against
it: so nothing more sets forth the deadly nature of sin, or the dangerous
condition of the sinner then that very thing which is so much in use for their
extenuation Atheists tell us there had been no talk of a God in the world if it
had not been for fear; 'twas fear say they that found out and founded the
notion of a Deity, whereas there had been (to speak truly) no such thing as
fear if first there had not been a God. In like manner argue poor sinful
sinners, there had been no talk of spiritual malladies had it not been for
melancholy spirits, no distress of the mind but by distemper of the humors;
and who begat this blackness of distempered humors? is not the hand of sin in
all this! sure 'twil be granted; and if so I Will speak a word to thee anon.

2. Thou think a wounded Conscience is but a melancholy conceit; sure thou
do not think that it is so in all. Give me leave to enquire what do you think
was that which troubled Adam in she day that he eat of the forbidden Fruit?
what was that which un-Paradiced him so soon? he hast^es away to the thickets
for an hiding place, Genesis 3.7, 8. lays hold on the broadest Leaves he could
meet with for a covering of his nakedness. What aileth him now? is he not in
Paradise still, as he was before? what makes this sudden alteration? why so
fearful in the cool of the evening, who in the dawning of the past morning knew
not what did belong to such a state? some mighty chance must needs be in him
for there was none without him. All things about him were the same, but he
himself was not. No external abatement of the pleasures of sense was here as
yet to be found. The ear had the same melody of the Choristers of the Woods for
delight as it had before. The mouth the same rarity and variety of pleasant
Fruits to feed upon, as it had before. The Flowers, and Herbs, and Spices did
as liberally send abroad their sweet Odours as they did before. The sight
wanted nothing of that compleatest beauty which clad the whole Creation. It had
the same ravishing Object, discerning Organ, and diffusing Medium, the eye saw,
the Sun shone, the creatures showed themselves as much as they did before* And
yet poor Adam could not take that delight in any thing as he took before oh
monstrou^. Oh astonishing change? what will not a guilty Conscience do? when
sin entered into the world what a death came upon all the comforts that were in
the world? and now what footsteps of melancholy can thou find here? it is
probable that he who came but newly warm out of his makers hands, so exactly
tempered as might have made him live a life of immortallity, should thus be
astonished and c^ushed into amazing dread upon the juddain and all by the
abounding of a melancholic humor! away, with this conceit. Rather think what
sad work sin will one day or other make upon the soul that makes not a speedy
return and an holy, timely resistance against it.

3. But still thou art of opinion that it is melancholy that does all this
mischief amongst the Sons of Adam, however it fared with their Father; well be
it so, but tell me then, do thou think that it is not possible for the^ to
fall into the like condition, is not the God with whom thou have to do the God
of nature as well as the God of grace, and therefore able to prohibit the
comfortable influence of, and suffer discords and disorders to arise in, both?
he is able to transform thee into a breathing Statue, to make this jollity and
roaring mirth, to hide its head, and hold its peace: while sorrow and sadness;
tribulation and anguish gnaw upon thine heart; he is able to cut off the spirit
of Princes Ps. 76.12. Kings cannot stand before him; they that have the
greatest advantages and privileges above all other men to solace themselves in
the abundance of Earthly delights: do little think how easily God can bring
them down without hands; he can smite thy heart with melancholy as well as
others; it is but for him to cross thee in the thing thou set thine heart
upon, and where art thou then? no further proof of this is needed then that of
Saul. A man considering to what, by whom, over whom he was raised that might
have as well expected a peaceable continuance in his great and unsought-for
Royalty as any other Monarch. And yet you find it otherwise, God for his
neglect of waiting patiently and believingly takes away his Kingdom; puts him
under the rule of an evil spirit; 1 Samuel 16.14. The spirit of the Lord departed
from him, and the evil spirit from the Lord terrified, troubled him. Thus you
see it is not easy to dally with sin, God can make the sinner quickly weary of
his life, by withdrawing the comfort and quiet of it, and filling it with so
much terror and horror, that there shall not be the least room left for
pleasures. I told you of Nebuchadnezzar, of Cain, Bellshazzer, and Judas, and
now of Saul; and you your selves may possibly remember what doleful examples
have been in your own knowledge: how those who spent their days in pleasure,
putting Heaven to defiance by their ungodly conversations, have some of them at
least been glad to be beholden to the Knife; to the Halter; to the Water; to
the Sword, to the Bullet, etc. to help their tormented souls out of their
weary bodies. So exquisite is that torture arising from an awakened Conscience,
that it puts the patient upon a miserable choice of ending his present agonies
with the adventure of an infinitely more worse, rather then abide the woe that
is therein. Poor man! such a thing as this can the hand of the Lord once lifted
up against thee bring upon thee, Thou think thou have little cause to fear
falling into the depths of terrors because resolved to avoid melancholy by a
merry life. Thou conceivest that to be the only cause of any ones distress, and
therefore not so much to be feared. But, were this true, alas^! thou have the
greater cause to sear. Thine enemy is within thy own bowels. As Physic does
not always preserve him who with the greatest care and constancy observes its
rules; but oftentimes apparently, brings to an untimely end: so carnal joys do
by inward peace, preserve it they may a while, but many times destroy it, by
provoking the just God to arise in his wrath. But however this is most certain;
corporal medicines cannot immortalize any man's person; nor can carnal mirth any
man's peace; assuredly God will break that peace that is not purchased by the
blood of Christ's Cross. One time or other (call it melancholy or what you
will) that fit of fears shall so closely follow the now presumptuous soul that
no carnal, no corporal cordial, nothing but a touch of that hand that cast
down, will be able to rid away. Such an evil that no King can cure but he whose
prerogative it is to kill and make alive out of whose hand none can deliver.
Deuteronomy. 32.29.

6. Remember judgment is already gone out against thee, the sentence wants
nothing but execution. The righteous Law of God which he is resolved to
magnify and make it glorious has already declared what shall be the end of
impenitency.

Bless not thy self with vain thoughts that God will spare any one for his
greatness or for his goodness, or his meanness, or for any thing but his own
Sons righteousness; and such also must not go free without their share of a
wounded Conscience. 4. especial hours of temptation. At the beginning of
Spiritual life; or the end of natural; or upon some heinous fin committed, or
heavy afliction let out; God usually at one of these times more or less, will
have every one to know by sad experience, that he himself is a righteous
sin-hating God: that the Devil is a malicious soul-hunting enemy: that they
themselves are in a miserable and forlorn condition without a multitude of
tender mercy no way to be had but by a Christ. The Law spares none, and the
Lawmakers is a God of truth that will keep up the authority, and honor, of his
own sayings to a little. Oh! take the book of the Law in your hands then, and
let the truth of that, strike such a terror into thee that may make thee to
betake thy self to the love and life of Christ with strong cries to save thee
from the terror of that wrath that is to come.

If you will not hearken unto me and will not do all these Commandments. And if
you shall despise my statutes, or if your soul abhor my judgments, so that you
will not do all my Commandments but that ye break my Covenant. I also will do
this unto you: I will even appoint over you terror. Levit. 26.14, 15, 16.

If there be among you a root that bears Gall and Wormwood, and it come to
pass when he hears the words of this curse, that he bless himself in his
heart saying I shall have peace though I walk in the immagination of my heart
to add drunkenness to thirst: the Lord will not spare him but then the anger of
the Lord and his jealousy shall smoke against that man and all the curses that
are written in this book shall fly upon him, and the Lord shall blot out his
name from under Heaven, and the Lord shall separate him unto evil. Deuteronomy, 29.19,
20. According to all the curses of the Covenant that are written in this book
of the Law.

Because I have called and you refused, I have stretched out my hand and no man
regards, but ye have set at naught my councels and would none of my
reproves, I also will laugh at your calamity, I will mock when your Fear
comes. When your Fear comes as desolation, and your Destrection comes as a
whirlwind, when Distress and Anguish comes upon you, etc. Prove. 24 etc.

How express is the holy Law of God? terror has an appointed season, distress
and anguish lie in the Womb of time, God has hi^ vials of wrath: tribulation
and anguish to powr^^^ upon enery soul of man that does evil. Romans 2. (...) and
who knows what a day may bring forth. Prove. 27.1.

7. How many a time has Hellfire flashed in thy face already, and yet thou
returnest not? I mean how often have thou found terror seizing upon thee at all
times which, yet, thou have shaken off again. I can hardly believe there is any
sinner in the world that now sins with the greatest delight and freedom, but
finds that his way is beset with dangers. I know not what may be said of such
who live in Countries where the word of God has not been familiarly taught,
the Apostle of the Gentiles seems to speak the same thing plainly concerning
them. Even they have witness bearing Consciences, and thoughts the mean while
accusing, or else excusing one another: Romans 2.15. The Devils servants have an
hard Apprentiship before they be made free. They sin with much bondage before
they come to sin with delight. The spirit of God has striven with them, their
own hearts have smitten them, secret warnings have they had within themselves,
oh! do not this thing which God hates! now what do these things mean? why,
they show you what is like, nay sure, to be the wages of sin; that God will not
be blamed when he shall sentence you to an eternal bondage under his heavy
wrath. He now would have frightened you out of your sinful state and you would
not; he sent his spirit to strive with you, and wring your weapons of sin out
of your hands, and you would not let them go; he gave you some tastes of the
Cup of trembling; shook the full bottles of wrath before thy eyes, which he
might have put to thy lips and held them fast there until thou had been
overwhelmed with terrors. He drew his bow, and whet his sword, that thou
beholding that, might prepare thy se^f to escape the prepared instruments of
death. So that poor sinner; thou art not an utter stranger to the things that I
am persuading thee to think off, the terrors of God. Some small appearances,
may be, have been sometime found in thee, upon commission of some extraordinary
sin. Well, see to it, this is the bitter root which, though thou labor to bury
it under the Earth a while, will without doubt spring up into a mighty tree
bringing forth the fruits of shame, pain, and death.

8. Thou go on merrily in the way of thine own heart laboring to suppress
thy sorrows at the first rising. Thou have no thoughts of thy latter end, which
thou smotherest not in their very beginning. But remember, though thou fear
not thy self now upon the Earth, but thy danger is better thought off in Hell.

Oh I think with thy self that the story of d^mned D^v^s was not penned from
the mouth of Christ in vain; Luke 16.27. etc. rather judge it to be, as indeed
it is, an argument fetched from Hell to carry thee over into the ways of Heaven.
All thy old acquaintance and relations who (once, while they were in the Land
of the living) spent their days in pleasure, drawing thee on to use the good
things that are now present; Wisd. 2.6. etc. Come on let us fill our selves
with costly wine and Ointments, and let no flower of the Spring pass by us. Let
us Crown our selves with Rose-bud, before they be withered; let none of us go
without his part of our jollity: let us leave tokens of our joyfulness in every
place; for this is our portion, and our lot is this. Let us oppress the poor
righteous man; let our strength be the Law of justice; let us lie in wait for
the righteous: because he is not for our turn, he is clean contrary to our
doings, he upbraideth us with our offending the Law: and objecteth to our
infamy the transgressings of our education. He professes himself to have the
knowledge of God, and he calls himself the Child of the Lord; he was made to
reprove our thoughts; he is grievous unto us even to behold: for his life is
not like other men's, his ways are of another fashion; we are esteemed of him as
counterfeit false come: he abstaineth from our ways as from filthyness; he
pronounces the end of the just to be blessed, and makes his boast that God is
his Father; let us see if his words be true, and let us prove what shall happen
in the end of him. For if the just man be the Son of God he will help him and
deliver him from the hand of his enemies let us examine him with
despightfulness and torture him that we may know his meekness and prove his
patience let us condemn him with a shameful death, for by his own saying he
shall be respected.

In contemplation, follow these boon Companions down to Hell, and you shall
find them of another mind, Wisd. 5.2. etc. There they shall be troubled with
terrible fear, and shall be amazed at the strangeness of the despised righteous
man's salvation so far beyond all that they looked for. And repenting and
groaning within themselves for anguish of spirit shall say. This was he whom we
had sometimes in derision and a Proverb of reproach we fools accounted his life
madness and his end to be without honor. How is he numbered among the Children
of God, and his lot is among the Saints? therefore have we erred from the right
way, we wearied our selves in the way of wickedness and destruction; what has
Pride profitted us? or what good has riches with our vaurting brought us? all
those things are passed as a shadow; and as a Post that hastes away: and as a
Ship that p^sseth over the waves of the water: or when as a bird has flown
through the air; or like an arrow shot at the mark, the trace of which cannot
be found: even so we as soon as we were born, began to draw toward our end, and
had no sign of virtue to show: but were consumed in our own wickedness.

By this time the stout hearts of sinners will be brought down, those whom the
evidence of truth (shining in the testimonies of the Prophets and Apostles)
could not convince or convert from their evil words and ways, sad experience
will work upon; if they cannot remove their pains, fain would they diminish or
prevent the increase of them. I pray thee Father Abraham that thou would
send to my Fathers house, for I have five brethren, lest they also come into
this place of torment, Luke 16.27, 28.

For shame let not Hell have more charity then earth, thy old companions in the
burning Lake would not by any means be troubled with the company of thee, whom
they engaged and encouraged in evil ways, they have fins and sorrows enough of
their own without the addition of others to weight them down into everlasting
confusion, here it may be some comfort (but an envious one) to have many
companion in the like misery but there (in Hell) it is nothing so.

Think then, shall those that have been in the subburbs of Hell by spiritual
desertions, or those who are really gone down thither never to return, wish me
to look to it that I never come into that place of torment, and shall not I
whom it most of all concerns, befriend my own precious soul with a serious
seasonable consideration of it is eternal danger? God forbid.

9. If thou will but now at last be willing it is more then possible thou may
be hid from or in the day of the Lords wrath.

Resolve with thy self fully that thou will now enter the ways that God, by the
Gospel of his Son, has chalked out for the ways of peace, and walk therein,
endure the troubles of an holy Life, shun not the spiritual worship of God;
think not the griefs arising from true repentance; or the troubles, God (by
wisdom and love) shall permit Satan to inflict upon thee, to humble thee for
thy past sins, or patient passing through many tribulations, to be sufficient
causes to quarrel with God or his ways, or worship, or people, think not, oh
think not God, the merciful God, the God who is Love, that he is an hard Master
venture thy talent abroad, act what thou have for the glory of the giver; thou
shall not complain of thy returns of mercies. They shall be sure, if not swift
mercies that holiness will entitle thee unto Is. 15.3. Thou may be sure where
grace leads the Van, glory and peace shall bring up the Rear* Is. 52.12.

Complain not that thou want power to turn thy self from sin to holiness;
from self to Jesus Christ; from nature to grace, till thou have faithfully
employed the power thou already have; if God has made thee willing, he will
not fail to make thee able, what is hard to the flesh, shall be easy and
delightful to the spirit, John. 14.6. the way thou walk in, gives Life, Heb.
10 20. a Life of duty, and a Life of glory it is a living way.

But dally not overlong, say not within thy self, shall I do it? must I leave
my old sins? when shall I begin? make no longer If's and And's, but be up and
doing. Behold now is the accepted time, now is the day of salvation, 2 Cor 6.2.
Let it alone till a little longer, and then a thousand world will not afford an
hiding place from the wrath to come.

10. I^ God has spared thee many years, not letting out his terrors upon thy
soul for sin, thou have no cause to flatter thy self, but to tear the more, the
longer terrors are in coming the more terrible when they come, and come they
will one time or other.

As comforts long withheld from the child of God, come in greater abundance at
the last so do terrors to the wicked. Lam. 3.27. In this sense it is good to
bear the yo ak^^n ones youth. Gods forbearance is no forgiveness, and greater
must that fire be whose fuel has been long in gathering, Romans 2.5. Thou
heapest up wrath against the day of wrath, long impenitency and hardness of
heart, will make thy pile of such a bulk, that when the breath of the Lord
shall kindle it, who can quench it? two vials are always filling together, the
one is here below, the other above, the vial of sin, and the vial of wrath, or
else the vessel of grace and the vessel of glory; look to it then, as these
vessels fill apace on earth, so do those in Heaven, unhappy is that Soul whom
God does not take off from his work of filling up the measure of sins, by
pouring out the vials of his wrath while it is yet little. You flee from the
pains of repentance to a merry Life, you do what you can to gag the mouth of
conscience to prevent your own disturbance made by its loud cries, lay aside
the Scriptures (as bankrupts do their books) least too much searching should
beget sadness, reproach the Godly man because he is your reproof, do by the
powerful painful Ministers of Christ (as the storied town of sluggards did by
their Smiths) drive them away that you may sleep the longer, or in plain terms
love darkness rather then light, least you should be reproved by the light, but
silly worm! what art thou doing all this while? thou fl^est from the Adder and
the Serpent will bite thee, thou fl^est from thy friend to an enemy; from the
Lancings of a Chyrurgeon to the deadly wounds of an adversary; from Gods way of
healing thee by gentlet means, from pricking of thy heart; till a dart strike
through thy Liver, in a word, all thy care is to shift off present, needful,
temporal, gentle correction and fatherly chastisement, but this is not thy way,
thou blessest thy self with thoughts that thy conscience shall never trouble
thee; but it will not be, the longer God forbears to handle thee thou should
fear the more. I have done what I could to employ the talent of my experience
for thy profit. I know a wounded conscience to be such a Guest that no man can
fall in Love with it, but rather then abide under an ignorant, flattering
seared conscience, let my portion be a wounded one, the next remove of this,
may be, (yea shall be in every child of God; from horror to healing, peace and
rest, whereas the other laboring to avoid wounds here will fall into woe and a
worse condition for ever.

Do as you like, since it will be no otherwise. I for my part shall pray
heartily with that good man, Lord here lance me! here burn me! here tear me? so
thou spare me for ever.

THE END.
HAving spoken something of Satan's stratagems in my preceding treatise I
intended to have spoken no more of that subject. But since the writing thereof
that wicked one Satan has made his attempts upon me again, endeavoring by his
old way to carry on his former designs, and as I have declared his fore-laying
the way for the catching of poor sinners before sin committed: I shall now
speak a word or two of his methods and devices in the pursuing the servants of
God after the Lord has showed great mercies, and has appeared unto them. To
the intent that I may further discover his wiles and temptations, whose malice
is great against God and the Sons and Daughters of men, but especially against
the Saints, and by reason of his great power, being an Angel (though of
darkness) he not only acts his own servants and slaves as he is the Prince of
the air, that rules in the Children of dissobedience, but acts upon Gods own
Children and servants that fear the Lord. As I shall give you several
instances, as namely upon Jobes three friends; (though godly men) how he did
act them to have persuaded Job to confess himself an Hypocrite, put it unto the
heart of Judas to betray his Master; ^e^ and Peter 100, to persuade his Lord
and Master that none of those things should be^^ll him at Jerusalem, which
Christ himself had foretold should come to pass: yea, how did he prevail with
the Scribes and pharisees to complot and agree with the Soldiers, to say his
Disciples came by night and stole him away, endeavoring thereby to have
concealed the Resurrection, and so to have blasted the work of man's Redemption.

I shall now speak a word or two more, of hingeneral practice upon the world,
for it is said the world lies in wickedness, therefore must needs be acted by
that wicked one, who ruieth in the Children of disobedience, (that is upon the
generality of the men of the world) The gate of Heaven being strait and few of
the Sons and Daughters of men go thither, (in comparison of the world) God
Almighty all along from the beginning, for the carrying on of his glory, and
building up his Church, has powered out his spirit upon the Sons of men making
some Prophets, and some Apostles, and that upon the meanest of men; as you see
the Prophets Herdsmen and men of mean occupations, and the Apostles Fisher men;
for you know it is said, not many noble, not many great, nor many wise after
the wisdom of the world, for by such mean men, the Lord does make his glory,
and wisdom, to be more conspicious, when these that are illiterate, and not
bred up at the feat Gamaliel, when such as these shall confound the wisdom of
the world, his glory shines more illusterously, (though without human^
learning, for having received the wisdom of the spirit are made wise to
salvation, discoruing not only the mysteries of man's redemption, but their own
particular salvation through Christ; which the wisdom of the world knew not:
And so the Prophets and Apostles have had the honor of being Pen men of the
Scripture; by the holy Ghrist: so that the words which they spoke, shall be the
standing word, by which the world shall be judged. But such is the present
condition of these times, that the Lord has given his spirit and excellent
gifts, to be improved for his glory: O, how duth the men of this world act^d by
Satan being indeed his main master piece, sets his own Instruments upon the
servants of God, by reproachful terms, and all other ways of mischief and in a
taunting deriding way of scorn, crying our; O you have the Spirit, O you are
Saints, and you can preach. Whereas surely it may be replied unto them if they
have not the spirit, they are none of Christ's, and if none of his servants then
you know what you are, if not Saints, then Davils, and without holiness, you
shall never see the Kingdom of God; And to others in a taunting manner you are
Preachers, surely if God has given out such gifts, though they do no^ take
upon them the ministry, yet such gifts may be employed to edification, and to
build up themselves and others in the faith of the Gospel: why then should this
be offensive, does not the Apostles say, if any may has a word of exhortation
let him speak.

Suppose that God has given such parts, for from him, comes every good and
perfect gift. Will you reproach the spirit of the living God, or obscure the
graces of God. O this indeed is a mighty Stratagem of Satan, whereby he does
much hinder the glory of God, what if God has given grace and gifts to mean
Persons as mean as Fisher men? I say to Glovers. Shoomakers, Tailors, Weavers,
and other Tradesmen, and why not as well as Fisher men, Herds men, and
Tentmakers? shall not their gifts be improved? It is true the Prophets and
Apostles, had the spirit given them in great measure, and shall not God give
unto such, as before mentioned in their measure? Alas, I would ask you by what
spirit do these men act, who are so industerous to improve, all their
knowledge, and utmost endeavors to walk exactly in all the Commandments of God;
having respect thereunto? shall such be reproached? But it may be objected that
these men have not human^ learning, they have not been at the Universities,
well then: It is grace that makes a man more excellent then his Neighbor, I do
not speak against human^ learning, it may be a good handmaid to Divinity, but
grace must be in the Chair, she must be Mistress: grace is the glorious
Ornament that makes the poor Saints shine in their conversations, and glorify
their Father which is in Heaven, when the men of great human^ learning
oftentimes, drown themselves in the ways of the world, and make their
condemnation to be the greater by it.

And by their scandelous lives bring dishonor to God, and the Gospel of Jesus
Christ, but the day draws near, when the Dragon, Beast, and false Prophet
with the Locusts of Hell shall be bound up together, and cast into that fire,
which burns with fire and brimstone, for the mouth of the Lord has spoken
it, when the feet of him shall be beautiful upon the mountains, that publishes
peace and salvation: saying unto Zyon thy God reigns; then shall the voice of
thy watchmen be heard, and lift up their voice, and shout together, for they
shall see him eye, to eye, when the Lord shall give deliverance to Zyon.

I shall give you one instance more, and that is of my self sines the Lord came
into my soul witnessing he had given me eternal sife, as I have declared and
set forth in my blesphemous thoughts, and when we shall take in hand the
performance of the duties of Gods worship, as singing of Psalms, reading the
word, and in Prayer, when we give the Lord his glorious titles, he is ready to
thrust the contrary unto our hearts, and plays the Devil indeed to contradict
what we say, and by the assistance of that unregenerate proceeding lines; He I
say Satan has so endeavored to do me all the mischief that possible he
could, not leaving a stone unturned that tended that way. And by reason of the
indwelling of sin the remainder of the curse for our first transgression, which
the best of Gods servants do carry about them, taking advantage thereof, being
like unto Tinder that is ready to take fire as soon as is touched, does cast his
fiery darts into our souls, part within us, our hearts are ready to opose every
truth of God, and so we have a daily warfare and great strivings, to keep our
hearts from consenting to his wicked injections, and much ado to bring them
into a subjection unto the truths of God, and like unto the Bird that has a
dog tied unto his leg, whereby he is hindered from flying up into the Air, and
so by his impressions left upon our souls, which is so weighty a burden that
unders us from soaring up to Jesus Christ by (...), and so vigilant is that
cursed enemy to the glory of God, and man's salvation that he goes about day
and night, seeking whom he may davour, and taking advantage of our weakness in
our sleeps, annoying us often with sinful dreams, then laying his delusions
upon us, who still pursuing me according to his former methods, lately in the
night, acted upon me in my sleep, as though I had been in the number of them,
who were dragged from the Tribunal seat to Hell, having received the sentance
of condemnation with the damned: and all this to the end and purpose, it
possible he could to have blasted that glorious mercy I received from the Lord
by the witness of his blessed spirit that God did rather take the advantage of
the greatness of my sins, for the magnifying of his mercy; rather then his
justice in my condemnation, and that I was of Abrakams family as I have
declared in my Narrative, (in the day: when the Lord gave me deliverance out of
his hand) But so impudent is this fiend of Hell, called by the word of truth a
liar from the beginning, and so the Father of lies, using his old trade toward
me, (with the subtlety of the old Serpent, and all this to daunt my faith) and
to have blasted the mercy which I received from my gracious God, who has laid
it upon my soul by such a witness, that I believe and know all the Devils in
Hell shall not be able to overthrow it. And that I may magnify and set forth
the goodness of God, I will take up the words of the Proph^t Isaiah, O Lord my
God, I will exalt thoe and praise thy name for ever for thou have done
wonderful things according to thy council of old, thou have been a strength to
the needy in his troubles, a refuge against the tempest, so that the blast of
the mighty was as a stor^^ against the wall, the Lord will destroy death, and
wipe away tears from the faces of his, and take of their rebakes: the Lord has
spoken it, and ^ill make it good, and in that day will men say ^^lo this is our
God, we have waited for him, yea in the way of his judgments he will save us,
and we will be glad in his salvation: He shall bring down the pride of Moab,
and lay their defensed walls as low as the dust, in that day, shall this song
be sunged, in the Land of Judah, we have a strong City, salvation shall God s^t
for walls and bulworks; Open ye the gates that the righteous Nation may enter
therein, for by an asured purpose will thou preferve in parfect peace for ever,
because they trusted in thee: Trust in the Lord for ever, for in the Lord
Jehovah is everlasting strength. Thou will make equal the righteous way of the
just, the desire of our souls is to the remembrance of thy name: for when thy
judgments are upon the Earth, the Inhabitants of the Earth shall learn
righteousness, even they that fear thy name, but the wicked will not do so, nor
behold the Majesty of the Lord: O Lord, they will not now behold thy hand, but
they shall see it, and be confounded with the zeal of thy people, but unto us,
thou will ordain peace, for thou kast wright all our works for us, thy dead men
shall live, and with my body shall they arise, even with my body, and shall
behold the King in his beauty. Awake and sing ye that dwell in the dust, thy
dew is as the dow of kerbs, and the Earth will cast out his dead, and in that
day of this power shall the coming in be, like the drops of dow that arise from
the Womb of the worning: Thou have drunk of the brook in the way, therefore
shall thy head be lifted in that day; for the Lord ^^m^^h out of his place to
visit the iniquity of the Inhabitants of the Earth, and the Earth shall
disclose his blood And to receive the Kingdoms for his inheritance and the
utmost parts of the Earth for his possession beirg Heir thereunto by donatian
of the Father, and ^h^n shall that good word of the Lord be ^^de good, that at
the ^^me of Jesus every knee shall bow, both in Heaven and Earth, and every
tongue shall confess that Jesus Christ is both Lord and King, to the praise and
glory of the Lord, for the Father has said, when he brirgeth his first
begotten again into the world, (...) all the Angels, and every Creature worship
him. And the glory of the Lord shall be revealed, and all flesh, shall see
together. O Sion that bring good tidings, get thee up into the Mountains, O
Jerusalem that bring good ridings, lift up thy voice with strength, be not
afraid, say to the Cities of Judah, behold your God, behold he comith with
power, and his arm shall rule, behold his Reward is with him, and his work
before him, and he shall feed his flock like a Shepherd, and gather his lambs
in his arms, and carry in his bosom, and guide them with them which are with
young. It is he that has measured the waters in his fists, covered the Heavens
with a span; comprehended the dust of the Earth in a measure, weighs the
Mountains in Scales, and the Hills in Balances. Who has instructed the spirit
of the Lord, of whom took he Counsel; Who instructed him, and taught uim in the
way of his judgments? Behold the Nation are as a drop of water, or counted as
the dust o^ the Balance; He takes up the Isles as a little thing, Lebanon not
sufficient for a fire, nor the beasts thereof for a burnt Offering: to whom the
will you liken God, he sits upon the Circle of he Earth, and the inhabitants
are as Grasshoppets; he spreadth out the Heavens like a Curtain, he brings
the Princes to nothing, and makes the Judges of the Earth as vanity, to whom
then will ye liken me says the holy one, lift up your eyes, and behold who
has Created all these things: he brings out his Armies by number, and
calls them all by their names: by the greatness of his strength nothing
fails. O ye suffering Saints, why say you my way is hidden from the Lord? and
my judgment passed over of my God; know you not, or have you not heard, that
the everlasting God, the Lords of the ends of the Earth, is neither weary nor
faints, but gives strength to him that faints: the young men shall faint
and be weary, but they that wait on the Lord shall renew their strength and
lift up their wings as the Eagle, they shall run and not faint. In that day
when the Mountains of the Lords house, shall be established above the Mountains
of the Earth for which glorious day I shall not cease to pray for.

O thou eternal being of beings, whose name is Jehovah; the Lord of Hosts, who
have made the Heavens; the earth, the great sea, and all the Creatures therein,
for the manifesting of thy blessed self in thine excellency, that so by the
displaying of thy glorious attributes, we might know thy power, wisdom, and
goodness, and fear thy great and glorious name, and truly Lord, thou had done
a most sweet work in the day wherein thou beheldst the works of thy hands, and
said they were very good, O the great engagements of love and obedience, thou
have laid upon us in that day, when thou had advanced us and made us not only
Lords of the works of thine hands, and for our use, putting all things in
subjection under our feet, but making us after thine own Image in righteousness
and holiness, whereby thou did enable us to the performance of worship and
obedience thou requirest at our hands. But O the great dishonor and Rebellion
we acted against thee our Creator in breaking thy holy Law, which thou gave
us to keep as the Trial of our obedience, and by giving more credit unto
Satan, in believing him and what he said, then the threatenings of thee our
God, and therefore O Lord how righteous wast thou in thy judgments upon them
and us their posterity, in delivering us into the hands of Satan, so that we
who came from their loins, came so deformed with that cursed Image of Satan,
that we are born thine enemies, children of wrath; and heirs of vengeance, and
bringing upon our selves a woeful necessity of sinning against thee. O Lord how
justly might thou laid upon our first Parents, and we their posterity, to
have born thy righteous punishments for ever without Redemption. But blessed
Lord thou did in judgment remember mercy in condescending to treat with our
Parents, letting out that gracious promise, That the seed of the woman should
break the serpents head, revealing mercy by a second Adam to come, and so
entering into a new covenant, (not of works) but of grace, that believing in
him, we should have eternal Life. O gracious Father how did thou magnify thy
mercy, over the works of thine hands, and did do a work more wonderful then
the Creation, in giving the eternal word, the brightness of thy glory, the
express Image of thy self, thine only begotten Son by an eternal generation, to
take upon him the nature of man, and to be born of the blessed Virgin that so
he might by an Hupostatical union, joy, the humanity to the diety, that so he
might be enabled to undergo the work of man's Redemption, a work so wonderful,
that all the Angels could not have devised, and into which they pry into with
admiration, that thereby he might make such an atonement, that might satisfy
for the sins of man to the utmost, and that whosoever believes in him should
not perish, but have Eternal Life. And now dear Father thou have given us the
word of reconciliation, the witness of thy truth, wherein thou have made known
to us, that thou have given us eternal Life by Jesus Christ, that immaculate
Lamb of God, who has laid down his Life upon the Cross to answer thy justice,
and by his sufferings, merits, and Righteousness, Resurrection from Death to
Life, has cancelled the Law of condemnation, taking down the wall of
partition, and making admission for sinners to come to the Throne of Grace with
boldness. And now have given us precious promises, that what we ask in the name
of thy son shall be done for us. And now dear Father of Heaven, what was I, or
my Fathers family, (but a sinful generation of men.) That thou should choose
me to salvation before the world was, and in due time to call me to the
knowledge of this mystery of man's Redemption, and by the witness of thy word
and blessed spirit, should seal unto me the pardon of sin, in the day when thou
deliveredst me out of the hands of that roaring Lion. And after my seeking thy
face for many years with doubtings and fears, under many desertions, and
dreadful temptations, and many various dispensations, (which thou most blessed
God have turned all to my advantage) breaking into my Soul with so much love,
that I know not whom of the sons of men did ever receive a greater mercy. And
now Lord of thy goodness, have called me from the ways of the world, to be of
the number of those whom thou have chosen to eternal Life, and therefore having
tasted so abundantly of thy strange Love, (a Love to admiration, a Love we are
not able to apprehend in the acknowledgement whereof, and that I might declare
what a God thou art, according to mine engagement, and that I might exalt thy
glorious name, and declare thy loving kindness to me to the ends of the earth,
have made bold to present these lines to the public view for the magnifying of
thy mercies to me (the worst of the sons of men) and the greatest of sinners,
(if thou should charge my sins upon me) and be thou pleased to accept of
what I have written, in good part, and let thy blessing so go along with it,
that the delusions, methods, devices, and temptationt of Satan that old
cunning Serpent, may be so discovered to poor souls, that lie under his cruelty
may receive advantage thereby. When they shall read this small discourse of thy
gracious actings with me. O let thy blessing be upon i^; that they may receive
comfort thereby, that thy goodness may be magn^fied (which thou know Lord to
be the only cause I have given it to the public view) who never thought my
nam^ should have appeared in such a way. And now dear Father, I humbly beseech
thee, manifest thy glorious Gospel of thy Son to the ends of the Earth, that
all Nations may know thou art a God through Jesus Christ, forgiving iniquity
transgression and sin, and to that end I humbly beseech thee fulfill thy word,
in pouring out thy indignation upon that whore of Babylon, who has dyed her
garments red in the blood of the Saints, that we may say Babylon, Babylon is
fallen, and upon all the powers that oppose the righteous Scepter of thy Son,
the Gospel, whom thou have made King of Kings, and Lord of Lords and have given
him the Heathen for his inheritance and the utmost ends of the earth for his
possession, (who is heir of the world, by thy free donation.) O bring forth
that glorious day, that thou speak of by thy servant Isaiah, when the Sun
shall be ashamed, and the Moon abashed, when the Lord* shall reign in Mount
Zyon, and Jerusalem, before thine ancients gloriously, and that thou will open
the mouths of thy servants, to preach and declare, that deluge of fire, that
shall cause the Heavens to melt and the Earth to be burnt up, which thy
servants Peter Malachi and Isaiah, have preached many hundred years of by the
word of the Lord, telling it shall come to pass, (which now in this day is
almost forgot.) That so it may not come upon this Generation unawares, as the
flood (...) upon the old world. But make thy servants mouth as a Trumpet to
proclaim the day of the Lords vengeance by fire, which he will contend with all
flesh by. The mouth of that dreadful God which did destroy the old world by
water has spoken it, and will certainly bring it to pass, for he shall come in
flaming fire to render vengeance on his enemies, (who is now a Lamb) but then
will be a Lion, in which dreadful day the greatest of men shall cry to the
Mountains to cover them, and the Rocks to dash them in pieces, who would not
let him Reign over them, and to reward his poor servants, that now suffer for
his glory: And so come Lord Jesus come quickly. Amen. Amen.

FINIS.
A Song of Praise.
Psalm 145.
1.
MY God! oh King! I Will thee extol
and I will bless thy Name,
For ever still, and ever will
I spread abroad thy Fame.
2.
Thee every day extol will I
and I thy Name will praise,
For evermore and never give e're
till Death shall end my days.
3.
Great is the Lord, and greatly too
he to be praised is,
And to be sought beyond all thought
no greatness like to his.
4.
One generation praise thy works
unto another shall,
And shall declare how great how rare
thy mighty acts are all.
5.
I will the glorious honor of
thy Majesty unfold,
My glory sings of wondrous things
that never can be told.
6.
Men shall likewise the power of
thy dreadful acts declare,
With them will I to magnify
thy greatness bear a share.
7.
They of thy mighty goodness, and
likewise thy rightousness.
In memory, abundantly
with Songs shall it express.
8.
Jehovah he is gracious
and of compassion full,
To anger flow his mercies who
can ever dissanul.
9.
Jehovah he is good to all
his tender mercies fly,
Abroad so far all his works are
clean overspread thereby.
10.
They shall O Lord thy works all praise
and they thy Saints shall bless,
Thy Kingdoms glory thy Saints shall story
and talk of thy greatness.
11.
That to the Sons of men might be
his mighty acts made known,
And gloriously in Majesty
his Kingdom might be shown.
12
Thy Kingdom is a Kingdom still
an everlasting one,
To ages sure still does endure
thy great dominion.
13.
The Lord upholdeth all that fall
he underprops his own,
Up raises he all these that be
with troubles bowed down.
14.
Upon thee wait the eyes of all
them thou their meat do give,
Seasonably, and opening thine hand
feedest all things that live.
15.
Jehovah he is righteous
righteous his ways are all,
His works are pure, merciful, sure,
and very liberal.
16.
To all that call upon him stands
Jehovah very nigh,
They shall not fall that on him call
if in sincerity.
17.
Those that do fear him the desire
of such he will fulfill,
And if they cry assuredly
deliver them he will,
18.
Jehovah does preserve all them
that heartily him love,
The wicked all the right hand shall
of vengeance them remove.
19.
The praises of the Lord my mouth
shall willingly express,
His name it is fit, let all flesh it,
for ever ever bless.

