ROYAL LOVES: OR, THE Unhappy Prince. A NOVEL.

Written in French by a Person of Quality.

Now rendered into English.

LONDON: Printed for Robert Sollers, at the Kings Arms and Bible in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1680.

TO THE READER.
THE Title Page to a Book, methinks, looks much-what like the Text before a
Sermon, and, in its way, serves to the same end and purpose; viz. to let you
know, in part, what is most probable to be your ensuing Entertainment: And
(that I may keep faithful to the Metaphor I have now assumed) the Epistle that
generally follows it, resembles that pretty kind of running Preludium, which
has such a jantee way with it of bringing you to the full body of the
Discourse: So that should I have taken other reverse measures, and brought you
clownishly to the close Treat, without this or the like previous Amusement,
you would have thought me phanatical, and perhaps then for ever I must have lain
under your indignation.

But I have so great a passion for your Content, that I would readily sacrifice
the utmost of my endeavors to be pleasing and agreeable to you; and though
peradventure I may not be so happy as to gain all your Favors, yet on the
other hand I cannot imagine the Stars will run so counter to me, but that I
shall meet with some of your kind Regards.

To write you here a Panegyric on the History, and the great Adventures you
shall meet with, may possibly give you a suspicion that the thing it self has
but little worth in it; and therefore it stood in need of some such Varnish, to
make it appear with the better color and gloss: but as Tamberlain was one of
the greatest Princes upon Earth, it cannot be well supposed that any would dare
to mention hi^ name, without a great occasion of bringing in uncommon
Accidents, such as were worthy to be joined to so illustrious a Character; and
I will presume to say thus much of it: That the Subject before you, is of the
nature of Beauty; which, though it may not have the power to effect an absolute
Captivation, yet you will not be able to defend your self from frequent and
strange Surprises.

I will not venture at more; for it is altogether unnecessary, in regard you
would not believe me only upon my bare assertion, should I speak the highest
things I could in its favor: nor can I blame you; for I should be loath to
have my own judgment so in Fetters, as to be determined and concluded by any
others private caprich of fancy: for (according to the old Proverb) My Mind to
me a Kingdom is. Read then, and proportionably to your own satisfactions,
entertain kind thoughts of

Your most humble Servant.

ROYAL LOVES: OR, The unhappy Prince. A NOVEL.
WIth a great deal of Reason is Fortune made to stand upon a Globe, which is
under an Impossibility of having any solid steadiness, being the first
Principle of all Revolutions. We are furnished from Antiquity with several
notable Examples of her capricious humor: The Rise of Monarchies, the
Elevation of mean and obscure Persons to places of the highest rank and
dignity; the downfall of an infinite number of Kings, and the ruin of Empires,
are as so many signal Instances of her inconstancy. But because we will not
absolutely rely upon those of the past distant Ages for the Justification of
this Truth, we will make our Reflections upon Accidents less remote, and see in
the misfortunes of Bajazet, with what Sovereignty she at pleasure does dispose
of the Destiny of Mankind.

Bajazet was of the Illustrious Blood of Ottoman; his Birth had exalted him to
the Empire of the Turks, and his Valor was so bright, that it dazzled the Glory
of those four great Princes who preceded him in it: He had almost brought
Europe under his submission, as he had made all Asia tremble. His Laws were
revered in the most remarkable Parts of the Earth; and never had any man
acquired to himself a Renown more glorious.

Tamberlain, Emperor of the Tartars, put a stop to the course of this
prosperity: he was of a low and obscure birth, but having with violence through
the succor of Arms placed himself upon a Throne, which others with trembling
ascended, his happy destiny surmounted that of Bajazet's; he triumphed over
him, and at that time when he looked upon Europe and Asia, as easy conquests
he desolated his Country, reduced his Family to a peregrine condition, and
carried him Captive to Samarcanda, which was Tamberlain's most beloved City, as
being built by him. The Wife and Daughter of Bajazet were partakers of his
misfortune; the former of whom died a little while after, but the Daughter,
being, either more courageous or of a more robust and resolute Spirit, was
better able to resist the attaques of Fortune, and became the admiration of the
Tartars, as she had been of all those who had seen her in her Fathers Palace.

Themir, Tamberlain's Eldest Son, who was one of the first, felt the effect of
this admiration: he had an absolute Empire over his Father's mind, and had
abused it by his ill conduct, even to the banishing of Adanaxus from the Court,
otherwise called the Prince of Tanais, his younger Brother; and he had improved
this affection to a thousand cruelties against the unfortunate Bajazet: it was
He, who had sacrificed in his sight the eldest and dearest of his Sons, ruined
the famous City Sebastia, took away the Princess Asteria his Daughter from the
Palace of Bursa, and without any pity abandoned all the Empire of that
miserable Prince, to the violence of the Tartars.

But Love punished him for all those Inhumanities, and his heart, as barbarous
as it was, was sensible of the Charms of the fair Asteria, so that much against
his will he did learn the use of sighs; and though they were prevented with too
great outrages from being favorably regarded, yet his Rage to see himself
despised by the generous, but resolute Princess, threw him into the last
extremity of desperation.

He was violent and furious in his Temper; and though he had been capable of
Sentimenrs more moderate, yet the Princess was inspired with no mean and
inconsiderable ones. He spoke as soon as he perceived himself pressed to it, but
it was with so much boldness, that Asteria found she was coming under a new
persecution, more afflictive and tormenting to her, than all the other: she
answered the passionate Declarations of Themir with a disdainful, flerceness,
which many times set him in such a heat and fury that cannot be expressed but
with a great deal of difficulty. He imagined that Bajazet, whose courage was
not rebated by his misfortunes, did fortify this aversion, and by a new piece
of Injustice, removing him from his Daughter, he was shut up in a prison at a
good distance from the Palace, and Asteria kept in her Apartment with a greater
Guard than she had been before.

This procedure gave an accession to the Princesse's hatred, and enraged her
more than ever, which made Themir become more furious. He went to visit Bajazet
in his Prison, and endeavored sometimes by entreaties, and sometimes by
threatenings, to bring him to a compliance; but having made an unprofitable
attempt, he straight had recourse to the blind Friendship of his Father, and
discovering his passion to him, and the fatal consequences that might attend
it, he did so effectually prevail upon his tenderness, that he brought him to
that pass of undertaking all things that might be for his satisfaction.

He went then directly to Asteria's Apartment, with a resolution not to spare
any means likely to make her flexible. He made her offers, entreaties, and from
thence fell to reproaches, and still finding her constant in despising his
gifts and injuries, he became so furious, that he thought he was obliged in
point of honor to conquer her; and told her with an absolute imperious tone,
that if she was resolved to persevere in her Obstinacy, he knew very well how
to make her repent of it in the person of her Father.

The Princess at those words was struck with a mortal terror; Do not invelope
Bajazet in a Resistance where he is not at all concerned, said she to him,
pouring down a torrent of tears; the Just refusal I make to marry the murderer
of Ortobulus my Brother was inspired into me by my own resentments, which were
every way legitimate, and if it merits any punishment, only I ought to suffer
it. Leave the days of Bajazet to their Natural end, they cannot last very long,
and no ways trouble the tranquillity of your Son; you ought to exercise your
vengeance upon my life only, and it is against me that every thing proves an
earnest solliciter to you. No, no, replied Tamberlain, I know better how to
choose my victims, and since for my Son's misfortunes, his days are fastened
unto yours, you shall live, but you shall live to see that Father, who is so
dear to you, expire in sufferings, and you shall never boast without a
punishment, the having scorned the Alliance of the greatest Prince in the
Earth. He went out as he ended those words; and the overwhelmed Princess fell
into a dreadful swoon in the arms of her Woman, who had much ado to recover her
from that weakness.

The cruelty of Tamberlain did not only consist in words, Asteria had order the
next day to go to Bajazet's prison, and to dispose him for death, or for a
marriage of her with Themir. Fatal Choice! for a Daughter who did so dearly
love her Father, and detest that unworthy Lover! the sight of Bajazet had never
been permitted her since their Separation; she had often demanded it, and would
have given the best part of her blood to obtain it; but the fatal condition
that was put upon it rendered it then insupportable to her, she resused to go,
and resolved to do her self some violence, but at last considering that that
Obstinacy might possibly hasten her Father's death, she obeyed, and suffered
her self to be conducted, all overwhelmed in tears, to the place where they
were to bring her; she found there the Turkish Emperor so changed that she
received his embraces without being able to speak a word. Bajazet asked her
what return had obliged the Tyrant to grant her to come and see him: the last
of all his cruelties, Seignior, said Asteria to him; the severest effect of his
Injustices; in a word, what ever he has in the world that can be most
tormenting to us. She then explained to him in a few words the sad mystery of
her visit, and taking away from him all hope that Tamberlan could ever be made
flexible, she gave him fully to know that there was nothing between a shameful
and cruel death, and the marriage that was so much desired. Bajazet could not
forbear sighing very often during her Discourse; and sometimes casting upon the
Princess such looks as were full of pity, and then again throwing most fierce
and disdainful Ones on those Tartars, who by the Emperors order had waited on
her. Tamberlane then must judge of my Sentiments by his own, said he to her, if
he persuades himself that I am capable of betraying the blood and the memory of
my Son, in joining you to his executioner: No, my dear Ortobulus, added he,
lifting up his watery eyes to Heaven, your shade shall never blush at an action
so little worthy him who had given you a Being: you judge well, Daughter,
pursued he, to think that mine is hateful to me, and that in the deplorable
estate to which I am reduced, I shall not make a great sacrifice to the Manes
of Ortobulus, and to your repose, though I should abandon it to the cruelty of
my Enemies: but, my Asteria, I will tell you more, and those Ministers of the
horrid Acts of Tamberlain, that do attend you, may report it to him; that
though this Marriage might restore me to my highest Fortune, and I might hope
from it for felicities as tranquil and untroubled as my destiny has been
unconstant, yet faithful to the remembrance of my Son, and jealous of a glory,
which all the prosperities of the Tartars cannot obscure, I would resist what
he exacts from us with the same courage you see me now refuse it. Thus then,
Seignior, interrupted the Princess, you are resolved for a death that will
expose me to all that can be imagined most bloody and dismal. Think, that for
my despair, I may be able to survive you: that the weakness of my Sex does
neither permit me to make such escapes, or go about such undertakings, as if I
had the strength of the contrary: that I shall always remain Tamberlain's
Captive, and the victim of Themir's violences: and that through pity you owe
this conversation to the perils wherewith I am threatened: Think your self,
replied the Emperor, that you will become the companion of all my miseries; if
you force me to prolong those days which the cruelty of my fate has rendered
but too long already: think, that after the loss of an Empire, and liberty,
there is more weakness in supporting ones disgraces, than in seeing ones self
sacrificed to them; and instead of exciting an unworthy pity which my glory
would utterly disallow, do you remember you have your extraction from the most
illustrious blood in the World, and so look upon my death as an action that
will crown all the former ones of my life: I shall leave you Brothers, whom
possibly the bounty of Heaven will regard and pity. My death will suffice to
appease its anger, and from it you may receive assistances that will secure you
from falling under those evils which so much disquiet you. Ah! Seignior,
answered Asteria, let us then jointly expect these Succors, for I will have
none of them, if you do not likewise partake with me: Will you then marry
Themir? Interrupted the Emperor coldly, will you resolve that the Ottoman
shade shall reproach you for the shameful mingling the blood of Tamberlain with
his? I would have you live, Seignior, cried the Princess out very grievously,
or else I would die with you: At these words her Spirits failed her, which
obliged them to carry her back to the Palace, without having made any
conclusion: and though Bajazet was sensibly touched at her grief, yet did he
see her go away without changing his Resolution in the least, and contenting
himself in putting up vows to Heaven for her, he waited his death with that
undauntedness, which is only the partage of great and generous Souls.

Those, who had been witnesses of Asteria's visit, made a very faithful
relation of it to Tamberlain and Themir, without ever forgetting the obstinacy
or the fierceness of Bajazet's answers. But yet they made some further efforts
upon him, and the Princess, to obtain of them the consent they desired; but at
last perceiving the more they were pressed to it, they more they showed their
stubborness and resolution, the Ottoman Prince was taken from his Prison, and
conducted to the place were Criminals were commonly put to death. All those
Tartars, that made any profession of virtue, detested that action; Axalla,
Tamberlain's favorite, and one who was greatly renowned for his extraordinary
valor, used his utmost endeavors to prevent it; but the Prince had a greater
influence upon his Father's spirit, and the unfortunate Bajazet was unworthily
conducted to the Scaffold were he was condemned to lose his head.

But how considerable soever the person was, yet was not this Imperial Majesty
suffered to have any respect: he went to the fatal place, as if he was the
meanest of all Mankind, without any thing to distinguish him besides his
resolution, and an Air of greatness which it was impossible for all his
miseries to despoil him of: he was sorrowful, but withal sedate; and if his
eyes had not in them all that vigor and sprightliness as before, they lost not
their vivacity from any prospect of fear or weakness. The houses were desolate,
for all people, flockt to the place of execution; And that confusion having
obliged a cavalier, who was just then arrived at Samarcanda, to demand the
cause of it of some Inhabitants; he no sooner understood it, but spurring on
his Horse with all the violence imaginable to the Scaffold, he rode through the
throng, and came up close to it just in that particle of time, as they were
going to put a period to the days of one of the greatest men in the World. His
cries and name suspended that fatal blow: Hold, cried he out, it is Adanaxus,
it is the son of Tamberlain, who commands it of you. This Prince was dearly
beloved by the Tartars, and they with an extreme affliction resented his
absence; so that they solemnized his return with showts of joy, which for some
little time he gave way to; and then prayed the Soldiers, who assisted at that
action, to stay till he had seen the Emperor before they proceeded any further.
He ran to the Palace, where he gave an agreeable surprise, to those whom his
absence had afflicted, and particularly to Axalla, who always had a most
passionate love for him.

Notwithstanding the difference Tamberlain had put between his two Sons, the
merit of Adanaxus disputed in his breast against the natural inclination he had
for Themir, and his unexpected sight caused in him so sensible a joy, that it
forced him to express it in a shower of Tears; the Prince received his embraces
upon his knees, and continuing in this submissive posture, Seignior, said he to
him, you see again at your feet a rash man, who assured of your goodness is
come to demand of you a favor of the last importance. It Is not the pardon of
an absence which you have not approved, I am willing to be punished for it;
but, Seignior, it is the life of Bajazet, for which I am here upon my knees an
humble sollicitour of your generosity. It Is an Enemy of a famous name and of a
blood that is illustrious, who is no longer in a condition to prove fatal to
you, and whose precipitated loss may be a blemish to your reputation. Think
Seignor, how happy it is to be in an estate to do favors of this kind to
persons who have reigned gloriously, and who are depressed merely through the
capriciousness of fortune. Consider, that of all virtues in Monarchs, Clemency
is the most glorious, and deserving praise: And at the name of a Son who
conjures you to it, signalize yours in the favors of a great, though now a
wretched Emperor.

Those words of the Prince of Tanais did not less astonish Tamberlain, then his
return had affected him; he could not refrain commending within his breast the
generosity of his Son; but the importance of his demand balanced this motion,
and made him remain unresolved. If it was any thing persuasive to him, to see
prostrate at his feet a Son worthy of esteem, and the uncertainty where he had
passed his life rendered him yet more dear, yet Bajazet contemning and
rebellious to his designs, kept up his indignation. You ought to let me resent
the pleasure of seeing you again, said he to the Prince, without intermixing it
with the trouble to demand of me a kindness which it is impossible for me to
grant you: Bajazet has but too much deserved that death to which he is
condemned, he is an insolent Captive, whose annoyance nothing is capable to
maderate, who never speaks my name but with contempt, and who would not spare
my life, if he had over it that power which I have over his. I have for a long
time endured it, but now my patience is quite worn out, and there are so many
reasons which authorize what I do, that I should be blamed of imprudence or
weakness, should I act otherwise. Whatsoever reasons you are pleased to allege
for his ruin, Seignior, Answered Adanaxus, you yet have more to pardon him;
The Example you will leave to posterity, the pleasure that comes from a good
action, and your own glory, which would be deeply concerned in causing so great
a Prince to fall, whom his severe destiny has delivered into your hands, ought
to triumph over all those other considerations. Think, Seignior, that Bajazet
has not long since seen what you are at present, yet the fate of Arms is
capricious, it may do again for him what it has done for you; and if you are
out of a prospect of fearing; you have Sons, who may one day meet with
Conquerours, and who may implore the same grace I now demand: Do not you then
give an Example of inhumanity, but make some reflection upon the uncertainty of
what future times may prove.

Tamberlain began to stagger at the pressing Reasons of the young Prince of
Tanais, he revolved in his mind the circumstances of Bajazet's fate, what he
had been, what he was, and considering that he himself was risen from a mean
fortune to one of the most glorious conditions of life, and that he might by
some return or other fall into the last of miseries, even that in which he saw
his Enemy. You have conquered me, Prince, said he to his Son, the tenderness I
have for you carries me above my resentment, and in a day that Heaven sends me
a Son which I have lamented, it is just I grant you something may testify how
acknowledging I am: Let Bajazet live, I am willing to consent to it, but my
Son, you must endeavor to overcome his pride, and make, if possible, an unjust
Princess compliant, whom the condition of a Captive, my entreaties, my offers,
the love and submissions of Themir, have not been able to get her consent to
marry him, and if you are as sensible of my satisfaction as I am of yours,
order it so that the consent of Bajazet to this marriage, be the reward of that
life you render to him. Adanaxus understood by that discourse, that Themir's
love for Asteria was the cause of that cruelty that Tamberlain was going to
commit, and overjoyed that it was revealed to him, he made what have he could
to prevent its being effected.

He got himself upon the scaffold, where Bajazet with an unshaken constancy did
wait his doom. He cut the Rope that tied that Prince his hands, and saluting
him with as much respect as if Bajazet had been upon the Ottoman Throne.
Receive, Seignior, said he to him, this service from a man, who happy as he
esteems himself in rendering it to you, would not at the price of all his blood
but have done it, and who would give a thousand lives such as his if he had
them, to make you forget the necessity that obliged him to give you so shameful
a mark of that esteem and considetation he has for you.

Adanaxus had a charming Mien, and delivered his words with an action so tender
and generous, that Bajazet was more enamoured with his sight than with that
life he had conserved to him. He regarded him with all the attention possible
to be given to a discourse so extraordinary, and as if his misfortune had not
wrought any alteration upon his spirit. Although my life be given me upon
condition, said he to him, and by it I prolong those evils which I should be
glad to put a period to yet I receive it from you without a difficulty, and the
condition in which I am, does not keep me from being sensible of this
obligation, the transcendent virtue you discover does already interess me in
what concerns you, and I receive no small consolation in that I have furnished
you with a means of giving such remarkable proofs, of it. Let us go, Prince,
pursued he, holding out his hand to him, let us return from the Scaffold to the
Prison, and there wait for the last decrees of heaven: You shall see me again,
Asteria, added he, drying up some tears, which the remembrance of that Princess
drew from his eyes, you shall see me again, if that tender love of yours for a
miserable Father, has not made it fatal to you.

Whilst the people by their cries were applauding the generosity of Adanaxus
and the safety of Bajazet, he was reconducted to his prison, and the Prince of
Tanais having given orders for all things that might sweeten it to him,
returned to the Palace. He there met with Themir, who complemented him, but
with so much coldness and indifference, that one might visibly observe in it
the remains of that old hatred that had obliged Adanaxus to leave Tartary. He
was extremely troubled to find him still so implacable, but as he did not
intend to make a long stay at Samarcanda, being called elsewhere by powerful
reasons, he resolved for some time to bear with the injustices of his Brother;
and after he had spent part of the Evening with Tamberlain, he withdrew to his
Apartment with Axalla, in a transport of joy, that he had relieved Bajazet from
so ignominious a death.

As soon as they were without witnesses, they began to speak to one another in
their usualway of an open freedom: There had continually been between them a
very strict bond of friendship, and though Axalla's age was already advanced,
he was of such a sweet and obliging temper, that persons of all Ages were
infinitely taken with his company, and he was not less charming in his
conversation, than was his valor to be feared when ever he came into the
Field. Adanaxus asked him a thousand questions, both about the war, and indeed
every thing else he thought himself ignorant of; Axalla gave him a particular
account of all things, and struck him with a horror for the inhumane actions of
Themir, especially for the death of young Ortobulus, whom with his own hand he
had cruelly murdered, after a battle where that young Prince had done immortal
actions, and from whence he went out so wounded, that he might have expected
the succor of a generous Enemy, with a great deal of more reason than the
death he had received.

Adanaxus was enraged at that cruel piece of barbarity, but passing from
discourses of war to those of love, Axalla who had a most infinite respect for
Asteria, by having sometimes the privilege of seeing her, gave a most noble
Character to Adanaxus of all those charms that rendered her adorable. She had so
many, and they were so advantageously represented by Axalla, that he was
surprised not to find in the Prince the least motion of curiosity, and blamed
him for his too great indifference for Ladies. You deceive your self, Axalla,
replied the Prince of Tanais, sighing as he spoke, that Sex has too great an
Empire over me, and my heart could speak to you more justly than any tongue, of
the sensible proof I have made of it. It Is neither any contempt nor any fear of
Asteria's charms, that keeps me from having a curiosity to see them: I honor
beauty wherever I see it, and am too much prevented by another object, to have
any fear of that of the Princess, but I am not willing to present before her
the Son of a man who within this hour would have robbed her of her Fathers life,
as also the brother of him that murdered Ortobulus. I will, if possible,
during that little stay I shall make at Samarcanda, act with some profit for
his repose, and endeavor before I see her, by my services to efface whatsoever
the names of Tartar, of the Son of Tamberlain, and of the Brother of Themir
might have, that is detestable to her. What Seignior, said Axalla, are you in
pain whilst you continue here, that you talk of your removal? and have you
given us a sense of the joy of your return, only that we should have the
greater grief to think of your departure? When you shall have heard the reasons
of it, replied Adanaxus, you will confess they are not unlawful, but that it is
necessary for my repose to go from Samarcanda. You know Seignior, replied
Axalla, the passionate interest I have taken all my life for your concerns, and
I am in an earnest impatience to have your reasons told me, therefore I shall
be infinitely obliged to you, if you will give me some small account of them.
That I can do very easily, replied the Prince, we are here alone, and this
Relation will not be long. Then beginning with some particularities a little
more remote,

The History of Prince Adanaxus.
YOu are not ignorant, said he to his friend, of the reason that obliged me to
leave Tartary, the violences of Themir against my most innocent actions, the
indulgence the Emperor showed to his proceedings, and the fear of not being in
a continual power to support them without doing things of a dangerous
consequence; All that, I say, you know as well as my self, and made me indeed
resolve, among strangers to seek out a more happy life than that I enjoyed in
my own Country.

I parted from Samarcanda without any retinue, concealing my true name under
that of Arsanes, and not designing to tarry in any place, but where I might
acquire some glory, I visited all Asia without finding the employment I sought
for. After that I passed into Europe, which I knew to be more oppressed with
war, and I arrived there at a time that Bajazet's forces were just sinking
under the Grecian Empire. I knew Tamberlain had a most invincible hatred for
the Ottomans, and that all the Tartars had the like affections, and though I
found them unjust, yet to do nothing that might one day reproach me, I cast my
self into the Emperor Paleologus his party, who made head against the Turks on
the side of Thrace, whilst those two Sons Andronicus and Emanuel defended other
Provinces. My first essay was very favorable to my reputation, and without any
ambition of being thought a Hero, I may affirm to you Axalla, that my actions
began to make the name of Arsanes eminently considerable. The Emperor gave me
many signal testimonies of his esteem, and finding himself in a danger out of
which I had the fortune to disengage him, he made a public acknowledgment of
the service I did him, and would not permit me to be absent from him.

We had a pretty equal success in both Armies, the battles were so much
favored by the season, but Winter coming on we were obliged to give our Troops
some rest: The Turk retired into his Country, and Paleologus went back again to
Constantinople, where his Sons were ordered to meet him. We arrived there
nevertheless a Month before them: the Court was very glorious, the Empress,
besides her two daughters, Eudoxia and Leonida, had about her person a great
many others, as considerable by their birth, as they were most killingly fair
to all their beholders. Mine were dazzled with them without being wounded, and
heaven which had other persecutions in reserve for me, in this occasion rendered
love unpowerful. The grateful Emperor did very obligingly sound my Elogy to
all the world, and unknown as I was at Constantinople, I bore there a quality
but little different to that I ought to have been in. Because the war was in no
likelihood to be concluded, I was willing to spend some time at the Court,
receiving there a thousand civilities from the Emperor, the Princesses, and
from the most considerable among the Grecians.

A few days after our arrival, the Emperor received the news that the Princes
had defeated a party of the Ottomans, and taken a good number of them
prisoners, but that which qualified the joy of this good success, was that
among those prisoners there was a Lady so beautiful, that it was reported
Andronicus was become passionately in love with her. Paleologus who was
sufficiently acquainted with the uncontrollable humor of his Son, and who knew
very well that he had no moderation in him, when ever he had a mind to any
thing, did much fear the consequences of this passion, and as soon as
Andronicus and the prisoners were arrived, he perceived his fear was too
legitimate. When first the report came to us of that love, I condemned the
frailty and easiness of that Prince's heart, and the inequality of his choice.
But Axalla, I was punished likewise by the same fate, for I no sooner had cast
my eyes upon her who had conquered him, but I felt the kindlings of an ardour
in me, which fully assured me that I was fallen into the same condition.
Axalla, what all the beauties of Greece had not the power to do, was in one
moment effected by a Fair unknown: the fatigue of a great journey and the grief
of her captivity, could not render her less beautiful to my eyes. Her paleness
appeared to me to be infinitely charming, and the indifference which in that
condition she showed to gain any victories, rendered her in my opinion more
deserving to conquer all. Many hearts were forced to submit to her powers as
well as mine, and Neris, (for so the Captive was called) in a short time became
the charm of all Paleologus's Courtiers, as she was the object of jealousy
among all the Grecian Ladies.

As soon as I perceived my love, and was out of all hopes to overcome it, I
found my self the Rival of Andronicus, I was one unknown, he was the Emperor's
Son and could pretend to all things, where I could hope for nothing; but as
repute and fortune do not always contribute to the felicity of Lovers, but it
is love and the disposition of hearts which does determine it, I resolved to
conceal mine and thought I might succeed better by that discretion than by a
public declaration which possibly might be a means to remove me from the
adorable Neris.

You may very well conceive, Axalla, that that procedure so contrary to my
wishes, did not give me a small affliction, my passion increased every day and
my mind was divided between the necessity of being silent and that of speaking,
so that I could not resolve with my self which to incline to, my reason made me
fly that which a violent inclination compelled me to look after, maugre all its
politics. My eyes sometimes were not so circumspect as they ought to have
been, and when by accident they were cast upon those of Neris, they made her a
thousand declarations, but whether she did not understand them, or whether she
was afraid to do it, those dumb discourses were very short and withal but
seldom.

In the mean time Andronicus conjured the Emperor by all the entreaties and
submissions imaginable, that might persuade a Father to resign Neris to his
love. The inequality of Fortune, he said, was sufficiently recompensed by the
merit of Noris; and besides her beauty which was extreme surprising, she
abounded with so many charms both in her wit and humor, that the Prince
thought he had a sufficient Authority openly to make this demand; the Emperor
acknowledged all the advantage of Neris; and he had a very high esteem for her,
and in his breast did not absolutely condemn the Sentiments of Andronicus; but
having more profitable Alliances in his eye, for the good of the Empire: and
the calamities wherewith Greece was menaced, not being able to be avoided, but
by the support of a puissance which might oppose the Ottoman Forces; he
endeavored to divert his Son by policies of State; but seeing him incapable of
them, he, like an absolute Father, forbad him ever to speak to him any further
about the marriage: this prohibition increased the fierceness of Andronicus;
and made him to answer the Emperor in terms that were little respectful, and
from that time he labored to put himself into a condition to be only dependent
upon himself.

Things were in these circumstances for two Months, and the Princes stayed well
near three at Constantinople, before I had ever spoke to Neris any otherwise
then in general conversation. It was hard to meet with occasions of speaking to
her in private, and I durst not openly seek them; but an accident presented one
to me, which I did not in the least expect, and which you may well imagine I
did not fail to make use of.

I was walking one Morning in the Palace Gardens, where commonly I was wont to
reflect upon my adventures, and for that purpose I sought out the most solitary
places to walk in. I found Neris in one of them that was least frequented; and
besides the ravishing surprise her sight gave me, I had a greater to see her in
such a place, and at such a time. O Axalla, how beautiful did she appear to me,
and in what a transport was I at my good fortune? One might observe in her
complexion a kind of blushing freshness, like to that which is borrowed from
Sleep; the undress she was then in presented to ones eyes a thousand Beauties
which most commonly she kept concealed. And the trouble she had upon her when
she saw me, gave me a pretty kind of an I do not know what timidity, which
rendered me more passionate and hardy. I cannot tell whether she took notice of
it, or whether it was only in civility that she judged it convenient to
withdraw, but she had done so, if I had not stayed her. Ah, fair Neris, said I
to her, do not carry away with you all the delicacies of these places; But
suffer an unfortunate stranger to enjoy by your presence those he never thought
to meet with. Neris seemed astonished at my discourse, and looking with her
face toward the ground; A miserable Captive, said she, is a very unfit person
to contribute to the delights of any place, and in a conversation so
languishing as yours you will but throw away that time, which you may employ to
a much better purpose. Would to Heaven, Madam, replied I, I could give all that
of my life, and withal you would permit it, I would never elsewhere seek a
satisfaction which only you can procure me. Such an earnestness you now express
would be altogether new, answered she very negligently, and you would have much
a do to persuade me into a faith that you had so passionate a one for that
which till now appeared to me very indifferent to you. I confess, replied I,
without presuming to dive into what might oblige Neris to speak so, I took upon
me an Indifference absolutely repugnant to those sentiments that were real in
me: But, Madam, the movements of the Heart, and those of the countenance do not
always run parallel, and if you please to have that goodness to distinguish
them, I could very well justify that indifference whereof you accuse me. I
accuse you of nothing, interrupted Neris very briskly, and perceive your
indifference is less criminal, than perhaps would be a closer application, but
whatsoever your movements are, the calamities I endure do not give me the
liberty to concern my self about them, and the unhappiness of my life is so
great, that it does not permit me to think of things wherein I have no
Interest. Ah! Madam, cried I to my self, in a transport of passion, you never
had a greater in any heart in the World then you have in mine: there is none so
absolutely devoted to you, and though you seem to set so light by it, there
shall never be any capable to give you the services that this shall undertake
for you. I have made it my great care and business to conceal what I discover
to you now, that so I might not expose my self to the fury of a Rival, who at
Constantinople is more powerful then I am, and who I fear has enough to
countermand my staying in it; but since my fate gives me this opportunity to
speak to you without any witnesses, suffer me to explain, Madam, and to tell
you, though I appear here unknown yet your condition might be as happy with
Arsanes as with the Son of the Emperor of Greece. All the while I was
speaking, Neris's eyes were fixed on mine, and in spite of all her
reservedness, I knew by her blushing, by her silence, and by a joy that seemed
full of fear, which at last appeared in her face, she wished there might be no
untruth in what I had said. One must love very passionately to penetrate into
all these things, but I did not lose any one circumstance of them and making an
happy application of them to my self, I became thereby both more Eloquent, and
hardy. I made use of that time that Neris was silent to give her an account of
the birth of my passion, and did it with so much sincerity that I began to make
her believe it. She said nothing to me at that time, for the coming in of some
persons obliged her to retire: But I could very well guess it by the looks she
gave me; and I flattered my self with this thought, that when one has the art
to persuade well, one is not very far from that of pleasing well too.

From that time I had my eyes more languishing upon her, Neris accustomed her
self to their language, and sometimes likewise hers in her supprise made me
such Discourses as were very obliging; afterward I found out several ways to
renew the conversation in the Garden, where I spoke in such a tender and
pressing manner, that I brought Neris to a compliance of receiving the offer of
my love: the first mark she gave me of her esteem, was her making me the
confident of her thoughts, she confessed she had a natural aversion for
Andronicus, that his greatness and his fortune were not capable of shaking her,
and though he should be possessor of Paleologus's Throne, he should never be
dearer to her heart, nor more agreeable to her eyes. I answered Neris, that I
was afraid this aversion was general for all men: and she made me to understand
by a sigh, one half of which her Modesty deprived me of, that in her breast the
Fate of Andronicus did not determine that of the rest of Mankind. I did
whatever I could to improve the discourse, and to find out what her fortune
was: But all I could learn from her was that she was born in the heart of
Africa, of a quality sufficiently illustrious, and that she had been taken by
the Pirates, and afterward sold to those whom Andronicus had taken prisoners.

My passion every day grew more violent, and I wished from my soul that Heaven
would be pleased to find out a way for me to show it to Neris by some
extraordinary service: but that was difficult to bring about in a Foreign
Court, where I was without any power. My destiny was so favorable to me as to
overcome that difficulty, and you shall hear of an adventure which you could
never have imagined.

The preoccupation of Andronicus seemed to increase by the resistance that was
made against it, and the Emperor not knowing any further what means to use to
remove it, thought that absence only could do the business, and that he was
obliged by necessity to deprive the Prince of an object that became fatal to
the repose of a State. He had no very specious pretense publicly to put that
design into execution, and indeed I know not when he would have had one, if
being conscious as he was of the violent humor of his Son, he had adventured
to serve himself with any, which made him resolve that Neris should be
privately carried away, and that free liberty should be given her to go where
she pleased.

It was an easy matter for him to effect it, and Princes do not want persons,
who, without examining the commands they give them, do blindly run to perform
all their Orders. The design was told them, and the hour stated; and Neris was
taken from her Apartment, about the middle of the night, and making her to
cross the Palace-Gardens, she was conducted to the seaside which ran by them,
where waited a Vessel ready to set sail for the first port dependant upon any
other Prince. Neris is Naturally of an even and well balanced temper, and not
easily carried out to make any outcries or rude efforts. But as she thought
her Ravishers were employed by the Prince, she threatened them with the
Emperors Authority, and presented to them the injustice they committed upon
the person of a Captive, who was then without any to defend her; those words
reached a place where very frequently I used to spend the best part of the
night in walking, I presently knew it to be Neris's voice, and finding them
going to use some violence to her: No, Madam, said I, putting my hand to my
sword, you shall not be taken away before my Face, and though I be single in
your defense, yet possibly I may behave my self with success enough to make
these rash men repent they ever undertook such an Enterprise; those fellows
laughed at the threats I made them, and dividing themselves, one part of their
company to engage with me, whilst the rest were to carry Neris away, they did
what they could to get to their Boat. But, Axalla, one is not sensible of any
danger when one is employed in the preserving of the object of our devoted
Love. I laid down two of the Villains at my Feet with the first passes I made,
and so clearing my way to Neris, with a reverse blow, I struck off the man's
Arm who held her, and gave her the liberty of saving her self by running
through the Garden. Those persons who were ordered to carry her away, without
making any great attempt upon my life, left me to run after her, and by that
means rescued me from a danger, in which I should otherwise most certainly have
fell. I pursued them, and forcing them to turn and engage with me; I had
received two dangerous wounds, before some of the Emperor's Guards, who were
got thither by Neris's outcries came to my Succor, and knowing me to be highly
in the favor of their Master, they obliged those that resisted me to betake
themselves to their heels; they would not have fled, had they dared to discover
themselves, for they were Messengers of an Order that was sufficiently
warrantable, but they were sworn to secrecy till they had got her to Sea, and
they judged it better for them to acquaint the Emperor with what had happened,
than to run the hazard of publishing what they had such a strict charge to
conceal.

I lost so much blood, that my strength was quite gone, and I fell at Neris's
Feet in a trance: but yet my weakness did not prevent me from hearing the
obliging complaints she made against Fate, and the affliction wherewith she did
accuse her self for my misfortune; she her self endeavored what she could to
stop my bleeding, but the pleasure I resented in perceiving Neris to take such
pains, made my blood gush out with greater violence, so that all thought it
would prove fatal to me; they reconducted me to my Apartment, and Neris was led
by Andronicus unto hers, who was come thither at the noise he heard of her
being taken away; He bewailed me, protested solemnly he would be revenged on
the Author of that bold attempt, and Neris, ignorant all this while of the
truth, demanded the next day justice of the Emperor for it in her name and
mine. He was obliged either to grant it her, or publicly to justify the
procedure, and not daring to take the latter course, through the fear he was in
of his Sons furious transports, he sent one of his principal Officers to
declare to me the mystery of that Enterprise, and to testify to me the grief
he was in, that she should be the occasion of my loss of so much blood: the
same Officer was ordered to discourse with me about the means of imposing
silence upon Neris, and of stifling the business; she believes her self
mightily obliged to you, said the Gentleman to me, and at the first word will
put it up, if you will but advise her to it. Counsel her not any farther to
search into the business, but let her understand that possibly a greater noise
would bring along with it but more troublesome consequences.

I knew what I had to say to Neris, and was not in a power to hide any thing
from her; but that so I might have some pretense for seeing her without being
under any suspicion; I promised to obey the Emperor's will, and that procured
me many a happy hour with the fair Neris by way of visit to me.

She acquainted me how that since that accident Andronicus, fearing lest any
other should be strongly pressing her to marry, assured her he had found out a
way to marry her himself in spite of the Emperor; you may very well imagine
what Counsel I gave her, and what discourses Love put into my head. My prayers
and protestations rendering her more opposite to the desires of Andronicus, did
likewise render my Rivals passion more impetuous. She grew into a fury; and one
day among the rest, after some propositions more pressing yet than ordinary, he
made her know, she was to fear the worst that could be from his violence, and
that he was now weary of using only his Entreaties and Submissions. I began
then to leave my Chamber, and went to make my first devoirs to the Empress,
where I met with Neris going out of the Princes's Apartment, and knew by the
sadness of her Countenance, that her breast labored under a very great
affliction: the Prince was just gone from making those threatenings to her which
I have told you of: her heart was almost dead with fear, and her eyes ready to
burst into a shower of tears: what has happened to you, Madam, said I to her?
your eyes reveal something that is fatal to my love, and if my jealousies be
just, though altogether weak, and a stranger as I am here in this place; yet
you shall see I Will make my vengeance be dreaded by them. I can easily judge
what you can do by that which you have done already, answered Neris to me; But,
Arsanes, all your generosity cannot hinder me from Andronicus his persecutions.
He continues his addresses to me to marry him, and now threatens to use his
power, if he finds not his Love sufficient. Ah! Madam, said I, interrupting
her, in a great passion, and how do you receive his threats? As a person,
pursued Neris, who imagines nothing can be more cruel than for ever to be
engaged to a man whom I cannot love. Ah! Madam, continued I, you shall never
then be engaged to him, rely upon the word and conduct of a Prince, who in any
other place than Constantinople, would not submit either to the Son of the
Emperor of Greece, or to any other Prince in the world. Have Courage, Madam,
take elsewhere upon you a quality more conformable to your merit, than that of
a Captive; the Sea and my valor shall find us ways for it, by conducting you
either to the place of your Birth, or to such retreats as shall be far enough
from Andronicus his attempts upon you: be not afraid of my Love, it is extreme
indeed, but my respect is extreme likewise: You shall find in me a passionate
Guide to whom the person is sacred, and a Defender, who will sacrifice his
fortune and his life to your safety. Neris hearkened to me with a great deal of
indulgence, and testified to me by her looks the acknowledgement of her heart;
but yet I could not persuade her to it; therefore I thought my true name might
have a greater influence over her than my words, and acquainted her with it:
but it would put me to a great deal of pains to express to you the trouble that
this Declaration gave her.

She looked upon me a good while, as if she had not known me, blushed, sighed,
was speechless, and indeed all her Actions showed me the confusion so great a
surprise put her into. However she assured me, that being fully persuaded of
the reality of my discourse, she would have a grateful sense of my offers,
which should be as lasting as her life: but the more considerable I became to
her she had the less desire to hazard so great a Prince. I neither forgot to
make use of Oaths, or Prayers, to conquer those Scruples, and to oblige her to
remove from Constantinople, but all my efforts were insignificant: she alleged
to me reasons of respect, to which for fear of displeasing her, I was forced to
submit; and leaving me, as if she was fearful, she might in her turn be
vanquished: do not join your self to my misfortunes, Seignior, said she to me,
perhaps fate will not distinguish you from Neris, and you may fall into such
evil circumstances, as may make me to despair that I was the cause of them.

I would have followed her to entreat her not to harbor such a sear, and to
assure her that in what soever place her fortune should conduct her, I would
inseparately wait upon her: but the Empress crossing the place where we were,
to go to the Walks, perceived me, and having called to me, obliged me to attend
her.

In the mean time Andronicus was not Idle; he had in part discovered the cause
of Neris's being carried away, and believing he might do what he had a mind to
against a Father who was resolved to deprive him of the sight of his Mistress:
he got together a good number of lusty resolute young Fellows, and made a
dangerous Insurrection. The Emperor resisted it as well as he could, and I was
so fortunate at that time, not to be a little profitable to him. Andronicus was
taken, and added the shame of being overcome, to that of having made an attempt
upon the Crown, and the life of his Father. The older and more experienced of
the Emperors Council, were for having him to spend the remainder of his days
in prison; Prince Emanuel, being of a most admirable sweet disposition, opposed
that advice, and with some advantages he might hope to have over the
unfortunate Andronicus, he did so ingeniously work upon the Emperors Spirit,
that after the first heats of resentment were over, he received the Rebel's
pardon, and promised him to forget the Crime.

But he had more need to repent of that too great clemency of his; Andronicus
did not appear submissive but to get his liberty, which he no sooner obtained,
but he made a new insurrection, and as you have heard, almost brought the
Grecian Empire to its last destruction. I could not engage my self in these
dissorders, I had in the former been so much concerned as I have told you; but
scarce had they begun to break out, but Neris disappeared at Constantinople,
without any bodies being able to discover either the reason of her departure,
or the place where she had chosen her retreat. At first I accused the Emperor
for having caused her to be carried away a second time; and besides my grief I
made to him a confession of my Love, and I conjured him to tell me where I
should find what he had convei'd away from me: But he solemnly protested he
knew nothing of her slight. I could not turn my suspicions upon Andronicus, for
he was almost driven to desperation at it, and from that accident derived the
chief pretense of his revolt. All hope then abandoned me. but only that of
searching my self for her, which made me prepare to do it in all the corners of
the Earth; but I was surprised by a violent Fever, which kept me languishing
very near two Months at Constantinople. The emperor had given them orders to
pursue his ungrateful Son, and to make him fly where he might never hear of him
again. prince Emanuel had command of the Army, and as I extremely honored him,
I should have been exceeding glad to have kept him company; but the Remembrance
of Neris was so much upon my Spirits, that I could not think of doing any
thing, but to go and find her out. I parted from Constantinople, after I had
complemented the Empress, and embarked my self to pass into Africa, where
according to what Neris had told me, I hoped I should hear some news of her. I
will not tell you how often I exposed my self to death, how many dangers I ran,
sometimes beaten by tempests, sometimes assaulted by Pirates; how many
Countries I have seen, almost unknown to Mankind, with a thousand other
circumstances of my voyage, they would make my relation too prolix: Let it
suffice I tell you that I have learnt no news of Neris, and that her absence
serves only to augment my passion. After I had spent four Years unprofitably I
came again into Asia, I understood the great revolutions that had happened
there, the downfall of the Ottoman Empire, and the captivity of the dreadful
Bajazet; I must acknowledge, Axalla, I could not keep my self from pitying
him, and knowing Tamberlain's humor, I did fear what has come to pass, and
what I have been so happy to prevent: the thoughts of it made me tremble again,
and how unjust soever the Emperor had been to me, yet did Love infuse
something in him of a paternal tenderness: I came back with all the have I
could to Samarcanda, where I arrived just in sufficient time to prevent the
misfortune which would never have given me any comfort. You have now in a few
words a very faithful account of the estate of my life, if you have at any time
been sensible of the power of Love, you may judge, Axalla, if any thing be
capable to give me a repose, so long as I shall hear nothing concerning Neris.

The Prince of Tanais having left off speaking, Axalla told him for his
consolation all that he could think was able to make any impression on his
spirit. It was late e're they parted, and the Inquietudes of Adanaxus being
renewed by the recital he had made, caused him to pass the night away in the
greatest sorrow imaginable.

In the mean time the Princess Asteria had very deeply resented the Joy of
Bajazet's safety, the succor he had received came from a very dear hand, and
the Prince, ignorant of his happiness, had no mind to foresee that the daughter
of the Turkish Emperor was the same person he had loved under the name of
Neris in the Court of Paleologus, and whom he still loved with so violent a
passion. The report of Adanaxus's return had no sooner came to the ears of the
Ottoman Princess, but all her grief for him was suspended. She loved this young
Prince as much as her virtue could permit her, he had a very tender place in
her remembrance, and she could not without a transport hear he had been
preserved in so tedious a Voyage; but when to this news was joined the service
he had lately rendered her in the person of Bajazet, her joy became so
powerful, that she could no longer keep it concealed in her breast. She did
imagine he knew her for Neris, and her return into Bursa was with too much
noise not to have been published in Greece, she flattered her self with the
thoughts that he still loved her, since he came so far, and that too to give
her so eminent an instance of it: and looking out Axalla, who, as she had
observed, frequently did visit him, she ingenuously confessed she had an
extreme kindness for the Prince, and most passionately complained to him that
he had not given her the means to tell him her self how greatful a sense she
had of the service he had done her. I know so perfectly the character of your
Soul, Madam, replied Axalla, that I foresaw that gratitude, before it was
possible for me to see the effects of it; and I would fain have obliged the
Prince to do what you desire: But as he is endued with a sincerity beyond
example, he acknowledged to me the unwillingness he had to present before your
eyes a Prince, who cannot be innocent in your account since he is the Son of
Tamberlain, and the Brother of Themir: Asteria grew pale at these words, and
giving them a cruel explication, she fancied the Interests of blood had
absolutely stifled those of Love, and that Neris was no longer charming to
Adanaxus, since he knew her to be the daughter of Bajazet. But yet she
pretended something else was the cause of her trouble, and the rest of the
conversation was spent in general complements and civilities. But as soon as
Axalla was retired, she called a Woman, who had accompanied her in All her
misfortunes, and from whom none of her thoughts were a reserve. Ah, Xaira, said
she to her, what have I learnt? Alas, in vain I flattered my self with the
thoughts of being beloved by Adanaxus at his return, and hoped to see him again
with the same transports which he expressed when I was at Constantinople. He
was only concerned for my Father out of generosity, Neris was not in the least
the occasion of that adventure, and far from doing any meritorious service to
me, and expecting any recompense from it, he came not to see me, but to prefer
the duty of the Son of Tamberlain to those of the passionate Arsanes. Alas!
Xaira, how criminal is my weakness rendered, and how good would it be for me to
follow that example he set before me, if I was capable of intimating it. I had
in my misfortunes the comfort to believe he did not any ways contribute to
them, they were less afflictive to me, and in a time when Heaven had taken all
things from me, I flattered my self with the thoughts that he reserved for me a
heart which I had no less an esteem for, then for the Empire of Bajazet. But I
have lost it, Xaira, that heart which was so dear to me, that I gave it all my
own; Adanaxus will not belly the cruelty of the blood of Tamberlain, and more
barbarous then our Tyrants, he procures the sorrowful Asteria a misfortune
which all the cruelties of the Emperor of the Tartars were not able alone to
give her. I do declare the punishment of it by the criminal remembrance I have
conserved of a Man, who has only testified to me an inconstant affection, and
by the weakness which forces me still so deeply to resent his levity.

Xaira interrupted the Princess by endeavoring to comfort her, and told her
all she thought was capable to make her doubt her misfortune, or to reinforce
her courage; but she gave no great heed to her, but abandoning her self wholly
to her error, she cast a thousand reproaches upon the young Prince, whilst he,
blindly carried away with the desire of finding out his Neris, was preparing
for a second Voyage all the Earth over, and found a great deal of difficulty to
give his generosity a few days rest at Samarcanda.

Themir had seen him arrive there with an enraged mind, and could not suffer
him to continue in it without giving him some Testimonies of it. He had
flattered himself with the hopes that he should never have seen him again, and
perceiving he was not returned, but only to preserve a victime from the effect
of his vengeance, he was continually pressing Tamberlain to put the conditions
in execution, upon which he had granted to the Prince the life of Bajazet, or
else to have him reconducted to the Scaffold from whence he had been taken.

Tamberlain persecuted on the one hand with the solicitations of his Son, and
excited on the other hand by his own natural cruelties, commanded Prince
Adanaxus to go visit the Turkish Emperor and to employ the credit which so
strict an obligation had given him with him, to obtain Asteria of him. But
though Adanaxus was fully persuaded that he should never bring Bajazet's Spirit
to a compliance to such a demand, yet he owed so much obedience to Tamberlain
as this came to. He went then to the prison where Asteria's Father was, with a
resolution to use all the honorable means he could to gain him to it, and to
make him consider after all, that the quality of being Empress of the Tartars
was not a thing for a Captive Princess to contemn.

Though Bajazet's life was only conditional, the service he had received from
the Prince of Tanais, had wrought in him all the effect it could do upon a mind
that is truly grateful: he had none of those barbarous blindnesses that lessen
the value of civilities done to a person, and then confound them with injuries.
It was not from the hands of Adanaxus that the effects of his misfortune did
proceed; he knew him not but by a considerable service he had done him, and he
received his visit with a great deal of satisfaction. Seignior, said Adanaxus
to him, after they had ended their first complements, if it had pleased Heaven
to have seconded my vows, I would have rendered you my submissions in a place
more worthy of you than this is, but since my good inclinations prove weak, and
mauger all my entreaties, you are still a prisoner. I am come to offer you all
that may contribute to make this place less grievous to you. Seignior, answered
Bajazet, according to the fashion I now lead my life, it very little concerns
me in what place I spend it, for all are equal to me in Tamberlain's Dominions.
But do not think, Seignior, that this indifference extends its self even to
what I ow you, and that it extenuates any thing of my obligations to you. I am
neither forgetful of the valor, manner, or circumstances of it: For I protest
to you my greatest affliction is that I am not in a capacity of testifying to
you my real resentments: I have done so little, Seignior, replied the Prince of
Tanais, in comparison of the reparation I owe you, that it deserves not your
remembrance; but as nothing is so afflictive to those who love and are
acquainted with glory, as to see such a person as you in fetters, I would
willingly do so much as may make my intentions pass for effects. If you have
any concern for the repose of those who are likewise joined with you in your
misfortune, Seignior, you ought to be more pitiful to your self, and consider
on the means that are offered you to get out of this place. Pardon me, if
knowing, as I do, your just aversion for Themir, I presume once more to propose
him to you for the Princess your Daughter. In a more happy time I should not do
this outrage to the hatred which exasperates you; but the pressing necessity of
your Affairs, the continual fears in which you put Asteria, all that which
threatens you, and what may happen are such powerful reasons, as I am forced to
speak to you of it. I am sensible that Themir, is accused of many crimes, and I
cannot own that he is not guilty as to your particular: but, Seignior, the love
he bears the Princess may render him more reasonable, he would not be the first
whom this passion should have changed, and what speaks more in his favor than
all things else is, that there is not any thing to which upon Themir's
consideration Tamberlain cannot be obliged. I confess, Seignior, it is a hard
thing to conquer ones self in matters of such importance as this; but what
cannot the courage of Bajazet do? If I could tell any other means how to
deliver you out of this place, I would not have proposed this to you. Ah! would
to Heavens, that in contempt of Themir's repose, and of my own life, I could
imagine any any other way; I would not balance the electing of it; but
Seignior, nothing but this remains, of consenting to the Marriage of Asteria,
and therefore I would conjure you to make some reflections upon it.

Prince, answered Bajazet, coldly, I do not doubt but that you would serve with
zeal all those who could any ways move your pity, since I have made such a
convincing experience of it; but I am both surprised and afflicted, that after
you have treated me like a Prince, and have set some value upon the actions of
my life, you look upon me as the slave of Tamberlain. Do not you judge of my
Sentiments by my misfortunes, it is not in the power of chains and fetters to
make me forget my name, nor can any torments debase the mind of a Prince who
has prescribed Laws to the Ottoman Empire, and has been the destiny of many
others. You do not possibly know, that this Themir, which you offer to me for a
Son in Law, is the Author of all my sufferings; that it was his criminal hand,
that basely before mine eyes did spill the blood whom I entirely loved, whose
virtues promised an endless happiness to my life, and whom I saw expire by his
sword without being able to give him any Succor. Ah! Seignior, if you believe
me to have any valor and resolution, judge by the tears that this remembrance
fetches from me, unto what excess my indignation swells. It Is one of Themir's
most bloody outrages, but it is not the only One, Bursa pillaged; Sebastia
destroyed; my Children become Fugitives; my Wife, oppressed with the rigours of
her captivity, dead; Asteria's imprisonment; my own, and the treatments I have
met with in it, are as so many effects of his furies: and ah! would you have
me, Seignior, renounce my hatred in favor of an Enemy who has so well deserved
it? No, no, let Tamberlain look to his own Rights, and give me leave to enjoy
the freedom of my breast; it is a comfort to me in my misfortunes to think that
this liberty cannot be ravished from me, but that I can without any remorse or
scruple wish to see Tartary o'rwhelmed with Enemies that may be merciless;
Samarcanda abandoned to flames and pillage; Themir to serve as a victim to the
cruelties of a mutinous people; and Tamberlain to follow the Chariot of a
Conqueror, as little generous as himself. My liberty possibly may be too great,
Seignior, but I cannot dissemble my thoughts, and indeed, it is that sincerity
which obliges me to assure you, that if Heaven would be favorable to my
desires, I would do no less for your fortune than I would for my vengeance; for
I have a very valuable esteem for your merit, and do conserve in me a heart
that is not unsensible of my obligation to you. I am too much indebted to your
goodness my self, replied Adanaxus, for putting so high a value upon services
that are so inconsiderable; and give me leave to answer you with the same
liberty, there is not any thing I would refuse to do to deserve it. But,
Seignior, must I renounce the hopes of obtaining any thing from you? consult a
little the necessity of the time, and do some violence upon your self to escape
the fatal consequences that may attend your refusal: the present time is so
wretched that it puts me into a capacity of dreading the future, interrupted
Bajazet, and there is nothing that we need to fear, when we have only a life to
look after, which derives all its troubles and torments from the length of it.
But, Seignior, that I may not be reproached for slighting your negotiation, and
that I may let you know how dear I account your kindnesses to me; let Themir
restore me my liberty; let him leave me to enjoy the wrecks of my fortune with
some equality; in a word, let him follow the example of your generosity, and
then I will hearken to his Propositions; but a heart like mine knows not how to
yield to any thing, when I am in chains, and I have a soul too resolute, to
give to the least of my Actions an appearance of a base and cowardly constraint.

Adanaxus found so much of the Hero in Bajazet's discourse, that he could not
answer him any further; only he assured him he would employ his utmost power to
incline Tamberlain to grant him the liberty he demanded; and so immediately
went to find out the Emperor his Father, to whom he forgot nothing that might
any ways be conducive to bring things to such a conclusion; but the
Proposition was not received, nor indeed so much as hearkened to.

What, said Tamberlain to him, when possibly by a Sentiment that discovers too
much of humanity, I do consent that Themir should marry the Daughter of the
Captive Bajazet, do I not bestow upon him a Grace that is sufficiently
considerable? He would fain prescribe me Laws in my Empire, and get to himself
a liberty, who has cost me so many thousand men: No, no, so easy a compliance
would load me with an Eternal shame; and all Asia* would call me to an Account
for so important a prisoner: Let him perish, since he is resolved on it, and let
Themir, to render himself happy, make use of the Rights and Privileges of his
Victory. We have too much neglected them, and the resolute Bajazet thinks to
prevail upon the Remonstrances of our weakness. Adanaxus was very much troubled
at this Determination; and though Tamberlain-was resolved to have him execute
it, and also forbad the Young Prince to bring him back so much as the least
resistance to it, yet could he not forbear making some unprofitable entreaties:
but at last he was commanded to pursue it so absolutely, that he was forced to
do it, and he retired into his Apartment, as much afflicted at Bajazet's
unhappiness, as if he had known the secret Interest he ought to take in it.

In the mean time Asteria entered into the Chamber of this illustrious
Prisoner. Adanaxus had obtained their liberty of seeing one another; he said
that those Interviews might be conducive to the happy success of his
Negotiation; and the Princess having heard that the Prince had been long in
discourse with the Turkish Emperor, came to know the subject of it.

Ah! Daughter, said Bajazet, as soon as he saw her, how opportunely do you come
to console me under that vast accession of grief which I have now received.
Prince Adanaxus to whom I am redevable for my life; and who has prevented my
having for him so high an esteem, is joined to our Tyrants for my persecution,
and has made such discourses to me, which coming from him are more
insupportable, than all that Tamberlain, or Themir were ever able to invent.
Adanaxus persecute you, Seignior, interrupted Asteria, after a languishing
manner! yes, he does, but in so handsome a fashion, pursued Bajazet, that in
appearance I have no cause to reproach him for it; he speaks to me in the
behalf of Themir, and seems to propose him to me as the means of facilitating
my liberty; but all things well considered, it is still to make an attempt upon
the just motions of my hatred, and this proceeding is more afflictive to me,
coming from a Man to whom I am so much obliged, then if it had come from my
most irreconcilable enemies.

The Princess was so disturbed at Bajazet's discourse, that she was at a loss
how to return any answer to it; she sighed, and in spite of all opposition she
could not refrain shedding some tears, to which the Turkish Emperor gave such
an explication, as they did not deserve; but, Daughter, pursued he, looking
upon her very steadfastly, I perceive this greatly afflicts you; would you have
forgot what you owe to the resentments of your Father, and to the blood of
Ortobulus, and should the Tartar Prince have come to speak to me at your
entreaty? at mine? Just Heavens! cried the sorrowful Princess: Ah! Seignior,
you penetrate into the sentiments of my breast greatly to my disadvantage, to
think I am in the least capable to engage Adanaxus to speak in Themir's favor,
how you o'rwhelm me with joy, my Child, added Bajazet, in giving me this
protestation, let it be to you an indispensable Law; and because possibly we
may not always enjoy this liberty of conversing together, observe diligently
this I am going to say, that what violence soever is used against me, do not
you betray any weakness at it; prefer this charge of mine to all that a
paternal affection can inspire you with: be you generous by my example, and
give up your life with mine, if it be necessary, rather than betray my just
resentments against Themir.

The Princess presently promised the Emperor her Father what he had exacted
from her obedience; the disinteressed Love of the Prince of Tanais had given
her a real tenderness: she had not the power to defend her self from being in
love with a person who was so worthy of her kindness; and being sensible by a
cruel experience, that though he should deserve it less, she could not get him
from her breast, she withdrew to her own Apartment so drowned in sorrow, and
filled with despite, that she had almost resolved upon some actions that would
have been unworthy both of her moderation and courage. She made Xaira to be
called, to whom she recited all that Bajazet had told her, and accompanying her
discourse with a thousand reproaches against her faithless adorer, she stirred
up so much pity in her woman, that she appeared as much afflicted as the
Princess. He is unfaithful, this Arsanes, said she to her, who seemed so little
capable of infidelity; he betraies both his oaths, and my hopes, and not only
forgets the Love he promised Neris, but he would with his own hands deliver her
into those of an unworthy Rival. Ah! Xaira, how treacherous is the Sex of Men,
how fatal is that of ours, and how wretched and little experienced do we
discover our selves, when we believe any thing that Mankind tells us? Xaira
made her no answer but with her tears, which were mingled with those of the
Princess, but fate was preparing for them occasions of grief that were more
legitimate, and they ought to have reserved those they then shed for a more
pressing opportunity.

Bajazet was Master of the motions of his Soul, and kept them from breaking out
by any action contrary to his constancy; but he could not prevent the
impression they made upon his health. The Prince of Tanais his visit had
extremely troubled him; that of Asteria had much increased it, and all this
succeeding the preparatory of an unworthy punishment, and of a long retinue of
miseries, made him fall into a sickness which he no sooner felt coming upon
him, but he judged it would be his mortal one. If he was affected with it, it
was only with joy; and the violence of his distemper did not in the least
deprive him of his reason, for he perceived with pleasure by the diminution of
his health, that his sufferings were now ready to take their leave of him, and
to end with his life. Yet he lay languishing many days; but finding himself
almost at his last period, he ordered that Asteria should be called; and the
Princess observing in his countenance the infallible presages of his death,
fell into such an agony of grief, that it wanted but little to cast her into
the resembling condition. The dying Emperor endeavored as well as he could to
comfort her; he commanded her to receive the assistances of the Prince of
Tanais, as from the only person could give her such as were generous, and
disinteressed; and being desirous to engage that Prince not to betray his
confidence in him; he sent to beg of him the favor to come unto his prison.
The Prince would not have stayed for this Entreaty, if he had not apprehended
his visit might be troublesome: he went to him in all haste, and Bajazet
reaching out his hands to him; merciful death is now going to free me from the
Tyranny of Tamberlain, Seignior, said he to him, and I on a sudden feel that
fate is robbing him of the pleasure to bring me new persecutions, or to
exercise his generosity, if ever he should be made capable of it. I should look
upon this so much longed for moment without any trouble, if I did not apprehend
it would prove fatal to the unfortunate Asteria; and that having no longer the
resolution of her Father to support her, she will fall into a misery that will
be more dreadful to her than the most shameful death in the world. Relieve me,
Seignior, from this fear, and please to give me your promise to protect a
deplorable Princess, whom at my death I commit into your hands. Captivity,
death, and the other caprices of fortune have not yet been capable to render
Bajazet a suppliant; but a paternal affection has greater influence than all
these things, and you see me with tears beseeching you to defend Asteria
against the violence of Themir. She is prudent and courageous; but she is
young, and my Child, promise me, Seignior, that she shall have your pity, and
that in her you will consider the remains of a precious blood, that will owe
all her glory to you, if you afford it a generous succor against the violence
of her Tyrants.

Adanaxus was so moved by Bajazet's discourse, that he could not refrain his
tears; he would not have balanced giving him all the promises he was able to
exact, if he had not apprehended himself too weak to make them good; and this
Impuissance rendering him somewhat reserved; Bajazet, though he knew himself
sufficiently generous, suffered himself to be surprised with some little
diffidence, and ordered the Princess to be called, that she might endeavor to
bring Adanaxus to a determination by her presence, or to give her stricter
orders than yet she had received. She had heard the Prince of Tanais was with
the Emperor, and wavering between a secret desire of seeing him again, and an
enraged passion she thought he justly deserved, she had past away the time of
Bajazet's conversation with him in such disquietudes as can never fully be
expressed: there were still some marks of her trouble upon her countenance, and
the tears she was so prodigal of at her Father's sickness, had made her eyes
all red, as they had put an extreme paleness into her face; but yet this change
made her not unknown to the eyes of the Tartar Prince, he came up three or four
steps to her, and his surprise not permitting him to come any farther, he
stopped and became immovable: and found himself at that juncture of time
capable of doing nothing but giving her his most languishing regards. He at
last pronounced the Name of Neris many times over, with such remarkable
demonstrations of Love, that Asteria was almost certain of her error, and
became as weak as Adanaxus. The Turkish Emperor looking upon them with as great
an astonishment as sensibility, was going to demand of them the reason of their
so strange surprise, but he was prevented by the coming in of Prince Themir.

Possibly he hoped, that as the extremity of his sickness did render him more
weak, it likewise would make him more complying, and he came to make his last
essay to conquer his valiant resolution: but it seemed to have an accession by
the sight of Themir; and Bajazet imagining that that Prince came but to
tyrannize over the last moments of his life, was so seized with rage and
horror, that he fell into mortal convulsions. The Princess ran to him almost
distracted with grief, and the Prince of Tanais making an effort upon himself
to succor a man who was become so dear to him, sent for all Tamberlain's
Physicians, though their art to him was unprofitable. Bajazet gave them no
other signs of life, but by his looks, which though dying, yet expressed the
horror he had for Themir; and expiring in the Arms of the afflicted Asteria,
she had reason enough to make her reproaches against Themir, for that his visit
had some minutes sooner hastened the death of the unfortunate Bajazet.

She did not conceal from him this new cause of her resentment; but forcing
away those Sobs which hindered her Speech; Go on, Barbarian, said she to him,
expose me still to thy sight for some time, and by that excess of thy cruelty
join the miserable Asteria to the Emperor her Father, and to Prince Ortobulus.
Those words having struck Prince Adanaxus to the Soul, he went to conjure
Themir to render himself sensible, now it was in his power, and to grant to the
tears of Asteria some hours of solitude. But Themir too much hated his Brother,
and had observed him to be too favorably distinguished by the Turkish Emperor,
and his Daughter, to receive his Counsels with any patience. I did not come
hither, said he very fiercely to him, to receive any advice from you; and I can
scarcely apprehend the motive of this confidence, though I would instantly
punish the Author of it, if I did not observe in it some circumstances which I
would examine before ever I did inflict that punishment. Adanaxus found himself
no longer to be in a suffering humor, and since he knew his Neris was Asteria,
he quickly perceived in Themir such qualities that might make him dispense with
his wonted moderation. What would be a boldness in Another, said he to him,
must be called by another name in the Prince of Tanais; and if till now the
respect I owed to the Emperor has constrained me to some observances; even that
respect obliges me to defend in my person the honor of his blood, and to
prevent the doing any outrage to it. Themir stormed at those big words he said
to him, and but that Axalla very fortunately came in, the presence of the
Princess would not have been powerful enough to have kept the two Brothers from
a bloody engagement: but that Illustrious Favorite making use of the power he
had over the spirit of Adanaxus, to oblige him to withdraw, and the extreme
affliction that Asteria was in, having at last constrained Themir to leave her
to her repose, this difference was suspended, and Axalla ran to advertise the
Emperor of it, that so he might put his Authority in force to make an absolute
accommodation between them.

But on the other hand the proud Themir was no sooner got to the Palace, but he
caused Odmar to be sought for: This person had been Governor of the Prince of
Tartary, of a wicked and pernitions spirit, and a barbarous humor, and who had
inspired into him by a dangerous education, those violences and furious
resolutions, which made him capable of so many cruelties, and he would lay his
contrivances with so much artifice and security, that though he had been of his
blood, they could not have more resembled those of Odmar. As he was Themir's
only confident, it was in the Counsels of a man so capable as he was to give
him such as were conformable to the violent transports he was at that time in,
that that Prince was so earnest to have him found out, that he might be
relieved from the trouble that possessed him, whilst the afflicted Asteria poured
out a flood of tears for her Father's death, in her Apartment of the Palace,
whither she had been reconducted; and Axalla, who found the Emperor engaged
with some of his Nobles about very important Affairs, could not say any any
thing to him of the Princess; but being by his Orders commanded to attend him,
Adanaxus was deprived of the consolations that that Prince might give him, and
of learning from him the truth of her adventure, and his coming again to know
that Asteria proved to be his Neris.

The End of the First Part of Asteria.
ASTERIA, OR TAMBERLAIN. A NOVEL.
The Second PART.
THe First Counsels that Odmar gave Themir, after he had understood what had
past in Bajazet's prison, were to search into the Sentiments which induced the
Prince of Tanais to be so sensible of his loss, and Asteria's grief; and what
made him so fierce in his Answers; and pressing Themir with an opinion that
they might possibly proceed from Love, he instilled into him a hatred against
the young Prince, which proved the occasion of a very violent jealousy.

They fell presently upon their search, and as nothing was difficult to them,
they made the next day all those come before them, who had attended Bajazet in
in his sickness; and the least promise of a Prince, who was able to do all
things, made them affirm that before Themir came into the room, the Turkish
Emperor, and Adanaxus frequently flung themselves into one another embraces;
at the sight of Asteria the Prince of Tanais seemed extraordinarily surprised,
and had often called her by another Name then that they knew her by: there was
nothing more needful to persuade suspicious spirits, than that the acquaintance
of the Princess and Adanaxus was not of a new foundation, but there was a
particular understanding and intrigue between them. In Themir's first rage, he
thought upon nothing, but stabbing his Brother before Asteria's face; but
Odmar, who was more prudent in his cruelty, convinced him that it would be a
great deal better to destroy such an Enemy with more safety, and less noise.

Themir too much relied upon Odmar's advice, not to submit himself to it; and
fearing lest the Prince of Tanais should find out some way to see the Princess,
he was resolved to take the surest measures he could to prevent him in it: and
addressing himself to the Emperor, he told him, that Asteria being deprived of
having any further fears for her Father, might be contriving now how to make
her escape, and therefore it would be requisite to have her Guards doubled, and
not to permit any body to make her any Visits. Tamberlain presently consented
to that new precaution, and made Themir Master of that affair, who immediately
commanded an Officer to go and double Asteria's Guard, and to forbid any
entrance into her Apartment besides himself; the Officer obeyed him, but as he
was coming up to the Princess's Chamber, he met Adanaxus, who was just joined
with Axalla, as he was coming from it; the sight of the Guards made the Prince
question the truth of it; he presently asked them what was the occasion of
their being in that place; and having learned it, his first choler had e'n
almost proved fatal to them. He had laid his hand upon his Cimetar, but the
prudent Axalla representing to him the necessity he had to suffer Themir freely
to act his pleasure, through his want of power to oppose him in it with
success, and that by such a violent procedure he might possibly loose the means
of being serviceable to the Princess with the Emperor, who was so strangely
fond on Themir, that he looked upon him as one, whom he had not the power to
deny any thing. Adanaxus was persuaded by him, contenting himself with a deep
sigh; he was just going to give Axalla an account of his acquaintance with
Asteria; not having as yet met with any convenient opportunity to do it, as
also of the design he had to go and aggravate to Tamberlain the cruelties that
were used against an illustrious, and a miserable Princess, when he perceived
Themir coming toward him, whose impatience of knowing whether his Orders were
put in execution had caused him to be upon the back of the Guards; they looked
upon one another with eyes that no whit discovered the relation that was
between them, and Themir beginning the discourse in a very opprobrious and
scornful manner; have you been consoling Asteria after the Death of Bajazet,
said he to him? and may we hope that the acknowledgement she owes you will be
any obligation to make her satisfy the Emperor's pleasure and my desires? you
express your desires by violences so outrageous to a generous breast, replied
Adanaxus, that I can scarce believe they can be favorably heard: and the
negotiations I have undertaken in your favor are too ill grounded to give you
any hopes of their happy success; the endeavors you use in explaining them,
answered Themir, do contribute much to the rendering of them unprofitable, and I
have great obligations to you which I am sufficiently informed of, we may one
day discourse of them more openly, added he, with a furious look; in the mean
time, I shall go and know of the Princess what you have done for me. As he
ended those words, he turned toward Asteria's Apartment, and Axalla got the
Prince of Tanais away, for fear lest at the return some other discourses more
fierce and bitter should make them proceed to worse actions.

I will leave you near Asteria, said Adanaxus to him, when they were got to
another place. You are just now come from her, have you not procured some
abatement of her grief? or does she still abandon her self to it with the same
violence? I did not entertain her long, replied Axalla; but, Seignior, since
you are pleased to speak of Asteria, preferably to what we may say of Themir,
give me leave to take notice, that you seem to be very sensible of her
misfortunes, and the scruple you made of seeing her has not been able to stand
against the first moments of her sight. Ah! dear Axalla, answered the Prince,
it is not from to day that her sight has had its effect upon my heart, and to
tell you in one word the most surprising thing that ever you have heard; that
Asteria whom you see at Samarcanda, is the same Neris to whom I did devote my
self in the Court of the Grecian Emperor. What? Seignior, interrupted Axalla,
can it be true you tell me? and has the Daughter of Bajazet before this last
Captivity felt the miseries of a former one? Alas, answered Adanaxus, it is but
too certain for my repose: yes, Axalla, it is the Father of Neris, to whom
Tamberlain has procured all these misfortunes; I am of that blood which is so
justly hateful to her; but what heightens my affliction to the last extremity,
is that I have made use of all my Rhetoric to get her to be delivered over to
the barbarous Themir; and she may suspect me of having preferred a base and
unworthy complaisance for the desires of of my Father, to that fidelity which
is redevable from me to her.

Axalla could scarce recover himself out of this surprise, and any other
besides the Prince would have had a difficult task to convince him of the
reality of what he then heard; but his sincerity not leaving in him any room to
doubt of so extraordinary a truth, and foreseeing the disorders that this
accident was likely to bring into the Imperial House of Tartary. Ah! Seignior,
said he to the Prince with grief, how fatal is this Neris to those States where
her destiny has conducted her, and how cruel a way does she take to revenge
Bajazet of the rigours of his captivity: let us not think of the revenges she
may exercise over the Children of Tamberlain, answered Adanaxus, and reflect
upon nothing but how to make her know the real sentiments of Arsanes: If I did
follow my transports, I should endeavor to find at her feet either my death or
justification; but yet I am not less respectful than she is cruel; my sight
would possibly trouble her and yet I study the tranquillity of her life: go
then, and see her, I conjure you, you are now acquainted with our Interests;
improve those of the passionate Adanaxus; the tears that Neris sheds, have not
concealed her anger from me, and whether she considers me as the son of the
Tyrant, or as a Lover that is unworthy of her, it is most certain that she
endeavors to shun me.

So far as Axalla durst venture himself in the favor of Adanaxus, being more
generous then he was politic, he made him a promise to do whatsoever he
desired; whereupon the Prince reassumed some hopes, but they were cruelly
abused; when Axalla told him, that having been to see Asteria, his entrance
into her apartment had been refused him. This indignity was very outrageous to
such a person as he was; but he presently understood that this was an effect of
Themir's precautions, and of Odmar's counsels; and the only thing he then could
do, was to advise the Prince to patience; but yet it was not in his power to
keep him from making his complaints to the Emperor of the severities that were
u^ed to Asteria.

Seignior said he to him, Bajazet is dead; there only now remains a fair young
Princess in your setters, whose Eminence and Sex should make you dispense with
suffering her to feel the weight of them; yet, Seignior, after the death of a
Father whom she so dearly loved, in a time that she is capable of nothing but
tears; her guards are doubled, she is reduced to seek her consolation in her
grief, and you use such rigorous and cruel securities, as if she was capable of
troubling your Empire, or of teating your Conquests from you: and what opinion
of the Tartars will this treatment cause all the rest of the World to have,
Seignior? they will take us to be Barbarians, and that not without reason; a
little more mildness would make them frame more advantageous Ideas of us, and
the Princess Asteria would have the less to suffer, and the less to complain
of. I do not mean Asteria shall play the Tyrant here, answered Tamberlain, nor
do I think a Conqueror who has destined her for his Son, ought not to give any
advantageous Idea's of his clemency. You are convinced of her hatred for
Themir, as likewise of what she is able to make him undertake to shun it; it is
that consideration which makes me permit those precautions he has taken; if she
was less violent, I would command you to go and see her, and indeavonr to
persuade her, but you are the Son of Tamberlain, and that is sufficient to keep
her from hearkening to you. The Prince would fain have returned his Father an
answer, and possibly would have accquainted him with the reason of his being so
sensible of Asteria's captivity, but the Emperor did not give him time to do
it, but went out about some important affair. Adanaxus clearly perceived that
he could not change the face of things, and therefore retired with his mind
full of a thousand bloody imaginations.

In those measures the Artificious Odmar had caused Themir to take, there was
not a word mentioned of Adanaxus, for fear it might be thought it was a result
of his hatred, and of their first fallings out: and Odmar, who was continually
improving himself in the favor of the Prince of Tanais, that so he might
prevent appearances, would not at all be seen in the matter, but contented
himself with secretly making the dangerous poison to work of which his breast
was so full: He sought out whatsoever might discover to him the intrigue
between Asteria, and Prince Adanaxus, and the effect did so abundantly
recompense his cares, that by seducing two of the domestiques, he came to
understand that they had their first acquaintance at Constantinople, and that
Adanaxus had not run through so many remote places as they had followed him to,
but only to find her out. Odmar overjoyed at this new assurance, confirmed
Themir that his brother was now his Rival, and redoubled a rage in him, the
effects of which were prevented by those very reasons before mentioned.

In this manner two Months were spent, Themir daily proved Asteria's persecutor
which made her lead a life suitable to the grief she had upon her, Adanaxus was
perpetually languishing for her, and the Emperor suffered all things to run
which way was most agreeable to the Son whom he little better then adored.

One night, when Adanaxus could take no repose, he went out of his own
apartment into a great long Tierrace, full the length of Tamberlain's palace;
the Princess's chamber joined to it, and it was to be near it at least that he
chose that place to pass away his hours of inquietude: The Moon shone very
bright, and the Prince of Tanais had no sooner leaned himself against one of
the Ballisters that encompassed the Terrace, but turning his head at the noise
of some sighs he heard emitted near him, he perceived a Lady whom he
immediately knew to be the Princess: her guards, less severe then their Master,
permitted her that liberty, which she only made use of in the night, and she
had so little a desire of discovering her self to him, that she did whatever
she could to prevent his seeing of her: Not that she did not know Adanaxus, but
to prevent her error, she was going to deprive him of her company. But the
Prince did not give her time to do it; he came, and threw himself at her feet,
and kept her by an amorous violence; notwithstanding all her endeavors to get
away from him. It Is true her heart did not absolutely give way to those
resentments; but a motion more powerful then despite, pleading in Adanaxus's
favor, did somewhat qualify an anger that could not withstand the imperious
force of Love, and made that innocent joy prevail of seeing a person dearly
beloved after so long and tedious an absence; the Prince was offering several
times to speak, without being able to find expressions: this silence was looked
upon by Asteria as a Remorse, though she found her self disposed to pardon him
if he was truly penitent, yet she had no mind to make a present discovery of
her weakness to him; what transports do bring you again to Asteria's feet, said
she to him, is it in favor of Themir that you come with this submission, and
do you address your self to me, as to the unfortunate Bajazet, to desire my
hand for the murderer of my Brother? This reproach gave the Prince of Tanais
some new hopes, and as jealousy is not a work of indifference, he thought if
that was the real cause of Asteria's anger, he ought not to believe it
invincible. I do not lie at your feet as Themir's protector, Madam, replied he,
it is my Love, which absence and time has not the power to diminish, that has
brought me hither again: And if I have demanded the daughter of the Turkish
Emperor for the Son of Tamberlain, it was through my ignorance that his
Asteria was my adorable Neris. Did not you know it, interrupted the Princess,
have you been the only person in Paleologus's Court, who has been ignorant of
it? my return to Bursia made a sufficient noise to be publicly known; and I am
assured there is not one that dwells at Constantinople, who has not heard that
Neris was Bajazet's daughter. Ah! Madam, replied the Prince, do you think your
loss permitted me to wait patiently at Constantinople, for the effects
wherewith it must needs be attended, and do you believe, Adanaxus, who had
endeavored to make you understand how absolutely he was at your devotion,
could after your departure with any quietness live in a City where only your
fair eyes had the power to keep him? Ah Neris, how injurious is this suspicion,
and how ill a character have you framed of my Love, if you have been capable of
any? being overwhelmed with grief for your absence, I could not find any Asylum
for my despair, but was forced to bear it with that ardor, which is inseparable
from the most passionate adorers over unknown Seas, and through the deserts of
Africa, and without ever being frightened at a thousand deaths which were daily
present to my eyes, I still continued my wandering, and guided only by my grief,
even to that moment in which my destiny proved so happy as to bring me to you
again; and yet you have accused me for having unworthily heard news of you in
Paleologus his Palace, and possibly upon that reflection have hated me. What,
interrupted Asteria once more, is it possible that you should not have had any
knowledge of the truth of my condition? No, Madam, pursued Adanaxus, I have
heard nothing but what has preserved me in my errors; as soon as ever you
disappeared, a violent, as well as hasty seizure reduced my life almost to its
last period; and I was yet languishing under that distemper, when I embarked to
find you out through all the places of the World. Remember, cruel Asteria, the
confidence you made me, and judge whether I ought to look for you in Bursa,
whom I thought in Egypt, in Mauritania, in Ethiopia, or in any other part of
Africa, could I inform my self of Bajazet's daughter, when I was running after
an African Lady, and could I, to say no more, be in that remission you
suspected me of, since I gave you what reserve all the movements of my life,
and all the affections of a heart, which you have wronged by your
mistrustfulness?

The Princess hearkened to Adanaxus his Justification with all that content and
satisfaction which the certainty of a happiness that one desires and hopes for
could produce. I confess, said she to him, when he had done speaking, my
suspicions have been unjust; but, Seignior, consider whither I could do less,
having such probabilities of the truth of your desertion, I was persuaded you
must needs know me, and at a time wherein as much a Son of Tamberlain, and
Brother of Themir as you were, I looked upon you still no otherwise then as a
Prince that was very dear to me, then as a Man in whom the blood of our Tyrants
did strike no horror in me; you came back to Samarcanda, you did to speak the
truth, do a great service for Bajazet, but you refused to see me; and went to
demand me of my Father for one that was a Barbarian, whom I have a thousand
reasons to detest; was not all this enough to allarm my tenderness, can you
find any thing in my resentment to complain of, if you consider the cause of
it, had not an indifference after such an occasion been more injurious for you,
then the anger which I have not been able to conceal? Yes, Madam, answered the
Prince of Tanais, you have too many reasons to look upon me as guilty, and I
have a thousand more to be eternally sensible of your favor and goodness: But
my Princess, ought I not to fear that those great Events which have astonished
all the earth, those tears and sufferings which mine have procured to you, the
outrages you have received from them, and the persecution you are still exposed
to besides this birth which I owe to Tamberlain, should change my destiny, and
keep me from finding in Asteria the Adorable Neris? Seignior, pursued she,
Asteria will always have the same esteem for you as the Slave of Paleologus
had, and she is already sufficiently indebted to you not any longer to conceal
from you, that you have had as great a share in her tears, as the effects of
that fortune which has authorized the shedding of them, as the deaths, the
Prisons, and the ruin of a glorious Empire have sometimes given to other
remembrances; and I confess, that even in this moment I am now speaking to you,
all my sorrow is removed by the joy of my finding you according to my desires.
I should be ungrateful, cried the Prince, if I would not sacrifice my whole
life to testify my acknowledgements of your favors, and indeed what is there I
ought not do to render my self worthy of the glorious esteem of my Princess! I
am convinced you deserve more, pursued Asteria, and the kindness I have for you
is no less redevable to your merit then your services; but, Seignior, how
different is our destiny at Samarcanda from what it was at Constantinople,
every thing went opposite to the desires of Andronicus, and here all things
contribute to those of Themir; the Emperor bears him out in hiscruelty; the
People applaud his crimes; and I have nothing but my hatred to stand by me. You
make nothing then of my Love, pursu'ed the Prince, do you think that shall be
idle whilst Themir is so active? Pray, Madam, judge more kindly of it, it cannot
be either weak or fearful, since it is inspired by you and the zeal of it will
not suffer any thing to be difficult, to give you a discovery of its ardour,
yes, Madam, whilst I enjoy my life, I will be an invincible obstacle to the
vows and protestations of Themir; I know very well there is no way in the World
which he will not attempt to take it from me; but if the Tartars fear him,
without vanity I may say they love me; the Emperor may in little time be less
blind, and more reasonable, and with some help possibly I may e're long present
to my Princess a more happy condition, then that I am as yet constrained to see
her languish in. This hope has no prospect of likelihood in it, replied
Asteria, and how favorable soever Tamberlain may be to you when those changes
shall come upon him, as you fancy; yet he will never be favorable enough to
give the preference of Themir: and then what designs will not your Brother
contrive against your life? He is cruel, ambitious, violent, and what is more,
Adanaxus, he is jealous, he knows that we have formerly been acquainted, though
by what means, it has yet been impossible for me to learn. But I will assure
you since my Father's death he has given me such Intimations of it, as I Have
but too plainly understood. Fear nothing from it, Madam, answered the Prince of
Tanais, I am no longer that weak and diffident Adanaxus, whom the dominering
carriage of an elder Brother did formerly send away from Samarcanda, I am now a
passionate Lover, that will defend what he adores against all the attacks of an
insulting and audacious Rival, I will firmly maintain by my courage the
glorious ambition of deserving you; and when it shall be employed for that
honor there is not any danger that can shock the resolution of Adanaxus.

The Prince would have held the conversation longer, but that Asteria, who was
fearful of being surprised entreated him to retire, but not without a mutual
promise of loving one another, in spite of all the oppositions that might
combat with their passion. Adanaxus spent the rest of the night in a joy he had
never before resented: Nothing more could be desired from Asteria, and if
Themir did prove his persecution, the trouble was not weighty enough to
balance the pleasure he had in thinking how tender he was in the affections of
his Princess: but whilst he was thus diverting himself with the pleasantness of
his thoughts, his destiny was cruelly preparing for him new traverses.

Themir now no longer doubted Adanaxus being his Rival, both what Odmar had
drawn from some of his own Servants, and the other Circumstances in Bajazet's
Prison, made it clear to him; but still as Odmar was never without his spies,
for he employed I know not how many creatures for that purpose, he presently
heard of the interview in in the Terrace, and the two lovers who thought they
had had no other witnesses of their conversation than the Night and their love,
were both seen and heard. Themir was even ready to burst with rage at it, Odmar
likewise was put into a strange fury, and after a long times consideration
about what was most convenient to be done, the advice was that Adanaxus should
be permitted to make an attempt that might be more convincing, that so they may
demand reason of the Emperor: But Odmar, pursued Themir, to what end should we
give him farther time, for him to do me more outrages, are not the affronts he
has done me already great enough? No Seignior, added Odmar, all that you can do
at present, will neither reestablish your repose nor the safety of your love:
But urge the Emperor to put Asteria into your possession, since you are so
desirous to be united to her. Ah, but what shall we do with Adanaxus,
interrupted the cruel Themir? What Seignior, answered Odmar, what other Princes
do that are enraged with those things which prove their trouble, leave to me
the concern of his destiny, it shall be such as shall be worthy of his
boldness, Well then, pursued Themir, i will rest upon your advice, and demand of
the Emperor the last sureties of his love.

At these words Themir went to find out Tamberlain, but as he was coming into
the Terrace where the Prince of Tanais had entertained Asteria, he perceived
him at the other end of it, the sight of Adanaxus, and the place where he
thought he had so lately met with a very sensible outrage inflamed his fury; he
strait forgot Odmar's advice, and fancying his Brother was only walking there
to see the Princess, he made up to him with a precipitation that argued his
impatience: The young Prince very prudently shunned him, perceiving his rage:
But Themir observing it; Stay, said he to him, and give me an account of the
reasons that make you look after my Captive, and of those secret plots you have
laid to night against me. Speak with more respect of so great a Princess, as
you think worthy to be made your Spouse, replied Adanaxus, looking upon him
very fiercely, and consider that you demand a satisfaction from a man that owes
you none, and who is not now in a humor to give you any. What, cried Themir,
do you think to brave me after you have offended me, or do you imagine that my
resentment will spare you? I have suffered so much from your pride, pursued
Adanaxus, as I am resolved to bear with it no longer: who has given you the
privilege of commanding a person over whom you have no other advantage than
what the name of Elder Brother affords you, that you think to make your self
his Master or Emperor? I ought not to give you an account any other ways, than
in sacrificing you to my vengeance, interrupted Themir, putting his hand upon
his sword, and I owe my self that sacrifice upon too many reasons: A very
weighty blow was the consequence of Themir's words, which hit upon Adanaxus's
shoulder, who avoiding the second, put himself into a posture of defense and
would have done it in such a manner as would have been fatal to Themir, if
Axalla with some other Tartars of quality, brought thither by the noise they
made, had not come and slung themselves between them. Themir was so base as to
strike the Prince of Tanais in the arms of those that held him, but seeing it
was impossible for him to satisfy his revenge; Your indiscreet zeal deprives
my resentments of a victim I am going now to demand of the Emperor, said he to
those that kept him off from the Prince. Away he went as soon as he had spoke
these words, and Adanaxus continuing the discourse, You will not, pursued he,
let him come before the Emperor, without giving me the liberty of going to
defend my self? We will follow you thither if you please, Seignior, replied
Axalla: Let us go then, continued the Prince, who came to Tamberlain almost as
soon as Themir. Immediately the Emperor cast his eyes upon the blood that ran
from the wounds of the young Prince, and he was not so little in his
affections, as to behold it without a trouble: what blood is that which runs
down your clothes, Adanaxus, said he to him, It is mine, answered the Prince of
Tanais very modestly: From whom comes this, pursued the Emperor, with looks
that sufficiently denoted the passion he was in? Is there any in Samareanda
that dares lift up his hand against you? Yes, Seignior, interrupted the violent
Themir, there are those that would give him death if you did not hinder them,
and in it give him that punishment he deserves, in affronting me with so much
boldness as he has done: I have a thousand things to accuse him, he has done me
secret offenses, and when I would have had him given me an account why he did
so, with scorn he answered me. As for my discourse, said Adanaxus, it has been
a great deal more moderate than it ought, and as for my action, I believe I
could defend a life; for which the Emperor still reserves some kindness.

Tamberlain then knew with an excess of grief, that his Sons found it difficult
to vanquish that violent antipathy which had disunited them, since that six
years absence had not wrought any change upon them. Though he did in his heart
condemn Themir, and render justice to the discretion of Adanaxus, yet he had
such a tender love for the former, as to sacrifice all his equity to him, and
desiring to reconcile them, Heaven, said he to them, surely has not brought you
together, to engage you in new quarrels, which are so hateful to it: Shall I
never see you in that happy state of friendship, which would render your lives
and my repose pleasant to me? shall it be in a continual uneasieness by your
divisions? Adanaxus, said he to the young Prince, do something to please me,
testify to Themir that you are sorry for the outrage you have done him: And,
you pursued he, addressing himself to the other, receive the submission of your
Brother as becomes you: No Seignior, interrupted Themir, just as Adanaxus, who
had resolved to sacrifice his resentment to the commands of the Emperor, was
going to obey him; I will not pardon him, but let him know by the vengeance you
owe me, that he is not to go unpunished who will dare to offend him that has
the advantage of being your eldest Son. Whatever dispositions the Emperor of
the Tartars had to favor Themir, yet this violent procedure was very
displeasing to him: You may be sure I would punish Adanaxus if he were
criminal, replied he, but I do not see he is so, for having defended a life
which you assaulted, without considering that he is my Son as well as you, and
if the privilege of birth has given you some advantages, that ought not to
make any difference between you in my breast, do not you give me the disquiet
of seeing you rebellious to my will: Submit your self to it Prince, since I
command it you. I must acknowledge my trouble, Seignior, in that I cannot be so
obedient as I ought, pursued Themir, but the crime of Adanaxus then will have
very strange consequences: you ow to my repose and possibly to my life what I
now demand of you: and since you refuse it me I find that I am less happy than
I thought my self to be, and that my loss would not be very considerable to
you. He went out at those words, and Tamberlain who loved him more dearly than
all the world, (though he learned the truth of what had passed from other
faithful persons and from Axalla, in whom he reposed his greatest confidence,)
commanded Adanaxus to do what he could to get the friendship of his Brother. If
Asteria he grateful, added he, you have a sure way to appease the resentment of
the cruel Themir, Bajazet is no longer in a condition to impose any laws upon
her, intercede for your Brother, and do your endeavors to overcome an unjust
aversion: She ought to esteem you and credit you, after what you have done for
her; and if you can incline her to be favorable to Themir, you will engage him
to your friendship and to clemency, and you will procure me a repose, which it
is impossible for me to enjoy, so long as you are disunited.

The Prince of Tanais found in himself no disposition to give him that
obedience he desired: There were within him such obstacles against it as were
not to be vanquished, and perceiving the Emperor fixed upon the happiness of
Themir, he went away from him, resolving rather to perish, than to see Neris in
the power of a Rival, and of such a one whom she mortally hated.

But whilst by the diligence and care of Axalla, who waited on him, the
Surgeons applied their remedies to his wounds, Themir was only breathing out
revenge: how he might destroy Adanaxus was the only thing he had been employed
about since he had left the Emperor, and he was no less studious how he might
sacrifice his brother to his implacable hatred, than to possess himself of
Asteria in spite of all right or reason. Tamberlain had put a kind of equality
betwixt them, which made him almost mad, and in the sury he was then in, not
Tamberlain himself was secure from the horror of his designs, he forgot that
his Father had ever had any blameable weaknesses for any besides himself, and
whatsoever he had done like an unjust man or like one enraged, was a pure
effect of his blind passion, the Prince of Tanais had offended him and went
unpunished, he could not digest the outrage, and it was in the Arms of his dear
Odmar, that he went to seek out his cruel consolations. I am betrayed, Odmar,
said he to him, Adanaxus triumphs over the weakness of the Emperor, and he is
ceased to be what heretofore he was. I thought it was sufficient to make my
complaints, to have my revenge granted, and that Tamberlain would have
abandoned that Rival to the safety of my repose. But I am Victim on the account
of love, and if I give him time to gain upon that Spirit which is already
wavering betwixt us, I may also be the victim on that of nature. But Odmar, he
must perish, it must be all his blood that must satisfy my despair, and assure
my pretensions. Well, Seignior, he shall perish interrupted Odmar, with that
fury that ordinarily follows the resolution of great crimes, and we will
sacrifice to your repose a victim that is so much your due: Let us have an
ungrateful captive, and if it be necessary let us carry your revenge even to
Tamberlain, do you dissemble and leave to me the care of managing the rest.
Adanaxus must needs fall under the designs that I have laid, and that love
which so much crosses yours, must be the occasion of his ruin. I will cause
him to be suspected by the Emperor for making an attempt upon his Throne and
upon his Life, and invelop him in the horrors of a crime of which I shall not
find it difficult to contrive sufficient probabilities. Tamberlain is jealous
of his glory, and of the Sovereign Authority. Adanaxus shall dye hated by his
father, his Ruin shall appear legitimate, you shall enjoy the tranquillity
that that can procure you, and if the Emperor by an unheard of inconstancy,
protects him and abandons you, you shall then break out, the revolt will be
permitted you and it may be something more. But Prince, pursued Odmar,
perceiving Themir to grow pale, you change color what makes you to despair,
does nature still seem to work in you? Ah! think that Adanaxus is beloved by
the ungrateful Asteria, and that he may yet usurp the power and influence you
have got over the Emperor's mind, to stir you up to a revenge that is
legitimate.

These fatal counsels which flattered Themir's fury, began to work a calm upon
his spirit, he resolved to feign obedience to the commands of Tamberlain,
whilst Odmar was laying his designs, and the Emperor at last taking that
dissimulation for a sincere return, forgot the disquiets that their enmity had
raised in him.

But whilst Themir, whose jealousy still kept up his cruel humor, hid his
bloody intentions under indifferent appearances, the Princess Asteria had some
secret fore-notices of it. She was not ignorant of what the unmerciful Prince
was capable, and when Odmar was laboring the performance of his horrible
designs, she trembled for the Prince whom they threatened. At first the joy of
finding Adanaxus faithful again was resented without having any thing to
trouble it, but representing to her self to what perils his love exposed him;
Alas! said she, if the Prince of Tanais came back to Samarcanda, but to serve
as a Victime to the cruelties of Themir, wherefore has he justified himself? I
was not any whit concerned in his life, so long as I doubted his heart; but he
is innocent, and now my tenderness makes me sensible of all that interesses
him, Ah! Themir, spare his blood, if you have any consideration for my life, or
at least complete all thy crimes by the death of Asteria.

The Princess made not these complaints upon light and trivial conjectures,
Themir was not reserved enough punctually to observe the silence that Odmar
imposed upon him; and being transported by his choler, when he was with the
Princess, he gave her by his threatening very great suspicions of some bloody
enterprise.

Time made his intentions break forth, Odmar gave out such orders as were very
faithfully executed, and they labored night and day to make the Prince
suspected by the Emperor. The weakness he had for Themir, was not the only one
of which he was capable; whatsoever concerned his authority, was very
afflicting to him, and he was jealous of it after an extraordinary manner,
Odmar had found some persons, whom the hopes of raising their fortunes had made
his creatures, and caused several hints to be given to Tamberlain, which all
agreed in the main, yet they came from different persons. His quality of being
Governor to Themir and those places of eminence he was in, made him greatly
honored among the Tartars, and having spent his whole life in Cabals, and by a
tedious consultation thought upon all things that made to his advantage, and
was pleasing to him, it was not difficult for him to hit upon such treasons as
he had contrived against him, and to gain persons of the same constitutions and
temper as he was: at by his wicked and malicious orders, the first thing that
shocked Tamberlain's spirit, and that submitted reason and truth to the
weakness of fear, was a person's telling him that Adanaxus had held very
blamable correspondencies with Bajazet: Which was presently backed with
another acquainting him, that being most passionately in love with his
Daughter, he had returned to Samarcanda only to quit him from his fetters; that
he had several times made an attempt upon the fidelity of the Ottoman Prince's
Guards to procure his escape; that he sided with his Sons, in the design of
coming to seek their revenge of him; that to that purpose he held secret
Intelligences with the Tartars, and that an Intestine War joined to the former
fury of the Turks rallied by Bajazet's Sons, might produce very great changes
in his Empire. To these false conjectures were added the reasons of Adanaxus's
extraordinary Rhetoric and earnestness to save Bajazet from his deserved
punishment, and of his care and pains to render the irksomeness of his prison
as pleasant to him as he could: besides they refreshed the Emperors memory
with the excess of grief the Prince had discovered at Bajazet's death; his
private conference in the night on the terrace with Asteria, the difference
that had been between him and Themir and in a word all things that might put an
evil interpretation upon the actions of the innocent Prince of Tanais,
Tamberlain, who upon the like occasion would have lost all affections for
Themir, presently emptyed his breast of all for Adanaxus, and not being capable
of examining any thing, he ordered that Odmar should be found out, to whom he
told all that this treacherous base man knew a great deal better then himself;
and after a great many threats, the cruel Tartar vehemently uttered against the
young Prince, he commanded him to go and secure Adanaxus's person, and to carry
him to the Tower of Samarcanda. Pardon me, Seignior, answered the dissembling
Odmar, if I beg of you not to lay this command upon me, how criminal soever the
Prince of Tanais is, he is the Emperors Son, and the Brother of an illustrious
Prince, whom I have had the honor to bring up; and I don't find my self
powerful enough to go and be the pronouncer of his misfortune. I have a horror
for his wicked designs, as I have pity for his Youth. You are his Father,
Seignior, use some endeavors upon that occasion and try your utmost efforts to
moderate your resentments, the perfidious wretch spoke after this manner, being
very well persuaded that Tamberlain was too deeply prepossessed with his fear
to hearken to him. What Odmar, said he to him, do you advise me to an
Indulgence which will it may be both cost me my Empire and my life? Your pity
is unjust, and I cannot too severely punish the ambitious Adanaxus: but yet I
will not constrain you; but Calih, continued he, perceiving the Captain of his
Guards coming in, shall be charged with the Commissions that you refuse. In
short, he appointed Calib, who being much about the same humor with Odmar,
went presently to the apartment of the Prince of Tanais with a considerable
Number of the Emperor's Guards.

He was alone when Calib came in, for Axalla had just before left him; his
love, his justification, and his quarrel with Themir was for several hours the
Subjects of their discourse; and he was still reflecting upon what they had
said, when he perceived Calib coming in, what would you have, said the Prince
to him not very well knowing him? Your Sword, Seignior, replied Calib, which
the Emperor commands you to put into my hands, and to go along with me to the
Tower of Samarcanda: As I had never been wont to receive the honor of any
visits from Calib, answered Adanaxus, I thought at first he only came thither
to make me some extraordinary complements, shall I not see the Emperor
continued he, and will you tell me nothing of my crime? I have no further
orders, Seignior, replied Calib, then to conduct you to the Tower: and for the
satisfaction you desire of me, I must confess I was never made a Confident of
the secrets of my Master. You act discreetly, replied the Prince; here Calib,
take the Sword that you demand of me, the name of the Emperor shall make me at
any time render my arms; let us go to the Tower you are to conduct me to; if I
ever do come out of it, I will not forget that you were my guide thither, and
besides will be mindful of your discretion. Calib returned him no answer,
because that Adanaxus just then went out. They were to cross the great terrace
to go into one of the Courts of the Palace where the Chariot waited that was
to carry him. Asteria was leaning at her Chamber-Window, and thinking on the
Prince of Tanais, just as he saw him in the midst of Tamberlain's Guards
without his Sword, though she had been fancying him a thousand times in that
posture before then, yet was not her surprise less great; she gave a horrible
shriek, which obliged the Prince to cast his eyes that way, and he had no
sooner done so, but he perceived her sinking into the arms of Xaira. The news
of his misfortune would have been a great deal less dreadful to her then this
accident proved: He used all his Oratory to persuade Calib to permit him the
favor of going to his Princess; but whether through fear or cruelty, the
Tartar would not consent to it: but he was obliged to go to the Tower without
any more delay, where he was shut up. As soon as he was come thither, they took
care to redouble Asteria's Guards; and besides the affliction she was in, to
know that her servant was become a Prisoner, she was deprived of the
consolation of having daily intelligence from him, being afforded no other
company but that of Themir's of all the Servants she had at Samarcanda.

The Prince of Tanais his being carried to prison occasioned a very
considerable noise in Tamberlain's Court; he was generally beloved, and his
destiny was in a high degree lamented, and amongst the most grave and sober
sort of persons, there were but few of them who would not with all their Souls
have done his virtue justice: But there was nothing to be done in his favor
the zeal of his friends was now unprofitable to him, and against both the
commands and the pleasure of the Emperor, the generous Axalla, as being the
most persuaded of Adanaxus's innocence, became the most sensible of his
misfortune: he saw no likelihood of undeceiving a weak Father, so great a Lover
of his fortune, and prevented by Impostors, who too well knew his humors and
his fears, and had managed their business with a great deal of prudence and
safety; but however he went to see the Emperor and to speak to him concerning
the Prince, but he was presently commanded silence; and judging that he might
endanger himself to be suspected, and consequently to lose his liberty, if he
spoke any more to a Man, who by his transport had made himself incapable of
understanding reason, he retired with an extreme regret but as he did not so
much fear his disgrace any otherwise then as it might give him an absolute
defeat from being any longer in a condition of serving Adanaxus, he made it his
business to gain over to him the gallantest persons of the Court, that he
likewise might have a party to speak in the favor of Adanaxus, and labor his
justification, and try if they could not in time melt down Tamberlain's heart
into some tenderness for his captived Son.

In the mean time Themir was triumphing; Odmar's projects met with such
successful beginnings, that he could not but expect the consequenses of them
would be resembling: The Emperor would hearken to nothing but the counsels of
his Rage and Error, and the ruin of the Prince of Tanais appearing now past
all prevention unto the contrivers of it, his barbarous Brother was before hand
pleasing himself with the agreeable thoughts of it; and his hopes buoying him
up, with such a delightful flattery, he went directly to Asteria, whom he found
in a condition conformable to her grief. But in spite of all her tears and
heaviness, (more charming then ever yet she had appeared to the sight of
Themir) her eyes, which an extraordinary paleness rendered languishing, were
notwithstanding full of a Majestic choler; she was then sitting upon a Couch,
and without ever rising off it, she thus addressed her discourse: Are you come,
said she to him, to make your boast that you have reduced Adanaxus to a Prison,
as a new instance of you cruelty? Is he only guilty because he has with pity
resented the unhappinesses of Bajazet? And as this compassion obliges me to
have a resembling interest for him, should you have proved false to you furious
transports upon my consideration; if you had spared him? I ought to have done
that which you reproach me for, answered the unjust Prince of Tartary, and this
Rival sufficiently deserves my hatred, since I ow your aversion to him. You
only ow it to your crimes, interrupted Asteria, to those barbarous sentiments
which have made you find such sweetness in the death of Ortobulus, in the ruin
of my Mother, in the loss of Bajazet, in my captivity, and in a word in all
your unworthy threatenings of me. Thus Madam, replied Themir, you impute all the
events of fate to me, and I am culpable still, because Adanaxus conspires
against the Emperor. I shall not go about to justify my self any longer to
you; but fear least you do not quite exhaust my patience; such a haughty pride
does not always meet with submissive Souls, and since I have suffered so much
from your ingratitude, I may very lawfully make use of my rights and
privileges. I understand your menaces, pursued the Princess; but since I have
nothing more to fear for Bajazet, they have not the power to frighten me:
consider, Heaven sometimes puts bounds to its anger, it is not always deaf to
the prayers of the unfortunate and miserable, but does reserve still its
thunders for the punishments of Tyrants. You ought then to make a Trial,
answered Themir, how far one may go without its succor and to begin to make a
more profitable use of my Authority. I confess I am tired out with those
tedious and servile respects I have paid you, and in a short time, you shall
either consent to my desires, or else not be in a condition to bring any
obstacle to them. He went away as he ended those words; and though they had
struck a terror into the Princesses soul, yet it was no small relief to her to
see the Barbarian go out of her room, and leave her the liberty of finding
consolations in her constancy against all the afflictions she was overwhelmed
with.

Axalla, and his friends did incessantly labor to put a stop to the most
pressing of them, they examined with all the care they could, when were those
moments that the Emperor found in his breast any return of tenderness for his
young Son, at last they began to find him in a humor to hearken to what might
be said in his favor, then it was they conjured him to make a solid reflection
upon Adanaxus's carriage, and what severity soever he resolved to use against
him, he could not find any of his actions blameable, and deserving
condemnation: his moderation in the unworthy treatments of Themir, his
submission to the commands of the Emperor, and particularly to the last he had
received from him, coming again into his memory, he began to fear he had acted
with too much precipitation; and reproaching himself for it as a default of
paternal love, he perceived himself in one of those inquietudes which
ordinarily do usher in a deep repentance. He was as soon come to himself as he
had been provoked, being incapable of himself to be carried out to any great
violences, but subject to a credulity which made him often take Chimera's for
truths, and the wicked and poisonous counsels of flatterers for a sincere zeal.
These kind of humors almost continually go from one extremity to the other,
Tamberlain past from that so favorably for the Prince of Tanais, that he could
not take any comfort in his being so much enraged against him. I have been too
cruel said he in those reflections, to condemn Adanaxus upon discourses which
I Have not given him time to oppose and answer: Those accusers, may not they be
deceived in what they charge him with, and is his justification impossible?
Weak Prince, continued he, search into the procedures of your Son with more
mildness and tranquillity; what, would you sacrifice him to your fears, and
possibly to your errors? Consider that a Prince elevated upon the Throne of
Asia ought to prevent accidents with a greater moderation; have you seen
Adanaxus in the troops of Bajazet during that absence which has deprived you of
him? Has fame, that publishes all things, ever told you any thing of him that
you have need to complain of? and in the extremity to which Bajazet was reduced
when Adanaxus arrived at Samarcanda, can you find any probability that his
return was designed by the Ottoman Prince, or by his daughter? He saw him not
but by thy orders, and did not obtain his life but by arguments very
advantageous to thy glory, and which it was impossible for thee not to yield
to. Those very arguments which have convinced me, become now thy crimes, thou
would make him suffer punishment for having persuaded thee to be generous. No
Tamberlain, do not thou become the talk or rather the horror of the world by
such an action, but seek the innocence of thy Son and not his ruin, and if he
be deeply smitten with the charms of that beauty, so fatal to the repose of thy
blood, content thy self in bringing despair to his affection by giving that
Asteria to Themir.

This change of the Emperor was soon observed, by the friends and persecutors
of the Prince of Tanais: Odmar was quite enraged at it, and did not doubt but
that the love and care of Axalla did much contribute to it, he would with all
his soul have destroyed him with Adanaxus, but how ruinously ingenious his envy
and revenge were, it could do nothing against Axalla's glory, and he was
obliged to confine his rage only in seeking out ways he thought might be most
fit and proper to counterplot him, in hindering the justification of Adanaxus.

In the mean time Tamberlain came more and more to himself, and was considering
among all those that were about him, who should be the man he had best pitch
upon to be sent to examine the Prince of Tanais, and from his mouth to be
informed when and how he got his acquaintance with Bajazet and Asteria: after a
great deal of balancing upon the election, he concluded that Talmis should be
the man, one who was of a considerable eminence about him, he was endowed with
a great deal of wit and honesty, Tamberlain knew Adanaxus had a high esteem and
service for him, and Talmis appearing more fit than any other to take upon him
such an office, and to discharge it with honor, received the commands of the
Emperor, and performed them with as much justice as zeal. He went to the young
Prince, and addressing himself with all that respect which was due to the Son
of the Emperor, he humbly beseeched him not to take it ill, if he propounded
some questions to him that he had in commission from his Father. Adanaxus
satisfied with his submission, frankly told him all he had before acquainted
Axalla with, and afterward his surprise, when at the death of Bajazet he knew
his Asteria again for Neris: Talmis being informed of the truth, made a very
faithful recital of all the circumstances to the Emperor, and fortified them
with arguments that were so powerful for the innocence of the Prince, that
Tamberlain was more than half persuaded of them, but yet he thought it prudence
to see whether the Princess and Adanaxus would be found in the same story. He
went to her Apartment early the next morning, and after he had excused himself
for the unseasonableness of the hour he had chosen; Madam, said he to her, I am
not of right to flatter my self with the thoughts of obtaining any grace from
you, yet I am come to demand one of you, upon which all my tranquillity does
depend. The Princess thought that Tamberlain was come again to be sollicitous
for Themir, and therefore looking on him very steadfastly, It is not likely in
good earnest, replied she, you should effect a thing that the death of Bajazet
has not been able to make me resolve upon. It Is not that now which brings me to
you, pursued the Emperor, I only am come to demand of you how Adanaxus began
his acquaintance with you, what correspondence Bajazet had with him, and what
intelligences he may still have with your Brothers; and I swear to you, that
were he convicted of a thousand designs either upon my Empire or my life,
Adanaxus should find his pardon from your confession, and that I will sacrifice
my most just resentments to your sincerity. Though the Princess could not much
believe Tamberlain's discourse, yet because she had nothing to hazard in
telling him the truth, she made him the very same relation as the Prince had
done before to Talmis: but indeed if she did pass over her tender affections to
him, it was easily discoverable, that she did it through modesty. It is
sufficient Madam, said the Emperor to her when she had done speaking, I will
keep my word with you, and set Adanaxus's Prison wide open to you. You will do
him justice, answered Asteria, and his innocence is manifest enough to oblige
you to restore him his liberty.

These stories agreeing together wrought a calm upon a great part of
Tamberlain's troubles, the sincerity of the Princess he himself discovered,
Talmis* was no way suspected by him, and nothing now remained but only to
confound the accusers of Adanaxus, the Emperor was just going to send for them
when he saw Odmar coming up to him: The feigned compassion he showed for the
unhappiness of the Prince of Tanais, made Tamberlain believe he would receive
abundance of joy at the appearances of his justification. Odmar, said he to
him, the pity you have testified for my Son, and which I condemned in you was
just: all things persuade me that he is not guilty, and you have appeared so
sensible of his misfortune, that you cannot but receive as great a satisfaction
to learn the happy success of it. This was a thunderclap that made the
perfidious Odmar think it would have struck him dead upon the spot, but as he
was the best man in the world to manage a dissimulation, he concealed his
trouble and confessed that he was over joyed at this resolution. He asked the
Emperor whence it proceeded, and by what means he came to be informed of the
Prince's innocence. Tamberlain with all the obliging civility imaginable, gave
him an exact account of it, and continuing to entertain him with the same
confidence; It is necessary, added he, that those who have been the cause of
Adanaxus's disgrace, should be examined before him, and that their punishment
should revenge his glory, if he was not found guilty of any crime; make them to
be sought out Odmar, they are known to you, and I my self will examine the
source and progress of this calumny. Seignior, answered Odmar, so hasty a
procedure will go near to exasperate them, therefore let us manage the business
with more secrecy, and if you please to take my advice, do not discover your
thoughts, one word is enough to allarm them, and their flight will defeat you
of the revenge you may take, it will be hard for me to get them together, and
bring them here upon other pretenses, give me only time to bring this to pass,
and in the mean while conserve against the Prince Adanaxus, all the appearances
of your first anger. This precaution seemed reasonable to the Emperor, he
embraced Odmar, and entrusting him with the conduct of this affair, he put a
stop to the discovery he so much desired.

As soon as Odmar was gone from him, he gave his rage the full swinge, and
after he had examined whatsoever might put things into disorder again, and make
the accusations seem probable, he saw every way so many things to confound him,
and so little security, that he thought he could not do better than to send
away the informers. As they had done nothing without his orders, he immediately
took this precaution, and sent them from Samarcanda the same night, and having
given them time enough to advance their flight, he went to find out the
Emperor, with a grief and perplexity in his face so admirably counterfeited
that it appeared natural. I saw sufficiently, Seignior, said he to him, that
there was but one word necessary to render your intentions public, and to
counterplot your absolute satisfaction: I have been in vain looking out for
those whom I was charged to bring before you: they are fled, so that none of
them are to be found in Samarcanda. Well then, answered the Emperor, this
flight does fully convince me of the innocence of Adanaxus. If he had been
guilty, his enemies would have stayed without ever fearing any thing of the
event of this business: Yet Odmar, we had best send so many in pursuance after
them, that we may from some of them hear what is become of those fugitives.
Yes, Seignior, answered the faithless Tartar, that is but requisite, and that I
will labor with all the care I can. In short, he sent out several persons, but
he knew very well which way to send them so that they should never be the
wiser: But yet all this could not be managed without some noise: the friends of
the Prince of Tanais had great resentments of joy at it, and Axalla, who only
was cautious of himself upon the consideration of Adanaxus, saw now that it was
time to complete his happiness, and addressed himself to the Emperor to
solicit him for it: The Emperor presently yielded, and commanded him to go
to the Tower, and bring the Prince from it: This was a very pleasing order to a
person who had so tender a passion for him as Axalla had; he accepted of it
with transport, and after he had continued with the Emperor a little while
longer, to take away the relics of his inquietude, he ran with the resembling
fury of a Lover to his dear Adanaxus. Though the Prince could not expect any
thing that might be fatal from Axalla, yet he had a thousand dismal Idea's in
his fancy when he saw him: Must I then dye, my dear Axalla, said he to him
embracing him, and are you come to be a companion of my misfortune? No
Seignior, answered Axalla, I come to restore you liberty, which only your
virtue and the justice of the Emperor has given you. He then acquainted
him-with the change of his condition, the weak effort his enemies had made
against him, and the Prince uncertain of the consequences which that might
occasion, appeared unshaken, he went toward the Palace, informing himself by
the way of Asteria, and he had the joy to know by the acclamations of the
people, that they had been as sensible of his imprisonment, as they were of his
liberty.

When he came up to the Emperor he threw himself at his feer, which action
made him blush through confusion, as it did also cause him to sigh through
repentance. Adanaxus, said he to him, after he had done embracing him, I have
not done any thing against you which I am not resolved to repair, and as I no
longer doubt but that the crimes you have been accused of are only forged, so I
would already have revenged you of those who were the inventers of them, if
they were not got out of the reach of my anger: To be plain with you, I am
sufficiently sensible of your innocence, for it I have believed my tender
affections to you, and you are also redevable for one part of your
justification to the Princess Asteria. You have the freedom to go and pay her
your acknowledgments for it, and judge of the return of my friendship, by this
first effect of my indulgence. Adanaxus blushed to hear his Princess named; and
it was not difficult for Tamberlain to interpret the emotion; but after he had
learned from the Prince's mouth, the same things that Talmis had reported to
him; You have a Rival in Themir, said he to him, whose pretensions are
strengthened upon my promises, and whom I cannot deny my protection against your
flame, though I know that you have the advantage of a longer service, as well
as of the gratitude of the Princess: But Adanaxus, is it not possible to
conquer your self, and by a generous effort -- Seignior, cried the Prince, if I
were unfaithful to Asteria, I could become so to you: He that can prove a
Traitor to his love will never have any great considerations for nature, and I
should render my self worthy of your Chains, if I were capable of doing the
least effort to break those of the Princess.

As the young Prince ended these words, Themir entered; his paleness expressed
the despair he was in, and the looks he darted upon Adanaxus, sufficiently
testified that his Soul was full of a thousand bloody resolutions. Tamberlain
seemed as if he did not mind them, and asked him if he came to share in his
brother's joy to which he returned no answer, and the Emperor according to his
usual complaisance, not being willing to press him any farther, contented
himself in giving to the Prince of Tanais the caresses that were due to him,
and publicly protested that there were not any punishments which those who had
unjustly accused him, ought not to expect.

As soon as Adanaxus had the freedom to retire, he took the benefit of that the
Emperor had given him, to see Asteria, and the jealous looks of Themir were
not powerful enough to prevent him from it. It would be very hard to tell,
which of the two were the most sensible of the pleasure they resented in seeing
one another again: Silence and sighs are the first marks of those kind of joys,
and there is more said in an amorous trouble and confusion, than in a set and
orderly discourse. Oh, how eloquent were the eyes of Adanaxus then, and how
attentive were those of the Princess to hearken to them? As he entered he flung
himself at her feet, and after he had been there a good while, without her
having the least power to make him rise, at last, Madam, said he to her, the
great mystery of my love is known to the Emperor, this knowledge has not
hindered my liberty, and I am come to pay you my acknowledgements for having
procured it me. What an honorable satisfaction is it to me to see my self
prostrate at your feet, and not to ow it to any thing but your self. You ow me
nothing for having done justice to a truth which was profitable to you,
interrupted the Princess, and though I should not have this testimony to your
services, my heart would have compelled me to render it you. Is it possible for
me to forget, without the last ingratitude, that you have been prodigal of your
blood for Neris, treated a wretched Unknown like a Princess, run through Seas
and Land to seek me out, and have done so many generous services for the
unfortunate Bajazet? You set too high a value upon those that are so little
deserving, replied Adanaxus, but as for me my Princess, what do I not ow you,
to suffer at your feet the Son of Tamberlain and the Brother of Themir? I do
not confound the vices of Themir with your virtues, replied Asteria, nor your
services with the outrages that have been done me; and if I do hate your
Brother as one that is worthy of my aversion, I love you, Seignior, because you
deserve to be beloved, and because Bajazet has not imposed upon me such laws as
are contrary to the sentiments of my breast. You see now my fears were but too
well grounded, and you ought not to doubt but that the misfortune you have
escaped was a design of the Prince of Tartar^^ for the future take more
precautions against him, let the Emperor know it was Themir that would have
ruined you. Alas Madam, answered the Prince, the Empire that my Brother has
over the mind of Tamberlain makes your commands be extremely difficult, none
can accuse him without rendering himself at the same time suspected by the
Emperor, and to testify the least suspicion against him would be to prove my
own destroyer. And what will you do then pursued Asteria? Adore you, my
Princess, interrupted Adanaxus with a melting fervency beyond expression, and
this devotion shall be the glorious employment of my life. Your sidelity is
dear to me, replied she, but in this present occasion it is not sufficient for
me, and if you love me you must think upon some way to conserve your self, and
what would you do your self, Madam, added the Prince, I would replied Asteria,
despise Themir unto my last breath, render by my resistance all his pretensions
useless, and though I would not do it for my self, believe me I would do it for
you. Ah Madam, cried the Prince of Tanais: ought I to be afraid of any thing
after this glorious assurance? Alas, Seignior, answered Asteria, this assurance
as sincere as it is, can it do any thing against Irons, Prisons, Impostors, and
to conclude, against all the other ways that Themir is able to make use of to
destroy you? Can my affection render you immortal, and am I more certain of
your life, because I love you? Give me the satisfaction to see you mistrust all
things, and then I shall value whatever you do to put your self in a condition
that may secure you from your enemies. Yes Madam, pursued Adanaxus, I will
obey, I will be careful of my life, I will foresee, if it be possible, the
designs that may be hatched against me, and I will forget nothing that may make
me capable of deserving the favors of my charming Princess.

At the end of these discourses, and some others much resembling them,
Adanaxus, who since he found that his Neris was Asteria, had never met with an
opportunity to demand of her those adventures of hers that he was ignorant of;
burning with an earnest impatience of knowing them, conjured her to give him a
Relation of them which she presently consented to, and thus began her discourse.

The History of the Princess Asteria.
WHen Andronicus defeated the Turks who were to be my guide, I was going from
Bursa to Sebastia to meet my Mother, who was to pass the Winter with the
Emperor; our Troops were on the side of Thrace, Bajazet had designs upon
Constantinople, and it was not believed that in the Winter Paleologus his Sons,
hardened by the little opposition they found, would venture to go into the
lesser Asia; but in their way they took us; I concealed my name, not knowing
into what hands I was fallen; but having learnt it was in Andronicus's, and
afterward understood his sentiments for me, I made it my particular business
to keep it from being known, and through the natural aversion I had for him;
and the fear of seeing Paleologus approve of his Son's Love and of being the
victime of a peace between the two Empires; it fell out very luckily for me
that I did so, the Emperor of Greece would not authorize an alliance unknown,
and in all probability unequal; which gave me a very sensible joy, because my
hatred for Andronicus augmented as soon as ever I had a sight of you. I quickly
perceived how my heart pleaded in your favor by the trouble and melancholiness
I resented, when I beheld you render your submissions with too much assiduity
to the Princess of Greece: and time, and your procedure having assured me of
your heart, I blushed sometimes to think I was the daughter of Bajazet, and
that when I with scorn refused the vows of Andronicus, I hearkened with
pleasure to those of one unknown: but that confusion produced no effects which
were not favorable to you. I told you nothing of my true birth, not so much
out of any mistrustfulness, as out of a certain scruple I then had: I was very
desirous to know whether you had only a kindness for my person; but I did it
out of policy, after you had told me yours. I was not ignorant of Tamberlain's
hatred to the Ottomans: and fearing lest your sentiments should resemble his, I
made that a secret to you, the reserve of which I thought I sufficiently
recompensed by my weakness for you. I began in the mean time not to be in a
power to be silent to you, but had infallibly told you all, if Andronicus had
but for some days suspended the design he had been meditating since the unhappy
success of his enterprise at Constantinople; but he made me be carried away
then when I thought least of it, and those fellows more hardy and resolute then
those of the Emperor, embarked me in a Vessel, which in a short time brought
us to a very strange and lovely House, which they were assured of. At first I
accused the Emperor for this second carrying me away, but I was undeceived,
when Andronicus reduced to his flight by the wicked success of those unfaithful
enterprises of his against his Father, came to find me in the place where I had
been conducted: I was fearful of all things from the violences of a desperate
and furious Spirit; and therefore to inspire him with a greater respect then I
thought he might have had to one unknown, I told him I was daughter to the
Emperor of the Turks: This news appeared to him to be much to his advantage,
and he imagined that in restoring me to Bajazet, he might not only obtain me
from him, but he might with greater facility conquer his Father's Empire, in
promising to share it with me. He then accquainted me with his design, and
desired me to consider of it as an effect of the passion he had to please me.
You may easily believe that the hopes of returning to Bajazet made me resolve
upon some complaisance: at last we arrived at Bursa, and we were received there
with all the joy that could be inspired into the Emperor, and my Mother, by the
return of a daughter whose loss they had bewailed: The Grecian Prince had very
extraordinary honors passed upon him, but when he explained his Intentions to
Bajazet and that he perceived him much averse to favor them, he fell to
reproaches and from thence to threats, which had but too bloody effects. He
went in great fury from Bursa, and marched toward his Father's Army, which he
found driven back by the valor of Ortobulus, who had the command of ours in
the Emperor's absence, even within sight of Constantinople. He made his peace
by a thousand submissions, related his adventures, and seeing the Greeks every
way weakened, he himself secreetly labored the relieving of the Tartars.
Tamberlain solicited by Andronicus, and jealous of Bajazet's glory whom he
hated, got together all the forces of Asia, and brought where ever he went both
horror and desolation. At last this Tamberlain famous by our disgraces, and
eminent by our misfortunes, without any pity burnt our Cities, sacrificed our
people, and reduced, by that fatal success that did attend him, a Prince who
was seen ready to share almost the World, with the rest of the Princes, to that
deplorable condition into which he is fallen.

Whilst these evils were happening, notwithstanding my grief I did not loose
the remembrance of Adanaxus, nor forget the cares of informing my self of him.
I was confirmed of your absence, and was persuaded that you must needs learn
who I was, I did imagine you had not gone from Tamberlain, but only to escape
fighting with my Father, and this very thought gave me a great consolation: at
last Seignior, Bursa was ravaged, afterward Sebastia, Themir haled us from the
Palace, and made us take this voyage to Asia, where we were seen to follow the
Chariot of that cruel Conqueror; and which cost my Mother her life. Our
captivity preceded that of Bajazet's some few days, and I have often heard him
say, that being overwhelmed with a mortal grief, after Ortobulus's misfortune
whom Themir had massacred before his eyes, and the loss of the last battle,
having suffered his Horses to carry him up and down without any design or hope
through unknown deserts. He met with a Shepherd, who was all alone by the side
of a River pleasing himself with playing some rural airs upon his Oaten pipe,
the Emperor looked upon him a long time admiring at the sweetness of his
condition, and then sighing: Oh! Too happy Shepherd, said he to him, how worthy
is thy state of envy, to have nothing to spend but thy days, which bloody
ambition never crosses; Bajazet's calamities will furnish you with matter for
your Songs, and you may hereafter in your pitiful Numbers say, unfortunate
Prince thou shall never more see thy delightful Sebastia, nor thy dear
Ortobulus. This Shepherd with the sight and words of the Emperor, oftered him
his little cottage, but that retreat was not very long serviceable to him.
Themir by his inquisition for him quickly resembled his fate to that of ours.
She ended this discourse with a thousand tears, which made Adanaxus repent that
he had been the unhappy cause of them, and after he had employed some time in
drying them up, he left her, to teturn to the Emperor.

In the mean time Odmar was flattering the transports of Themir with the hopes
of a more successful crime, and promised him the ruin of Adanaxus with very
powerful assuranses, and counseled him to go once more, and make his last
efforts to Asteria. Seignior, said he to the Emperor, I Have now dispensed with
all that has hitherto made me support the contempts of Asteria, will you give
me your consent to impose upon her inclinations to make me happy, for I do not
think you will authorize Adanaxus to thwart my pretensions, and especially upon
the account of Asteria, whom I may call my conquest, by the blood she cost me
whilst he abandoned you. Indeed I have no intention to prefer Adanaxus to you,
answered the Emperor, but you have your liberty to satisfy your Love. But Son,
are you steadfastly resolved to marry a Maid that cannot love you, who will look
upon you as her Tyrant in your most pleasing moments, and become a torment to
your Life. India, China, Egypt, Arabia, have Princesses, who will procure us
such alliances as may be advantageous, and who are blessed with charms, if Fame
may be believed: You will bring to your self a more quiet happiness, and the
daughter of Bajazet will see her folly punished by a contempt she will repent
she had ever merited. No, Seignior replied Themir, I will have no other
happiness then that I demand of you. Well then added Tamberlain, give her some
days respite to her mourning. Seignior, interrupted Themir, Asteria will never
soften by time, and it is unprofitable to throw it away. I will not prescribe
you any long time, pursued the Emperor, and then you shall have all my
Authority. Themir complied with the Emperor and by an affected kind of
submission got himself commended for it. He presently went to fling himself at
the feet of Asteria; and Adanaxus being a greater persecution to him then his
love, he sought out Odmar, who advised him to give the Prince of Tanais the
liberty of seeing the Princess for some few days, that so he may be deprived of
it for ever.

Adanaxus did not trouble himself about forming of bloody designs, but
employing all his desires to his Love, one obliging word from the Princess did
move him more then the possession of an Empire could have done.

He spent one evening with her with as much sweetness and tranquillity, as if
he had neither had Rivals nor enemies, and was taking his leave of her with the
ravishing joy of a successful Lover, when he heard a crying in the Palace, that
the Prince of Tanais was dead. It is impossible to express Asteria's
resentments at these pitiful cries, Adanaxus was so newly gone from her that
she had not had the time to undress her self since that separation, and to hear
his death proclaimed, struck her with an astonishment that gave her almost a
mortal paleness, and she fell into a swoon that held her so long, as made her
women believe she was quite expired.

The cries increased up and down the Palace, Tamberlain was frightened at it,
and Axalla enraged at the cruel destiny of so young a Prince, ran to the place
where the massacred body lay (which was at the foot of a pair of Stairs that
led to Asteria's Apartment.) He embraced it all bloody as it was, but it was
not long e're by the light of several Flambeaus that the Servants brought, he
discovered that the person departed was Themir and not Adanaxus: Oh how great
was Axalla's joy? What was the surprise of Odmar in beholding his dear hopes in
the condition he thought the Prince of Tanais had been. The Emperor was also
come to this place, and by his transports testified, how cruelly the loss of a
Son so tenderly beloved, was like to be revenged. Adanaxus came thither too at
the same time, and troubled at Themir's fate; how excusable soever he would
have been; if he had not bewailed it. Ah! Seignior, said he to Tamberlain,
whosoever is the murderer of my Brother, he shall only dye by my hands. It Is
I, interrupted Odmar, with an undaunted resolution, it is I who have given to
the unfortunate Themir, that destiny which I only designed for thee: and when I
thought thy death certain, I my self was the publisher of it by my outcries. I
saw you go to Asteria's Apartment, and having long since resolved thy
destruction, I waited here to sacrifice thee, to give a pleasing surprise to
Themir by the noise of thy death, my first designs not having been successful,
I would not ow the execution of this last to any other hand; than mine own: but
fortune has proved base to me, and betrayed my intentions, and Themir who in
all likelihood would have prevented me with resembling ones, is now
unfortunately fallen under the horror of my stabs. Odmar spoke like a man
despairing, who only owed his unhappiness to his crimes; and perceiving the
astonishment that every body was in by his discourse, gave him opportunity to
pursue it. Themir was wicked through my care to make him so; continued he, for
finding dispositions in him conformable to my desires, I made it my business to
improve the malignity of them: He was absolutely mine and I was ambitious to
see him have the Empire, but Tamberlain, be not surprised with so blind a
passion, but render justice to nature; for Themir was my Son, and in the first
days of your own, your absence during the war of China, and the residence of
your Queen at Cambalu, favoring my ambition, I very happily made an exchange
of them: your young Prince died naturally in the exile to which I had sent him,
and mine enjoying his place, would, had it not been for this fatal accident,
have reigned over the Tartars: He was ignorant of his birth, and I had used my
utmost industry, and address to make him dear to you, and Adanaxus to meet with
your hatred, or at least your indifference, whom I looked upon as the only
obstacle that could trouble me. But yet after the precaution of so many years,
and the flattering Idea's I fed my self withal, I have inhumanely deprived my
self of him, these are the effects of unconstant fortune, she yet demands one
more, and he who has not trembled to reach the heart of his Son, ought not to
have any pity for his own. At those words he ran a poniard up into his body,
and then throwing himself upon that of Themir, he there expired in a moment.
The death and the last words of Odmar produced new causes of astonishment,
Tamberlain had not the power to recover himself out of his, to think that he
had given the whole Empire of his Soul to an impostor, who had committed so
many injustices against him, and caused the ruin of his true Son. This
dreadful accident which was so great a justification to the Prince of Tanais,
obliged the Emperor to make him a public reparation for what was past, and
not being able to tarry any longer in a place that was floating with such
odious blood, he retired to his Apartment, and the generous Adanaxus after he
had ordered that the wretched Bodies should be buried, returned to the
Princess, not doubting but that the report of his death had sufficiently
alarmed her.

He found her in that dismal swoon she fell into at the first outcry. Just
Heavens, cried he, seeing her in that condition, shall I never enjoy a
happiness without such afflicting allays, those tears and the name of the
Princess which he several times repeated, began to make her come to her self.
Asteria at last opened her eyes, and casting them upon Adanaxus; Ah! Seignior,
said she to him, is it you I behold? Yes, Madam, replied the Prince, Themir has
met with that destiny which was prepared for me, Ortobulus is revenged, I am
without a Rival, I now need not fear any other to persecute me, and for my
greater joy, that Themir, who was so odious to my Princess by too powerful
reasons, was not of the blood of Adanaxus. The Prince of Tanais who perceived
Asteria, began to gather strength by the joy he had inspired into her at the
Relation, gave her a true and full account of all the circumstances, and
passages of it, how he had escaped death in passing through the Terrace.

The rest of the Night passed in confusion, Asteria beheld her affection
innocent, the murderer of Ortobulus was not her Lover's Brother, and with a
greater ease and tranquillity than ever, enjoyed the pleasure of seeing her
self beloved by him.

This accident divested Tamberlain of that cruel Mien he had before, and which
made him be looked upon with so much fear; now all his severity with Themir had
its sepulture; his eyes lost their fury; and put a very pleasing sweetness on
his face, and all those whom the address and subtlety of Odmar, and his
complaisances for Themir, had removed from his esteem, received then fresh
assurances of it from him.

As Adanaxus only now took up all his thoughts, he minded nothing but how to
complete his happiness. He went to visit Asteria, testified to her the sincere
grief he had at the afflictions he had procured her, restored her all the
conquests he had made in her Father's Kingdom, to dispose of how she pleased,
and offered her the Crown of the Tartars with Adanaxus. It was not possible
that such a proffer as this could be displeasing to the Princess, She loved the
Prince of Tanais, Bajazet had given him his esteem, and she thought she could
not do any wrong to his memory in marrying him; but as he had left her
Brothers, she acquainted the Emperor that she could not dispose of her self
without their allowance. This reason appeared to him but just and equitable, he
ordered Alizanes and Calixtus two illustrious Tartars, to go and find them out.
The impatience of Adanaxus made some little murmur at it, but he was
necessitated to submit to the Princess. Bajazet's Sons were found on the ruins
of the Ottoman Empire, rallying by the help of their Neighbors such forces,
they thought might be sufficient to go out against Tamberlain. The Letters of
Asteria and the conquests which were restored, put an end to that design; they
now were thinking only how to raise up the Throne of Bajazet; which Mahomet the
youngest of those Sons some few years after the death of the other, brought
again to its first splendor. The Tartars returned, having managed their
negotiation with success, Adanaxus's love was authorized, and the marriage of
Asteria recompensed his fidelity in the great City of Samarcanda, where they
passed away their days in a lasting happiness, after so many long and tedious
persecutions.

FINIS.
Books Printed for and are to be sold by Robert Sollers at the flying Horse, in
St. Paul's Church yard.
SErmons preached upon several occasions before the King at Whitehal. By the
right reverend Father in God, John Wilkins, late Lord Bishop of Chester, to
which is added a Discourse concerning the Beauty of providence by the same
Author.

Syncrisis or the most natural and easy Method of learning Latin by comparing
it with English. Together with the holy History of Scripture War: Or the sacred
art Military-Illustrated in fourteen copper Plates: With the rude translation
opposite for the exercise of those that begin to make Latin, by E. Coals.

Nugae venales or the Complaisant Companion: Being new Jests Domestic and
foreign, Bulls, Rodomantad's pleasant Novels and Miscellanies.

The Miss Displayed with all her Wedding Arts and Circumventions in which
Historical Narration are detested, her selfish Contrivances, Modest pretenses,
and subtle stratagems.

A Present for a Papist: Or the Life and Death of Pope Joan. Plainly proving
out of the Printed Copies, and Manuscripts of Popish writers and others, that a
Woman called Joan, was really Pope of Rome; and was there deliverd of a Bastard
Son in the open street as she went in Solemn procession

The Life and Death of Alexander the Great, (...)


