THE HISTORY OF THE Late Proceedings OF THE STUDENTS OF THE COLLEGE AT
EDENBOROUGH.

Which has occasioned the Kings Proclamation for Banishing them Fifteen miles
from the said City. In three several Letters to a worthy Citizen of London.

Published to prevent false Reports.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Janeway, in Queens-head Ally, in Paternoster Row,
1681.

THE FIRST LETTER.
THE manner of it was thus, They had taken up a resolution to Celebrate this
Pageant a week or a fortnight before to which all generally consented. In ord^r
whereto they employed a Carver who erected them a Wooden Holiness or a Pope in
Effigy with Clothes, Tripple Crown, Keys and other necessary habiliments, for
which there was a general Collection amongst the Students. All things being in
readiness on Thursday night, they acquainted some others with it, by which the
rumor came to the Provosts Ears, who was so enraged that he sent for the
Primier and Regents, Commanding them to order the Students to desist from their
enterprise with menaces, that if they would not be would make it a bloody
Christmas to some of them.

After which he went down to the Abbey, to acquaint the Duke and Chancellor with
it. The former was much moved, and the latter swore a great Oath that if they
undertook it he would order six hundred of Lithgows Regiment to be brought
within the Town. (Which is an infringment of the Legal Privileges of the City)
To Cut down all Students where ever they saw above four or five assembled
together. Order also was given that the Guards should be doubled.

But the Students, not being at all dismayed, went on with an entire resolution
to accomplish the project in pursuance of which they would live or die
together. Being encouraged by Merchants and Tradesmen, who by this time were
acquainted with their purpose, and came and offered their assistance, yea most
of the Town, excepting the Magistrates, resolved if Lithgows men were brought
in they would Lay out the Blew Blanket Flag, seldom laid out and taken in
without Bloodshed.

The day being come, they all as well Students as Apprentices with others
convened in the Morning, and at nine a Clock (the Soldiers not being as yet
brought in), the Lads took their opportunity and carried the Pageant to the
High Street, (the Duke being then in the Council-house) and immediately set fire
to it, shouting no Pope, no Pope. Every old Wife thought her self happy that
could get a stroke at it, and made as great a noise as any, Cursing the Pope
and blessing the Students, but they were not well separated till General Daliel
with Lithgows men came rageing through the streets like Lions, but they being
but one Company, they were not regarded.

SIR, Your Servant.
Christmas Day, 1680,
THE Second Letter From another Friend at Edenbrough, giving an Account of the
same.
Edenb. December. 25. 1680. SIR,
THis Night I intend you only the Diversion of our Christmas; some days since
the Boys of the College took a conceit to Burn the Pope, and Antichrist, on
this day, as most proper for it.

They ordered the Pope and his Formalities, to be prepared in good Fashion,
with his Mitre, Crosier, Pastoral Staff, and Robes; but the thing taking Air,
is brought to my Lord Chancellor's Ears, who judging rightly how necessary it
was at this Time, to prevent the beginnings of such Insolences, sent for the
Magistrates, and enjoined them very strictly, to be careful to hinder it; The
Magistrates called the Principal, and Regents; and after severe Intimations to
the Boys, the Principal causes a Bond to be tendered to them, whereby,
considering of what dangerous consequence it might be to Burn the Pope in
Essigie, they were to bind neither to do it this day, nor hereafter: Some
Bearnes took it, but the rest of the Classis insolently refused it; and so the
thing coming to be more apprehended, I am told, that some of the Council met
Yesterday for the Preventing of it, and the Principal Officers of the Forces
were in Arms most part of the Night, that they brought the Companies from
Leith, and gathered all the Forces about, to the Cannogate, without beating of
Drums, that our Magistrates were up all Night; the Provost in the Court of
Guard, and the Bailiffs at the Ports, and this Morning early the Gray-Coats,
the Town-Guards, went to the College, and some other Houses, conducted by the
Town-Mayor, and seized several Scholars judged to be most active, in their
Beds, and committed them to the Cannogate Tolbooth, where they still lie; two
or three of them are English Boys, but they say innocently suspected; one of
them is said to be one Gray, Son to Sir Phil. Gray. A little after Day the
Magistrates sent the Town-Guards again to the College, to prevent any
Rendezvouse there, but the Boys in the mean time met in a place called the
High-School-Yard; and having ordered the Pope, and taken the best Opportunity,
they bring the Pope up Blackfriars -- to the High Street, just about the Time
that a Bailiff ordered by the Magistrates was come that length discharging
tumultuous Meetings, and commanding our Train-Bands to be in Arms; but the
Boys took the Paper from the Officer; and having read a short Accusation
against His Holiness, they set Fire to him with Links, having ordered a Train
within him. About the same Time General Daliel getting the Alarm, for which he
was in readiness, sends in a Squadron of His Majesty's Horse-Guard, conducted
by the Lord L --. with Kettle-Drums, the Kings Standard, and Swords drawn, by
the Cowgate Port, who rid in great haste to the Grass-Market; and the General
himself, with other Companies, follow them with no less haste the same way; the
Companies being followed with three Men carrying Ball, Match and Powder; and by
the Nether-Bow-Port enters the E. of Mar, about the same Time with two
Companies drawn up in one; and before he came the length, the E. of Linlithgow
passing by where the Pope was first fired, draws his Sword, and drives off the
Boys, though they were rude enough; and coming to the Burning Pope, he turned
him over, and caused his Men to draw him under the weynd head; but they fearing
Powder in the Pope's Belly, left him; and the Lads beat the Pope with Sticks
until the Powder took fire, and blew off his head, and then they took the Head
and Chair, and haled him through all the Streets to the Weigh-house: The E. of
Mar marching fast after them with his two Companies; but the Chair being then
broke, the Boys scattered, only they tossed the Head a while, and the E. of
Mar returned as he went up, and the General came from the Grass-Market down
the High Street, and the King's Guard in the same posture as they came in. We
have also had good Guards to day, to suppress the remains of the disorder, our
Train-Bands came not together, yet I must assure you, that in all this business
there were none but Boys only. You may see how careful we are to prevent the
Extravagancies that abound with you, for otherwise all the world knows what
Protestants we are: You need not doubt but this Show would gather concourse
enough, and the People cried, No Pope, No Pope, and made sport enough of the
whole. This Account I hope will help you to pass your Christmas the more
merrily. I am Sir Your Humble Servant.

FINIS.
THE THIRD LETTER.
SIR,
I Hope you have received my last of the 25th. of the last Month, in which I
gave you an account of the conceit the Boys of the College took to burn the
Pope, the Antichrist, on Christmas day last. I gave you also an account of the
endeavors used by the Lord Chancellor the Principal and Regents, and other of
the Magistrates, for the preventing of it, and of the ill effect of those
endeavors, the Bearns notwithstanding carrying on their enterprise in despite
of the opposition they met with from the E. of Mar. General Daliel and other
Soldiers.

Since when our Provosts house has been burnt, whither occasioned by malicious
men, or done accidently I know not, tho it be said that he was threatened with
the burning of his house at Priest-field, and with other injuries, it has also
been made out that fireballs were thrown into it, and that a Barrel of Powder
was found in that part of the house that was unburnt;

And yesterday was published here a Proclamation, That whereas the Lords of the
Council were informed that several disloyal and malicious Persons, frequenting
Edenborough, had instigated the Students of the College to enter into Bonds
and Combinations, and to convocate in Tumults, there was order taken for the
Securing of our Peace, and it being made appear that the Students did enter
into Bonds and Combinations, in which they did oblige themselves, among other
things, contrary to the Laws of this Kingdom, to adhere to one another, if they
were called in question of it, and in confidence of that Seditious Combination
did on the 25. of December last, in a Tumultuary was, assault and affront
several persons, and did associate themselves with Apprentices, and put up blew
Ribbons as signs and cognizances to differ themselves from others, and for
convocating themselves; for which being justly reproved, they did some days
after run up and down the Streets in Tumults, disquieting the Nobility and
Gentry of both Sexes, and threatening the Provost as above, etc. Whereupon the
Lords of the Council by an Act ordered the Gates of the Schools of that
College to be shut up, till they should be fully informed of the Root and
Progress of these disorders, and satisfied by the punishment and submission of
the Offenders. Therefore to prevent any further Seditious Tumults, and
disorders from these Students, they are all commanded to retire 15 miles at
least from this City, within twenty four hours after publication of this
Proclamation, and not to come within our limits without leave of the Privy
Council, under the pain of being punished as Seditious Persons, and Contemners
of the Kings Authority, and their Parents, Tutors, and all others are forbid to
resset or entertain them without giving caution to the Clerks of the Council
for their good behavior.

What our thoughts hereof are I leave you to judge. The Duke is still with us,
but there is a talk of his removing higher up into the Country toward Glasgow.
At your leisure I shall be glad to be informed what your thoughts in England
are of these proceedings: As any thing else of moment occurs you may expect an
account of it from,

Sir, Your most devoted Servant, L. L.
Edinborough, Jan. 22. 1680.

