AN HISTORICAL ACCOUNT OF THE Late Troubles DURING THE WARS of PARIS.
CONTAINING The Material Transactions, and Private Intrigues practiced by the
Rebels and Traitors, for obtaining the Regency and Government. Showing the
Endeavors used by them to maintain a Confederacy disadvantageous to the Kings
Authority.

With the manner of their imprisoning the Court, the Nobility, and the People.

And an Account of the Parliaments Proceedings, in declaring them Enemies to
the King and Government.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Chapman, near Stanhope-Court at Charing Cross.
MDCLXXXVI.

An Historical Account of the late Troubles, during the Wars of Paris:
Containing the material Transactions, and private Intrigues practiced by the
Rebels and Traitors, for obtaining the Regency and Government.
THE Persecution which I suffered during the Authority of Cardinal Richelieu,
being ended with his Life, I thought of returning to Court. The King's
Sickness, and the little Inclination he had to trust his Children and State
with the Queen, made me hope that I should quickly find considerable occasions
of serving her, and giving her at that juncture of Affairs, the same marks of
Fidelity which she had received from me in all the Occurrences, wherein her
Interests, and those of Madam de Chevereuse, were contrary to Cardinal
Richelieu's. When I came to Court, I found it as submissive to his Will after
his Death, as it had been during his Life; his Kindred and his Creatures there
had the same Advantages which he had procured them; and by an effect of his
Fortune (whereof you will find very few Examples) the King (who hated him, and
wished his Ruin) was forced, not only to dissemble it, but also to Authorize
the Disposal, which Cardinal Richelieu made in his Will, of the principal
Charges, and most important Places of his Kingdom. He also chose Cardinal
Mazarin to succeed him in the Government of Affairs, and so was assured of
Reigning much more absolutely after his Death, than the King his Master could
do all the thirty three Years that he enjoyed the Crown. Notwithstanding the
King's Sickness being desperate, there was some probability that things would
e're long change, and that the Queen, or The King 's Brother, so called.
Monsieur, coming to the Regency, would be revenged upon the Remains of
Cardinal Richelieu, for the Injuries which they had received from him.

Cardinal Mazarin, Monsieur Chavigny, and Monsieur de Noyers, who then had the
greatest share in the management of Affairs, resolved to prevent this Mischief,
and to make use of the Power which they had over the King's Mind, to oblige him
to declare the Queen Regent, and to Reconcile themselves to her by this
Service, which ought to appear so much the more considerable to the Queen, as
she believed the King far from any such thoughts, by reason of the little
Inclination he always entertained for her, and because of the League, which he
believed she yet had with the Spaniards, by the means of Madam de Chevreuse,
who had fled into Spain, and was then at Brussels.

Monsieur de Noyers was the first who gave the Queen hopes that they might win
the King, by his Confessor, to Establish her Regent, thinking thereby to tie
her strictly to him, and to exclude Monsieur de Chavigny, whom she most
favored in Cardinal Richelieu's Lifetime; but Monsieur de Noyers soon found
himself far from his designs; for the Confessor had Orders to withdraw, and he
himself was afterward turned out. It seemed to me that this Change did not at
all lessen the Queens Hopes, and that she expected from Cardinal Mazarin, and
Monsieur de Chavigny, the same Service which Monsieur de Noyers designed to pay
her; both of them every day gave her all the assurances of their Fidelity that
she could desire, and she expected a proof thereof, when the Kings Sickness,
growing to such a height that there remained no hipes of Cure, gave them an
opportunity of proposing to him to regulate every thing whilst his Health would
permit him, to choose a Form of Government himself, which might exclude from
the management of Affairs all those whom he held suspected.

This Proposition, although it was apparently against the Queens Interests, did
notwithstanding seem to him too favorable to Her. He could not consent to
declare her Regent, and also could not resolve to share the Authority betwixt
her and Monsieur. The Intelligences which he suspected her guilty of, and the
Pardon which he had but just before granted to Monsieur for the Treaty of
Spain, held him in an Irresolution which he could not have overcome, if the
conditions of the Declaration, which Cardinal Mazarin and Monsieur de Chavigny
proposed to him, had not furnished him with an expedient to diminish the Queens
Power, and render her in some manner Dependent upon the Council, which he
intended to establish. Notwithstanding the Queen and Monsieur, who had had too
many Testimonies of the King's Aversion, and, who almost equally suspected that
he would exclude them from the management of Affairs, sought all manner of ways
to acquire it. I was informed by Monsieur de Chavigny himself, That being sent
to the King from the Queen, to beg his Pardon for all that she had ever done,
and also, for having displeased him in her Conduct, beseeching him particularly
not to believe that she had any hand in the business of Chalais, or, that she
had the least design of Marrying Monsieur after Chalais had killed the King: To
which, he answered Monsieur Chavigny (without being moved) In the condition I
am in I ought to Pardon her, but I am not bound to believe her. Every one
presently then thought they had a Right to pretend to the Regency, to the
Exclusion of one another; and if Monsieur was not long of that mind, he at
least believed that he should be declared Regent with the Queen. The hopes of
the Court, and of all the Kingdom, were too different, and all the State (which
had almost equally suffered during the Favor of Cardinal Richelieu) expected a
Change with too great an Impatience not to receive with joy a Turn from which
every one hoped an Advantage. The different Interests of the chief Men in the
Kingdom, and the most considerable in the Parliament, obliged them to side
either with the Queen or Monsieur; and if the Interests which they made for
them underhand did not break out more, it was because the King's Health, which
seemed something repaired, made them fear lest he should be advertised of their
Practices, and make the provident cares which they took to establish their
Authority after his Death, to pass for a Crime. It was in this juncture, that I
believed it would be of Importance to the Queen to be assured of the The now
Prince of Conde.
Duke d' Anguier: She approved of the Proposal I made of gaining him to her
side, and being a very particular Friend of Coligny's, in whom the Duke d'
Anguien wholly confided, I represented to them both the Advantages that would
accrue to the Queen and the Duke d' Anguien, if united, and that besides the
particular Interest of opposing the Authority of Monsieur, that of the State
also obliged them to it. This Proposition was advantageous enough to the Duke
d' Anguien, to make him readily accept it, therefore he ordered me to endeavor
all I could to bring it about; and because the Commerce I had with him might
perhaps be suspected by the King or Monsieur, especially at a time when they
had but just before given him the Command of the Army, and that by all means it
was of great importance to keep it secret, he defir'd me to give the Queens
Answers only to Coligny, and that we should be the only Witnesses of their
Intelligence. There were no Articles of Agreement in writing; Coligny and my
self were entrusted with their Promises, which were, That the Queen would grant
the Duke d' Anguien the favor of being preferred before Monsieur, not only by
the marks of her Esteem and Confidence, but also in all the Employs from which
she could exclude Monsieur, by such Expedients agreed upon betwixt them as
might not engage him to an open Breach with the Queen. The Duke d' Anguien
promised on his part to be inseparably united to the Queens Interests, and make
his Addresses to her alone for all the favors he desired at Court. The Duke d'
Anguien departed soon after to Command the Army in Flanders, and give a
Beginning to those great things which he so gloriously accomplished. The King,
whose Sickness augmented daily, being willing to give at the end of his Life
some marks of Clemency (either out of Devotion, or to testify to the World,
That Cardinal Richelieu was more to blame than himself for all the Violences
which were done since the Queen Mothers disgrace) consented, That the most
considerable of those who had been Persecuted, should return to Court, to which
he was the more willingly disposed, because the Ministers, foreseeing many
disorders, endeavored to oblige People of Quality to secure themselves against
all that might happen in a Revolution like this that threatened them.

Almost all that had been banished the Court returned, and as there were many
who were bound to the Queen, (either by the Services they had done her, or by
that Bond with which Disgrace ordinarily unites persecuted Persons) there were
few of them, who had not so good an Opinion of their Services, as to expect a
Recompense proportionable to their Ambition; and many believed that the Queen
having promised them every thing, would continue the same Opinion of them in
her Sovereign Authority, which she had in her Disgrace.

The Duke de Beaufort was the Man who entertained the greatest hopes: he had of
a long time been most particularly devoted to the Queens Interests, and she
gave him so public a Proof of her Confidence in him, in making choice of him
to take care of the Dauphin and the Duke of Anjou, one day when they thought
the King was a Dying, that it was not without reason that they began to
consider his Credit, and to find a great deal of likelihood in the Opinion he
endeavored to give them of it.

The Bishop of Beauvais (who was the only Servant of the Queens, whom Cardinal
Richelieu thought too inconsiderable to put away from her, and who by his
assiduity had found an opportunity of Ruining almost all those whom she had a
kindness for) was of Opinion, that he ought not to oppose the Duke of
Beaufort's Favor, and therefore desired to strike in with him to ruin the
Contrivances of Cardinal Mazarin, who began to get ground; they persuaded
themselves that they could easily accomplish their Designs, not only from the
Opinion they had of their Credit, and the experience which the Bishop had made,
how easily he had ruined such as were more considerable to the Queen by their
Services than Cardinal Mazarin, but also, because being Cardinal Richelieu's
Creature, they thought that this Relation alone would Exclude him, and that the
Queen had too publicly condemned the Conduct of Cardinal Richelieu, to
continue in the management of Affairs one who was put in by him, and who was
the Author of the Declaration which the King had just before issued out,
whereat the Queen seemed displeased to the last Degree.

This Confidence made the Duke de Beaufort and the Bishop of Beauvais, neglect
many Precautions, during the latter end of the King's Life, which would have
been necessary to them after his Death, and the Queen also was at this time not
enough resolved to receive the Impressions which they would have given her.

She concealed her mind from me less than from any body else, because I, having
had no Interests but hers, she was not jealous that I would join with any Party
but what she her self should choose.

'Twas she, who desired me to be the Duke de Beaufort's Friend in a Quarrel
with Marshal de la Meilleray; and ordered me to see Cardinal Mazarin, that she
might avoid the occasion of being complained of by the King, who was persuaded,
that she hindered her Servants from visiting those whom he had confided in: So
that I, not being at all suspected by her, might know more easily than any
body, what Impression the Reasons of both Parties made upon her Mind. She began
to fear the imperious and haughty Humor of the Duke de Beaufort, who not
contenting himself to uphold the Pretensions of the Duke de Vendosme his
Father, to the Government of Britany, upheld also the Pretensions of all them,
who had suffered under the Authority of Cardinal Richelieu, thereby not only to
engage all People of Condition, for their particular Interests, in a Cause,
which to them seems Just, but also to have a pretense of striking at Cardinal
Mazarin, and by filling the Principal Offices of the State, to make Creatures,
and give such resplendent marks of his Favor, that the cause thereof might be
attributed to all, that was most capable of satisfying his Ambition and Vanity.

On the other side, the Queen considered, that after having trusted her
Children with the Duke de Beaufort, it would be a fickleness, which all the
World would Condemn, to see her pass, in so short a time, from one extreme to
the other, without any apparent Reason.

Mazarin's and Chavigny's Fidelity were not known to her enough, to be assured,
that they had no hand in the Declaration, and thus finding doubts on all sides,
it was not easy for her to take any Resolution, which she should not repent of
afterward. Notwithstanding the King's Death obliged her to it; and the World
quickly learnt that Cardinal Mazarin's cares had had the success he wished;
for, at a time when 'twas thought that the Queen looked upon him as the Author
of the Declaration, all the displeasure fell upon Monsieur Chavigny, and
whether Cardinal Mazarin was innocent, or that he justified himself at his
Friends cost, who was, in appearance, no more guilty then himself, which soever
it was, he, in fine, stayed in the Council.

But, as I do not pretend to write all the particulars of what passed at this
time, and that what I do at present is rather to keep in my Memory some
Circumstances which I have seen, for which some of my Friends have had a
Curiosity, than to make them public; I will be content to report only what
concerns my self, or at least the things whereof I have been a Witness. Soon
after the Kings Death, it was easy for me to know the increase of the
Cardinals Credit, and the diminution of the Duke de Beaufort's; both appeared
in the confidence the Queen owned she had in the Cardinal, since he, being
directly opposite to the Duke, the Power of the one must entirely ruin the
other.

Notwithstanding the Court was yet very much divided, and they stayed for the
return of Madam de Chevereuse, as the decision of all, they did not look upon
her as one who would be contented to support one of the two Parties, but as one
that would certainly ruin that which depended least upon her; I had less
reason than others had to judge so advantageously of her Authority.

The Queen, who had always testified to me the Friendship she had for her, had
for some time spoken to me of it with Coldness enough, and the uncertainty I
saw her in, whether she should let her return to Court, made me doubt no longer
if the Bishop of Beauvais's ill Offices had not made as great an Impression
against her, as against all the rest whom he had attempted to ruin.

The Queen had already ordered me to visit Cardinal Mazarin, and though she
approved the Declaration I made to him, That I could not be his Friend and
Servant, but so far as I saw him adhered to the Queens Service, and whilst he
did in great and little things what might be expected from an honest man, and
one worthy the Employ he had; yet I knew that she wished I had spoke to him
with less reserve, and had promised him every thing as easily as many others,
who were the more readily engaged to do so, because they were resolved not to
stand to any thing, but so far as their Interest obliged them: notwithstanding
she appeared satisfied with my Visit, and testified, That she desired nothing
more of me than what I had done.

At this time there was notice of Madam de Chevereuse's return into France, and
the Queen seemed to me to be more unresolved than ever about her return to
Court, not as if I believe she was detained by any difficulty there was in it
to grant her this favor, but that Cardinal Mazarin should mediate to obtain it
for her, and that Madam de Chevereuse should be obliged to him for having moved
the Queen to overcome those reasons which kept her out, which were a particular
Clause in the Declaration, and a strange aversion the King declared he had
against her, when upon his Deathbed.

I asked leave of the Queen to go to meet Madam de Chevereuse, which she the
more willingly granted me because she thought I might dispose her to desire the
Cardinal's Friendship, since I saw very well that it was one of the things the
Queen most desired.

Montague, who was more for the Cardinal's Interest, was sent to her to make
her Propositions, which were in consequence of some others which were made her
in Flanders by the same Man, two or three Months before the King's Death.

I met with Madam de Chevereuse at Brye, and Montague, who arrived there some
time before me, had all he desired to make his Designs take effect. She
presently told me, That she suspected him, either because she really wanted
Confidence in him, or because she believed I would be unwilling to share hers
with a man whom I did not know my self, and whom I had no great reason to
esteem upon the report of others.

She desired me not to speak to her before him, but because it imported her to
be informed of the state of the Court, and how the Queen stood inclined, and
because I saw she would undoubtedly mistake both, if she judged by her own
knowledge, and by the thoughts the Queen once had of her, I thought my self
obliged to represent to her how things seemed to me to be, and to assure her,
That the Queens thoughts being far different from what she had seen them, it
was necessary to take other measures than those she had hitherto acted by.

That the Queen was entirely resolved to make use of Cardinal Mazarin, That it
was hard to judge otherwise than by events, whether that was good or bad
Council, because he being Cardinal Richelieu's Creature, and united to his
Relations, it was to be feared he would authorize the same Maxims, but withal,
That he having had no hand in his Violences, and being almost the only Man who
had Knowledge in foreign Affairs, I doubted if in the necessity the Queen and
State was in for one capable to manage them, she could easily be prevailed with
to exclude Cardinal Maza^^^ besides, That I saw no body whose Capacity or
Fidelity was so well known that one would wish him settled in an Employment so
difficult and important as this.

Therefore it was my opinion, that she should not by any means signify to the
Queen, that she returned to her Court with a design to Govern her, because it
was apparent, that her enemies made use of this pretext to her prejudice.

That she must by her care and complaisance work her self up to the same pitch
she once was at, and that then joining with Madam Senecy, Madam Hautefort, and
the rest of those in whom the Queen confided (who had all given me their word,
that they would entirely adhere to her Interests) she would be in a condition
to ruin or protect Cardinal according as his preservation or ruin would be
beneficial to the public.

Madam de Chevereuse told me that she approved of my advice, and promised me
positively to follow it; she came to the Queen with this Resolution; and
although she was received with many marks of Friendship, I could without great
difficulty observe a difference in the joy she had to see her, from what she
formerly had, when she spoke to me of her, and I perceived by certain defects,
she took notice of in her person, that the ill offices, some had done her, had
made too great an impression. Madam de Chevreuse notwithstanding slighted them
all, and thought that her presence would in a moment take off all that her
enemies had done against her when she was absent.

She was strengthened in this opinion by the Duke de Beaufort, and they both
believed, that being united, they might easily ruin Cardinal Mazarin, before he
had time to fix himself.

This thought made Madam Chevreuse receive all the advance of Cardinal Mazarin,
as so many marks of his weakness, and believe, that she answered them enough,
if she did not openly declare she designed his ruin, but only to procure it by
establishing Monsieur Chateau-neuf in the management of Affairs.

She thought her self also obliged to uphold my Interest, and seeing the Queen
designing to confer upon me some considerable settlement, she was very urgent
to procure for me the Government of Havre de Grace, which was in the Duke de
Richlieu's hands, that by getting me the Estate of this Family, she might begin
its persecution and ruin.

In the mean time Cardinal Mazarin seeing very well that the Queen was not
longer in a condition to undertake an affair of this importance, without making
him a party in it, thought it enough to hinder it, by saying, that he with all
submission would approve of what the Queen should think best, but that he
thought himself obliged, not only in gratitude, which he owed that family, but
also for the Queens Interest to represent to her the reasons she had to uphold
the House of Richlieu, that he wished always that she would approve them, but
that he did not think he had reason to complain if his advice was not followed.

He did not declare himself so openly upon the return of Chasteau-neuf, either
because he believed him so ruined in the Queens favor, that he thought he might
give her this mark of his moderation without any danger, or because she was far
enough from restoring him to the management of affairs on her own head, without
his making some endeavors for it; but in fine, he was contented to let the
Chancellor act, who (being obliged for his own preservation to keep out
Monsieur Chasteau-neuf, (who could not return to Court without taking the Seals
from him) had taken all imaginable care to make the Queen sure by the means of
one of his Sisters, who was a Nun at Pontoyse, and was also Sister to that
Mountague I have already mentioned.

In the interim all these delays vexed Madam de Chevreuse to the last degree;
she looked upon them not only as Cardinal Mazarin's Artifices, (who by this
accustomed the Queen not to grant her immediately what she desired,) but as
they diminished, in the opinion of the World, the Reputation, she would give it
of her credit; she oftentimes let the Queen know she was dissatisfied, and in
her complaints always intermingled some sharp thing against Cardinal Mazarin;
she could not endure to speak to him, for what she desired of the Queen, and
she made it appear, that she had rather receive no favors, than owe a part of
them to the Cardinals mediation. He on the contrary, who saw, that this conduct
of Madam de Chevreuse did more persuade the Queen that she desired to govern
her, than all that he had hitherto made use of to make her believe it, took
very different ways to ruin her.

The War of Paris.
IT is almost impossible to write a very just Relation of the past Troubles,
because those, who caused them, having acted out of ill Principles, took care
to keep them secret to the World, for fear Posterity should accuse them of
having sacrificed their Countries Happiness, to their private Interests; besides
it is very difficult for him, that writes the affairs of his own Age, to keep
his Passions so pure, as not to abandon himself to hatred, or flattery, which
are the ordinary Shelves that shipwreck Truth; as to my self, I design to make
an impartial Rehearsal of what is past, and leave to the Readers an entire
liberty to praise, or to condemn.

France in the Year, 1635. declared War against the House of Austria, and
Fortune favored so great an Undertaking taking with so much success, that she
was victorious wherever she bore her Arms. We pierced into the heart of
Flanders, having subdued all the River of Lys, we extended our Conquests in
Germany as far as the Danube, by the famous Battle at Norlingue; Milan was the
Theater of the War with Italy, and on the side of Spain our Conquests had not
been bounded by Russition and Catalonia, but for Lerida, which was the fatal
term thereof.

These Prosperities, which begun in the late Kings time, continued with more
splendour for the first five years of the Regency, which were so famous for
brave and glorious Victories, that it was a wonder, how they could gain such
considerable advantages over Strangers, in the time of a Kings Minority,
usually exposed to Civil and Domestic Wars. But as it is the fate of our
Nation to grow weary of its own happiness, and to fight against it self, when
it finds no opposition without, or because God has set to Empires certain
bounds of Power, and duration, which are beyond the jurisdiction of Men, we
lost in one Campaign, by our Divisions, the greatest part of the Conquests,
which we had gained in many years; but before I enter into a Narration of these
Troubles, it will be seasonable to tell you how things were governed in the
Cabinet Council.

The Kings Council in the Queens Regency were the Duke d'Orleans, Monsieur le
Prince, and Cardinal Mazarin, the rest of the Ministers, as the Chancellor,
Monsieur de Longneville, the Superintendent Chavigny and Servien, had little
Authority there.

The principal Affairs were ruled by the Council of the Princes, and the
Cardinal, which last had the oversight of all, because of the confidence the
Queen reposed in him.

The Princes of the Blood were strongly united to the Queen, and this Union
produced the public happiness, insomuch that by this all the hopes of a change
being taken away (to which our Nation has a natural propensity) every one
aspired by honorable services to make his Fortune. Cardinal Mazarin kept up
this right Understanding betwixt them, it being useful to his preservation; and
when one of the Princes aspired to be greater, he qualified him by the
opposition of the other, and by thus ballancing their Power, he rendered his
own, without comparison, the most respected.

Besides he had proeur'd the Duke d'Orleans the Government of Languedoc, and
had made the Abbot de la Reviere, his chief Minister, so absolurely his
Creature, that he looked upon all ways (besides the Cardinals favor) to his
advancement to the Cardinalship, as dangerous as Precipices.

As to the Duke d'Anguien, he satisfied his Ambition with the Government of
Champaine and Stenay, and the Command of the Armies, which he procured for him;
add, that the Cardinal, being of a nature mild enough, was the less to be
apprehended, and the Princes by intermedling less in the management of Affairs,
might throw all upon him without Envy.

Now, as he foresaw, that the Union of the Princes and their Authority would
weaken the Queens, he skilfully put into their heads suspicions of jealousy
and distrust one of another, which he scattered again seasonably for fear they
should come to a breach; for being the Author of their differences, it was
easy for him to be the Arbitrator of their reconciliation, and derive the
whole merit thereof upon himself. As to the other Nobles of the Kingdom, since
they had no Power, their good or ill will was not at all regarded.

This was the condition of the Court, till events breakings this Union, so
necessary to the State, brought upon it most fatal mischiefs.

Before I relate them, I must take notice of the Prince of Condy's death
(happening just before these troubles) which was so much the more considerable,
because it was the common opinion, that if he had lived, he had prevented them
by his Prudence and Authority, which gave a check to the Ministers, and was
revered by the Parliament.

The Union of these Powers was so solid a Pledge of the Tranquillity of the
Kingdom, that it gave the Ministers too much confidence, and encouraged Emery,
Superintendent over the Kings Revenue, to levy great Taxes. Now because this
Conduct, although colored with a Foreign War, and the Defense of the State, was
introduced in the time of Cardinal Richlieu's Ministry, and was but a
consequence of that, it will not be impertinent to speak thereof. This
Minister, whose absolute Polity had violated the ancient Laws of the Kingdom,
to establish the immoderate Authority of his Master, which he was the dispenser
of, looked upon all the Rules of this State as forced Concessions, and bounds
imposed on the power of Kings, rather than a solid Foundation of governing
well; and because his very long Administration was authorized with great
success, during the life of of the late King, he quite changed all the forms of
Justice, and the Kings Revenues, and introduced the Royal Will for the
Sovereign Tribunal of the Lives and Estates of Men.

This so violent method of Governing continued till his death, and the King
(surviving him but a few months) left to the Queen with the Regency the
establishment of his Orders for the Taxes which seemed necessary to maintain
the charges of the War.

Her Majesty, being in the beginning of her Regency constrained to be
expensively Liberal, drained her Exchequer; whereupon Emery was obliged to put
in practice all the Expedients, his Wit could invent, without being restrained
either by Justice, or pity, or the despair into which he might drive the People.

To this end, after having consumed the Peoples Estates by new Subsidies, he
extends his Arts as far as the Cities, Taxes Rich and Poor, Creates new
Offices, Seizes the Public Rents, forced them to give him Credit, prepares
more new Edicts, and by this rigorous imposition upon Estates in every kind,
drove the Companies, Commonalties and Corporations into a secret Revolt. In
fine, all Springs being drained dry, he would have seized the Revenues of the
Chambers of the Courts of Aids, and the great Council, who complained to the
Parliament, which thereupon made the famous Arrest d'Vnion.

This Act was a signal to all the disconted; the Renters, the Treasurers of
France, the Kings Secretaries, the Assessors, the Officers of the Taxes, and of
the Impost of Salt in France.
Gabelle; In fine, people of all conditions, repaired thither, exposing their
Griefs to the Parliament, demanding reparation.

The Names of the Farmers, and of Emery fell under a public Curse, every one
cried out against the violent exaction of the Customers, the unbounded Power of
the Intendants, the Cruelty of the Soldiers, the rigorous force used to the
poor people, by the selling of their Goods, and the imprisonment of their
Persons, and the heavy weighty Taxes; in a word, against this oppression, as
great to the last degree, destructive of the Lives, Liberties, and Estates of
all the Kings Subjects.

The Parliament appearing sensible of the public miseries, received the
Petions of the afflicted People, offered to do them Justice, and by professing
that they bore a part in their sufferings, gained their affections to that
degree, that they looked upon them as their Revenging and Redeeming Gods.

I don't pretend to give a recital of the Assemblies of the Chambers, of the
matters they treated of there, of the Counsels and Results of their
Conferences, and of the Remonstrances of the Company carried to their Majesty's
by the chief President Moles, there are Memoirs enough filled therewith, it
suffices to say, that there were three Parties in the Parliament.

The First was that of the Frondeurs, a Name given in Raillery to those that
were against the Court. These People being Zealous to stop the course of the
present Calamities, had the same Object, though from a different Motive, that
those had, who were Interested by their Fortune, or particular Hatred against
the Principal Minister.

The Second Party were the Mazarins, who were persuaded, that they owed a Blind
Obedience to the Court; some out of Conscience to maintain the Peace of the
State, others out of Respect to the Obligations they had to the Ministers, or
Interest with the Men in Business.

And the Last were such, as Condemned the Violence of the First, yet approved
not the Coldness of the Second, but kept themselves betwixt both, to act upon
occasion, either according to their Interest, or their Duty.

Thus the Parliament was divided, the greatest part whereof (who at the first
had no love for Innovations) yet for want of Experience in the Affairs of the
World, were very glad to be Commissioners for Regulating the Abuses, that were
Crept into the Government of the State, and to see themselves Mediators betwixt
the Court and the People.

It was insinuated into them, that this Employment gave consideration and
luster to their Persons; that Charity obliged them to succor the Distressed in
their Pressing Necessities; and that the Duty of their Charges, which were
instituted to Moderate the Extreme Power of Kings, and Oppose their
Irregularities, prompted them to it; That they ought to know, that the
Ministers of France, were, of late years, persuaded, that it was to Reign
Precariously, if their Power extended only to permitted things; That the Laws
are stifled by Fear and Justice, by Force. That, to our Misery, our late Kings
left the Management of the State so much to them, that they became themselves a
Prey to their Passions; That the time is come when they must revive their
Ancient Orders, and that Harmonious Relation which ought to be betwixt a Lawful
Command, and a Reasonable Obedience: That for this end the People Invoked their
Justice as the only Refuge to prevent their extreme Oppression; That so Holy a
Commission, approved by Heaven, and followed with Public Acclamations, would
Skreen them from all fear; or if there should be danger, that it is the
property of Eminent Virtue to signalise it self in a Tempest, rather than in a
Calm; and, that Death, which is common to all Men, is distinguished only by
Oblivion, or by Glory.

These Venmous Discourses made so much the greater Impressions on their Minds,
because Men have a Natural Inclination to believe whatever flatters their
Greatness; so that they suffered themselves to be charmed with the fine words
of Tutelar Gods of their Country, and the Restorers of Public Liberty.

He that infused this Poison into them, with most Artifice, was Longueil,
Counselor in the Great Chamber, who, being pushed on with a Spirit of
Ambition, to advance his Fortune in the Public Divisions, was in Private Clubs
for some years, prepared, with some of his Confederates, to Combat the Power of
the Favorites, under the color of the Kingdoms Good insomuch, that in the birth
and progress of these Troubles, he was Consulted as the Oracle of the
Frondeurs, so long as he was constant to his Party.

Notwithstanding, the Parliament pretending to apply themselves to Reform the
State, met every day, They had already suppressed the New Edicts and Laws,
Revoked the Intendants of the Provinces, and Restored the Treasurers of France,
and the General Assessors, to the Execution of their Offices: and further
pretended, to exact an Account how the last Levies, since the Regency, were
Employed, and insenfibly Attacked the Cardinals Administration.

On the other side, the Court omitted nothing that might be serviceable to
dissolve their Meetings; the Duke of Orleans, the Chief President, and the
President of Mesmes represented the consequence thereof to be prejudicial to
the General Peace; the Enemies fancied to themselves a Triumph, which should
repair their former Losses; and notwithstanding the King had Authorized all the
Acts which the Company had Proposed to him, yet the Mild Methods were ill
represented, and passed for Marks of weakness and fear, which made the
Cardinals Enemies more active and eager to push at him.

At this time Monsieur le Prince commanded the Kings Army in Flanders; he had
taken Ipres, but whilst he Besieged that, the Spaniard surpised Courtray, and
gained other small advantages: But as his Genius is great and successful in
War, he found the Spanish Army on the 21 of August on the Plains of Arras, and
Lens, Fought it, and obtained a Famous Victory.

The Duke de Chatillion, who had bravely signalized himself there, came from
him, to bring the News to Court.

The King's Council looked upon this great success as an extraordinary
Providence, which they might use, to stop the course of the Disorders which
time and patience increased, and resolved to secure such of the Parliament as
were the most active, chiefly Broussel Councellor in the Great Chamber, a
person of ancient probity, of competent abilities, and one who was grown old in
hatred to the Favorites.

This Man, inspired with his own Opinions, and the Persuasions of Longveil, and
others, who had gained credit with him; first gave the most rigorous Counsels,
which were followed by the Cabal of the Frondeurs, insomuch, that his Name made
a noise in the Assemblies of the Chambers, and he was made Head of this Party
in the Parliament; being the more in Credit with them, because his Age and
Poverty placed him beyond the Strokes of Envy.

Now seeing the People, who stirred not from the Palace, when informed that he
so mightily concerned himself for their Relief, loved him extremely, and gave
him the Gilded Title of their Father; to secure him must needs be a bold
action; and as it might be very advantageous, so it might be of dangerous
consequence (as we shall see hereafter.) Nevertheless it was happily executed,
by Comings, the Morning that they Sung the Te Deum at, Noterdame Church, for
the Victory at Lens, while the Company of the Guards were ranked on each side
of the Street, and was con^^ucted out of the City with Blanmenil, to be
transmitted to.....

Two hours after the Report of Brussels being taken was spread abroad, the most
considerable Burgesses came to the Palais Royal, where they dissembled the
excess of the Disorder; and those who were afraid to go thither, had the
complaisance to tell the Queen, That it was only some Rascally Fellows, whom
they would quickly reduce into better order.

The Coadjutor of Paris, who, till then, did not appear upon the Stage, and
kept himself within the bounds of his Profession, was to offer his Service to
the Queen, from whom he concealed nothing of what passed, but his Offers and
Advice were both rejected: he apparently employed the Dignity of his Character,
and his Persuasions, to calm the Storms, and after came to the Palais Royal to
give an Account of the Sedition; where, having not received the Satisfaction he
expected, he conceived a hatred against the Cardinal, which, with his being
refused to Treat for the Government of Paris, was the Cause (or at least the
Pretense) that he so much Interessed himself for the Faction opposite to the
Court.

Notwithstanding, the Queen, who is naturally incapable of Fear, commanded the
Marshals of La Meilleray, and the Hospital, to take Horse with their Friends,
to ride through the Streets, and restrain the People by some Example of
Justice; but they found the Mischief so great, that they could not execute
their Orders. So that they were reduced to hope, that the Night might appease
the Tumult (as it did,) but the morning after, an Accident kindled the Fire,
which was almost quenched.

The Chancellor going to the Palais, to carry the Kings Declaration, which
forbad the Chambers to Assemble, was perceived by some of the Mutinous Rabble:
his Person odious to the Public, and the Errand he was sent on, animated a
Crowd of People, to run after his Coach, which they forced to fly to the Hotel
de Luines, where they sought him, to Sacrifice (as they called him) This
Mercenary Soul, the Protector of the Impositions, laid on so many ruined
People, by the Edicts which he had Sealed.

Notice of the Condition he was in was brought to the Palais Royal, from whence
the Marshal de La Meilleray came with some Companies of the Guards, who
Discharged upon the Seditious, and delivered the Chancellor; but this was a
Signal for the City to take up Arms; for, at the same time, the People shut up
their Shops, put Chains cross the Streets, and Barricadoes almost to the Palais
Royal.

During this uproar the Parliament consulted about the Imprisonment of their
Members, with the more courage, because they saw the People Rise in favor of
them; and, without doubt, if the Chancellor had come to the Palais with his
Commission, they would have detein'd him as Reprisal.

It was Ordered, by common consent, That the Parliament should instantly go in
a Body to beseech their Majesty's to set at Liberty their Members. They found
the People up in Arms in the Streets, some Threatening them, if they brought
not Broussel back; others Conjuring them to fear nothing, and that they would
die for their Preservation; and all together Protested, that they would not lay
down their Arms till they saw the Father of their Country.

The Parliament, after having been introduced into the Great Closet in the
Palais Royal, where their Majesty's were, accompanied with the Duke of Orleans,
the Prince of Conty, Cardinal Mazarin, the Nobility of the Realm, and the
Ministers of State, the Chief President Represented, how much the Company was
concerned for the Imprisonment of their Fellow Members, and showed their Humble
Addresses for their Liberty, which were Seconded with the Vows of a Hundred
Thousand Armed Men, who demanded Monsieur Broussel.

The Queen Answered, That she wondered they should keep such a stin about a
simple Counselor, when the Parliament said not a word against the Imprisonment
of the late Prince.

The Chief President, and the President of Mesmes Replied, That in the Posture
things were now, there was no time to deliberate, and that there was an
absolute necessity of submitting to the Peoples will, who would not hearken to
the Magistrate, had lost all Respect and Obedience, and, in fine, were the
Masters.

The Queen Answered, That she would remit nothing of her Severity; that
hahaving in her hand the Sacred Depositune of the King her Sons Authority, she
would never consent to its Violation, by yielding to the Passions of the
Multitude; that the Parliament should Remonstrate to the Seditious their Duty;
that those who had raised the Mutiny should endevor to lay it; and that one day
the King would know how to make a difference betwixt the Loyal, and the Enemies
of his Crown.

These Gentlemen were still urgent, but in vain; Her Majesty always continuing
in an absolute Denial, so that they returned to the Palais to consider upon the
Refusal. When they came to the first Barricade, the Rabble Asked them, If they
had obtained Broussel's Liberty? and seeing by their Countenances that they had
not, in a Rage sent them back to the Palais Royal, Threatening, that if it was
not Granted them in two hours, they would go in Arms to Beg it of the Queen,
and would exterminate the Ministers who were Authors of the Sedition.

These Gentlemen returned, to Represent what they had seen and heard; and
added, That since they could not overcome their Disobedience, neither by
Reason, nor Force, She must submit, unless she would hazard the Crown.

Upon this they called a Council, wherein the Duke of Orleans and the Cardinal
Advised, contrary to the Queens Opinion, That Liberty should be granted to the
Prisoners; which they immediately declared to the Parliament, and the
Parliament to the People; who, notwithstanding all the Assurances could be
given them, were so jealous, that they would not faithfully perform what was
promised, that they remained still in Arms, expecting the Arrival of Broussel;
who, no sooner appeared, but was Saluted by all the Musketeers, and
Accompanied with Public Shouts to the place where he and Blanmenil received
the Compliments of the Company, and from thence was conducted by the People to
his Lodging, with demonstrations of a Joy so great, as if every one in the
Liberty of Brussel had that day gained a Glorious Victory.

This is the Famous Day of the Barricades, which was caused not so much out of
an Affection the Public had to Broussel as out of an Inveterate Hatred, which
they, for some years, entertained against the Government: a hatred so great,
that they only wanted an opportunity to show it. It is not easy to determine,
whether this Counsel of detaining the Prisoners was safe, according to the
Rules of Policy; for, on one side, if we consider the Rudeness, not to say
Violence, of the People, so great, that an Attempt upon Royal Majesty was to be
feared; it will seem, that Prudence could not advise any other Method but
Mildness, since they wanted Power to reduce them: On the other side, to
Acquiesce to their Fury, would give a Mortal Wound to the Princes Authority,
and, as it were, prepared a Triumph for the People over Sovereign Dignity: Upon
this some said, That it would have been much better to have carried the King to
St. Germains, there to expect all sorts of events, rather then to Prostitute
Royal Dignity to the Capriciousness of a Multitude. But the Duke of Orleans and
the Cardinal, naturally Friends to Moderate Councils, thought of nothing but
delivering themselves from present danger. However it be, it is evident, the
Parliament from this day got ground of the Court; and a great many People of
Quality, either out of Interest, or a desire of Innovation, solemnly engaged
for the ruin of the Chief Minister.

Now seeing he was, during all the Troubles, the Object of Public Invectives,
and both Pens and Tongues took the greatest Liberty to defame him; it will not
be amiss to report the best founded Accusations against him, and also his just
defenses. 'Twas objected against Cardinal Mazarin, That it was a strange and
shameful thing to France, that a Stranger, and one who by Birth was a Subject
of Spain, should be its Principal Minister, even with a Power so absolute, that
he was the Arbiter of War and Peace; that of his own head he distributed
Honors, Offices, Benefices, in fine, all sorts of Favors, not with respect to
Merit, or Services, or Quality, but to the devotion they paid his Person, which
was the true qualification to obtain them. That for his Ambition, he had
carried the Arms of France into Tuscany, at an extreme charge, and to no
advantage; and that he would not have assisted the Duke of Guise in the Revolt
of Naples, but for his own Interests. He would not accept the Treaty of Peace
concluded on at Munster, and eluded it by the Ministry of Servien his
Secretary. That by his Jealousy he would have destroyed the Marshal Gassion,
when he dyed, and also Monsieur le Prince in Catalonia, because his Birth and
Reputation overclouded him. That by his Edicts he had drained France of its
Money, to send it into Italy. That after the death of the Duke of Breze, he
assumed the same Power at Sea that he did at Land. That he was only knowing in
Foreign Affairs; moreover that he had lost us the Reputation of Fidelity
amongst our Allies. That Cardinal Richlieu had set him up during his Ministry;
and as to his Parts, he was a Man of no Judgment, of which the confusion
whereinto they were fallen was an evident Proof, since of a Peaceable State it
was become divided and full of Revolts; That he would Govern the Kingdom
according to Foreign Maxims, no ways proper to our Nation; and the Court by
Addresses so openly observed, that they turned him into contempt; in sum, that
he was not capable of so great a Burden, and that he had lost his credit in
the Minds of the People.

To these Accusations it was Answered, That it is no new thing for strangers to
have a share in the Government of the State, witness the Cardinals of Lorrain,
and Birague, the Duke of Nevers, and the Marshal of Rets; That Cardinal Mazarin
was chosen Cardinal by the Interest of France, after he had done it
considerable Services; that Cardinal Richlieu who knew his Parts, destined him
his Successor in the Ministry, foreseeing the Advantages would accrue to the
State thereby. That the late King, who was a competent Judge of Men, after the
Cardinal's Death, made him President of the Council; That the Queen coming to
the Regency, merely out of Necessity, and in conformity to the late Kings Will,
continued him so. That this choice was approved by all the Wise Men in the
Kingdom, and also the Allies of the Crown; that having answered by his Services
the Queens expectation, she could not abandon him without failing in her Duty
to the State, and Gratitude to so useful a Servant. Moreover, that all the
Favors were disposed of with the consent of the Princes, and that he was so far
from favoring those who were devoted to the Interests of the Court, that it was
a common complaint, that in the distribution, he had, before all others,
considered the Servants of the Duke of Orleans and the Prince, and that all
Affairs were proposed in Council, and finally resolved on there. That the
Accusation of his opposing the Conclusion of the Peace, is but an Idle Fancy;
since, beside the General, his own particular Interest obliged him to crown a
Negotiation glorious for so many great Events, by a Treaty, which would have
Eternis'd him in the Peoples Affections: but, the Truth is, the Spaniards
always opposed it, which he calls the Duke of Longueville, and even the Princes
to witness, That the Expedition of Orbitel, and Portolongone was the most
advantageous that France could make, to bring the Enemies sooner to a ready
Peace, because these places kept in subjection the King of Spain's States,
which are in Italy: That the Independance which the Duke of Guise affected in
Naples, kept him from soliciting the Cardinal to succor him. That Marshal
Gassion would have established a particular Covernment in Flanders, very little
depending upon the Court; and that Monsieur the Prince never complained that he
did not assist him in Catalonia, and in all his Campains, as much as he could.
That he was constrained to seek for Supplies by Edicts, to furnish the Charges
of the War. That notwithstanding the Taxes were diminished, and that time had
but too much verified, that this Transportation of Money into Italy, was a Lie,
invented to Defame him; as to the rest, That he had managed with success enough
the Interests of the Princes of Europe for Twenty years; and that if the good
Intelligence betwixt France and the United Provinces had ceased, it was by the
corruption of some particular persons, who had been Suborned by Money from
Spain; as to the Administration of the State, he had followed Cardinal
Richlieu's Maxims, excepting only in the Cruelty of Punishments; And that if he
had been obliged to promise more then he gave, it was because the number of
those that serve in France is great, and of pretenders yet much greater. That
the State was never in greater prosperity then during his Ministry: and that if
in the Great Expeditions, the Honor of the Exeoution was due to the Generals,
that of the Design belonged to him; that France would have yet preserved its
Peace, if every one had conspired to it according to his Duty, if the People
had not been drawn from their Obedience by the suggestion of Malcontents; or
rather if the Parliament, which ought to be an Example of Obedience, had not
opened and led them the way to Rebellion. That the Post he is now in has been
always exposed to the strokes of hatred and envy in all States; and that it is
not an extraordinary thing, if they one while tax his Ambition, another while
his Inability; that at least he is happy in this, that Calumny, in its most
Poisonous Design, has not thrown the least Suspicion upon his Fidelity.

During the time of this Commotion, Three things happened, which were of unlucky
consequence.

The First was, The Duke of Beaufort's escape out of the Dungeon of Vincennes,
where he was Prisoner from the beginning of the Regency, for Reasons which are
not within the compass of my Subject; but because he held a considerable Place
in the Wars by the Affections of the People of Paris, it is not impertinent to
Remark it.

The Second was that upon a Quarrel that happened at Feuillians, betwixt the
Lifeguard, and the Sergeants of the Grand Provost, the Marquess de Gesures,
behaved himself so, as displeased the Cardinal, who sent him order to retire,
and Charrost and Chaudenier to undergo the punishment of the Baton, who refused
it; upon which their Offices were given to Gerse and Nouailles; and thereby the
Friends and Kindred of the disgraced were incensed against the Cardinal, at a
time, when no body spared him, either in Deed, or Word.

The Third was, The Imprisonment of Chavigny, which deserves a particular
Relation.

This Minister, so considerable in the late Kings Reign, was united with
Cardinal Mazarine, by their mutual Interests, which is the only Bond at Court,
and the most certain Rule of Friendship; after Cardinal Richlieu's death, the
King divided his Affairs betwixt them two, and the Denoyers, whom they ruined
presently, and remained in a strict Union till the Regency. The Queen, who had
been Persecuted by the late Cardinal Richlieu, took an Aversion to Chavigny,
and wished his Ruin. Cardinal Mazarin, either by good Fortune, or by his
Address, or rather by the Interposition of my Lord Mountague, and Beringhen,
was not only continued near her Majesty, but the entire Management of Affairs
conferred upon him: Now though Chavigny expected to be greatly protected by
him, in his fall, yet he endeavored only to mitigate it, and to defend him from
falling into absolute ruin, because Favor as well as Love, cannot endure to be
divided, or to admit of a Rival; They divested his Father of his
superintendency, and himself of the Office of Principal Secretary of State;
only they left him the vain Title of Minister, with admittance into the
Council, but without any Employment, or Respect. This is all the Cardinal gave
to his ancient Friendship, to the strict obligations wherein Men often play the
Bankrupts in the World. Chavigny nettled with this ill usage (which he
dissembled for five years, with very much prudence) designed to make use of the
present conjunctures, and to be revenged, by raising himself upon the Cardinals
ruin; to this end judging, that Monsieur le Prince, after the Battle at Lens,
could do what he would at Court, would give Laws to the Court: he declared his
thoughts, concerning the present state of Affairs, to the Duke of Chatillion,
at his return from the Army, whom he found disposed to hearken to him, from a
hatred he had to the Cardinal, who made him languish with the expectation of a
Marshal Staff: but as Prudence ordinarily sleeps, and unbends it self in the
excess of our Passions, he entrusted the same secret to Perrault, but when he
found that it took not as he desired, he Repented of it, and proved to his
cost, that he, to whom you tell your secret, becomes Master of your Liberty.
Perrault having reason to fear the Genius of Chavigny, if he came near the
Prince, told all their discourse to the Cardinal, who caused him to be made
Prisoner by Drouet, in the Castle of Vincennes, whereof he was Governor. This
Imprisonment gave occasion to the Public (who knew not the secret) to tax the
Cardinals Ingratitude; and his Enemies in the Parliament represented this
Action in very black colors.

About this time they put Emery out of the Exchequer, which was but an
ineffective Remedy, because the mischief had made too great a Progress to stop
in his person, and the pretense of Reforming the State was changed into a firm
Resolution to ruin the Cardidal. For, as the Authority of Princes and
Ministers, is kept up only by Fear, or Admiration, his weakness raised him
Enemies, whom he never offended. Brussels, Charton, and Viole, did, in effect,
point him out in the Assembly of the Chambers; but Blanmevil the President of
Noujon named him, and there was ordered a solemn Deputation to the Duke of
Orleans, to Monsieur the Prince, and to the Prince of Conty, to beseech them to
join with the Company, and bring effective Remedies to the Mischiefs which
threatened the State.

The Court was at Ruel at the time of this Declaration against the Cardinal,
who was touched to the quick with it, to see himself necessitated to throw
himself into the Arms of Monsieur le Prince, and to secure his shaking fortune
by his support: The Prince, who could not enjoy the fruit of his Victory at the
Battle of Lens, because of the Disorders of Paris, was reduced to bound his
Conquests with the taking of Furnes, where good Fortune preserved him from the
Shot of a Musket, which he received in the Trenches, for it hit him on the
Back, in a place where his Belt was doubled, which deadned the stroke of the
Bullet. Immediately after it was taken, he had orders to return.

At this time he was looked upon by all the People with admiration; for besides
that this new Laurel, which he had acquired by his pure Valor, gave a great
addition to his Glory, he had no hand in the present troubles, and both Parties
looked upon him as their Defender, or at least as the Arbitrator of their
Differences. It also looked as if Fortune invited him to entertain more
ambitious designs, because the ebbing state of the Court, and Public
Admiration, equally concurred to his Advancement; but as he was natural ly
inclined to keep within the bounds of Duty, he was not very industrious to
manage the General Love. He admitted into his confidence two persons of Quality
and Merit, who were of opposite opinions, viz. the Duke of Chatillion, and
Marshal Gramount; The first, whose Family and Person were strictly united to
the Prince, advised him to declare himself for the Parliament, or at least to
make himself Moderator of the Differences with all the Neutrality possible; The
other, by all sorts of interests, bound to be on the Courts side, employed his
persuasions to induce him to be of his Party. Upon this occasion he did
violence to his Nature, which is something averse to such temperate methods,
and Wrote, together with the Duke of Orleans, to the Parliament, to desire them
to send Deputies to St. Germains, that they might put an end to the Divisions
in a Conference. So many Relations give an account of what passed there, that
it would be a superfluous Repetition, and I need only to remark, that the
Deputies would not consent that the Cardinal should assist at it; and, that at
the first interview, the Prince was hot upon Viole, for having first propounded
the Liberty of Chavigny, because he was of opinion, that they should decide the
Matters in Controversy, and agree upon Rules necessary for the Drawing up of
the Kings Declaration, by virtue whereof Chavigny would recover his Liberty, as
it happened by this Authentic Declaration of the 28th of October.

After this Declaration, which gave some respite to the Public Divisions,
there happened some Court Disputes, which, for a while, disturbed the Union
that was in the Council, and thus it was. From the beginning of the Regency,
the Abbot de la Riviers possessing absolutely the favor of the Duke of Orleans,
aimed at a Cardinals Cap; and Mazarin, to make him more sure to his Interests,
gave him more hopes of it, the execution whereof he still evaded, judging it
not at all convenient to have a person of the same Dignity with himself in the
King's Council, but from time to time he procured him Benefices to preserve his
good Will; nevertheless at the Birth of these troubles, the Abbot urged him so
vehemently, that he could not avoid giving him the Nomination of France for the
Cap, because he stood in need of the Duke of Orlean's Protection: but he
believed, that either there would be oppositions at Rome, which he might
underhand foment, or else that time would produce opportunities at Court, to
hinder it from taking effect. The Abbot sends his Agent to his Holiness, who
gave him assurance of his Promotion to the first that fell; and in expectation
of this he brought his Master to preserve the Cardinals so much tossed Fortune
from Shipwreck. When he saw himself at the height of his desires, the Prince of
Conty, who was not yet declared for the Cardinals Cap, any more then as it was
an extraordinary Promotion, more honorable for his Birth, begged, at the
persuasion of the Court, the King's Nomination for the first. It could not be
refused him, and the competition of Rivier was too weak to dispute the
Preference. So that not being able to blame the Prince of Conty, he taxes the
Cardinal, detests his Ingratitude, and obliges the Duke of Orleans not to speak
to him any more.

Now, as he thought of nothing but the means whereby he might break off the
Nomination of the Prince of Conty; He attempts to do it by Monsieur the Prince,
and proposed to him by Vinevil, that in case he would take off his Brother from
desiring the Cap, his Royal Highness would procure him what Government soever
he would. He answered Vinevil, That he had an Estate, an Offices great enough
to maintain him with his Services and Fidelity; that if he had more, he might
justly become suspected of the King, who would aim at nothing so much, as to
ruin him, if he became Great; and that his Fortune was in a condition, that
wanted nothing but Moderation in his desires. I thought these so virtuous words
worthy to be reported, to show, how much Inconsistant Man is with himself, and
how much his Mind is subject to change.

During this Division the King came from St. Germains to Paris, where the Duke
of Orleans gave continual Marks of his anger against the Cardinal, he went very
little to the Palais Royal; there was nothing resolved on in Council; all the
Malcontents repaired to him; he hearkened to the Frondeurs of the Parliament;
in fine, the Quarrel must have either ended in the greatest violence, or be
accommodated. The Marshal d'Estree, and Senators, persons of credit, took upon
them to try if they could bring both to an agreement; They represented to the
Duke of Orleance, that this misunderstanding betwixt the Queen and him could
not continue longer without ruining the State; and that the cause of it was
dishonorable to his Royal Highness; that Monsieur the Prince would gain a
notable Advantage by it, because he would be obliged in Honor to his Family,
and his own Greatness; to take the Queen into his Protection, and she to fly to
him as her only refuge; that he being of a hot nature, would reduce things to
the greatest extremity; and that it was already talked that he was coming with
the Regiment of Guards to force the Palace of Orleans, to reduce that company
of Seditious which were about his Person: They Remonstrated to la Riviere, if
he would pretend, for his private Interest, to make a division in the Royal
Family, and cause a Civil War; If it was reasonable that he should be offended,
because a Prince of the Blood was preferred before him? That he would become
the object of the hatred and vengeance of Monsieur the Prince, and of all his
Family; that the load he laid upon his Master, was too weighty, that he would
quickly be weary of it; or that if he broke off with him, his favor would
become a prey to others; and as to the Cardinalship, that the Prince of Conty
would either give it over, or the Court demand two Caps for the First Promotion.

The two Commissioners of the Court found the Minds of the Duke de Orleans, and
de la Riviere very well disposed to understand their Reasons, for Time had done
much toward an Accommodation, and this Minister was already persuaded by his
own fears, that things ought to return to the same degree of concord, that they
were at before, and so they did upon this Agreement.

The Declaration agreed upon by the Kings Council and the Deputies of the
Sovereign Courts seemed to secure the Repose of the State, and to quench the
least sparks of Fire which threatened it; but the Ambition of those who hated
the present Government, and desired Innovations, had taken too deep root in
their Minds to keep within the bounds of Mildness; So that they omitted no
endeavor, or practice, whereby they might incite the Parliament and People to
disturb it. They represented to them, that this great business of the
Barricadoes, this Victory of Subjects over their Sovereign, this Diminution of
Royal Authority, the Public Invectives against the Cardinal, would never be
forgotten. That his want of Power made him at present prudently dissemble his
Resentments, but that they would break out with so much the greater violence:
That it was never heard, that so powerful a Minister was ever attacked, without
being ruined to all intents and purposes: that he stays only for favorable
occasions; a Division in the Parliament, a change in the People, the King's
Majority; in a word, the Benefit of Opportunity, which cannot be wanting to him
who absolutely disposes of the Royal Power; that therefore they must make use
of the present junctures, if they would get rid of so dangerous an Enemy. That
the Duke of Orleans was a sober Man, and one too knowing in the Affairs of the
World, to oppose an universal concourse; That Monsieur le Prince will bethink
himself, that the true Refuge for Princes of the Blood, and his own Reputation
against the jealousy of Favorites, must be the Public Love of the People; so
that at the most, to please the Queen, they will appear to defend her, but
weakly, and with reservedness.

Lastly, That they must consider, that the Declaration which was extorted from
the Court, when in a weak condition, and which will be of force no longer, then
while it continues so, is a Necessity, not a Sincere Friendship, in the heart
of the Queen, who but waits the Moment to Revenge her self.

Those who dispersed such Discourses in Parliament, and who declared most
against the Court, were after Broussel and Longueil, the President of Noujon
and Blanmenil, Enemies to the Cardinal, because of the disgrace of the Bishop
of Beauvay their Uncle, and because their Cousin was retused to be made the
Coadjutor of this Bishopric, and Viole, because they broke the promise they
made him to be Chancellor to the Queen, but the person that at this time by
the instances of his Friend in Parliament, and his Emissaries among the people,
labored with most success to make a party to their Association, was the
Coadjutour of Paris. This man who had joined too many excellent, both Natural
and acquired Qualities, that defect which the Corruption of minds makes to pass
for a Virtue, was tainted with an extreme ambition, and an unbounded desire of
increasing his Fortune, and Reputation by all sorts of ways, so that the
Constancy of his undaunted Courage, and mighty Genius found a sad and unhappy
object, which was the troubles of the State; and a Compassion to the Capital
City, whereof he was Archbishop. Now judging that this Party could not Subsist
with out a Head, he cast his eyes upon Monsieur le Prince, whom he Assaulted
with such strong reasons, that it was reported, he was persuaded by them, or at
least seemed to be so, even to give his word to Broussel, and Longueil to put
himself at the Head of them. But whether it was that he did not engage his
word, and that the Duke of Chatillion, who Negotiated for him with the
Frondaurs, had advanced so far on his own head without his Orders, or rather
that the Prince had expressly given it to hinder them from addressing
themselves to the Duke of Orleans, during his discontent, however it was, he
undeceived those who suspected Him of Favoring his Desire.

The Coadjutor seeing himself disappointed, having a Head of this Importance,
turned his hopes upon the Prince of Conty, whose Birth alone was of Great
Consequence in the Kingdom. This Prince was dissatisfied because he was not one
of the Council, and much more because the Prince set so little esteem upon him.
But being entirely Governed by the Duchess of Longueil his Sister, (who was
netled at the Indifference which Monsieur the Prince showed to her) he
abandoned himself without reserve to her Opinions. This Princess, who had a
great hand in the sequel of Affairs, had all the advantages of Wit, and Beauty
to so high a Degree, and with so many charms, and so generally liked, that
nature seemed to have been pleased to frame an accomplished and perfect Work.
But a Blemish, which is rarely or never seen in a Princess of this merit,
something darkened these fair Qualities, which was far from prescribing to those
who had a particular Adoration for her, she transformed her self so very much
into their sentiments that she was not sensible of her own.

At this time the Prince de Marcillac had a place in her Affections, who
joining his ambition to his Love, inspired her with a desire of intermedling in
Affairs, tho she had a natural Aversion to it, and made use of the passion she
had to be revenged on Monsieur the Prince, to set the Prince of Conty against
him. The Coadjutour was happy in his project, to see the Brother and Sister
disposed to Unite themselves with the Frondeurs, by a Treaty into which the
Duke of Longueville was drawn, being pushed on with the Hopes that the
Parliament would bring about his ill grounded pretensions to be a Prince of the
Blood.

The Court seeing that the Designs of their Enemies, prevailed to that Height
as openly to demand the Cardinals ruin, put all their hope in the Duke of
Orleans, and Monsieur le Prince, and thought that their Union, with their
Majesty's would reduce them into Order. Now because the mischief had taken such
deep root, that there was required a great deal of force to pluck it up, they
judged that the temperate Nature of the Duke of Orleans, was not so proper, as
that of Monsieur le Prince; which was incapable of all Moderation: Add to this,
that his Reputation in the Wars, the Splendour of his Victories, the Forces of
his Troops would strike terror into peoples minds, so that they applied
themselves particularly to gain him, to espouse a cause so just. The Queen to
this end made use of very pressing persuasions, to Wit, Tears, and most
affectionate words, telling him that she looked upon him as her Third Son. The
Cardinal promised him that he would all his life depend upon his Will. The King
himself embracing him, told him that he recommended to him the saftey of his
State and Person. So that the Court considered him, as the Principal Defender
of its Fortune: but those who determined him, were Marshal Gramont, and le
Tellier; by these or the like Arguments, they represented to him, that by
little and little, the Parliament would Usurp the whole Authority: That instead
of bounding their Ambition within the Declaration of the 28 October. they would
not only be judges of the Affairs of War, but also took upon themselves a power
to turn out the Minister, that at the same time they might set up a new one of
their own choosing, and further that frequent Mutations are Pernicious to
Kingdoms, nay that it is sometimes better to suffer an ill one, than to change
him; that it is ten thousand to one, but if an usurpation, (the like whereof
was never heard of till now) be tolerated, they will assault priviledg'd
persons and nothing be sacred enough to secure it from Violation; by this
licentiousness, that the Counselors would be in a fine Condition, if they
should impose Laws upon Kings and the Princes of the Blood, miserable if they
received them. That this new practice shocked the Monarchy, which is absolute
and independent, and contrary to the Constitutions of France, and even to the
Institutions of the Parliament; that if there be abuses in the Kingdom, they
ought to be reformed by the Assemblies of the General States; and not by the
Decrees of a Company, whose suffrages are rather counted than weighed. That
when ever the Parliament went beyond their Duty, they were severely corrected,
sometimes by the late King, sometimes by Henry the Fourth, and Charles the
Ninth, and other Kings their Predecessors, upon occasions less dangerous than
this. That Great Kingdoms cannot be supported by remiss Councils, but must give
a proof of their Courage and strength, and that the justice of Kings consists
in their Power. That He the Prince, was interested in the person of the
Cardinal, to oppose an enterprise which tends to the Destruction of the Royal
Family; and that if the Duke of Orleans, and his Highness would not stand in
the Gap, the Queen would be forced to go with her Children, to Implore the Help
of the Princes that were Allies to the Crown: Besides, that Monsieur le Prince
must think that the Innovations made by the Parliament, since the Declaration
wounded the Establishment of the Peace.

These Discourses, which represented the thing very lively, made such an
Impression on his Spirit, that he would not hear of a neutrality, without ever
so much as thinking that he might lose the peoples Affection. It is certain,
that Great Minds, like this of Monsieur le Prince, produce great Virtues, but
are eminent also for great Defects: By an Invincible Excess of Passion, he
ruined all the Advantages Fortune had, even to Envy, added to his person, which
were such, that the would have surpassed the glory of the greatest men in
former Ages, if Piety, Justice, and Solidity had been answerable to that
Excessive Valor, that incredible Constancy in Adversities, and that sparkling
Wit which were remarkable in him. Monsieur le Prince might have rendered himself
adored by all the World, if he could have managed himself with a design to have
treated his Affairs with calmness; but instead of this he was forced by his
rash conduct to have recourse to means, which brought him to strange
Extremities. He went with the Duke of Orleans to the Parliament, and pushed on
by his ill Fate, as soon as Viole had invoked the Holy Spirit to illuminate the
Princes in their Consideration of the Cardinals Conduct, Monsieur le Prince
rose up and bid him hold his tongue; this inconsiderately raised a murmuring
amongst the Young Counselors, with which he was fired into a passion, and
threatened them with his hands and words. At this time he lost the Affection of
the Company, and when this Action was spread abroad, the esteem his Victories
gained him was changed into Fear, and the love of his Person into Hatred, not
to say Exceration, from which he recovered not but by particular good Fortune.

And now being interested in a quarrel of his own, as well as of the Courts, he
hearkened to all propositions that were made him for reducing the Parliament:
They tell him that the speediest and surest way was to besiege Paris, that by
stoping all the Avenues, the people would be starved in three Market days, and
so rise against the Parliament, and accuse them of being the Authors of all
their miseries. In fine that the Parisians were without any to head them,
without Soldiers and accustomed to soft ease; he relished these Reasons, which
seemed strong to him, because animated by his Fury, to which nothing was
impossible; so that he made himself the Head of the enterprise to besiege
Paris, under the command of the Duke of Orleans, who at first opposed this
design; but the solicitations of the Queen, the persuasions of the Abbot de la
Riviere, and the willful Resolution of Monsieur le Prince, overr-ulled his own
Opinion, and the contrary advice of the Duchess of Orleans: This being
resolved on, Monsieur le Prince and the Marshal de la Meilleraye, proposed
(that they might gain their end more speedily) to seize upon the Isle of St.
Louis, the Port St. Antonie, the Arsenal, and the Bastile, and also to put
their Majesty's in the Bastile; but either because this proposition was not
well enough grounded, or because they were afraid of exposing the Kings person,
they rather chose to quit Paris, than to besiege it.

After his Majesty had solemnized the Festival of the Epiphany, at the Marshal
Gramont's House, the King retired to the Cardinal's Palace, from whence he
departed the next day at three a Clock in the Morning, with the Queen, Cardinal
Mazarin, and all the Court, except Madam de Longueil, to go to St. Germains,
whither the Nobility and all the Ministers likewise came the same day, and
presently in a Council that was held, the Blocking up of Paris was Published
and talked of by all the Court.

This Departure, or rather Escape, was joyful News to the Factious, and was by
no means approved of by wise Men, who esteemed it unbecoming Sovereign Dignity,
which Princes ought to be jealous of, since the splendour of the name of King is
the chief thing that awes the People into Respect.

The Parisians were not so much startled as was imagined they would be: on the
contrary, as if they had taken courage from the condition they were in, they
declared, That they were prepared for all the Consequences that threatened them;
and fear did not keep them from railing against the Cardinal, Monsieur le
Prince, the Queen, and all those whom they believed to have advised this
departure, which they called a Rape of the King.

The Parliament appeared less constant in this accident, because they foresaw
the Consequences of it better, and after the first Assembly, they deputed some
of the Kings Council to carry their Submissions and Offers, which, though very
advantageous, yet were sent back without being heard, so much was all the Court
possessed with a vain hope that the Parisians would yield too with a blind
obedience upon the first Alarm of the Siege; but they were quickly undeceived,
for the day after (which was the eighth of January) that the King's Council had
made their Report, so that they could no longer question the design of the
Court, the Parliament declared the Cardinal an Enemy to the Government, and
issued out Commissions to levy Soldiers; the Companies voluntarily taxed
themselves, they laid in abundance of Provisions, and the people with a great
deal of ardor stood to defend the City: So true is it that Fear oftentimes
begets Courage, and that nothing Arms the Hand more powerfully than Despair.

Notwithstanding Monsieur le Prince, with six or seven thousand Men, who were
the remainder of the Army of the last Campaign, blocked up Paris, possessing
themselves of Laigny, Corbeil, Saint Cloud, St. Denis, and Chaerenton, a thing
Posterity will admire, but never believe, That he should by his Conduct and
Vigilance block up the greatest and most populous City in Europe, when at the
same time there were so many Princes and Lords in it, with an Army stronger
than his. Now as the Court never wants Malcontents, the Duke d'Elbeuf, his
three Sons, the Duke of Brisac, and the Marquess de la Boulaye, first offered
themselves to the Parliament, who had no sooner installed the Duke d'Elbeuf in
the Office of General of the Army, but news was brought them that the Prince de
Conty and the Duke de Longueil, accompanied with the Prince de Marcillac and
Normonstier, were that night privately come from St. Germains, and lighted at
the Hotel de Longueil, who came to declare themselves for the Parisians,
according to the Agreement which they had made with the Coadjutor. This their
sudden arrival gave occasion to some controversy, which was ended by the
nomination of the Prince of Conty for Generalissimo, and of the Duke d'Elbeuf
for General, with whom the Duke de Bouillion and Marshal de la Motthe were
joined in equal power. Monsieur de Longueil would not take any Employment, but
of assisting the Prince of Conty by his Counsels, esteeming himself above the
last, and not able to be equal to the first. The Prince of Conty had great
difficulty to justify the sincerity of his Intentions, because the Public,
who were ignorant of the misunderstanding betwixt him and Monsieur le Prince,
who was the real head of the Enterprise against Paris, could not think
themselves secure of him; even Provost, a Counselor of the great Chamber, gave
himself the liberty (as if this mutual Confederation against their Duty
inspired him with boldness) to be disrespectful to a Prince of the Blood,
Nevertheless Madam de Longueville was required to live in the Hotel de Ville,
to be an Hostage for the Fidelity of her Brother and Husband to the People, who
naturally distrust great Men, because they are ordinarily the Victims of their
Interest.

This departure of Monfieur le Prince de Conty, and of Monsieur de Longueil,
from St. Germains, was a mighty surprise in it self, but became much greater by
raising a jealousy that Monsieur le Prince was of the Party, which put the
Queen and the Cardinal into extraordinaryfears, though they were quickly
removed by his return from Charenton. He stormed and was incensed against them
with the greater heat in this quarrel, that he might be revenged on his
Relations, who he believed ought to depend absolutely on his Will. 'Twas said,
That at this time the Cardinal resolved to leave France, thinking it impossible
for him to be safe in the midst of all these Tempests, and destitute of
support. But the Prince encouraged him, and engaged his honor to the Queen,
That he would perish, or bring him back to Paris triumphant over his Enemies.
In the mean time the Party in the City got no small strength by the Declaration
of a Prince of the Blood, whose quality was of great consequence in the
Kingdom, and of another Prince who was almost absolute in his Government of
Normandy; the Marshal de la Motthe also rendered himself considerable in the
Army, and the Duke of Bouillion incomparably more so by the great Knowledge he
had in the affairs of the World, and his strict Alliance with his Brother
Marshal Turenne, who commanding at this time the Army in Germany, it was
presumed would Sacrifice his Duty to the raising of his Family, and to the Peak
he had against the Cardinal. Monsieur le Prince indeed, who took these two
Brothers for his Friends, wrote to the Duke de Bouillion, fearing lest he
should think that the retreat of the Prince de Conty, and of Longueil, was
contrived with his consent, and therefore he was willing to undeceive him, and
conjured him to return to St. Germains, where he would procure him all the
satisfaction possible to his Interests. Monsieur de Bouillion showed this
Letter to the Parliament, and the Ministers being informed, That Marshal
Turenne stood ill affected, the King and Monsieur le Prince, who had great
Interest amongst the Troops in Germany, wrote to the Colonels to observe his
Commands no further, and to abandon him, which took effect and was the safety
of the Court.

At this time likewise the Duke of Beaufort arrived at Paris: He had absconded
in the Provinces beyond the Loire since his escape out of Vincennes, and found
this favorable occasion to set him up again in the World. He came to offer his
service to the Parliament, who cleared him from the Accusation of having
conspired against the Life of Cardinal Mazarin, admitted him Peer of France,
and made him one of their Generals. Now although his Genius was none of the
most raised, yet his Presence, his Language, and his popular Air, with a
Conduct adroit enough, gained him the love of the People of Paris, and the
rather, because they thought him irreconcilable to the Cardinal for
imprisoning him, from which he would never change till he was necessitated by
the revolution of Affairs to be reconciled unto him. In the mean time the
King's Army possessed all the Posts about Paris, and though the Parliament were
more in number, yet the Generals never made an attempt to open a Passage,
insomuch that the Provisions came in with difficulty only by Brie; for Monsieur
le Prince could not put a Garrison in Brie Comte Robert, without dividing his
Forces, and had also quitted Charenton, which the Prince de Conty possessed
himself of, fortified, and put into it 3000 Men under the Command of Canleu.

This made Monsieur le Prince resolve to attack this Post, which secured the
Provisions of the Parisians, and also to give terror to his Arms. Thither
therefore he went on the eighth of February, with the Duke of Orleans and all
the Princes and Lords of the Court, and committed the Assault to the Duke de
Chatillon, whilst he himself went to an adjacent Hill to hinder all relief from
Paris. The Duke executed his Orders with all the Valor possible, but at the
last Barricade he received a Musket Shot through his Body, of which he died
the next day, lamented by both Parties for his excellent qualities, in the
flower of his age, and just upon his enjoyment of the Honors which his
Services had acquired him. The taking of this, as it very much diminished the
Honor of the Generals and Forces of the Parliament, so it was looked upon as
miraculous in the Person of Monsieur le Prince, to have carried a place in the
presence of an Army, and at the Gates of Paris, from whence ten thousand Men in
Arms came out to be Witnesses of it. This Battle, and those of the Bois de
Vincennes, of Lagny and de Brie, (in one whereof the young Duke of Rohan,
showing himself the worthy Successor of his Father's Virtue, lost his Life)
being all disadvantageous to the Parisians, inclined them to some thoughts of a
Peace, which, notwithstanding it was difficult to effect, because of the
different Interests in the Parliament, which hindered it. The number of those
who were disaffected to a Peace, though inferior to the other, yet appeared
more, because they disguised their Hatred and Ambition with the name of Public
Good and Safety, which is not to be found, said they, in an agreement with the
Cardinal. The more moderate durst not show their good intentions, because
(besides the danger in doing so) they would have been eluded, and it was better
to stay till the minds of the people were a little wearied, and the strength
and hopes of the Party more weakened, before they declared themselves. As for
the People, the richer sort would not expose themselves to the Multitude, which
having not suffered much from necessity, and being animated by some People of
quality, was glad enough of this pretense for War, and cried out against such
as desired a Peace. All the Generals (except Monsieur de Beaufort, who wholly
devoted himself to an hatred of the Cardinal, and love of the People, whom he
designed to make use of afterward) contrived their particular Reconciliation,
and every one had his private Friends at Court to make his conditions better.

Monsieur d'Elboeuf held Correspondence with the Abbot de la Riviere from the
beginning; Monsieur de Bouillon, with Monsieur le Prince, and the Marshall de
la Motthe was engaged with the Duke de Longueville, who was retired into
Normandy, where he fortified himself with Arms, Men, and Money, to make his
Treaty more advantageous by the mediation of Monsieur le Prince. As to the
Prince de Conty, because he had no inclinations but what his Sister inspired
him with, who was cruelly affronted and slandered by the injurious discourses
of Monsieur le Prince about her Conduct, time alone must allay these heats, and
the necessity of Affairs bring this Family to a reconciliation, as it quickly
did. The Coadjutor only was the principal Promoter of this War, wherein he had
but too much desecrated his Character amidst Sedition and Arms, which banished
from his mind all thoughts of Peace, and thwarted every thing that spoke in
favor of it, because he found not wherewith to satisfy his Ambition. On the
other side the Court swelled with good success, and the glorious Warlike
Actions of Monsieur le Prince, expected yet greater from him, and would impose
too rigorous conditions on the contrary Party: so that apparent necessity was a
Sovereign Law which determined both Parties to a Treaty of Peace, besides that
Civil war being contrary to the nature of all the World, every one was ready to
return from his errors and animosities, it being the humor of our Nation to
become Dutiful with the same levity that it becomes Mutinous, and to pass in a
Moment from Rebellion to Obedience.

And now see the present occasion that was offered. The King, on the 20th of
February, sent a Herald, clad with his Coat of Arms, his Staff covered with
Flower-de-Luces, accompanied with two Trumpetters: He came to the Port St.
Honor, and said, That he had three Pacquets of Letters to deliver to the
Prince of Conty, to the Parliameut, and to the City. The Parliament being
advertised thereof, determined not to receive or give him Audience, but to send
the King's Council to the Queen, to tell her, That their refusal was purely a
mark of Obedience and Respect, since Heralds were not sent but to Sovereign
Princes, or to Enemies; That the Prince of Conty, the Parliament, and the City,
being neither, beseeched her Majesty to let them know her Pleasure from her own
mouth. The Kings Council were well received by the Queen, who told them, That
she was satisfied with their excuses and submissions, and that when the
Parliament returned to their Duty they should experience the effects of her
Kindness, and that the Persons and Fortunes of every one in particular, not one
excepted, should find there their security. the Duke d'Orleans, and Monsieur le
Prince gave them the same assurances. Many material reasons were the cause that
the Court was so ready to be indulgent; for besides the constancy of the
Parisians, the difficulty of raising Men and Money, the Revolt of Gascony,
Provence, and Normandy, and of many other Cities which followed the Parliament,
as Poictiers, Tours, Angiers, and Mant, you must know there was yet a more
pressing Motive. The Prince of Conty, seeing that the Army in Germany had
passed the Rhine to come into France against Monsieur Turenne, and that his
Party could not subsist without a powerful foreign Aid, had sent the Marquess
de Normoustier, and Laigues, to the Archduke, to invite him to join his Forces
to the Party of Paris, to constrain the Ministers to conclude a general Peace.
The Spaniards resolved not to slip so favorable an opportunity to foment our
divisions, and make an advantage thereof, either by a Treaty, or the
continuation of the War. To this end the Archduke sent a Deputy to the
Parliament, who gave him Audience after he had delivered his Credentials, not
without some blot to this Society, if necessity of defense had not pleaded its
excuse. In his Audience he declared the Catholic King's joining with this
Company for a general Peace, which should be the sole end of his Forces Entry
into France, and not to take advantage of the weakness of the Frontier, and
that he found more security in treating with the Parliament than with the
Cardinal, who had broke it, and who was a declared Enemy of the State: And
indeed Vaufourle, sent from the Court to the Ministers of Spain in Flanders, to
insinuate some Propositions for a Peace, was not favorably heard, and they
inclined to the Parliaments side, to relieve this Party which was going down
the Wind; so that the Offers of the Archduke to the Faction of Paris (which he
performed by his actual entry into France, (accompanied by the two Agents of
the Prince of Conty, with fifteen or sixteen thousand Men) giving a just
apprehension to the Court, made it suddenly resolve to accommodate the affair
of Paris. The Taxes were out; it was extremely difficult to get Money; their
Troops perished, either by the Avarice of the Officers, or for want of
subsistence, or the dissatisfaction of their Generals; and their Arms grew into
discredit. In fine, the minds of most were disgusted, either because they
smarted under the inconvenience, or because it is the nature of people to be
soon wearied with a War which they undertook in passion. The Premiere
President, and the President of Mesme, who had by consent acted underhand with
the Ministers during all these commotions, managed with Address these
dispositions to advance a Treaty for Peace; and as they were deputed, together
with others, to carry to the Queen the Letter of the Archduke, and the
Credentials of his Envoy, and to justify the Company for having given him
Audience, but withal to acquaint her, That they would not determine upon an
Answer without knowing her Pleasure, they had a Conference apart from the other
Deputies with the Duke of Orleans and Monsieur le Prince, wherein they Treated
for a Peace. When they were together, the Deputies insisting upon the opening
of the Passages, the Princes promised them to open one as soon as the
Parliament gave full power to their Deputies to Treat for a Peace. Now though
this secret Conference made the Parliament, and the People, who were at the
Door of the great Chamber, to murmur, yet the Premiere President, who never
wanted Constancy upon occasion, nor Zeal for the public Good, having said,
That it was only to get an Answer from the Queen, who was incensed at the
Company for having received the Spanish Envoy, persuaded them to give a full
Power, without the restriction of the Arrest of January 18. against the
Cardinal and foreign Ministers, giving them in charge the Interests of the
Generals, and the Parliaments of Normandy and Provence, who were Confederates
with the Parliament of Paris, with whom the other Deputies for the Companies of
the Chambers of Accounts, of the Courts of Aids, and of the Hotel de Ville,
were joined.

Whilst this famous Deputation was in their way to St. Germains, their
Majesty's and the two Princes had sent some Persons of Quality to the Queen of
England, to condole the fatal Death of the King her Husband; and Flammarin, who
was one of them, made a visit from the Abbot de la Riviere to Prince Marcillac,
who lay Sick of a Wound which he received in the Fight at the Brie Comte
Robert; The Count de Grancey, in this Visit, made some secret Overtures
advantageous to the Prince of Conty, namely that he should be admitted into the
Council, and have a strong place in Champaine, provided that he would agree to
an accommodation, and desist from his nomination to the Cardinalship in favor
of this Abbot. This Proposition, made with the consent of Monsieur le Prince,
who desired to reunite the two Families, was approved of by Monsieur de
Marcillac, and soon after by the Duke de Longueville, and the Prince of Conty.
At this time the Duke de Longueville was persuaded by Monsieur le Prince to
retard his Supplies for Paris, and to Treat with the Court upon a Promise of
the Pont de l'Arche, and a great Charge, for which he was his Surety. Monsieur
de Bouillon had also some assurances given to him and Monsieur Turenne by
Monsieur le Prince, but either because he did not very much confide in him, or
because he entertained other hopes, he put all the obstacles he could to the
conclusion of the Peace: So rare is Fidelity in Civil War to the mutual ties
and correspondencies which are found amongst People of different Parties, and
there are always particular Treaties which precede the general one, because the
secret Agreements of heads so considerable, seeming to preserve only a respect
for their Party, necessitate the most Zealous to acquiesce in the Peace, or to
show a shameful weakness.

Notwithstanding the Conferences at Ruel had like to have broke up, upon the
Queens nomination of the Cardinal for a Deputy in conjunction with the two
Princes: Those of the Parliament not being willing to admit him, because he had
been condemned, they therefore made use of this expedient, to negotiate by two
Deputies for each Party, which were the Chancellor and le Tellier for the
Court, and the President Coigneux and Viole for the Parliament. At last, after
many Debates and Contests, they agreed upon a Peace, wherein, though the
Cardinal was preserved, yet he complained to the Princes that he was put sub
hasta (as it was termed in ancient Rome) that is, set to sale, and that they
had made him restore his Movables and Habits, Clothes sold by an Arrest of
Parliament. This necessity appeared to them little important, in respect to the
Necessity they lay under because of the approach of the Spanish Army. The
principal Articles were, that they should send back the Deputy of the Archduke
without an Answer, a general pardon for all the Party, all the Declarations and
Arrests since the sixth of January to be repealed and annulled, and the
Semestres of the Parliaments of Normandy and Provence, suppressed upon certain
conditions: Those who were Enemies to this Peace, took a pretense from some of
the Articles to decry it, especially the Coadjutor, who was incensed, that the
War which was here begun by him, should be concluded without him; and that
instead of all the Advantages which his Ambition had fancied to him, he reaped
nothing but the shame of having labored to subvert the State.

He was strictly associated with the Duke de Beaufort, whose credit be made use
of in all Occurrences; and in this he forgot nothing to render the Treaty
odious to the People, the Parliament and the Generals: He represented to them,
that this War being made only to remove the Cardinal, he was nevertheless
preserved by this Peace; even the Arrest of the eighth of January against him
and Foreign Ministers was revoked, and then where is the fruit of so much pains
and sufferings, and will not the Parliament fall under the Peoples contempt by
such a remissness? And also that the Generals abandoned themselves to their
private Interests in prejudice to the Union, but that which with some show of
reason exasperated them most, was, that the Cardinal signed the Treaty, the
greatest part saying, That he having signed it, it became null, because the
Conference was against him, and that there was reason to wonder that the
Deputies should suffer a condemned man to confer and to sign with them. He and
his Emissaries, by such like Discourses, provoked the Parliament and People,
who threatened the Deputies with the utmost Extremities. As soon as the Premiere
President began to read the verbal Process, and the Articles in the Assembly of
the Chambres, he was hindered by the great clamours and murmurs of the
Counselors, and the complaints of the Generals. But the wisest part of the
Parliament, either ballancing the Inconveniences of a Civil War, with the
hardness of the Articles, or because they perceived that it was the Ambition of
the Coadjutour, and of some particular persons that inspired them with this
averseness, judged the Peace necessary. The Company thought of sending back the
same Deputies to St. Germain, to reform the three Articles without speaking of
the Cardinal, and to treat of the Interests of the Generals, who should be
inserted into the same Declaration.

This pretty mild Advice was proposed by Broussel, and for that reason followed
by the Frondeurs and the Mazarins, not without some (it may be, unjust)
suspicion, that a secret promise of the Government of the Bastile, had at this
time mollifyed the good man, so few are there who are proof against the charms
of Interest! When the Coadjutor saw that the Parliament in the Reformation of
the Article, did not insist against the Cardinal, he persuaded the Prince of
Conty to send some one from him, and the rest of the Generals to the Conference
at St. Germain, (which was held principally for the Interest of the Generals)
to propose, that they would renounce all their pretentions (provided that the
Cardinal would resign up the Ministry of State) and at the same time to beg the
Parliament to order their Deputies to insist upon that in conjunction with
them. To this end, the Prince sent the Count de Maure to St. Germain, and asked
the company to join with him, who granted it: But because there was no mention
made thereof in the first Treaty, and also that the Duke de Brissac, Barriere,
and Crecy, the Deputies of the Generals had made other Propositions for their
Interests, and because they had already tasted of the Fruits of the Peace, by
the restoration of Traffic, and the Cessation of all Acts of Hostility. The
Queen and Princes answered to the pressing Instances of the Count de Maure,
that they would never consent to remove the Cardinal, and that the pretensions
of the Generals either were Acts of Grace, Favor, or were due in Justice, that
those in Justice due should be preserved for them; but for such as were only
Acts of Favor, they should be conferred on such as deserved them most, and
depend purely on her Majesty's pleasure: So that all their pretensions being
for the most part ill grounded, came to nothing; and there was only the Prince
de Conty who had Danvilliers, the Duke de Lougueville who had the Pont de
l'Arche, and Brussel who had the Bastilc, which also was not performed till
some time after, and some arrears of Pensions put into the Bargain. As to the
Parliament, it was satisfied with the Reformation of the three Articles which
the Deputies demanded, and Her Majesty dispensed with their coming to St.
Germains, where she was to keep her seat of Justice. The Deputies came to
Paris, where the Chambers being assembled, the Kings Declaration for a Peace
was ratified, and it was Ordered, That their Majesty's should be thanked for
the Peace they had been pleased to give their Subjects.

This was the end of the War, wherein neither Party having got the better of
the other, neither of them obtained what they at first proposed to themselves.
For the Parliament and the Cardinal remained in their former splendour, and the
present state of Things was not at all changed, notwithstanding the Peace which
for some time put a period to all the Horrors of a Civil War; was received with
an universal Joy, except amongst such as grow sick of public Tranquillity, and
have no way to advance themselves but by Factions, and establish their Safety
and Fortunes in the Shipwreck of others. But the Fire of Civil War was not
quite extinguished by this Peace of the Parliament, it soon after kindled
again, and flamed out with more violence in the principal Provinces of the
Kingdom. and certainly, it was difficult for the Queen to pay an
Acknowledgement proportionable to the great Services which Monsieur le Prince
had done her, and for Monsieur le Prince to contain himself within a dutiful
Modesty, after having so usefully served her: for Debts of this nature being
almost impossible to be paid, ordinarily produce hatred in the mind of the
Sovereign, and at the same time inspire Subjects with thoughts of domineering,
which are not to be endured: Now as the Cardinal had chiefly reaped the fruit
of Monsieur le Prince's assistance, so he was the most exposed to his
complaints, demands, menaces, and ill humor.

Sometime before the Troubles, the Cardinal desiring to establish the Seat of
his Fortune in France, that he might strengthen himself by great Alliances,
cast his eyes upon the Duke de Mercaeur, whom he designed to marry to one of
his Nieces; he gave him leave to come to Court, and the Duke de Vendosme to
return to one of his Houses; and also gave over persecuting the Duke de
Beaufort. This made the more quick-sighted judge, the Cardinal, who foresaw how
burdensome the protection of Monsieur le Prince would in time be to him,
attempted all possible ways to make a shift without it; and yet he hoped by
appeasing the Discontents of the Regency, and getting new supports, to free
himself from depending upon him. This project was interrupted by the War, and
set on foot again soon after the Peace, when the Court being at Compeigne where
the Duke de Vendosme was. The Cardinal omitted no care to make it take effect:
The Queen spoke of it to Monsieur le Prince, who durst not contradict the
Proposal, either because he foresaw not, or slighted the consequence; or
rather, because he feared the Breach that would happen upon this refusal. But
Monsieur de Longuevil (who was restored to his Brothers favor, and had greater
power over him than before) induced by reasons which respected his own
pleasures more than the advantage of Monsieur le Prince; let him see the
Cardinals intention, exaggerating his Ingratitude for allying himself with the
House of Vendosme, which was an enemy to his. And indeed, Monsieur le Prince
was so very much touched with his Discourses, that, contrary to the Rules of
Policy, he kept not himself within bounds when he spoke of the Cardinal, and
spared no Ralleries and Invectives against his Person, and the intended
Marriage. The Cardinal, to whom this procedure was not unknown, complained
mightily of the opposition which Monsieur le Prince made against the Marriage
of his Niece, which the Duke de Mercaeur, since he opposed not the Marriage of
Mademoiselle d'Angoulesme with Monsieur de Joyeuse, affecting by this
comparison an equality which was then unseasonable: So that their hearts being
exasperated one against another, Suspicions, Jealousies, and evil Reports,
which Courtiers are seldom niggards of, in the dissentions of the Cabinet
Council, incensed them more, and produced very different thoughts of Revenge.
For Monsieur le Prince satisfied himself with Contempts, which are frequently
Impotent, whilst the Cardinal with a deep Silence, made great preparatives,
and laid foundations for his Ruin; but notwithstanding, both of them showed
very little coldness, yet this Alienation took its original from the strict and
daily communication that they passed betwixt them during the War; by which (as
it is ordinary enough for esteem to be lessened by familiarity, which discovers
all entirely and without reserve, chiefly in the Exercises of good or ill
Fortune) the Prince lost a great deal of the Respect which he once had for the
Cardinal; and being no longer restrained by the awe of his tottering Power,
played upon his defects before the Duke of Orleans, and the Cardinals
confidents. These, with little fidelity to either of them, after having made
their Court to Monsieur le Prince, gave an account of his bitter Railleries to
the Cardinal; the remembrance whereof gives spurs to his Revenge, and will
never be blotted out of his mind. Besides, the Cardinal discovered, that he
could not firmly rely upon the Friendship of Monsieur le Prince, who was rather
governed by his capriciousness, than by reason and his interests; and that this
scornful humor, instead of being restrained, increased daily; so that not
being able to gain him over, he resolved to ruin him. Add to this, that
Concord and Power being incompatible in the same place, the Cardinal could not
brook a Superior at Court, nor the Prince an Equal: But that which entirely
broke off the Bond of Friendship betwixt them, was, That the Cardinal being
justly enough persuaded, that he could not engage Monsieur le Prince to
persevere in his Interests, but by pretenses of new Establishments, did either
by himself, or by his Creatures, make him some Proposals, with the hopes
whereof he entertained him for some time, but, at last eluded them. The Prince
enlightened enough by his own Judgment, and it may be by those of his
Acquaintance, perceived the Cardinals insincerity, which he no longer doubted
of after such a Rencounter as this that follows.

The Cardinal having put Monsieur le Prince upon gaining le Montbelliard, and
having sent d'Herval on a pretense to Treat thereof, but with private Orders to
conclude nothing, d'Herval advertised Monsieur le Prince thereof, who could not
dissemble it; and following the Spanish Proverb, Despues quae te err nunca
bien te quiese: and it was no wonder, if the Cardinal being jealous that
Monsieur le Prince would not fail to revenge himself, designed to prevent him,
even at the cost of those great Obligations which he had to him, seeing that in
matter of Policy all means proper to preserve Authority, provided they be sure,
are reputed Honest and Lawful.

From this Discourse it is easy to see that the Cardinal was willing to make
use of all the events to throw Monsieur le Prince upon Precipices, and thus it
proceeded. The Peace not being yet declared, it was judged inconvenient to the
well fare of the State, as well of the Provinces, as of the Frontiers, for the
King to return to his Capital City. The Ministers could not resolve so quickly
to put themselves amongst a provoked Multitude which they had but just before
Besieged; and because the Campaign drew near, it was made a pretense to go to
the Frontiers, there to prepare for some considerable Enterprise, that in the
interim Time might calm their Spirits, and the remembrance of things past be
worn out. And indeed, their Majesty's and the Duke of Orleans, and the Council
went to Compeigne, but Monsieur le Prince thinking it would be for his
Reputation to show himself to a People, who had laid so many Curses upon him,
came to Paris, and showed himself in the Streets alone in his Coach: there he
attracted the Respect and Fear, rather then the Resentments of the People: So
much does Valor charm even those whom it wounds: The greatest part of the
Parliament, and the principal of the Party visited him; for five or six days
after which, he returned to the Court, where the Joy the Cardinal had to see
the way to Paris made open for him, was allayed by a jealousy over the least
of his Actions. At his arrival, the Cardinal desiring to remove so dangerous a
Rival, proposed to him the Command of the Army of Flanders, which he would not
accept, because he had tasted the pleasure of Ruling in the Cabinet Council: He
had also a design to go to his Government in Burgundy, to pacify the Troubles
in Guyenne and Provence, which were up in Arms because of a misunderstanding
betwixt the Governors and the Parliaments: But the Cardinal and la Riviere did
what they could to hinder his Mediation (to the Authority whereof, the parties
concerned referred their Differences) for fear it should give any addition to
his Power. During this stay at Compeigne, the Prince de County, the Dukes of
Nemours and de Candale, Monsieur le Prince and Marshal de Turennes, who had
struck in again with all people of Quality, repaired to him, when they were in
company, and full of Mirth, he never dissembled his contempt of the Cardinal
and the Duke of Vendosme, and the aversion he had to the Marriage of the Duke
de Mercaeur; nay, even went so far as to railly the Royal Authority, whereof he
had but just before been the strongest support, but rather out of a hatred to
the Cardinal, than out of any design he had to Raise his own upon the Ruins of
that.

This manner of Behavior from that time, gave the Cardinal some thoughrs of
attempting against his Liberty, if he durst have put them in Execution; but
amongst many Reasons which restrained him, that of his Friendship with the Duke
of Orleans, was an obstacle to this Design: For Monsieur le Prince had in the
late Affairs treated his Royal Highness after such a manner, that he took off
all the Envy that his extraordinaay Reputation might create in him, by
particular Honors and Respects, in leaving to him the outward marks of Command.
Add, that the Abbot de la Riviere, to whom he promised that the Prince de Conty
should not traverse his Nomination, was a certain Security for his Masters
Affection. Monsieur le Prince left Compeigne with this good understanding
betwixt them, to go to his Government: The Cardinal took his leave of him very
well attended, as if he was afraid to trust his Life with him who had ventured
his for his preservation, so frail are the ties and friendships of the Court,
and the least Accidents expose them to the greatest Changes. At parting, he
desired the Commander of Souvre, le Tellier, and others of the Cardinals
Confidents, and charged Marbille his own Servant to tell him, That he could not
be his Friend, if he thought of this Marriage. The Cardinal being vexed at the
heart to see himself constrained to publish to the World, a dependence so
submissive, as if the Will of Monsieur le Prince was the only Rule to which he
must conform his Interests, defended himself from it with vehemence enough;
alleging, That having imparted this Alliance, approved by the Queen and his
Royal Highness, to Rome, and all the Princes of Italy, he could not desist from
it without shame and dishonor: So that being balanced betwixt the Reputation
of the World, and the fear of Monsieur le Prince, he could not resolve either
to break off, or to conclude this Marriage: but following the Genius of his own
Nation, which was very Ascendant in him, he waited the benefit of Time. In the
mean while we were obliged to send out an Army into the Field, to deface the
Infamy of our Civil Wars, and raise the Reputation of our Affairs. A strong
Army was set out, made up of the Troops of Germany, (with which a Peace was
just before concluded) whereof Comte d'Harcourt was the General, who had orders
to lay Siege to Cambray. This Success, besides the Public Interest, was of
advantage to the Cardinal, who intended to reestablish himself in his ancient
Luster by a glorious Conquest; with the thoughts whereof he was the more
pleased, because Monsieur le Prince had no hand either in the Design or the
Execution; also to make the Honor of it more entirely his own, he went himself
from Amiens, where the King was, to the Siege, rather out of Ostentation, than
for any good effect that it had, contenting himself to distribute some Presents
of little value, which served only to discredit him in the Army, and expose him
to their public Railleries: But his Fortune looked upon him with an evil Eye
this year, Cambray was relieved, and this Enterprise turned to his dishonor.

This Event raised the Party of Paris, and revived their Violence, though they
were always actuated with the same Animosity against the Cardinal. For he
having made no endeavors to gain the Coadjutor, the Duke de Beaufort, Longueil,
and the most in credit with them, they kept up (notwithstanding the Peace) the
Peoples and the Parliaments hatred against him, as quick and active as in the
time of the War, that hereby they might render themselves necessary at the
Kings return to Paris, and make their Conditions better; even the Prince de
Conty, by the advice of Prince de Marcillac, though that which was agreed upon
in his favor at the Peace, was fully performed, forbore not to head this Party,
and to show himself the Cardinals enemy, that he might by this render himself
more considerable.

Besides, He being entirely devoted to the Will and Pleasure of Monsieur le
Prince, who by his power procured for him Danvilliers, and brought him into the
Council: it was for their mutual Interest, that he should keep up his credit at
Paris, during all the Storms at Court. So that at this time the Kings Authority
was as little respected as before the War, because its only support is Fear or
Admiration, both which were lost: and the Public were no less violent against
the Chief Minister, expecting that he should become sensible of the little
Power he had since he broke with Monsieur le Prince: Notwithstanding, as he
wanted not such who by false Flatteries suggested to him, that the Party of
paris was baffled, even in Paris it self, and that his prevailed there: he made
a trial thereof by Jarze, who received an affront from Monsieur de Beaufort at
the Jardin de Renard, wherein the Duke de Candalle, Boutellier, and other
Persons of Quality, were concerned: hereupon some Challenges followed, which
went no further than the disarming of Monsieur de Beaufort: A Rencounter which
stirred up all the Fronde into an almost universal Insurrection against the
Cardinal and his Partisans. The the Cardinal being undeceived of all the Errors
they had persuaded him into, and foreseeing that (how averse soever he was to
it) he could not prolong the Kings return to Paris, who was pressed to go by
the Princes, and the necessity of Affairs, wholly employed his Thoughts upon
what might contribute to his safety: with respect to the Prince de Conty and
Monsieur de Longueil, he engaged his Word to Prince de Marcillac, to procure
him the Honors of the Louvre, which the greatest Families in the Kingdom enjoy:
He forgot no promises to the Duchess de Monthason, who had an entire and
absolute Authority over the Duke de Beaufort. He at this time promised the
Superintendency to the President de Maisons, Brother to Longueil: and as to the
Coadjutor, he being in League with the Marquess de Noirmoustier, de Laigues,
and the Duchess de Chevereuse, who in the Troubles returned from her Exile in
Flanders to Paris, the Cardinal entered into a Conference with her upon his
account, so that the Upholders of this party being cooled by his Treaties with
them, were glad enough to cover the weakness of their credit, which would have
appeared, if they had attempted to oppose the concurrence of so great a number
as desired the Kings presence at Paris.

But the Cardinal, though he stood in need of the support of Monsieur le Prince
for his re-establishment, yet (either because he believed he could make a shift
without him, by the means of these new Practices, or indeed because he could no
longer endure the Yoke of his Obligations which he thought lay too heavy upon
him) kept only a civil correspondence with him during his absence, treating him
like a suspected Friend. Monsieur le Prince, to say the truth, now saw the
prosperities of the Court, for which he was before so blindly passionate, not
without some regret, he was vexed at the Siege of Cambray, and was glad when he
heard it was raised. The troubles of Guyenne and Provence, with the
difficulties of the Kings return to Paris, pleased him well enough and the
more, because he saw into the Cardinals Intentions, who thought of nothing but
how to surmount the present Obstacles, and to regain an absolute and
independent Authority; nevertheless, he fomented not his Discontents either in
private or public, as if he had a mind to let his Resentment sleep awhile,
that it might afterward break out with the greater Violence: On the contrary,
upon his return from Burgundy to paris, before he had seen the Court, he
powerfully solicited his Friends to receive the King with the Cardinal, and
testified the same earnestness as if it had been for his own Interests; it may
be, because he took a pride to perfect so glorious a Work as that of
re-establishing him; or because he vainly flattered himself, that so great a
Service would be always present to the Eyes of the Queen.

He staid till the Court returned to Compeigne, where he received more
Demonstrations of Friendship than when he went from thence, either to make him
remit something of his averseness to the Marriage, which was the fatal cause of
their division; or rather, that he might act with his wonted vehemence at the
Kings return to Paris, which was looked upon by all the Provinces as the Seat
of the Empire.

When the King made his Entry with the Queen, and all the Royal Family in the
same Coach, the Cardinal was in one of the Boots with Monsieur le Prince, who
by his Presence encouraged him against those Fears which he might justly
apprehend, when he saw himself in the midst of an incredible Crowd of People
who had so much horror for his Person; but only the joy of seeing the King
again, possessed every man's mind, whence they banished all thoughts of the late
Troubles and Enmities: When their Majesty's were come to the Palais Royal, they
accepted the Submissions of the Duke de Beaufort, and the Coadjutor; and
Monsieur le Prince concluded so fair a Journey, with telling the Queen, That he
thought himself happy since he had now fulfilled his promise which he made to
bring the Cardinal back to Paris: Her Majesty answered, Sir, This Service that
you have done the State, is so great, that the King and my Self would be
ungrateful, if we should ever happen to forget it. A Servant of Monsieur le
Prince's who heard this Discourse, said, That he trembled to think of the
Greatness of this Service, and feared that this Complement would one day be
looked upon as a Reproach. Monsieur le Prince answered, I don't doubt it, but I
have done what I promised.

The Retreat of the Duke de Longueville to his Government of Normandy, during
the War of Paris, 1649.
AS the Duke de Longueville was going into the Old Palais, he met with Monsieur
de St. Luc, who was sent to St. Germains to the Marquess d'Hectot, to endeavor
to bring him over again to the Court Interest: He told him, with a Countenance
full of Joy, St. Luc, It is not long since I hated you mortally; and I Sir,
answered St. Luc, hate you no less at present than you then hated me: If I had
not been deceived, You would not have been here; and if you had not been
deceived first, I should not have been suffered there. This short Discourse
being ended, Monsieur de Longueville designed to go to the Parliament, which
was met to consult, whether they should receive him or no. Some of his Friends
were against his going, alleging. That he both exposed himself and the Party;
some were sent up to the top of a high Tower, to observe how the People stood
affected; and when it was told him that they heard shouts of Joy on every side,
he immediately went out accompanied with those that attended him, and presented
himself at the Palais: After having received a thousand Acclamations all the
way as he passed, he surprised the Gentlemen of the Parliament, who never
thought of so unexpected an Adventure, and after having taken his Place, spoke
after this manner, Having always very much honored and loved you, I am come
with all the Danger that a Man of my Quality can expose himself to, to offer
you my Estate and my Life for your preservation: I know that the greatest part
of Governors do not use to do so, but when they have reaped all the Benefits of
your Services, that they could get from you in a time of Peace, they abandon
you as soon as they see you in Danger: As for me, who have a thousand
Obligations to you, I pretend here to acknowledge them, both as a Governor, and
as a Person sensibly obliged, I come to do you all the Service I am capable of
in a Conjuncture so dangerous. The Primier President making no answer to this
Speech, and showing by the trouble in his looks how much the Presence of the
Duke afflicted him, all the Gentlemen gave him Testimonies of their Joy, who
were animated by the mouth of a Counselor of the Great Chamber, called
Monsieur -- who made him this fine Speech: The same difference which was
betwixt the Wolf and the Shepherd, Most Courteous Prince, is observable betwixt
the Count d'Harcourt and your Highness on such occasions as these; the Count
d'Harcourt came either like a Wolf, or like a Lion, but always like a ravenous
Beast to devour us; we would not open the Doors to him, for fear of receiving
an enemy into our Bowels; we in favor let him take a turn about our Walls,
which he did, casting on us Eyes all sparkling with anger, tanquam Leo rugiens:
For you, Great Prince, you are come like a true Shepherd to shelter all your
Flock, Bonus pastor ponit animam pro ovibus suis: It is too true that you do
so, atqueideo, Mon Seigneur, we commit to you the keeping of this City, and the
safety of all the Province; it is your part to be careful of our Preservation,
and ours to help your Cares with all the assistance that is in our power. The
Speech being ended, Monsieur de Longueville rose up, and after he had saluted
every one in particular with his ordinary Affableness, went out of the Palais,
accompanied by his Friends and followed by the People, who conducted him with
new Acclamations.

The Gentlemen of the Parliament reflecting upon the Joy which the Burgesses
expressd to see their Governor, began to fear an absolute Slavery; and to
hinder this Calamity, designed to make their terms with him: but whether
Monsieur de Longueville perceived their Intention, or because he would bring
them into an entire confidence in him, he was willing to prevent, and to assure
them, That they should always have the disposal of every thing. He told them,
That the Affairs he was about, were properly the Parliaments and not his own;
that he desired nor, nor ought to have any other Employment, then to lead an
Army for the good of the State, and their particular Services; that all the
Taxes should be made by their Orders; that they themselves should establish
Commissioners of their Company for the Receipt and Distribution of the Public
Treasure; and in fine, as they had the principal Concern in the success of
Affairs, it was reasonable that they should have a share in all the Counsels.
These Gentlemen gave him Thanks for the Honor he had done them; assured him,
That they would issue out as many Arrests as he would, without examining any
thing; that being the Kings Tutors, they would at their pleasure dispose of
their Pupils Estate; that they would hazard every thing for his Service, on
condition that he would suppress the Semestre, and reduce the Company to their
ancient State. The Primier President and the Advocate-General, finding that
they could do the King no Service, went to St. Germains, to give an account how
little Power they had.

In the interim Monsieur de Longueville, who saw himself sure of the People and
the Parliament, thought of nothing but raising an Army: And though he had yet
laid no Foundation, he would always be distributing Offices to amuse the
People, and they began to Marshal an Army which was but then in imagination:
The most Considerable of them being Assembled, he gave them thanks for the Zeal
they restifi'd in his Service; that for his part, He would all his Life
acknowledge the Affection of those that did adhere to his Fortune; and in the
mean time, That he might oblige them by Essential Favors, he was ready to
confer upon them the most important Employments that he had. At these sweet
Words, all those Illustrious Persons made their profound Reverences: Some time
after was spent in Complements, which insensibly ended in assurances of
Fidelity and Protestations, to spill the last drop of their Blood. Afterward,
there passed many fine Discourses of the present state of Affairs, and some
possessed with a zeal for the Party, proposed this weighty Advice: Why, said
they, should we not strike the Iron while it is hot? You have, Sir, a great
many of the Nobility about you, and a great many young Men in the City; you may
make a Body of Gentlemen, another of their Valet de Chambres; to which you may
join the Cinquantain and your Guards, two great Battalions of the best
Burgesses, and with these Troops surprise the King at St. Germains: Yes,
answered Monsieur de Longueville it shall be so; but being it is our principal
Enterprise, we must consider how to carry it on well, we will talk of it in our
first Consult: In the interim, to avoid Confusion, which ordinarily ruins all
Parties, we must distribute the Offices, that every one may be assured of his
Employment. Varricarville refused to take any, having read in a Rabby, who
advised him to feed upon Herbs, That a Man should not embarass himself with any
business, notwithstanding his aversion to the Favorites not suffering him to be
useless upon these occasions, he would needs take care of the Politic part,
and regulate all things according to the Memoirs of the Prince of Orange: But
as there always happens a hundred Misfortunes, he had forgot at Paris a
Manuscript of Count Maurice, from whence he took all his great Notions for the
Artillery and Provisions, which probably was the reason that there was neither
Ammunition nor Bread in this Army. Saint-Ibal begged the honor of bringing in
Enemies into France, and 'twas answered, That the Generals of Paris would
reserve it for him: He demanded a full Power to treat with the Polanders,
Tartars, and Moscovites, and the entire disposal of all Chimerical Affairs,
which was granted him. The Count de Fiesque, fertile in Military Visions
(besides the charge of Lieutenant General which he had from the Parisians)
obtained a particular Commission for the beating up of Quarters, and other
sudden and brisk Exploits, which might be resolved on with singing of a
Ballet, or Dancing a step or two. The Marquess de Beuvron was made Lieutenant
General, on condition that he would stay at the Old Palais, the Place and
Government both being of so great Importance, that they could not be preserved
with too great care. The Marquess de Matignon, always remarkable for his
Conceitedness, and at present famous for the memorable Siege of Vallongne,
commanded the Troops of Constantine, saying, That he would have his little
Army, and depend upon Monsieur de Longueville, no more than Walsten did on the
Emperor. The Marquess d' Hectot begged the Command of the Cavalry, which was
given him, because he was better Mounted then the rest, and was about the age
of Monsieur de Nemours when he Commanded it in Flanders, and had an embroidered
Coat exactly like his. Ansonville was chosen Governor of Roan, because he was a
Man that very civilly understood War, and as fit to harangue the People
Soldier-like, as le Plesis-Besanson. The Governor was made Marshal de Camp,
that he might not be under the Command of others; and the Marshal de Camp was
made Governor, that he might not be oblig^d to leave the City, so that one of
his Maxims was, That he ought not to stir out upon any account whatsoever;
alleging, That a great many considerable Towns were lost by their Governors
absence. Hannerick and Cumenil, desired to be made Marshals de Camp; Hannerick
claimed a right to it, because he had like to have been Ensign in the Kings
Army. Cumenil, because he narrowly missed being Maistre de Camp in the Regiment
of Monsieur de Bocaule; he could not say that he had ever seen an Army in the
Field, but he alleged. That he had been a Hunter all his Life, and that
Hunting being an Image of War, according to Machiavel, forty years Hunting were
as good as thirty Campains at least; he would be a Marshal de Camp, and he was
so. Flavacourt said, That to be a good Captain, a Man must have run away as
well as have gained Victories, as Barriere observed out of the Book of Monsieur
de Rohan; this being so he pretended that no body could dispute with him the
advantage of his own Experience; and all the World remembered very well the
Disorder he was in when d'Estarte was taken Prisoner, they would have given him
the Command of the Artillery at St. Euremont; and to say truth, out of an
Inclination for Monsieur St Germain, he had a mighty desire to serve the Court,
by undertaking a considerable Charge which he understood nothing of: but since
he promised the Count d'Harcourt not to take any Employment, he kept his
Promise, as well for his Honors sake, as that he might not resemble the
Normans, who had all of them broken their word: These Considerations made him
generously refuse the Money that was offered him, which indeed was never paid
him. Campion was not ambitious of great Employments, he only begged to be
Marshal of a Squadron to learn the Trade, confessing ingeniously that he had no
skill in it, but valued himself mightily for his knowledge of the Country, even
to the little Brooks and By-ways, which Knowledge he arrived to by Hunting with
Monsieur de Vendosme. Sevigny was content with such another Office, but he was
gulled by his moderation when he saw there was no necessity of being a skillful
man to be a Marshal de Camp: beside, he set up for a Buffoon, and had the honor
to make his Highness laugh. Rucqueville, an ancient Servant, would do nothing,
and his long experience in War became useless, under pretense of being troubled
with Vapors. Monsieur de Longueville, to sweeten his discontent because he was
not Governor of the Court, augmented his Pensions, but in vain. Rucqueville
professing generously, that he was ready enough to take his Masters money, but
to speak ill of him he would not do it for the world. Barbarousse remained a
long time Neuter without taking either side, Boncaeur keeping him still in
suspense by the friendship of Marshal Gramount: yet during his long
consideration, he forbore not to raise himself insensibly by doing of good
offices, and joyfully flattered himself with the vanity of an undeserved
Repute: Afterward being informed by Letters from his Friends that they
seriously endeavored a Peace, he designed to quit this timorous Neutrality: He
had Caesar's opinion to fortify his Courage, which was yet drooping; and when
he came to pass the Reubicon, he made a full stop as this great Captain did,
and after having thought a little, cried out like him, I have passed the
Reubicon, there is but one dangerous cast to lose all: upon this he went out
immediately in a violent bussle without any consideration of Boncaeur, without
any regard to his little Henry, (well knowing that the sight of Wives and
Children, can soften the fiercest Courage and the bravest Minds) or without
saying a word to any of his Friends, he went to the Duke de Longueville, and
thus accosted him: I have always been your servant, but not with so particular
a Zeal as that which obliges me to serve you in this Juncture; from this day I
will embrace your Interests, and am come to assure your Highness, that I devote
my self entirely to you.

The Joy the Duke at this time felt was great, and like those which being too
big to keep within the Breast, do ordinarily break out and make an Impression
upon the Face. But it was very much allayed, when Barbarousse thus explained
himself.

The Declaration I have made is not so general, but I must add to it one
condition; I intend to stay behind when you go to the War, which ought not to
be attributed to want of Courage, but to an unhappy detension of Urine, which
hinders me from riding: Not that I will be useless in the Party, I will
Negotiate with Madam de Matignon, for whom I have always had some kind of
Gallantry; and besides, seeing you have no body here that knows how to make
Relations, I will undertake the care of publishing your Exploits. These last
words cheered up the Princes heart again, for to say truth, there was great
need of a Gazetier, and he was glad to find one so knowing in Narratives.

Fonterailles came just in the nick to see the great occasion of de la Bouille
during his abode in Normandy, the Duke de Longueville communicated every thing
to him, as well as to Varricarville and the Count de Fiesque; but Fonteraille
could not relish this Confidence well, fearing to engage himself too far in the
Interests of the Prince, and to become the Confident of a second Enterprise
upon Pontoise. So just an apprehension obliged him to strike off, and to carry
with him the Count de Fiesque, to whom he represented, That since they governed
their General so absolutely, all the Disorders that happened, if he should
carry things to extremes, would be laid at their Door.

The Duke de Retz, from whom they expected such great Supplies, came
accompanied only with a Page that carried his Arms, and his two faithful
Squires. Some began to talk, when they saw him come without Troops, but they
were quickly satisfied, when he showed them a long List of all the Bretons, who
demanded Employment: It would cost no more then Two hundred thousand Crowns to
equip these Bretons for the Campaign, and for want of so little money, the
Authority of so great a Lord signified nothing. It is true, he promised to pay
it with his Person, and to serve as Duke and Peer in the Army of Rouen, with
the same diligence as he had done in that of Flanders: Besides, he assured them
that Montplaisir would come quickly, and also give them some hopes of being
more secret; moreover, that Bell-Isle was in a very good condition, there was a
Garrison in Machecours, and a strong Guard kept at Nommiral. His manner of
living with the Officers was altogether obliging, and whosoever was happy
enough to have a Buff-coat, or a short Cassock of black Velvet, might be
assured of his Friendship.

You see the different employments of the most Considerable in the Party. If
any body wonders that I have given him no account of their Actions, it is
because I am exactly true, and as I saw nothing else, so I have said nothing
more; in the mean time I think my self happy for having acquired a hatred to
these Troubles, more from Observation than my own Experience. It is a Trade for
mad and miserable Men, with whom honest People, and such as are well to live,
ought not to intermix.

Fools come thither every day in crowds, the proscribed, the miserable throng
in from both ends of the World. Never was there so many entertainments of
Courage without Honor; never so many fine Discourses and so little Sense; never
so many Designs without Actions, so many Enterprises without Effects; all were
Imaginations, all Chymera's, nothing true, nothing real, but necessity and
misery.

Thence it comes to pass, that private Persons complain of the great Men that
they deceive them; and the great Men, of private Persons that they abandon
them. The Fools are disabused by Experience, and withdraw: The Miserable, who
see no change in their Condition, go to seek elsewhere some other mischievous
Affairs, as much discontented Heads of the Faction, as with the Favorites at
Court.

The Recapitulation of what was said above, together with the Imprisonment of
the Princes.
I. THe reason that obliged Monsieur le Prince to quit the Command of the Army
after the Battle at Lens, was not only the fear of hazarding his reputation
after so many great Successes, but also the desire of enjoying the Fruit of his
Victories, and of being an Agent in the Affairs of State, at a time when the
weakness of the Government made his Relations and Friends believe that he would
be Master at Court.

II. This second Point is not in its right place, and we must first answer to
the third, which concerns the Assembly met at Noisi near St. Germain. The
Answer is, That under pretense of going thither to see Madam de Longueville,
the Frondeurs engaged the Prince de Conty, and the Duke de Longueville, to come
into the Parliament Interest, with whom they will needs persuade the World,
that Monsieur le Prince promised to join, as the Coadjutor all along said, and
afterward reproached him with it in the Parliament, which was the cause of the
Quarrel betwixt the Duke de la Rochefoucault and the Coadjutor in the Palace,
who had like to have been the cause of his ruin, as we shall see anon. Now
though Monsieur le Prince disavow'd that he ever made any such promise, yet
there is very great probability, that he would have made himself head of the
Frondeurs, upon hopes of reducing them to the Court Interest, to which he as
zealously adhered as ever, whatever he pretended; but when he perceived that
they would give him no Authority over them, but what was destructive of the
Power he designed to support, he pretended to forget himself, and to have never
had any correspondence with them.

III. The departure of the Prince de Conty, the Dukes de Longueville and de la
Rochefoucault, and of the Marquis de Noirmoustier from St. Germain, was an
effect of those Measures which were taken at Noisy. But Monsieur le Prince, who
was altogether for the Court Party, made his Brother join with it; the Duke de
Longueville also rendered himself, as well because he is naturally irresolute,
as because he hoped that things would be soon accommodated: But being the Duke
de la Rochefoucault, and the Marquis de Noirmoustier were interressed by their
League with the Frondeurs to make him stand to his word, they at last
constrained him to follow the Prince de Conty to Paris. It is true, that they
came not thither at the time appointed, and this delay obliged the Parliament
to review the Offers of the Duke d'Elboeuf, and confer upon him the Office of
General; who presently made so strong a party in the Parliament, and amongst
the People, that it was in his power to cause the Prince de Conty, and all
those who accompanied him, to be arrested, accusing them of holding
intelligence with the Court, and of coming with the consent and contrivance of
Monsieur le Prince, who had abandoned them. This went so far, that they set a
Guard upon the Hotel de Longueville, and at last constrained the Prince de
Conty, and the Duchess de Longueville, to go to live at the Hotel de Ville.
But that which brought this suspicion upon them, was because the Engagement
they had made to be of the Parliament party, was entrusted only with a few
particular Persons of this company, who durst not declare, till the presence of
the Prince de Conty, and those that were with him, gave them liberty to publish
this secret.

IV. The Provisions which were permitted to be brought into Paris, were not the
effect of any Intelligence which Monsieur le Prince had with his Relations who
were shut up there: for there were never so great Quarrels amongst them as at
this time, but it was because the Court desired extremely to conclude a Peace
speedily, before the arrival of the Archduke and his Army, and a general
Insurrection of all the Provinces. And the entrance of Provisions was a
condition, without which they would not begin the Conference.

V. Here we must explain the second Point, because it was after the War of
Paris, that the Prince of Condy and Cardinal Mazarin fell out. The principal
occasion of their Misunderstandings, proceeded from the Cardinals throwing the
hatred of the People upon the Prince de Condy, and making him to be reputed the
Author of all the Violences which they suffered, insomuch that Monsieur le
Prince, who believed he could not better raze out this Impression, than by the
means of the Frondeurs, whose Affections and Sentiments the People espoused,
resolved to reconcile himself to them, by making an open Breach with the
Cardinal, and letting them see that he did not depend upon the Court so much as
they imagined. Not that he intended by doing this to declare himself their
Head, but to become more formidable to the Court, to regain the Peoples
affections, and to make his Conditions more advantageous. And forasmuch as he
was sensible of the mischief, which the Divisions in his Family had brought
upon him, he ardently desired to be reconciled to the Prince of Conty, the
Duchess of Longueville, and the Duke de la Rochefoucault, who at that time was
the sole Confident of the Prince de Conty and the Duchess de Longueville:
Therefore it was for all these Reasons that he took an occasion to break off
with them, upon their refusal of the Government of the Pont de l' Arche to the
Duke de Longueville, but because he would not long continue ill at Court, he
quickly thought that he had done enough, and was reconciled to the Cardinal
within eight days. This lost him the Frondeurs and the People again, and
brought him no advantage but the reunion of his Family.

VI. Monsieur le Prince supported the Interests of Bourdeaux, cheaply to oblige
a great Parliament and a strong City, that this might render him more
considerable at Court, and put him into a better condition of making advantages
by it.

VII. The League betwixt the Prince de Conty, and the Abbot de la Riviere, was
agreed upon without Monsieur le Prince's being made a Party in it; that is to
say, That Monsieur le Prince had no further to do in it, then barely to
consent, that the Abbot de la Riviere, should, upon the Peace with Paris,
procure the Prince de Conty's re-establishment in his Governments, Monsieur de
Longueville's in his; and over and above, the Government of Danvilliers, upon
condition that the Prince de Conty should wave his Pretensions to the Cap, in
favor of the Abbot de la Riviere. It was the Duke de la Rochefoucault who
treated about this Affair, because the Prince de Conty had no mind to be an
Ecclesiastic, and because he judged that so long as the Abbot de la Riviere
was in hopes of being Cardinal, he would engage Monsieur always to take such
Measures as the Prince de Conde desired; and so he did, till the Imprisonment
of the Princes, that the Abbot de la Riviere was discharged with the consent of
these Gentlemen.

VIII. The fifth Point explains this as well as the second, and therefore it
will be needless to speak any more of it.

IX. The Affair of folly was never so well discovered, as to give a Man ground
to speak positively of it: But what I believe, is, that la Boulage, who raised
the Sedition in the morning, with the Confederacy of the Duke de Beaufort,
attempted to raise another in the Evening to alarm the Court, and thereby
shelter himself from the danger he was in for the first. Likewise the Cardinal,
who had of a long time sought an occasion to set the Prince de Conde at open
War with the Frondeurs, made use of this Accident to divide them
irreconcileably: He made the Prince of Conde believe that they meant it against
his Person. The Declaration which he made thereof to the Parliament, at last
gave occasion to the Frondeurs to reconcile themselves to the Court, and to lay
the Design of Imprisoning the Princes, which was soon after executed, and which
produced all the mischiefs that have since befallen us. The Princes de Conde,
de Conty, and the Duke de Longueville were seized the eighteenth of January. It
was reported, that several gave them notice thereof; but the Prince de Conde
told me that no body spoke a word of it to him. This I know, that the Duke de
la Rochefoucault seeing the different Procedures of Monsieur d'Orleans in the
trial of the Assassin, said to the Prince de Conty the very day that he was
taken into Custody, that either the Abbot de la Reviere was gained over to the
Court, or that he was lost in his Masters favor; and that so neither Monsieur
le Prince, nor him, could be one moment safe at Court. The same Duke de la
Rochefoucault had before told la Moussaye the same day, that the Captain of his
Company came to tell him, that he was sent to seek him from the King, and that
being in the Gallery of the Palais Royal, Monsieur le Tellier asked him if the
People would not approve of it, if the King should do some bold Action to
retrieve his Authority; to which the other answered, That provided they did not
Arrest the Duke de Beaufort, there was nothing they would not consent to; upon
this, the Captain came to the Duke de la Rochefoucault, and told him, That they
were resolved to ruin Monsieur le Prince, and that he saw by the Measures they
took, that it would be within a very little while. La Moussaye promised to tell
him, but Monsieur le Prince said that he never spoke to him of it. All the
World knew what passed in this action, and how the Coach wherein the Princes
were, being broken betwixt Paris and the Bois de vincennes, they staid four or
five hours by the way, with a Guard of only sixteen men. They would have
arrested the Duke de la Rochefoucault and la Moussaye at the same time, and
sent Monsieur de la Vrilliere with an Order to the Duchess de Longueville to
come to the Queen at the Palais Royal, where they had a design to detain her.
But the Duke de la Rochefoucault made her resolve to depart that very moment,
and to go with all possible diligence into Normandy, to engage the Parliament
of Roiien and all Normandy to side with the Princes, and to secure the Friends
and Fortified Places of the Duke de Longueville, and Havre de Grace. The Duke
de la Rochefoucault went along with her; but this Princess, after having in
vain attempted to gain the Parliament, retired to Dieppe, which served her for
a retreat no longer then till the Court came, which pressed her so, that she
was forced to Embark her self and go by Holland to Stenay, whither the Marshal
de Turenne was retreated since the Imprisonment of the Princes: the Duke de la
Rochefoucault left Dieppe four or five days before the Duchess de Longueville,
and went into his Government of Poictou to dispose things there for a War, and
to endeavor with the Dukes de Bouillon, de S. Simon, and de la Force, to renew
the discontents of the Parliament and City of Bourdeaux, and oblige them to
espouse the Interest of Monsieur le Prince, since the Court in their
Declarations imputed to him no greater crimes then his having highly defended
the Interests of Bourdeaux. As to the Reasons which moved the Cardinal to
arrest Monsieur le Prince, I am persuaded he had none that were good, and that
all the Rules of Policy were agains this Design, as it proved in the event;
besides, till then Monsieur le Prince was not suspected guilty of the least
thought against the State: therefore I think that the Cardinal by doing this,
not only intended to be Master at Court, but also that he could not endure the
sharp and scornful way wherewith the Prince de Conde treated him in public, by
which he endeavored to retrive in the opinion of the World, what their
reconciliation had taken from hin. He did the samething in private Counsels to
ruin him in the Queens affection, and to gain the Post which he there
possessed: In fine, the animosity betwixt Monsieur le Prince and him increasing
daily, he hastened his ruin, that he might not give him time to reconcile
himself to the Frondeurs; he carried on this Affair with so much Artifice, that
the Prince de Conde did not only think that the Preparations in order to Arrest
him, were intended against the Frondeurs; but also in hopes of this, did
himself give Orders to see them more safely conducted to Prison: The thing was
executed with so general a consent of the People, that the Duchess de
Longueville being retired incognito into a private House, to stay for things
necessary for her Journey, saw Bonfires lighted, and other Marks of public Joy,
for the Imprisonment of her Brethren and Husband.

The Authority of the Court seemed more established then ever, by the
Imprisonment of the Princes, and the reconciliation of of the Frondeurs.
Normandy received the King with an entire submission, and the Garrisoned places
of the Duke de Longueville were rendered without resistance: The Duke de
Richelieu was driven out of Havre: Burgundy followed the example of Normandy:
Belle-Garde, the Castle of Dijon, and St. Jean de l'Aune, imitated the
Garrisons of the Duke de Longueville. Monsieur de Vendome had the Government of
Burgundy given him: the Count de Harcourt that of Normandy: the Marshal de
l'Hospital that of Champane and Brie: the Count de S. Aignan that of Berry:
Montrond was not given any Body, because there was no Garrison there. Those of
Clermont and Danvilliers revolted, and Marsin, who commanded the Army in
Catalonia, was taken Prisoner, and lost Tortose whereof he was Governor: then
was none but Stenay alone which remained true to the Princes party. Almost all
their Friends seeing so many Misfortunes, contented themselves with complaints,
but did nothing in order to make them cease.

The Princess de Conde and the Duke d'Anguien, were by the Kings order at
Chantilly: the Duchess de Longueville and Marshal Turenne were retreated to
Stenay: the Duke de Bouillon at Turennes: the Duke de la Rochefoucault at
Vertueil in Angoulmois: the Duke de St. Simon at Blaye: and the Duke de la
Force at la Force. These at first testified an equal zeal for Monsieur le
Prince; but when the Dukes de Bouillon and de la Rochefoucault were ready to
begin the War, the Duke de St. Simon flatly broke his word, and the Duke de la
Force, who had little engagements to the Party, made excuses not to declare
himself. The Duke de la Rochefoucault, who had no fortified Places under his
Government, nor Soldiers, was notwithstanding the first that took up Arms.
Saumur, which had been given to Cominges after the death of Marshal de Breze,
was a place of great importance to the Party. He who commanded there under the
Marshal de Breze, delayed for some time to put it into the hands of Cominges,
and in the mean while sent word to the Duke de la Rochefoucault, that he would
adhere to his Party if he would bring some Soldiers thither: He in the interim
who had none disciplined, and who could get no other Forces then what his own
Credit and his Friends could raise, under a pretense of solemnizing his Fathers
Funeral, assembled so many of the Gentry and Men within their Lordships, as
amounted to above Two thousand Horse, and Five or six hundred Foot. He marched
with these Troops to relieve Saumur, which was already besieged by the Kings:
but though he arrived thither before the time expired that the Governor had
promised to hold it, yet he found the Capitulation made, so that he was obliged
to retire to his own House; but he was constrained to depart soon after,
because Marshal la Meilleraye marched toward him with all his Troops, which
made him to retreat to Turennes, after having put into Montrond Five hundred
Foot and One hundred Horse. At his arrival at Turennes, the Duke de Bouillon
and he had news, that Madam la Princess had followed the advice which they gave
her, to depart secretly from Montrond with the little Duke d'Anguien, and come
to Turennes, thence to be conducted by them to Bourdeaux, where they had a
great many Friends ready to receive them. The Duke de Bouillon got his Friends
together, and the Duke de la Rochefoucault sent his who came to Turennes, being
about 300 Gentlemen, under the Command of the Marquis de Sillery. All these
marched into Auvergne with Madam la Princess and the little Duke, whom they
conducted to Turennes; there they staid eight days, in which they took Brive la
Gallarde, and the Company of Gendarmes of Prince Thomas, which consisted of One
hundred Horse. This stay at Turennes, which was necessary to dispose the minds
of those at Bordeaux, that we might go thither with safety, gave the General de
Valette, who commanded the Kings Army, time to come into the Road which Madam
la Princess was to take, with a design to hinder her Passage: But whilst she
stayed at a House of the Duke de Bouillons, called Rochefort, the Duke de la
Rochefoucault and He marched to the General of the Army, with all the Troops
that they had raised within their Lordships, and six hundred Gentlemen who were
their Friends: they joined the General de Valette at Montelard in Perigord, who
fled without fighting, and retreated to Bergerack after having lost all his
Baggage. Madam la Princess, after this, set forward for Bourdeaux, and came
thither without disturbance from any Enemy. The Princess de Conde and the Duke
d'Anguien, were received at Bourdeaux with all the Testimonies of public Joy,
and though the Parliament and the Jurats.
Sheriffs saw her not in a Body, yet there was scarce one of them in
particular' who did not give her assurances of their Service; but for all this,
the Court party and the Friends of Monsieur d'Espernon, hindered the Dukes de
Bouillon and de la Rochefoucault, from being received into the City till after
some time. They stayed two or three days in the Fanbourg des Chartreux, whether
the People resorted in Crowds to see them, and offered to force their entrance;
they would not accept their proffer, and were contented, as I said, to enter
into the City together two days after Madam la Princess. There were then in the
Province none of the Kings Troops in a Body, but those which the General de la
Valette commanded, who were near Libourn. Those of the Dukes de Bouillon and de
la Rochefoucault, consisted of Five or six hundred Gentlemen, their Friends,
and such as they raised among their Tenants, which not being disciplined
Soldiers, it was impossible to detain them, insomuch that every one of them
was ready to withdraw, therefore they judged it necessary to attempt to set
upon the General de la Valette, and for this end they marched with all their
Troops to Libourne where he was: But he having advice thereof, withdrew and
avoided Fighting a second time, well knowing that the Nobility was upon the
point of returning home again, and so by not fighting at all, he might
certainly make himself Master of the Field.

At this time the Marshal de la Meilleray had order to march toward Bourdeaux
with his Army, whither also the King was coming. This news made the Dukes de
Bouillon and de la Rochefoucault hasten to levy Men, and to take a general
review of the Burgesses of the City, to prepare them against a Siege. They made
also some Outworks, but because no money came from Spain, they could not
fortify any of their Works: for in all this War they had not a farthing from
Spain, but Two hundred and twenty thousand Livers, the rest being taken up in
Provisions, or upon the Credit of Madam la Princess, or of the Dukes de
Bouillon and de la Rochefoucault, or of Monsieur Laisne. Nevertheless, in a
very little time they raised near Three thousand Foot, and Seven or eight
hundred Horse; they took Chatelneau, which is four Leagues from Bourdeaux, and
had extended their Victories further, but for the news they heard of the
approach of Marshal de Milleraye betwixt the two Seas; and of the Duke
d'Espernon, who came to join the Army of General de la Valette. Upon this the
Dukes de Bouillon and de la Rochefoucault dispatched the Marquis de Sillery
into Spain, to acquaint them with the state of things, and to hasten the
Supplies which they had promised them. In the interim they left a Garrison in
Chastelneau, and withdrew with the rest of their Troops to Blanquefort, which
is two Leagues from Bourdeaux. It was at this place that the Duke de Espernon
came to beat up their Quarters. The Dukes de Bouillon and de la Rochefoucault
were returned to Bourdeaux, and Champhon Marshal de Camp commanded the Troops,
which were much weaker than the Duke d'Espernons; nevertheless, though he could
not defend the entrance of his Quarter, yet the Marshes and Trenches which lie
on all one side of it, gave him opportunity of retreating without breaking his
Ranks, and of saving his Men and all the Baggage. Just upon this Fight, the
Dukes d'Bouillon and de la Rochefoucault went out of Baurdeaux with a great
number of Citizens, and having joined their Troops, returned to the Duke
d'Espernon with a design to fight him, but the same Trenches hindered them from
coming to a close Fight: So that all passed in Skirmishes, wherein the Duke
d'Espernon lost a great many Officers and Soldiers: on the Citizens side there
were very few killed. Gutault, Monsieur le Prince's Chamberlain was there
wounded. After this, the Troops of Marshal de la M^illeray, and those of the
Duke d'Espernon, drew nearer to Bourdeaux. The King came to Libourn, he made
them attack the Gastle de Vaire upon the Dourdongne, the Governor having
surrendered it at discretion, was hanged, to intimidate those of Bourdeaux; but
it wrought a contrary Effect, for this News coming at a time when the Peoples
minds were unresolved and wavering, the Dukes d'B^uillon and de la
Rochefoucault, hanged up the Commander of the Isle Saint George, which was also
rendered them at discretion. This Action astonished the Court, heartned the
People of Bourdeaux, and so disposed things in the City, that they were
resolved to stand the Siege and to defend themselves courageously, confiding in
their own strength and the promises of the Spaniards, who assured them of a
speedy and powerful Supply. With this design they hastened to make a Fort of
four little Bastions at the Bastide: The Bastide is over against Bourdeaux, on
the otherside of the River. They diligently made other Fortifications to the
City; but because a great many Citizens had Houses in the Fauxbourg de St.
Surin, they would not consent to the burning or pulling down any of them, so
that all that could be done, was to shut up the Avenues and make the Windows of
the Houses strong; which was done only to content the People, and not out of
any hopes of defending a place of so little strength, with the Citizens and so
few Soldiers as remained, which were not above Seven or eight hundred Foot,
and Three hundred Horse. Notwithstanding, because all depended on the People
and the Parliament, we must satisfy them, though contrary to the Rules of War,
and undertake the defense of the Fauxbourg de St. Surin: it lies open on every
side, the Gate of the City nearest to it is Dijos, which was weak, being
defended with nothing, and because they may walk to it on even ground, that it
was thought convenient to cover it with a Half Moon; but every thing being
wanting, they made use of a little Dunghill before the Gate, which being
raised into a Scarpe in fashion of a Half Moon, without a Parapet or a Trench,
proved notwithstanding the greatest Defense of the City.

Whilst the King stayed at Bourg, Cardinal Mazarin came to the Army, which
consisted of Eight thousand Foot, and near Three thousand Horse: they resolved
to attack the Fauxbourgh de St. Surin, so much the more readily, because the
Avenues only being guarded, they might without danger gain the Houses, enter
that way into the Fauxbourg, and also cut off that which defended the
Barricado's and the Church, without their being able to retreat into the City:
They believed also that the Half Moon being impossible to be defended, they
should be possessed of the Gate de Dijos after the first day: for this end
Marshal de la Meilleray attacked the Barricado's and the Houses at the same
time; and Palluan also had Orders to enter by the Palais Galien, and to cut
betwixt the Faubourg and the City, directly to the Half Moon; but the Marshal
de la Meilleray having begun the Assault before Palluan came, found more
resistance then he expected: The Skirmish begun as soon as the Kings Troops drew
near: They had lined the Hedges and Vine-yards which covered the Fauxbourg with
a great many Musketeers, who presently put a stop to the Kings Troops, with a
great loss. Choupes Marshal de Camp was wounded there, and many Officers
killed. The Duke de Bouillon was in the Churchyard of S. Surin, with all the
Burgesses he could get to recruit the Posts; and the Duke de la Rochefoucault
was at the Barricado where the principal Assault was made, it was presently
won; Beauvais, Chafferat, and the Chevalier de Todias were taken there. The
Fight was very hot on both sides* there were One hundred or sixsco^e m^n killed
of the Dukes Party, and Seven o^ eight hundred of the Kings, notwithstanding
the Fauxbourg was carried, but they yet passed no further; and therefore they
resolved to open the Trench for to take the Half Moon, and to make another
Assault by the Alleys de l' Archevesch's. I have already told you that there
was no Ditch to the Half Moon, so that it being easy to be taken, the
Burgesses would not come upon the Guard, but contented themselves with shooting
from behind the Walls; the Besiegers attacked it thrice with their best Troops,
they entered also within, but were beaten back by the Duke de la Rochefoucault,
who brought thither the Prince de Conde's and his own Guards, just at the time
when those that defended it began to give back: Three or four of Navailles
Officers were taken Prisoners, and the rest put to flight or killed; the
Besieged made three great Sallies, in each of which they cleared the Trenches
and burnt the Lodging; thirteen days after the Trench was opened, the Seige was
no more advanced than on the first day: But because those of Bourdeaux had not
Foot Soldiers enough to relieve the Guard of the Ports that were attacked, and
those who were not killed or wounded, were almost unable to fight, because of
the fatigue of keeping Sentry for thirteen days together, the Dukes de Bouillon
and de la Rochefoucault refreshed them with the Cavalry, who quitted their
Horses; and they themselves staid there the four or five last days without
stirring thence, that they might by their Example keep more of the People
there. In the mean time, the Deputies of Monsieur and of the Parliament of
Paris, arrived at Bourg to make Propositions of Peace. Le Coudray-Montpensier
entered into Bourdeaux with two Counselors of Paris, le Meusnier, and Bitaud.
The Court desired a Peace, fearing the event of the Siege of Bourdeaux, whose
resistance was the more obstinate, because they hoped for the Supplies of Spain
and of Marshal de la Force, who was upon the point of declaring himself; but
the Parliament wished for a Peace, the Court Party and the Duke d' Espernons
acted vigorously to dispose the rest of the City to it. The Infantry was
ruined, and the Supplies I spoke of had failed them too often to give them any
reasonable assurance of them now. All this together made the Parliament resolve
to send Deputies to Bourg: they incited Madam la Princess, the Dukes de
Bouillon and de la Rochefoucault to send also; but because both of them had no
other Concerns than the Liberty of the Princes, and could not desire a Peace
but upon this condition; They were contented not to oppose a thing which indeed
they could not hinder; they refused to send any, and only desired the Deputies
to Treat for their Safety and the Liberty of Madam la Princess, of the Duke d'
Anguien, and all of their Party, with the re-establishment of every one. The
Deputies went to Bourg, and there concluded the Peace without communicating the
Articles thereof to Madam la Princess, or to the Dukes de Bouillon and de la
Rochefoucault. Madam la Princess and the Duke d' Anguien were permitted to go
to Montrond, where the King would keep a little Garrison for the safety of
Madam la Princess, which should be of her own choosing. The Duke de Bonillon
retired to Turennes, and the Duke de la Rochefoucault, who was, as I have said,
Governor of P^ictou, to his own House, without exercising the Office of his
Charge, and without any reparation for his House de Vertueil, which the King
had caused to be razed. Madam la Princess, the Duke d' Anguien, and the
aforesaid Dukes, went together from Bourdeaux to go to Coutras. Marshal la
Meilleray, as he went to Bourdeaux, met Madam la Princess upon the Water, and
advised her to go and see the King and Queen, giving her hopes, that the King
it may be would grant to the Prayers and Tears of a Woman, what he thought
himself obliged to refuse when it was demanded by Arms. In fine,
notwithstanding the aversness which Madam la Princess had to go to Court, the
Dukes de Bouillon and de la Rochefoucault, counseled her to follow the Advice
of the Marshal, that they might not be reproached with the neglect of any thing
that might procure her Husbands liberty. The arrival of Madam la Princess at
Court, produced many Effects, so sudden a change made Mademoiselle believe,
that they treated about many things without acquainting Monsieur with them. The
Dukes de Bouillon and de la Rochefoucault, had great Conferences apart with
Cardinal Mazarin, with a design either to make him resolve to give the Princes
their Liberty, or to render him suspected by Monsieur. They represented to him,
that the Princes would be the more obliged to him for it, because they very
well knew that he was not in a condition to be compelled to it by War. That it
would be glorious enough for him to let all Europe see, that he had ruined and
reestablished Monsieur le Prince, when he pleased: That the proceedings of the
Frondeurs ought to make him sensible, that they desired to be Masters of the
Princes, either to destroy them, and afterward him himself with the greater
ease; or to set them at liberty, and thereby engage them jointly to effect the
Queens and his ruin: That the War was ended in Guyenne, but the desire of
renewing it all over the Kingdom, would never end but with the Imprisonment of
the Princes, and that he ought the more to give credit to those that spoke to
him, because they did not fear to tell it himself whilst they were in his
hands, and had no other Security but his word: That the Cabals would every
where be renewed in the Parliament of Paris, and in all the other Parliaments
of the Kingdom, to procure the Princes Liberty, and to get them out of his
hand: And in fine, that whatever the said Dukes could do, by all ways possible,
should be to procure Liberty to the Princes, but that they had much rather owe
the Obligation to him than to any body else. This Discourse had the effect they
desired it should have; it shak'd the Cardinal, and made the Frondeurs and
Monsieur de Orleans jealous: it took away their hopes of getting the Princes
into their hands, and made them resolve to be reconciled to them, and seek
again for means to destroy the Cardinal.

The Frondeurs, since the Imprisonment of the Princes, endeavored, not without
Cardinal Mazarins consent, underhand to make all the advantages they could of
their Reconciliation with him, but they affected always to make the World
believe, they had not changed their design to ruin him, that hereby they might
keep up their Credit amongst the People: So that what they did for this end, at
the beginning with the Cardinals approbation, was afterward serviceable to
them against him when they really intended his ruin. I have already told you,
that the Dukes de Bouillon's and de la Rochefoucault's conversation with the
Cardinal had made them jealous. Mademoiselle took the alarm, and gave it to
Monsieur d'Orleans; afterward the Frondeurs used their utmost and last
endeavors to get the Princes within their power: and seeing that they were
refused it, they entered upon a Negotiation with the Princes, and those who
Treated for them, they engaged Monsieur d Orleans to procure their Liberty. The
President Viole, Arnaud, Montrueil the Prince of Conty's Secretary, and many
others, entered upon Negotiating with Monsieur d'Orleans, the Coadjutor, Madam
de Chevreuse, and the Frondeurs, and with Monsieur de Beaufort, and Madam de
Monthazon; the rest treated with the Cardinal. At this time the Princess
Palatine was more than any Body the Confident of the Princes and the Duchess
de Longueville; she began all the Negotiations of the Princes, as well with the
Frondeurs and the Cardinal, as also with Madam de Chevreuse (whose Daughter was
to be married to the Prince de Conty) and with Madam de Montbazon and the Duke
de Beaufort. She was the Trustee for their Treaties, how opposite soever they
were: who seeing her self charged with so many contrary things at a time, and
fearing to become suspected by one or other of them, sent word to the Duke de
la Rochefoucault, that it was necessary he should come to Paris ineognito, and
that she would acquaint him with the state of Things, that they might together
resolve upon concluding with one side or other. The Duke de la Rochefoucault
was then a declared enemy to the Coadjutor, to Madam de Chevreuse, the Duke de
Beaufort, and Madam de Montbazon: So that seeing the Negotiations equally
advanced on both sides, and judging, That if they concluded with the Frondeurs,
the Princes could not get out without a Revolution of all the present state of
Affairs; He came to Paris, and having let the Princess Palatine see that the
Cardinal had the Key of the Princes Prison, and could set him at liberty in a
moment, he hindered her from making Monsieur le Prince ratify the Treaty with
the Frondeurs, to give the Cardinal time to consider the Difficulties he was
going to be entangled in. The Duke de la Rochefoucault saw him three or four
times in private, they both of them desired it might be so, because the
Cardinal would have no body in the World know of this Negotiation, for fear
Monsieur and the Frondeurs should speedily break out against him: and the Duke
de la Rochefoucault kept it the more secret, because the Frondeurs demanded as
one Condition of their Treaty, That the Duke de la Rochefoucault should sign
it, which he neither would nor ought to do, so long as he had reason to hope
that the Treaty with the Cardinal might be sincerely intended both by him and
the Princes. He received also from the Duchess de Longueville a full Power to
make the Cardinal Friends with all the Family, upon condition that he would set
the Princes at Liberty. In the interim, the Frondeurs who got intelligence that
the Duke de la Rochefoucault treated privately, pressed him to sign their
Treaty with Monsieur le Prince; so that seeing himself necessitated speedily to
conclude with one party or the other, he resolved to see the Cardinal once
more; and after having represented to him the same things that he had told him
at Bourg, and the danger he was ready to incur by the Declaration of Monsieur
d'Orleans, the Parliament, and the Frondeurs, and by being almost generally
abandoned by his Creatures, he declared to him that things were come to that
pass, that if he did not that very day expressly give him his word for the
liberty of the Princes, he could not Treat with him any more, nor help
concluding with the Frondeurs, who began to be alarmed at his delay to sign the
Treaty, and who would not finish it without him. The Cardinal saw very much
probability in what he said, nevertheless the Duke de la Rochefoucault spoke to
him only in general of the several Cabals which were formed against him,
without enumerating any in particular; and this he did, because he would not
betray a Secret with which he was Entrusted, nor say any thing that might
prejudice that Party which he was going to make for the Princes Liberty, if the
Cardinal refused it; so that the Cardinal seeing nothing particularized,
thought that the Duke de la Rochefoucault had made the danger greater than it
was, only to make him conclude; and believed, because he named not to him so
much as any of his Enemies, that he had told him nothing that was certain. In
the mean while all sides were mightily exasperated, Monsieur declared openly
that he would have the Princes set at Liberty; for their part, they desired
that the Treaty might be concluded with the Frondeurs, and obliged the Duke de
la Rochefoucault, to reconcile himself to, and join with them: Monsieur's
Declaration for the Liberty of the Princes, made the Parliament and the People
of Paris come over to his side: The Burgesses took up Arms, set a Guard at all
the Gates, and would not give the King and Queen liberty to go out of Paris;
they were no longer contented to demand the Princes Liberty, they would also
have the Cardinals Life. Monsieur de Chateau-neuf, Keeper of the Great Seal,
espoused the Interests of the Princes, and hoped that their Liberty and the
removal of the Cardinal, would render him chief in the management of Affairs.
Marshal de Villeroy, and almost all the Kings Family, supported him, part of
the Ministers, and many of the Cardinals most particular Friends did the same
thing; and the Duchess de Chevreuse contributed all her Power, whereof she had
a great deal in all the Cabals: Monsieur de Chateau-neuf was always engaged to
her Interests, since and before his Imprisonment; and it was with each others
Advice that they took all their Measures, sometimes with the Cardinal, and
sometimes with his enemies. She had a great influence upon the Coadjutor, but
the Beauty of Mademoiselle de Chevereuse had yet a much greater power over him:
Mademoiselle and the Coadjutor, assisted by Madam de Chevereuse and Monsieur de
Chateau-neuf, had got the Ascendant over the mind of Monsieur d'Orleans;
besides, they had powerful Cabals amongst the People and the Parliament, whom
they actuated as they had need. The Duchess de Chevreuse and Monsieur de
Chateau-neuf, were not yet suspected of the Cardinal, he knew nothing of the
Marriage that was proposed betwixt the Dutchesses daughter and the Prince de
Conty; he remembered that she contributed more than any body to the Imprisonment
of the Princes, by disposing Monsieur to consent to it, and obliging him not to
tell it to the Abbot de la Riviere, and afterward to cashire him. So that the
Duchess de Chevrease, who wished nothing so much as the Marriage of her
daughter with the Prince de Conty, and the establishment of the Keeper of the
Seals, thinking she might compass both her desires by removing the Cardinal,
managed her self so well in this Affair, that she really was the greatest cause
of the Resolution he took to withdraw. His retreat did not at all calm the
minds of the Parisians or of the Parliament; they feared he was gone to Havre
to take the Princes thence by force, and that the Queen at the same time
designed to carry the King away from Paris, insomuch that not only the Guards
of the Gates and the Streets near the Palais Royal were doubled, but also there
were all the Night some of the Cavalry about in the City, to hinder the King
and Queen from going out. The Parliament on the other hand, made every day new
Petitions for the Princes Liberty, and the Answers of the Court being
ambiguous, did but enrage, instead of appeasing them: They thought to blind the
World by sending Marshal de Gramont to the Princes, and he himself made great
preparations for the Journey, but because it was not to produce any thing for
their Liberty, they quickly saw that it was only to gain time. In fine, the
Queen seeing the mischief increase on every side, and not certainly knowing
whether the Cardinal would deliver the Princes, or take them away with him; and
besides, fearing lest their minds already exasperated with so many delays,
should be at last run to strange Extremities, she resolved to promise the
Parliament to set the Princes at Liberty, without any further delay, and sent
away the Duke de la Rochefoucault, the Sieure de Vrilliere Secretary of State,
and Cominges Captain of her Guards, with an express Order to de Bar to set the
Princes at Liberty as soon as he received it. The Cardinal had notice of it from
the Queen when he was near to Havre, and though it was in his power to permit
this Order to be executed, or to take the Duke de la Rochefoucault, and those
who accompanied him Prisoners, yet he rather chose to go to the Princes
himself, in which Interview the Cardinal immediately began to justify his
conduct and carriage toward them, declaring the reasons he had to Arrest them:
afterward he desired their Friendship, yet told them, with a mind something
haughty, that they were at liberty to grant or refuse it him, and whatsoever
they did as to that, they might leave Havre and go whither they pleased; they
seemingly promised him what he desired: He dined with them, and immediately
after the Princes and Marshal de Gramont left Havre, and went three Leagues off
to lie at a House called Grosmenil, in the way from Havre to Rouen, where the
Duke de la Rochefoucault, la Vrilliere, Cominges, and the President Viole,
arrived presently after with the Orders of the Court which I before mentioned.

What passed after the Imprisonment of the Princes, till the War de Guyenne.
THe Imprisonment of Monsieur le Prince, added new Luster to his Glory, so that
he came to Paris with all the Splendour that a Liberty so advantageously
obtained could give him. The Duke d'Orleans and the Parliament had forced him
out of the Queens hands, Cardinal Mazarin had hardly escaped the People's, and
left the Kingdom loaded with public contempt and hatred. In fine, the same
People who but a year before made Bonfires for the Misfortune of Monsieur le
Prince, besieged the Court in the Palais Royal to procure his Liberty; every
one believed, that his disgrace might be laid upon his Humor and Conduct,
which brought upon him so much hatred, and all equally hoped, that his Presence
would settle the Kingdom in Order and Peace. Things were thus disposed, when
Monsieur le Prince arrived at Paris with the Prince de Conty and the Duke de
Longueville, an infinite crowd of people came to meet him, as far as Pontoise:
He was met by the Duke d'Orleans in the Midway, and was conducted to the
Palais Royal in the midst of this Triumph and public Acclamations: The King,
the Queen, and the Duke d' Anjou, were there only with the Officers of the
House; and Monsieur le Prince was received like one, that was rather in a
condition to give than to beg Pardon. This Interview passed in ordinary
Civilities, without discovering the least anger on either side, and without
discoursing upon Affairs. But the Queen, too impatiently, desired the Cardinals
return, not to attempt all sorts of ways to dispose Monsieur le Prince to it:
She offered by the Princess Palatine to enter into a strict League of
Friendship with him, and to procure him all manner of Advantages. But because
it was in general Terms, he answered her with Civilities, which laid no tie
upon him: he also thought that it was an Artifice of the Queens to renew the
general Dislike against him, and by rendering him suspected of Monsieur
d'Orleans, the Parliament and the People, to expose him to fall into his former
Misfortunes. Moreover, he considered that he came out of Prison by a Treaty
signed with Madam de Chevreuse, by which the Prince de Conty was to marry her
Daughter, and that it was principally because of this Alliance, that the
Frondeurs and the Coadjutor of Paris confided in him. This Consideration had
also the same Effect upon the Keeper of the Seals, de Chateau-neuf, who was
then President of the Council, and was inseparably bound to the Duchess de
Chevreuse: Besides, this Cabal seemed to continue in the same Force and Credit
it was before; She offered him also the choice of any Preferments for himself
and his Brother, and Monsieur de Chateau-neuf had but just before
reestablished them both with the Duke de Longueville in the exercise of their
Offices. But in fine, Monsieur le Prince found it dangerous and shameful to
break with those from whom he had received so many Advantages, and who had so
powerfully contributed to his Liberty.

Though these Reflections balanced Monsieur le Prince, yet they changed not the
Queens design, she all along desired with the same earnestness to enter upon a
Negotiation with him, hoping either to tie him firmly to her Interests, and
thereby secure the Cardinals return, or to render him again suspected, for all
that he did, by his party: In hopes of this, she pressed the Princess Palatine
to make Monsieur le Prince declare what he would desire for Himself and his
Friends, and gave him so much hopes to obtain every thing, that he resolved at
last to Treat, and privately to see Servien and Lyonne at the Princess
Palatines: He desired also, that the Duke de la Rochefoucault should be there,
and made the Prince de Conty and the Duchess de Longueville acquainted with
it. The first Project of the Treaty which the Princess Palatine proposed, was,
That they would give Guyenne to Monsieur le Prince, the Lieutenancy General to
whomsoever of his Friends he pleased, and the Government of Provence to the
Prince de Conty; that they would gratify those who had followed his Interests;
that they would require no more of him, than to go to his Government, with any
of his Troops he pleased to choose for his safety, that he should stay there
without contributing any thing to the Cardinals return, so that he opposed not
what the King should do to bring him back, that, however it happened, Monsieur
le Prince should be at Liberty to be his Friend, or Enemy, as his behavior
gave him occasion to love, or hate him: These Conditions were not only
confirmed, but also increased by Servien and Lyonne; for upon Monsieur le
Princes request to join the Government of Blaye, to the Lieutenancy General of
Guyenne for the Duke de la Rochefoucault, they gave him all the hopes he could
desire. It is true, they demanded time to treat with Monsieur d' Angoulesme for
the Government of Provence, and perfectly to dispose the Queen to grant Blaye;
but it was only that they might give an account to the Cardinal of what passed,
and receive his Orders; they declared also the Queens unwillingness to the
Marriage of the Prince de Conty with Mademoiselle de Chevreuse, but they gave
them not occasion to discourse any further upon that matter, and only let them
know, that the engagement they had made with Madam de Chevreuse, was too strong
to admit of expedients for breaking it: they insisted not upon this point, and
parted in such a manner, that one might have reasonably believed, that the
League betwixt the Queen and Monsieur le Prince was upon the matter concluded.
Both of them were almost equally obliged to keep this Negotiation secret, the
Queen had reason to fear increasing the jealousy of the Duke d'Orleans, and
the Frondeurs, and to contradict, so soon and without any pretext, all the
Declarations which she had but just before made to the Parliament against the
Cardinals return. Monsieur le Prince also was obliged to use no less Caution.
The noise of his Treating would make his Friends believe, that he had done it
without their having any benefit by it, and from that time would furnish the
Duke de Bouillon and Marshal Turennes, with a just pretense to quit his
Interests. He would render himself irreconcilable to the Frondeurs and Madam de
Chevreuse, and presently renew the fearful Image of the late War in the minds
of the Parliament and People. In fine, this Affair continued for some while
without being discovered, but the time which they took to conclude it in, soon
produced occasions to break it off, and carry things to those Extremes which we
have since seen them in. The Court was then divided into many Cabals, but all
were unanimous to hinder the Cardinals return; notwithstanding their Conduct
was extremely different, the Frondeurs openly declared against him, whilst
Chateau-neuf, the Keeper of the Seals, pretended to be strictly engaged to the
Queen, and at the same time was the most dangerous enemy the Cardinal had. He
believed this Conduct the surer to remove him, and possess himself of his
place, because he affected being of the same mind with the Queen to hasten his
return. The Queen, for her part, gave the Cardinal an exact account of every
thing while he was retreated, and augmented his Power since his absence; but
because his Orders came slowly, and one often contradictory to an other, this
diversity brought Affairs into such a confusion, as admitted of no redress.

In the mean time the Frondeurs pressed the Marriage of the Prince de Conty and
Mademoiselle de Chevreuse, they were jealous of the least delays, and already
suspected Madam de Longueville, and the Duke de la Rochef^ucault, of having a
design to break it off, for fear Madam de Chevreuse, and the Coadjutor, should
get the Prince de Conty out of their hands. Monsieur le Prince also dexterously
increased their suspicions of his Sister, and the Duke de la Rochefoucault,
thinking that so long as they were of this Opinion, they would never discover
the true cause why the Marriage was delayed; which really was, because the
forementioned Treaty of Monsieur le Prince with the Queen, being neither
finished nor quite broke off; and having had notice that Monsieur de
Chateau-neuf would be disgraced ere long, he intended to wait the event of all
these things, either to conclude the Marriage, or make his Court to the Queen
by breaking it off; and to see whether the Cardinal would be ruined by the
Keeper of the Seals, or the Keeper of the Seals be turned out by the Cardinal.
In the mean time, they sent to Rome to get a Dispensation for nearness of
Blood, the Prince de Conty expected it with impatience, both because the person
of Mademoiselle de Chevreuse pleased him, and because the changing of his
Condition had at least the Charm of being new, a Charm which he never had the
power to resist. Nevertheless, he hid his thoughts from his Friends with all
the Art he could, and feared above all things lest Madam de Longueville should
perceive it, and ruin the vain hopes of a shameful and ridiculous passion,
which he would make them believe he was inspired with. In this perplexity, he
secretly desired the President Viole, who was to draw up the Articles of the
Marriage, to accord what points soever they contested, and to overcome all the
difficulties that might impede it. At this time the Keeper of the Seals, de
Chauteau-neuf, was in disgrace. The Primier President succeeded him, and the
Queen reestablished Monsieur de Chavigny in the Council. She thought, because
he returned without the mediation of any body, that he would owe the obligation
entirely to her self; and indeed so long as Chavigny hoped to gain a confidence
with the Queen, he never came near Monsieur le Prince, nor any of his intimate
Friends: but from the moment he perceived that nothing could alter the Queens
affection to the Cardinal, he secretly renewed his Friendship with Monsieur le
Prince, and from that time believed, that this union would advance him to every
thing his unbounded Ambition prompted him to desire: His first thought was, to
oblige Monsieur le Prince to impart the Treaty he was agitating with the Queen
to the Duke d'Orleans, that he might help him to break it off. Afterward, he
required Monsieur le Prince to remove Madam de Longueville, and the Duke de la
Rochefoucault from all particular and secret knowledge of his Designs, though
he owed to them both as great Confidence as Monsieur le Prince reposed in him.
Whilst Chavigny acted thus, the removal of Monsieur de Chateau-neuf increased
the diffidence of Madam de Chevreuse, touching the Marriage, which she
impatiently desired, she found her self no longer in a condition to procure of
Monsieur le Prince and his Friends, the establishment to which he was engaged,
and in the mean time Madam de Rhodes had by her order agreed with the Duke de
la Rochefoucault, that these very Establishments, and the Marriage, should be
performed at the same time, and be reciprocal Pledges of the fidelity of both
parties: But as on one side Madam de Chevreuse saw her hopes diminish with her
Credit; so on the other side, they were increased by those testimonies of
Passion, which the Prince de Conty gave to Mademoiselle de Chevreuse. She gave
him a thousand uneasinesses, which he did from his Friends, and chiefly from
his Sister, He had very long and particular Conferences with Laigues and
Noirmoustier, which, contrary to his custom, he gave an account of to no body.
In fine, his conduct appeared so extraordinary, that the President de Nesmond,
a particular Servant of Monsieur le Prince, thought himself obliged to
advertise him of Prince de Conty's design: He told him that he was going to
Marry Mademoiselle de Chevreuse without his knowledge, and without a
Dispensation; that he absented himself from his Friends, to get an opportunity
of treating with Laigues, and that if he did not speedily prevent it, he would
see Mademoiselle de Chevreuse would rob him of his Brother, and complete the
Marriage, at a time when 'twas believed it was more for his Interest to hinder
it. This advice put him out of all doubts of the thing, and without asking any
Bodies advice, he went to the Prince de Conty, and beginning his Discourse with
railleries upon the greatness of his Love, ended it with speaking of
Mademoiselle de Chevreuse, the Coadjutor Noirmoustier and Commartin, all that
he thought capable of disgusting a Lover or a Husband. Without any great
difficulty he accomplished his Design, for the Prince de Conty, either because
he believed what he said to be true, or because he durst not show that he
doubted of it, thanked him immediately for his good advice, and resolved never
to think of Mademoiselle de Chevreuse more; he also complained of Madam de
Longueville, and the Duke de la Rochefoucault, for not having told him sooner
what the World talked of her: hereupon they endeavored by all ways to break off
this Affair, without exasperating the other party; but the Interests were too
great, and the Circumstances too provoking, not to revive and increase the
ancient hatred of Madam de Chevreuse and the Frondeurs, against Monsieur le
Prince, and all those whom they suspected to have had a hand in what was lately
done.

Nevertheless, the President Viole had Orders to go to Madam de Chevreuse, and
try if he could handsomely disingage Monsieur le Prince, and the Prince de
Conty, from the promises they had given for the Marriage: they themselves were
both of them to go to wait upon her the day after, but either because they knew
not how to have the confidence to visit one whom they had so sensibly
disobliged, or because the two Brothers who quarreled every day for the least
things, could not then agree about the manner of paying their Visit, In fine,
neither they themselves nor Viole waited on her; and the Affair broke off on
their side, without endeavoring to keep any moderation, or to make the least
pretense. I cannot tell whether it was by Chavigny's advice that Monsieur le
Prince accepted the Government of, Burgundy, in exchange for that of Guyenne;
but this Treaty was at last concluded by him, without mentioning what he before
demanded for his Brother, the Duke de la Rochefoucault, and his other Friends.

In the mean time, the Counsels of Chavigny had the success he desired; he
alone was Monsieur le Prince's Confident, and had persuaded him to break off
his Treaty with the Queen, contrary to the advice of Madam de Longueville, the
Princess Palatine, and the Dukes de Bouillon and de la Rochefoucault. Servien
and Lyonne were on both sides in this Negotiation, and were afterward
discarded. The Queen denied that she ever heard of the Proposition of Blaye,
and accused Servien for having done it on purpose to make the Demands of
Monsieur le Prince so high, that she could not possibly grant them. Monsieur le
Prince again complained of Servien, for either entering into a Business with him
by the Queens orders, upon conditions which she never had knowledge of, or for
having made so many vain Propositions to amuse him with the pretense of a
sincere Treaty, which was really nothing, but a premeditated Design to ruin
him. In fine, though Servien was suspected on both sides, it diminished not the
disaffection that begun to arise betwixt the Queen and Monsieur le Prince,
which was almost equally fomented by all that came near them: they persuaded
the Queen, that the difference betwixt Monsieur le Prince and Madam de
Chevreuse, would reunite the Frondeurs to the Cardinals Interests, and that
things would ere long come to the same pass they were in, when Monsieur le
Prince was Arrested. He, on the other side, was hurried on by many different
Interests to break with the Court: He found no security in the Queen, and was
afraid of falling again into his first disgrace. Madam de Longueville knew that
the Cardinal had made her Husband hate her, past all hopes of reconciliation,
and that after the Impression he had given him of her Conduct, she could not go
into Normandy to him, without either exposing her Life or her Liberty:
Notwithstanding, the Duke de Longueville would by all means have her come, and
she had no way to avoid so dangerous a Journey, but by inciting her Brother to
quit the Court by an open breach with it, and to prepare for a Civil War. The
Prince de Conty had no particular aim, nevertheless he followed the Opinions of
his Sister before he know them, and would have a War, because she prevented his
taking upon him a Profession which he had no inclination to. The Duke de
Nemours also counseled it with a pressing earnestness, which proceeded not so
much from his ambition, as from his jealousy of Monsieur le Prince; he could
not bear his seeing, and loving Madam de Chastillon; and because he could no
way hinder it but by separating them for ever, he believed that the War alone
would effect it. And this was the only motive he had to desire it. The Dukes de
Bouillon and de la Rochefoucault were much more averse, for they had by a fresh
experience tried to what invincible Labors and Difficulties they expose
themselves, who would support a Civil War against the presence of their King:
they knew with what Infidelities they were threatened, when the Court by
Proclamation promised rewards to those that would submit, and gives Interested
persons a pretense of returning to their Duty: they knew also the Treachery of
the Spaniards, how vain and deceitful their promises are, and that their true
Interest is not, that Monsieur le Prince, or the Cardinal, should be at the
Helm in the management of Affairs, but to foment the Quarrel betwixt them, and
so advantage themselves by our Divisions. The Duke de Bouillon also added the
consideration of his private Interest to that of the public, and hoped he
might do a thing meritorious in the Queens eyes, if he contributed to restrain
Monsieur le Prince within the bounds of his Duty. The Duke de la Rochefoucault
could not so openly declare his Aversion to this War: He was obliged to follow
the Sentiments of Madam de Longueville, and all that he could then do, was to
endeavor to persuade her to a Peace. But the Conduct of the Court and of
Monsieur le Prince, soon gave occasions of Diffidence to both parties, the
consequence whereof was fatal to the State, and to most of the great Families
of the Kingdom; it ruined almost in a moment, the greatest and most splendid
Fortune that ever dignified the Head of a Subject. Whilst things were on all
sides disposed for an entire Rupture, Monsieur le Prince sent the Marquis de
Sillery into Flanders, under a pretense of disengaging Madam de Longueville,
and Marshal Turennes from the Treaties, which they had made with the Spaniards
in order to procure his Liberty, but really with an Order to take Measures with
the Count de Fuensaldaigne, and know beforehand what assistance Monsieur le
Prince might expect from the King of Spain, if he should be forced to resolve
upon a War. Fuensuldaigne answered him to this, according to the usual custom
of the Spaniards, and by promising in general much more than he could
reasonably ask, omitted nothing that might engage Monsieur le Prince to take up
Arms. On the other side, the Queen had made a new Treaty with the Coadjutor,
the principal foundation whereof, was the common hatred they had to Monsieur le
Prince. This Treaty was to be kept secret, both for the Queens and the
Frondeurs Interest, because she could expect no service from them, but by the
Authority they had amongst the People, which they could preserve no longer then
while they believed them the Cardinals enemies, both parties equally thought
their safety consisted in the Princes ruin: they also offered the Queen to
kill him, or to take him Prisoner; but she aborr'd the first proposition,
though she willingly consented to the second. The Coadjutor and Lyonne went to
the Count de Montresor's, to consult about the means of executing this
Enterprise: They unanimously agreed that it should be attempted, but could
neither resolve upon the time, nor the manner of doing it. Now either because
Lionne feared the Consequences thereof for the State, or because he considered
the liberty of Monsieur le Prince, as the greatest obstacle to the Cardinals
return, which he desired to hinder, he one day discovered to Marshal de
Grammont, all that was resolved upon against Monsieur le Prince at the Count de
Montresor's. Marshal de Grammont kept the secret no better then Lionne, for he
told it to Chavigny, after having engaged him by all manner of Oaths not to
reveal it, but Chavigny immediately gave notice of it to Monsieur le Prince. He
for some time thought that they had raised this report of Arresting him, only
to make him quit Paris, and that it would be a weakness to take the Alarm,
seeing the People so zealously adhering to his Interests, and finding himself
incessantly accompanied with an infinite number of the Officers of the Army, of
his own Troops, of his menial Servants, and particular Friends: with this
confidence he altered not his Conduct in any thing, save that he resolved, not
to go any more to the Louvre; but this precaution could not secure him from
putting himself into the Kings power, by an Imprudence which cannot be blamed
enough: for he went to the Course de la Reine in his Coach, at the same time
that the King passed that way in his return from Hunting, followed by his
Guards and his Light Horse. This Rencounter, which might have destroyed
Monsieur le Prince, at that time produced no such effect: The King went on his
way, and Monsieur le Prince went out of the Course, that he might not give him
any time to lay a Design against him. We may believe, that they were equally
surprised with such an extraordinary adventure, and that they were quickly
after sensible that both of them had made a considerable fault: the King, in
not taking a resolution immediately to Arrest him; and Monsieur le Prince, in
exposing himself to such a danger, without perceiving it till it was out of his
power to avoid it. The Queen and the Frondeurs comforted themselves for the
loss of so fair an occasion, with the hopes of seeing their project soon take
effect: In the mean time, the continual advice which Monsieur le Prince had
given him on all hands, began to persuade him, that they really intended to
secure his Person: and therefore he reconciled himself to Madam de Longueville,
and to the Duke de la Rochefoucault; nevertheless it was some time, for all
that they could do to make him resolve, ere he would take warning to look to
himself. At last his Fate would have it, that after he had obstinately resisted
so many apparent Conjectures, and certain Intelligences, he was alarmed without
reason, and by a new fault did what he had refused to do at the advice of his
Friends; for one time when he was laid in bed talking with Vineuil, he received
a Note from a Gentleman called Bouche, who sent to Advertise him, That two
Companies of the Guards were in Arms, and going to march toward the Fauxboug
St. Germain: This News made him believe, that they were to beset the Hotel de
Conde, so that without ever considering that they often employed these
Companies to guard the Gates, and to exact the payment of Entries (as indeed
they were then commanded only for that purpose) he thought they were intended
against his Person: upon this, he got on Horseback with all the haste
imaginable, and being only attended by six or seven, went out by the Fauxbourg
St. Michel, and for sometime staid in the High Road to hear news of the Prince
of Conty, to whom he had sent notice of his departure: But a second Alarm, yet
more ridiculous then the first, obliged him to quit his Post: He heard a great
many Horse trotting toward him, so that thinking it was a Squadron sent out to
seek for him, he retreated to Fleury near Meudon; but these Troops which made
him quit the Field, proved to be nothing but Higlers that marched all the Night
for Paris. As soon as the Prince de Conty knew that Monsieur le Prince was
gone, he sent word to the Duke de la Rochefoucault, who went to him: but
Monsieur le Prince obliged him immediately to return to Paris to give the Duke
d'Orleans an account of the reason of his Departure, and retreat to St. Maur.
This action of Monsieur le Princes produced amongst People, what great news is
wont to do, every one made different Conjectures, and laid different Designs;
the appearance of a Change gave Joy to the People, and Fear to all those that
were established in Places. The Coadjutor, Madam de Chevreuse, and the
Frondeurs, believed, That the Retreat of Monsieur le Prince would unite them to
the Court, and increase their Esteem by the need they would have of them. The
Queen, doubtless, foresaw the mischiefs which threatened the State, but she
could not be afflicted with a Civil War that advanced the Cardinals return.
Monsieur le Prince feared the Consequences of so great an Affair, and could not
resolve with himself to embrace so vast a design. He distrusted the unconstancy
of them who pushed him on to a War, and judged well, that they would not long
help him to sustain the weight of it. The Duke de Bouillon silently broke off
from his Interests, and Marshal Turenne had already declared, that for the
future he would have no concern in them. The Duke de Longueville had a mind to
be at quiet; besides, he was too ill satisfied with the Lady his Wife to
contribute to a War, which he thought her the principal cause of: Marshal de la
Motthe shifted off from his word that he once gave, to take up Arms. In fine,
so many Reasons, and so many Examples, would doubtless have inclined Monsieur
le Prince to reconcile himself to the Court, if he could have confided in the
Queens or the Cardinals words. But the horror of his Imprisonment was yet too
fresh in his mind, to expose himself upon such pledges, the value whereof his
own Experience had so often given him cause to know: Besides, Madam de
Longueville, who was again pressed by her Husband to come into Normandy, could
not avoid the Journey, if the Treaty of Monsieur le Prince was once concluded.
Amidst so many contrary thoughts, the Duke de la Rochefoucault would needs
undertake to secure Madam de Longueville from the persecution of her Husband,
and persuade Monsieur le Prince to Treat with the Court; within a few days
after Monsieur le Prince arrived at St. Maur. Marshal Grammont (with whom he
refused to Treat in particular) came to him from the King, to demand the reason
of his Retreat, and to invite him to return to Paris, with a promise that he
should be in safety there: Monsieur le Prince answered him before a great many
people, that tho Cardinal Mazarin was retreated from the Court, and Servien, le
Tellier, and Lionne, were ordered by the Queen to withdraw, yet the Spirit and
Maxims of the Cardinal ruled there, and that having suffered so hard and so
unjust an Imprisonment, he had found by experience, that his Innocence could
not establish his Safety, which he hoped to find in a retreat, wherein he would
preserve the same Thoughts (which he had so often given evidence of to the
World) for the good of the State and the glory of the King. Marshal Grammont
was surprised and vexed with the Discourse, he thought to have entered upon the
matter in hand with Monsieur le Prince, and begun some Negotiation betwixt the
Court and him. But he had no reason to complain if Monsieur le Prince refused
to give credit to the promises he made him for his safety, since Lionne had
made choice of him to entrust with the Resolution they had taken at the Count
de Montresors, to Arrest him a second time. Monsieur le Prince de Conty, and
Madam de Longueville, came to St. Maur as soon as Monsieur le Prince, and at the
beginning this Court was as great and as full of Persons of Quality as the
Kings: they had all manner of Divertisements, which they made use of to a
politic end; and Balls, Commedies, Plays, Hunting, and good Cheer, drew
thither an infinite number of those uncertain people who always offer their
Service at the beginnings of Factions, and betray and abandon them ordinarily,
according as their Fear or their Interest incites them. Nevertheless, they
thought that this great number might break the Measures which they might take
to attack St. Maur; that this, upon any other occasion, useless and
inconvenient Crowd would be serviceable on this, and give some reputation to
their Affairs. Never was the Court divided into so many different Intrigues, as
at this time; the thoughts of the Queen, as I have said, were set upon the
Cardinals return; the Frondeurs aimed at Chateau-neuf's, for they thought him
necessary to accomplish their Designs: they judged, that if he was once more
reestablished, he could more easily underhand traverse the Cardinals return,
and get possession of his place if he chanced to fall. Marshal de Villeroy
contributed as much as possibly he could, to dispose the Queen to it; but this
Affair, as all others, could not be resolved on without the Cardinals consent:
whilst they expected his Orders at Court, about the present Affairs, Monsieur
le Prince was yet dubious what side he should take, and could not resolve
either upon Peace or War. The Duke de la Rochefoucault observing the Princes
mind so uncertain, thought that he might make use of this Juncture to engage
Madam de Longueville to go into Normandy, and persuade Monsieur le Prince to
hearken to Proposals for an Accommodation. With this Design he showed Madam de
Longueville, that there was nothing but her separating her self, that could
hinder her from taking the Journey she so much feared; that Monsieur le Prince
might easily deny her the protection he had till then given her, having so fair
a pretense as that of reconciling a Wife to her Husband; and above all, that if
he intended thereby to oblige Monsieur de Longueville, they would also accuse
her alone as the Fomenter of the disorder: that she would many ways render her
self responsible both to her Brother and to the World, for kindling a War in
the Kingdom, the Events whereof will be fatal to his Family, or to the State:
for the preservation of both, which she was equally interested, he further
represented to her, That the excessive Expenses, which Monsieur le Prince would
be obliged to lay out, would neither leave him the Power, nor it may be the
Will to supply hers; and that since she could get nothing from Monsieur de
Longueville, she would find her self reduced to insupportable want. Lastly,
That to remedy so many inconveniences, it was his advice, That she should
desire Monsieur le Prince, that he would be pleased to let Madam la Princess,
the Duke d'Anguien, and her Self, retire to Montrond, that they might be no
trouble to him if he should be obliged to march suddenly, and also be free from
the guilt of partaking in the dangerous Resolution he was going to take, either
to set the Kingdom on fire by a Civil War, or to trust his Life, his Fortune,
and his Liberty, to the doubtful Faith of Cardinal Mazarin. Madam de
Longueville approved of this Advice, and Monsieur le Prince was willing it
should be followed soon after. The Duke de Nemours began to abate his first
violence, and though all his passions were still alive, yet he did not demean
himself so violently as he did at first. The Duke de la Rochefoucault designed
to make use of this occasion to sound his Thoughts; He let him know, that they
could never find any Interest in a Civil War; that Monsieur le Prince might
very well ruin their Fortune by ill success, but never advantage them by good:
That the same Resolution which hindered Monsieur le Prince from taking up Arms,
would likewise hinder him from laying them down after he had once taken them
up: That he would not easily find safety at Court, after he had offended it,
since he could not meet with it at a time when he had attempted nothing against
it. Lastly, that besides the difficult Humor of Monsieur le Prince, which he
had to manage, he should consider, that by removing him from Paris, he removed
himself too, and put his Fate into the hands of his Rival. These Reasons found
the Duke de Nemours disposed to receive them, and either because they let him
see further into things then he had done till then; or out of a Levity,
ordinary to men of his age, his desires became quite contrary to what they were
before, and he resolved to contribute to a Peace, with as much earnestness as
he had till then labored for a War; therefore he consulted with the Duke de la
Rochefoucault about the Measures they were to take in order to their mutual
acting in this Design. In the mean time, the Queen was more and more incensed
against Monsieur le Prince. The Frondeurs sought all manner of ways to be
revenged on him, though in the interim they lost their credit amongst the
People, who thought they were in League with the Court. The hatred of the
Coadjutor particularly broke out with violence against the Duke de la
Rochefoucault, he, as I said, attributed the Rupture of the Marriage of
Mademoiselle de Chevereuse chiefly to him, and thinking every thing lawful that
could but ruin him, forgot nothing that might engage the Duke de Longueville
to do it by extraordinary and shameful ways: His Coach was also set upon three
times in the Night, and he could never know who they were that had a hand in so
frequent Assaults. All this Animosity notwithstanding, hindered him not from
endeavoring, together with the Duke de Nemours, to gain his Design; to which
Madam de Longueville also assisted, from the time she was assured to go to
Montrond. But their minds were too much heated to hearken to reason, and all
Parties in the end experienced, that neither of them understood their true
Interests: Even the Court, which Fortune alone sustained, often made
considerable faults, and the Consequence made appear, that both the Cabals were
supported more by the defaults of the opposite party, than by its own good
Conduct: In the interim, Monsieur le Prince employed all his Arts to justify
his Intentions, both to the Parliament and the People, and seeing very well
that the War he was going to undertake, wanted a Pretext, he endeavored to find
one in the procedure of the Queen, who had recalled to her Servien and le
Tellier, after she had discarded them at his Request. He endeavored also to
persuade the World, That their return was not so much to offend him, as to
contrive the Cardinals: These Reports being noised abroad amongst the People,
made some Impression on them. The Parliament was more divided, the Primier
President became Monsieur le Prince's Enemy, thinking be contributed to the
putting him out from being Keeper of the Seals; those who were gained over to
the Court joined with him, but the Conduct of the Frondeurs was more reserved:
They durst not appear well-affected to the Cardinal, though they really desired
to serve him. Things were thus when Monsieur le Prince left St. Maur to return
to Paris. He believed himself in a condition to stand against the Court there,
and that his high and bold demeanor, would give reputation to his Affairs. At
the same time he sent away Madam la Princess, the Duke d' Anguien, and Madam de
Longueville, to Montrond, with a resolution to go thither himself soon after,
and from thence to Guy^nne, where they were well disposed to receive him. He
sent the Count de Tavanes to his Troops which served in the Army of Champaigne,
with a Command to march them in a Body to St^nay, as soon as he sent him
Orders: He also laid Provisions into his Fortified places, and had Two hundred
thousand Crowns ready Cash: thus he prepared for a War, though he had not yet
entirely laid the Design: Notwithstanding, at his return, he endeavored to
engage people of Quality into his Interests, and amongst others the Duke de
B^uillon, and Marshal Tur^nne, they were both particular Friends to the Duke de
la Roch foucault, who forgot nothing to induce them to take the same party
which he saw himself obliged to follow. The Duke de Bouillon then seemed to him
to be unresolved, he being willing to find his Security and Advantage, because
he almost alike distrusted the Court and Monsieur le Prince, intended to see
the Affair engaged before he would declare himself. Marshal Turenne on the
contrary, spoke to him always in the same manner since his return from Stenay:
He told him, That he had no reason either to thank, or to complain of Monsieur
le Prince, for not having imparted to him some things wherein indeed he had no
mind to have been engaged: That he thought himself obliged to forget nothing,
that might contribute to the Liberty of Monsieur le Prince, but he pretended
that the engagement he had to him, ought to cease with his Imprisonment, and so
he might make new Alliances according as his Inclination or Interest moved him.
He added also, That Monsieur le Prince had not employed him in any thing since
his return to Paris, and had been so far from taking his Measures by consulting
with him, and making him a Confident in his Designs, that he not only removed
him from his Counsels, but also chose to let those very Troops who had but just
before fought for him under his Command, perish, rather than to speak one word
to get them Winter Quarters. These were the Reasons why Marshal Turennes
refused to follow the Fortune of Monsieur le Prince a second time. The Duke
d'Bouillon in the interim, who avoided as much as he could to declare what he
would do, found himself hard enough put to it not to answer precisely. Monsieur
le Prince and he, chose the Duke de la Rochefoucault to be Mediator betwixt
them, but because he would not be Surety for the Word of either of them, and
knew well, that a Post like this, is always nice, having to deal with people
who are to agree upon so many important and different Articles, he engaged them
themselves to tell their Opinions before him. It happened, contrary to the
usual custom of such interviews, that their conversation ended without any
distaste, and both of them remained satisfied, without being tied or engaged to
any thing. At that time, it seemed, the chief aim of the Court and of Monsieur
le Prince, to render the Parliament favorable to them. The Frondeurs affectedly
pretended to have no other Inrerest but the Publick's, and under this pretense,
they clash'd with Monsieur le Prince in every thing, and opposed all his
Designs; at the beginning they acted with some reservedness, but seeing
themselves openly encouraged by the Court, the Coadjutor had the vanity openly
to declare himself Monsieur le Prince's enemy: from that time, he not only
beyond all moderation thwarted whatsoever he proposed, but also never went to
the Palais without his Friends, and a great number of Armed men to attend him.
This insolent and haughty procedure, did not without reason displease Monsieur
le Prince, who thought it no less insupportable to be forced to go well
attended to the Palais, that he might dispute the way with the Coadjutor, than
to go thither alone, and so expose his Life and his Liberty into the hands of
his most dangerous enemy: therefore he believed, that he ought to prefer his
safety to every thing else, and resolved to go no more to the Parliament
without being accompanied by all that were of his Interest. The Queen was glad
to see a new subject of Division arise betwixt two men, whom she almost equally
hated in her heart: she imagined, that the Consequences of it would be such, as
to give her hopes of being revenged of one by the other, or to see them both
perish; nevertheless, she in appearance gave her protection to the Coadjutor,
and permitted him to be guarded by a party of the Kings Gensd'armes, and his
Light Horse, and by the Officers and Soldiers of the Regiment of Guards.
Monsieur le Prince was attended by a great many Persons of Quality, and many
Officers, and by a crowd of People of all Professions, who never left him since
he returned from St. Maur: This confusion of People of different Parties, being
all together in the great Hall in the Palais, made the Parliament fear lest
some disorder should happen, which might involve every one in particular in the
same danger, and no body be capable of appeasing it. To prevent this mischief,
the Premier President resolved to beseech Monsieur le Prince not to come to the
Palais any more thus accompanied; but one day, when the Duke d'Orleans was not
there, and Monsieur le Prince and the Coadjutor were come with all their
Friends, the number and animosities on both sides seemed so great, that it
augmented the Presidents fear: Monsieur le Prince also spoke some provoking
words, which he addressed to the Coadjutor; but he answered them without
concern, and dared publicly to say, that his Enemies could never accuse him of
breaking his word, and that now adays there are few persons exempted from this
fault: by which words he plainly pointed at Monsieur le Prince, and reproached
him not only for breaking the Engagements he had entered into with the
Frondeurs, about the Marriage of his Brother with Mademoiselle de Chevreuse,
but also alleged the business of Noysi, when the Prince de Conty, Madam, and
Mademoiselle de Longueville, and the Messieurs of Retz, laid the foundations of
the War of Paris, and Monsieur le Prince promised to head them; not to remove
the Cardinal, as the Public intended, but only to make his Conditions better
with him, and have the merit of securing him from mischief, which so powerful a
Cabal was not able to do. These Reports being noised abroad by the Coadjutors
adherents, and also renewed so boldly before the Parliament when assembled, and
before Monsieur le Prince himself, might have made him more sensible of the
Affront, than he at that time appeared to be. He mastered his Resentment, and
gave no answer to the Coadjutors Discourse. At the same time some came to
advertise them, that the great Hall was full of Armed men, who being spurred on
by Interests so opposite, would certainly create very great Disorders, if they
were not speedily prevented. Upon this, the Primier President told Monsieur le
Prince, that the Company would be infinitely obliged to him, if he would order
those who followed him to withdraw; that they were assembled to remedy the
disorders of the State, not to augment them, and that no body would believe
they were so entirely free to speak their Opinions, as they ought to be, so
long as they saw the Palais (which should be the Asylum of Justice) serve as a
place of Arms for all that were capable of raising a Tumult and Sedition.
Monsieur le Prince immediately offered to make his Friends withdraw, and
desired the Duke de la Rochefoucault to send them away without disorder: The
Coadjutor rose, and said, That he was going to do the same by his: And he
really did go out of the great Chamber to speak to his Friends; the Duke de la
Rochefoucault went eight or ten paces behind him, and was yet in the place
called the Parquet des Hussiers, when the Coadjutor was got into the great
Hall; as soon as they saw him, all his party drew their Swords without any
reason, and Monsieur le Prince's Friends did the same, every one ranged himself
on that side he was to serve, and in an instant the two Parties came within the
length of their Swords to one another; and yet amongst so many brave men,
animated by so many different hatreds, there was not one that made a pass with
his Sword, or shot off a Pistol: The Coadjutor seeing so great a Disorder,
intended to withdraw and return to the great Chamber; but coming to the door,
which goes from the Hall to the Parquet des Hussiers, he found the Duke de la
Rochefoucault possessed of it: nevertheless, he attempted to force it open, but
it being only half shut, the Duke de la Rochefoucault, who held it, just as the
Coadjutor entered, clapped it too and caught him by the middle, keeping his Head
on the side of the Parquet, and his Body in the Hall. This opportunity might
have tempted the Duke de la Rochefoucault, after all that had passed betwixt
them: General and particular Reasons pushed hyim on to destroy his most mortal
enemy, besides the easiness of revenging himself, by revenging Monsieur le
Prince for the affront and reproach which he had but just before received: he
saw also, that the Life of the Coadjutor ought to pay for the Disorder which he
was the cause of; but he likewise considered, that they had not yet struck a
stroke in the Hall, and that no body came against him to defend the Coadjutor,
and therefore that he had not the same pretense to assault him, which he might
have had if the Fight had been begun; besides, the Servants of Monsieur le
Prince did not imagine of what importance the Service was which they might do
their Master in this juncture. In fine, one because he would not do an action
which might look like cruelty; and the rest, for want of resolution in a great
Affair, and capacity to go through with it, gave time to Champlatreux, the
Primier Presidents Son, to arrive with an Order to disengage the Coadjutor, and
free him from the greatest danger he was ever in. The Duke de la Rochefoucault
seeing him in the hands of Champlatreux, returned into the great Chamber and
took his place: the Coadjutor came thither at the same time, with all the
trouble that an accident like this which he had escaped, could give him, he
begun to complain to the Assembly of the violence of the Duke de la
Rochefoucault; he said, that he had like to have been assassinated, and that he
held him at the Door only to expose him to whatever attempt his Enemies would
make against his person. The Duke de la Rochefoucault answered, That Fear must
have certainly taken away his liberty of judging of what passed at that time,
otherwise he would have seen that he had no design to kill him, since he did
not do so, when he had his Life in his hands a long time; that indeed he was
possessed of the Door, and hindered him from entering, because he believed not
that he ought to expose Monsieur le Prince and the Parliament, to the Disorder
which his men raised when they saw him come, purely to prevent his fear. This
Discourse was also followed with some injurious menaces which he publicly
threatened him with, insomuch that the Duke de Brissac thought himself obliged
to answer him. The Duke de la Rochefoucault and he appointed to Fight that very
day without Seconds, but because the occasion of their Quarrel was public, it
was instantly made up by the Duke d'Orleans. This Affair, which in all
appearance was like to produce ill Consequences, put an end to that which might
have most contributed to Disorders, for the Coadjutor avoided coming again to
the Palais; and so being no more where Monsieur le Prince was, he had no
occasion to fear an Accident, like this which he had so narrowly escaped.
Nevertheless, Fortune, which rules men more than their own Conduct, brought
these two together at a time when they least thought of it, and in a condition
far different from what they had been in at the Palais; for one day when
Monsieur le Prince went abroad in his Coach with the Duke de la Rochefoucault,
and was followed by a prodigious crowd of people, he met with the Coadjutor
dressed in his Episcopal Robes, and going a Procession with a great many
Shrines and Relics, Monsieur le Prince immediately stopped, to show more
Reverence to the Church, and the Coadjutor walking on till he came over against
Monsieur le Prince, made a low bow, and gave him and the Duke de la
Rochefoucault his Blessing; both of them received it with all the appearances
of Respect, though neither of them wished it might have that effect the
Coadjutor desired; at this time the people who followed Monsieur le Prince,
being moved with such a rencounter, cried out against the Coadjutor, and were
ready to pull him in pieces, but that Monsieur le Prince sent out his men to
appease the Tumult, and reduce them into order.

The War of Guyenne.
THe War in Gascony.
Guienne was maintained much more by the vigilence and reputation of the Prince
of Condy, than either by the number or the valor of his Soldiers; and the
Count de Harcourt had already repaired by his Conduct and Fortune, all the
disadvantages that the Defeat of the Marquis de St. Luc at Miradoux had brought
to the Kings Army; the Siege of Miradoux was raised, the Prince of Condy's
Guards, with three or four hundred Horse, were taken in their Quarters, where
Persan, and the Prince of Condy himself, with the rest of his Troops, were
forced to quit his Post, for to pass the River of Garonne to Boue, and from
thence to retire himself to Again; but the Divisions which were in the Town,
made the Prince soon sensible that it would remain on his Party no longer than
he retained it by his presence, or by a strong Garrison: 'twas therefore to
secure it by this last means, that he resolved to put into it the Regiment of
Infantry de Conty, and to make himself Master of one of the Gates of the Town,
whereby he might take away from the People the liberty of refusing a Garrison;
but this Design not being secret, it was immediately spread through the whole
City, and in an instant all the Citizens were in Arms, fortifying themselves
with Barricado's; of which the Prince of Condy being informed, got strait on
Horseback for to hinder the Sedition by his presence, and to secure the Port
de Grave till he could put it into the possession of the Regiment that was
marching toward the Town. But the arrival of the Soldiers increased the
disorder, instead of appeasing of it, they having entered the Town, halted in
the first Street, and tho both the Prince of Condy and the Prince of Conty, and
the Officers, used all possible means to calm the disorder, yet the Streets,
for all they could do, were instantly all Baricado'd; the People
notwithstanding still preserved their respect for the Prince of Condy, and for
the rest of the General Officers, though the Peoples disaffection to them
increased in all those places where they were not present. It being impossible
for things to remain any longer in this condition, the Soldiers were possessed
of the Port de Grave, and half that Street which led to it: the People were up
in Arms, all the Streets Baricado'd, and Guards set every where.

The Night coming on, which augmented the Confusion, and the Prince of Condy
seeing himself reduced either shamefully to quit the Town, or else to plunder
and burn it; but he found on which soever he should determine, it would
apparently ruin his Affairs, for if he left Again, the Kings Troops would be
received into it; and if he burnt it, that severe usage would insence the whole
Province against him, the most considerable Towns whereof were still firm to
his Party: which reason induced him to attempt an Accommodation that might in
appearance preserve his Authority, and serve him for a Pretext to pardon the
people of Again. The Duke de la Rochefoucault wrought upon the principal
Citizens to retire themselves to the Townhouse, and there depute some one of
them to go to the Prince, and entreat his pardon, and to beseech him to come to
their Assembly, to prescribe to them what means he should think fittest to
preserve the Town, in the Submission and Fidelity that they had sworn to him.
The Prince went thither, and assured them, that his intention always was to
leave them their Liberties entire, and that that Regiment was only entered to
ease the Citizens in the keeping of the Guard; but since that they desired it
not, he would be content it should go out again, if so be that the Town would
maintain a Regiment at its own expense, the Officers whereof should be at his
disposal: They willingly accepted the Conditions, and threw down all their
Barricado's. The Soldiers marched out, and the Town was in quiet, and seemed
in as much submission as it was before the Disturbance. But the Prince of
Condy, not being willing to trust to appearances, staid some time at Again, to
re-establish the Town in its former state; in which time he received the News,
That the Army from Flanders (under the Command of the Duke de Nemours) and the
Troops of the Duke d'Orleans, Commanded by the Duke of Beauford, were joined,
and on their March toward the Loyre. Nevertheless, this Joy was mingled with
many unquiet Thoughts; for on one side he saw in the middle of France, a
Spanish Army, that he had so long expected, and which could either Relieve
Montrond, or come and join him in Guyenne; but at the same time he knew that
the division between the Dukes of Nemours and Beaufort, was come to a very
dangerous Extremity. They could not agree if together, that their Forces, when
separated, were not able to maintain the Field against the Kings Army,
Commanded by the Marshals of Turenne and d'Hoquincourt, and Fortified by the
Troops which the Cardinal had brought, but much more by the Voyage of the
Court: The Orders of the Duke de Nemours, was to pass the Loire and relieve
Montrond, and then march straight away to Guyenne; but those which the Duke de
Beauford had received from the Duke d'Orleans, were entirely opposite: for
Monsieur could not consent that the Army should be so far from Paris, for he
apprehended, that either the People or the Parliament might change their minds,
when they saw the Duke de Nemours pass with his Army into Guyenne, and the
King's Forces remain in their Neighborhood. The Coadjutor of Paris, in whom
Monsieur more confided than in any body, seconded this Advice, and still
increased the Fears and the natural Irresolutions of that Prince, for by
detaining the Army on this side of the Loire, he not only made it useless to
the Prince of Condy, whose Enemy he was, but he rendered himself more
considerable at Court, by showing them, That being so much master of Monsieur's
Counsels, it was in his power either to advance or retard the progress of the
Army: and thus he made use of all sort of ways to obtain the Cardinals Cap.
Neither was Chauviny's Designs less on his side; for he pretended to govern
Monsieur in the letting him know, that he governed Monsieur le Prince, and
assured himself to become Master of his Counsels, by showing of him that he was
Master of Monsieur's: But his projects stopped not there, for from the beginning
of the War he had taken his Measures to become Negotiater of the Peace, to
which end he joined himself to the Duke de Rohan, believing that he might be
equally useful to him, both with Monsieur, and with Monsieur le Prince: He
though also, that he had taken all necessary precautions, as to the Cardinal,
by the help of Faber; and as he set no bounds neither to his Ambition nor his
Hopes, he doubted not, having made the particular Peace, but that he should be
chosen to go along with the Cardinal Mazarin to conclude the general; and then
he believed, in making use of the Reputation that Monsieur le Prince was able
to give him among the Spaniards, he should acquire all the merit of the good
success, and that the Cardinal on the contrary, would return laden with shame,
and accused of all the mischievous Events, and so re-enter into the management
of Affairs, either with the Glory of having made the Peace, or else with the
Advantage of having published to the World, that the Cardinal had hindered it.
In prospect whereof, he writ several times to the Prince of Condy, to press him
to leave Guyenne: he represented to him how needful his Presence was in the
Army, that if he let that be destroyed, all hopes of Recruits would be lost;
and that Marching into the Heart of the Kingdom, and even before the Kings
Face, he would in a moment, not only re-establish Guyenne, but also all the
rest of his party. The Prince of Condy yielded easily to Monsieur Chavigny's
persuasions, but the chief motive which induced him to it, was the desire he
had to quit Guyenne, in a time when the weakness of his Army forced him
continually to decline the Count d'Harcourt: He communicated his Design to the
Duke de la Rochefoucault, and Marsin, they both alike represented to him what
there was to be feared, and what to be hoped in it, but neither of them would
venture to give him their advice concerning it, but both immediately begged,
that he would give them leave to wait upon him; he chose the Duke de la
Rochefoucault to go along with him, and left Marsin with the Prince of Conty,
reposing entirely upon him the design to maintain his Interest in Guyenne; and
not only to preserve Bourdeaux in spite of all the divisions that had been
formented amongst the People, and in the Parliament, but also, to take care
that the different Interests of the Prince of Conty, and Madam de Longueville,
might not increase their misunderstandings, and so hasten the loss of the Town.
The state of Affairs in the Town was thus, The people were divided in two
Cabals, one whereof consisted of the richest Citizens, whose opinion was, That
they ought to maintain the authority of their Magistrates, and make themselves
so powerful and necessary in the Town, that both Monsieur le Prince and the
Parliament might look upon them, as those who were most capable to serve them:
The other Cabal was formed of the poorest and most seditious, who often
assembling, though without any design, in a place near the Castle of Ha, called
Horme; from thence took the name of Hormees. The Prince of Conty, and the
Duchess of Longueville, much more for their particular Interest, than for
their Interest of the party, supported that Faction, and made it much more
powerful in Bourdeaux. They both labored alike to accomplish this Design,
though for quite different Reasons: The Prince de Conty inclined to Peace,
through his natural fickleness, which chiefly made him hate the War, because he
had so earnestly desired it; he alleged afterward, that Monsieur le Prince,
after having set his hand that he would not Treat without his being made
Governor of Province, was now absolutely gone from his Word in what concerned
his Interests; but the principal reason of his disingaging himself, was, that
all those about him (being gained by the Cardinal Mazarin) persuaded him
gloriously to break with the Duchess de Longueville, upon pretexts which the
near Alliance and Interest of Blood obliged him to conceal. As for the Duchess
de Longueville, she then believed her self irreconcilable with her Husband; she
had made many fruitless attempts to return to Court, by the Princess Palatine;
she beheld the Prince of Conty transported with rage and jealousy, which has
been much more pardonable in a Lover, than a Brother: Moreover, she knew if the
Prince of Condy spoke less of her behavior than he, that he had not a more
advantageous opinion of it: He was informed how she designed to ruin his
Party, by very extraordinary ways, for the Interest of the Duke de Nemours; and
also feared, that if she took a like Inclination to another, she was liable to
be carried to the same Extremes if he desired it. Seeing her self then equally
ruined on either side, she now believed that she had no way left to restore her
self, but to make her self a party in Bourdeaux, which might be powerful enough
to give her a new Reputation, either with the Prince of Condy, or with the
Court; in view whereof, she found nothing so advantageous to her Design, as to
join with the Hormees, and to engage herself with the most considerable of
them. Neither was the Parliament more united than the People; those who were
against the Court were divided into two Bodies, one whereof was called the
Great, and the other the Little Fronde, although they both agreed to be of the
Interest of Monsieur le Prince; they were very opposite in all other things. In
the beginning the Army joined with both the Fronds, but often separated from
them, which Changes were managed by different Interests, which commonly makes
men act in that manner. But at length the Prince of Conty, and the Duchess of
Longueville increased the Credit and the Insolence of that Faction so high to
gain it to themselves, that they advanced the ruin of the Party, by putting
the Parliament and the rest of the People in despair, and giving occasion to so
many Plots, and to all those private Intelligences with the Court, which since
put Bourdeaux into the Kings power. The Prince of Conty made use of these
Divisions to ruin his Sisters credit, and the Duchess of Longueville
endeavored to establish it in Bourdeaux, to retrieve what she had lost with the
Prince of Condy; but he who foresaw what Inconveniences such opposite Opinions
would produce in his party, and who believed moreover, That the Discontents and
Divisions increased by his absence, left Marsin, as I said, to put a stop to
these great Disorders, and on every occasion to take care, that neither the
Prince of Conty, nor the Duchess of Longueville, undertook any thing that
might be prejudicial to him, during his absence; therefore as soon as he had
regulated the Affairs of the Army, with Marsin and Laisny, as also the Cabals
of Bourdeaux, and those in his own Family, he left the Prince of Conty behind
him at Again; and leaving all things under his management, he desired him to
follow the Advices of Marsin and Laisny: He seemed also to repose a great
confidence in the President Viole, but to speak the truth, he did not think he
left one man behind him in Bourdeaux, that was really true to his Interest, but
only those two that I have named. Things being thus settled, he prepared to
quit Again, to go and join Monsieur de Nemour's Army: This Journey was extremely
long, and so full of Difficulties, that he could not reasonably hope to
surmount them. The Count d'Harcourt was Camp'd nigh Again, and there was too
many in the Town gained by the Court, not to inform him of Monsieur le Prince's
departure, those of his own party had before suspected it, insomuch that it was
reported, even before he had resolved it himself; he was to go near six score
Leagues, and all the way upon the same Horses, so that the Count de Harcourt
might not only send a party to pursue him, or give advice to the Court of his
going, but also send to all the Towns and Garrisons to stop him. Moreover, he
could not confide a matter of such Consequence to many, and a few were not
capable to accompany him with safety: It was necessary to persuade the World,
that he was only going to Bourdeaux, and to hinder the Officers of the Army
from waiting upon him thither, upon pretenses which could give no cause of
suspecting what he designed: for which reason he left the Prince of Conty at
Again, and pretending to go to Bourdeaux for two or three days, only he gave
Orders to all the Officers and Volunteers, to stay at Again with his Brother.
From whence he parted on Palm Sunday, about twelve of the Clock, accompanied by
the Duke de la Rochefoucault, le Prince, de Marcillac, Guitault, and Chavinac,
Gourville, and one valet de Chamber: The Marquis de Levy waited with Horses for
him at Langez, where he found also Bercenes, Captain of the Duke de la
Rochefoucault's Guards. And as the Marquis de Levy had a Pass from the Count
d'Harcourt, to return home with all his Train to his own House in Auvergne, the
Prince of Condy, and those that accompanied him, followed him as his
Attendants, and were to go for the same Servants whose Names were written in
his Pass, though they were resolved never to make use of it. What was most
severe in this Journey, was, That our extraordinary haste oblidged us to Travel
both Day and Night, and almost always upon the same Horses, without ever
staying any where above two hours in one place, either to sleep or eat: They
lodged at two or three Gentlemen's Houses, Friends of the Marquis de Levy's, to
take some small rest, and to see if they could buy any Horses: But these
Gentlemen so little suspected Monsieur le Prince to be what he was, that once
at Dinner, when Men commonly speak their Thoughts more freely than at other
times, he heard things of some of those that were nearest him, which till then
it may be he never knew. At length, taking his way through the Vicounty of
Turenne and Charlus in Auvergene, he arrived on Saturday night at Bac-d Alier,
two Leagues distant from la Charity, where he past the River de Loire without
any interruption, although that two Troops of Horse lay in la Charity,
Commanded by Bussy Robatin: From thence he dispatched Gourville in all haste to
Paris, to inform his Royal Highness and Chavigny of his coming. He staid all
Easter Day in Cosnes, where a Guard was kept; and as the Court was but at Gien,
he pretended that he was going thither, with the rest of his Companions, to
wait their Quarter upon the King; nevertheless, finding that they could not
long keep the Highway to the Court, without being known, they resolved to quit
it, and take that which leads to Chatillon, and he began to think he had reason
to repent his neglecting it so long: For meeting two Couriers, whereof one knew
Guitaut, and though he did not stop to speak to him, showed concern enough in
his Face to make them think that he suspected Monsieur le Prince to be there,
which he presently after discovered to be certainly true. For afterward
meeting with Monsieur le Princes's Valet de Chamber, who had staid behind, he
stopped him, and by making him believe he would kill him, he perceived that his
supition was well founded; which accident made Monsieur le Prince resolve not
only to quit the High Road that very time, but also to leave Bercennes, Captain
of the Guards, to the Duke de la Rochefoucault, amongst the rubbish of a ruined
House, near a Bridge, to kill the Courier in case he took that Road, which
appeared the way he must go to give notice to the Court, of the Prince of
Condy's Journey. But Fortune led his steps another way, so that he carried in
haste to Gien the News of what he had seen. St. Maure was presently dispatched
with twenty chosen men to watch for Monsieur le Prince, in the way between
Chastillon and the Duke de Nemour's Army, with order to take him either alive
or dead. The Prince of Condy, although he saw that this Encounter must
inevitably discover his Passage, marched with full speed toward Chastillon:
But as we were forced to go that day Six and thirty Leagues upon the same
Horses, the necessity of Baiting made us lose much time, and gave St. Maure
what he wished for, to overtake us. Another accident also had like to have
caused Monsieur le Prince to be taken, for being come to the Canal de Briare,
he met the Quarter Masters of two or three Regiments of Horse, who came thither
before for Quarters; and as the main Body advanced from different parts, it was
difficult to take any way secure. Chavaignac, who was acquainted with a
Gentleman named la Brustery, who lived near that place, taking Guitaut with him
to get something for the Prince of Condy to eat. But as that was a day destined
to Adventures, as soon as ever Chavaignac went out of the House to seek for the
Master of it, and to invite Guitaut in, an Officer of the forementioned
Regiments came thither; and all that the Mistress of the House could do, in the
Fear she was in, lest some disturbance might arrive in her House by the meeting
of Men of different Parties, was to send her Daughter to meet Guitaut, and tell
him, That an Officer of the Kings Army was just come into the House. Whilst
this happened, Monsieur le Prince, who staid expecting Chanaignac and Guitaut,
could remain no longer in the place that they had left him in, because of the
arrival of the Soldiers, he sent his Valet de Chamber before to Chastillon, to
tell the Housekeeper to have the Park gates open, so that he had no body left
with him but the Duke de la Rochefoucault and the Prince de Marcillac. They
went nevertheless still on toward Chastillon, the Prince de Marcillac rode
about one hundred yards before, Monsieur le Prince, and the Duke de la
Rochefoucault followed him about the same distance, that either of them might
give him notice if any danger approached, which might give him the advantage to
save himself. They had not rode on far in that posture, when they heard the
noise of shooting off Pistols, that way which the Valet de Chamber was gone, and
immediately there appeared four Horsemen upon their left hand, who came
Trotting up toward them: They undoubtedly believed they were pursued,
therefore concluded to Charge these four men that advanced toward them, and
faced about with a Resolution rather to dye than be taken: But being come
nearer, they perceived it was Chavaiguac, who, with three other Gentlemen, had
been seeking after them, and from thence they all arrived at Chastillon without
any further danger. And there the Prince of Condy heard news of his Army that
he was going to join; he was told that it was not far from Lory, near the
Forest of Orleans, about eight Leagues distance from Chastillon. He was told
moreover, That there was ten or twelve Light Horse of the Kings Guard, besides
several of the Kings Officers, lodged in the Town of Chastillon; wherefore
fearing to be discovered, he parted from thence for Lory in all speed about
Midnight, with a Guide, but the Guide had like to have been the cause of his
being taken; for after having traveled a long time, he found they were not
above a little League from Gien, when quitting that Road, to go into that which
leads to Lory, Monsieur le Prince passed within thirty yards of the place,
where Saint Maur waited for him; and whether it was that he knew him not, or
that he durst not attack him, nothing interrupted his passage to Lory, where he
had certain intelligence of his Army, which lay but two Leagues from him: He
would have staid to have baited his Horses at Lory; but although he still took
the same care to disguise himself, that he had done all the rest of the way,
Both he and the Duke de la Rochefoucault, were known by some of the Inhabitants
of the Town, many whereof were the Kings and the Duke d'Orleans's Servants; but
that rather proved serviceable to him than hindered him, for some of them got
on Horseback, and bore him company to the Army. He met the Vanguard at the
entry of the Forest of Orleans, where some of the Horse asked him, Who comes
there? but immediately knowing of him, the whole Army was in so great Surprise
and Joy, that it cannot be expressed, for it never had more need of him, and
never less expected to see him. The animosity between the Duke de Nemours, and
the Duke de Beauford still increased, insomuch, that the hopes of the party
daily diminished by the Divisions that were amongst the Heads of it, and at a
time when the approaches of the King and his Army, ought to have made them
prefer the Public Interest before Private Quarrels, to make an end whereof,
was of too great Importance to Monsieur le Prince, not to endeavor it with all
imaginable eagerness; and what plained his way, and made it more easy for him
to perform, was, That his arrival taking away from them both, their chief
Commands, it also took away the principal Spring which fed their Jealousy and
Hatred. Things being in this posture the Army marched to Lory, where it rested
one day, and then marched forward three or four more; in which time they came
to the Walls of Montargis, which yielded without the least resistance; but they
soon quitted that place, which being stored with Corn and Wine, might be
serviceable in time of more need: besides, it would be an example of their
moderation, which might produce many advantageous Effects to the party in other
Towns. The Army marched from Montargis to Chasteau-renard, where Gourville
arrived at the same time from Paris, to inform the Prince what his Friends
opinions were, how he ought to carry himself toward Monsieur and the
Parliament: Their Counsels were quite different, for some of them advised him
to stay with the Army, representing to him, That the whole Resolutions of
Monsieur and the Parliament, always depended upon the event of this War, and
that as long as he was at the Head of a Victorious Army, the Power of the King
would be in his hands, instead whereof, his going to Paris would deprive his
Army of all the Reputation which his presence gave them, and would oblige him
to leave the Command of it to those same people, whose Divisions and
Incapacities were before upon the very Brink of producing so great Disorder.
Chavigny, on the contrary, sent positively to Monsieur le Prince, that his
Presence was absolutely necessary at Paris, that the Cabals of the Court and of
Cardinal de Rets, daily increased in the Parliament, and undoubtedly they would
draw the Duke d'Orleans in to them; if Monsieur le Prince came not himself to
free him from the dependence he was now in, and to put the Duke de Rohan and
Chavigny in possession of a place, for which without his presence, they could
not contend any longer with the Cardinal de Rets. But the Dispute ended, in
that they both concluded it was the best course now to fall upon the Kings
Army. At this time the Prince had advice, That the Marshal d'Hoquincourt's
Brigade was still in quarters, separated from the rest of the Army very near
Chastean-Renard, and that the next day they were to join with the Marshal de
Turenne, which made him resolve to March that very moment with his whole Army,
straight to attack the Marshal d'Hoquincourt, before he could have time to draw
his Troops together, and retreat to the Marshal de Turenne; which Attempt
proved very successful. On his first approach, he fell upon two of their
Quarters, which gave the Alarm to the rest, but that hindered him not from
being presently Victorious over five, whereof the four first made small
resistance: But the Marshal d'Hoquincourt drawing himself up in Battle with
Eight hundred Horse, upon the side of a Brook, where they could not pass over
but one by one, upon a Bank of Earth very narrow and much broken, seemed as if
he would Dispute this Pass with them; beyond which, the rest of his Men were
Quartered that they were going to attack: But when he saw that those under the
Command of the Duke de Nemours, and three or four others were passed, he
retreated behind the Quarters, leaving them to be plundered, and ranged himself
there again in Battle, to try if he could take his time, and Charge them in the
heat of the Plunder. Those Quarters there, made no more resistance than the
others had done, but the Houses being all thatched, as soon as they had set
them on Fire, they gave so great a Light, that it was easy for the Marshal
d'Hoquencourt to discern the number of men that were passed over, and
perceiving that there was not above One hundred Horse, he advanced with above
Eight hundred to attack them. The Prince of Condy, who saw the Force of that
Cavalry just coming to break upon them, presently made a Squadron of those that
were about him, and went to meet the Enemy, though with so unequal a number,
that it appeared as if Chance had drawn them together in that place, all the
General Officers of his Army, to show him how much one unprosperous Event was
capable to make him lose, the first Rank where he himself was, was composed of
the Duke de Nemours, the Duke de Beaufort, and the Duke de la Rochefoucault,
the Prince de Marcillac, the Marquis de Clinchant, who Commanded the Spanish
Troops, the Count de Tauanes Lieuten. General, Guitault, Gaucourt, and several
other Officers: The two Squadrons discharged upon each other very close,
without one man stirring a foot; but two others engaging presently after, that
which Monsieur le Prince was at the head of, the Duke de Nemours received a
Shot with a Pistol quite through his Body, and had his Horse killed under him.
The Prince of Condy's Squadron not being able any longer to maintain their
Ground against two so violent Charges, foot to foot, broke, and retreated One
hundred yards in disorder, toward the Quarter which was on Fire; but the
Prince, and the rest of the General Officers that were with him, geting again
to the head of it stoptit, and the Enemy was satisfied with making them retire,
without pressing it any further: There was only some few Officers and Horse
that advanced, and the Prince de Marcillac, who was a dozen or fifteen yards
behind the retiring Squadron, turned about to an Officer, and killed him.
Between the two Squadrons, the Prince of Condy, as was said before, stopped his
men, and made them face about to the Enemy, which durst not push the advantage
they had gained for fear they should be backed with Foot. This disorder had
given time to a Squadron of thirty chosen Men to pass the Brook: The Prince of
Condy immediately put himself at the head of them, with the Duke de la
Rochefoucault, and attacked the Marshal d'Hoquencourt in the Flank, while the
Duke de Beaufort charged him in the Front, with a Squadron that the Prince had
left him for that purpose, which totally overthrew the Enemy; some whereof flew
into Bleneau, and the rest they pursued three or four Leagues toward Auxerre,
without ever endeavoring so much as to rally: They lost all their Baggage,
besides Three hundred Horses that were taken. The Victory had been much
greater, but that Monsieur le Prince was informed, that the Marshal de
Turenne's Army was come in sight. This News made him return back to his Foot
which were scattered about to Plunder; and after having rallied his Men, he
marched toward the Marshal de Turenne, who had drawn up his Army in a large
Plain, within less then Musket shot of a far extended Wood, through the middle
whereof the Prince of Condy's Army was to pass, to come to him. This Passage
was wide enough of it self for ten Squadrons to march in a Front; but as it was
a very Marshy Ground, they were obliged to make so many Ditches to drain it,
that they could not march to the Plain without breaking their Ranks. The Prince
of Condy, seeing that the plain was possessed by the Enemy, put his Foot upon
the Right hand, and the Left into that part of the Wood which was nighest the
Enemies Army, to force them to a greater distance. This worked the effect that
he desired, for the Marshal Turenne, fearing to be endamag'd by the
Musquereers, left that Post and went to take another a little farther off, and
upon a higher Ground than Monsieur le Prince; but the removal which he made for
that, persuaded Monsieur le Prince that he was retiring for Gien, and that he
might easily cut them off in the disorder of the Retreat, before they arrived
there: For which reason he Advancd his Horse, and made six Squadrons pass
unrank'd in all haste to enter upon the Plain; but Marshal Turenne considering
what a disadvantage it would be to give Battle upon the Plain to Monsieur le
Prince's Army, heightened with Victory, and also stronger than his own, rather
chose to return with their Swords in their hands, and fall upon the six
Squadrons, to defeat those that were passed, and to stop the rest from passing.
Monsieur le Prince, who judged what he intended, first passed his Horse, and
then those who were unrank'd for that purpose, hindering the Enemy from
approaching without great disadvantage, so they were content on both sides with
only advancing the Artillery, and for a long time playing the Canon at each
other, the success whereof proved not at all equal; for besides that, Monsieur
de Turenne had a much greater number of Canon, and better served than the
Enemy; they had also the advantage of the highest Ground upon them. Moreover,
Monsieur le Prince's men being enclosed within the passage that parts the two
Woods, there was scarcely any Shot that did not execution, insomuch that there
was killed sixsoore Horsemen, besides several Officers, amongst which was Mare,
Brother to the Marshal de Grancy. And in this manner they passed the rest of the
day. About Sunset, the Marshal de Turenne retreated toward Gien. The Marshal
d'Hoquencourt, who since his Defeat had joined with him, staid in the
Rear-Guard, and going with some Officer to withdraw those Squadrons which were
nighest the Enemy, he was retained by Monsieur le Prince, who sent to tell him,
That he should be very glad to see him, and that he might advance upon his
word. He did what Monsieur le Prince desired him, and advanced, accompanied
only with some few Officers; and Monsieur le Prince had the Dukes de la
Rochefoucault and Beaufort, with two or three more who waited upon him. All
their Conversation passed in Civilities, and in Raillery on Monsieur le
Prince's side, and in Justification on the Marshal d'Hoquincourt's, concerning
what had hapened to him that day, complaining extremely of Monsieur de Turenne,
though one may say with Justice, he did that day two Actions great and bold,
whereof the Success was the cause of his own Safety, as also the preservation
of the Court; for as soon as ever he knew that the Marshal d'Hoquincourt's
Brigade, which was to join with him the next day, was attacked. He marched with
a very few men to that place where Monsieur le Prince found him drawn up in
Batalia, every minute expecting the rest of his Soldiers, exposing himself
thereby to have been inevitably defeated, if Monsieur le Prince had marched
straight to him, instead of pursuing two or three Leagues, as he did those
Troops that he had routed in the night; he preserved also that same day the
rest of the Kings Army, with eminent Valor and Conduct, when he turned upon
Monsieur le Prince's six Squadrons who had passed unrank'd upon the Plain, by
which Action he stopped an Army which would undoubtedly have cut his quite off,
if it could but have drawn up in the same Plain. The Kings Army being
retreated, Monsieur le Prince, with his, took the way that leads to Chastillon,
and went that Night and lodged in Quarters upon the Canal de Briare, near la
Bruslery, and the next day arrived at Chastillon with all his Army, whereof two
days after he left the Command to Clinehant and the Count de Tauanes, and went
to Paris with the Dukes de Beaufort and de la Rochefoucault. This Journey proved
of greater importance than at that time he thought it was, for I am persuaded,
that the only desire to go to Paris, and there to receive the general applause
which his success in so dangerous a Journey, and in obtaining so great a Victory
had merited, made him incline to Chavigny's Reasons, who really endeavored to
support himself by the Presence and Authority of Monsieur le Prince, and to
possess the place, the Cardinal de Rets held with the Duke de Orleans: he
hoped, as I said before, to make himself not only equally considerable to
these two Princes, in persuading of them both that he was the real cause of
their Union, but believing, that that was the easiest way to succeed in the
project which he had laid with Faber; therefore he pressed Monsieur le Prince
to come to Paris, to oppose all the Attempts that Cardinal de Rets made upon
Monsieur, as also to increase the good will of the Parliament, who had by an
Act which they made, set a price upon Cardinal Mazarin's head: Whatsoever
esteem Mounsieur le Prince had of Chavigny's Advice, he still followed it, he
was received in Paris with so many Acclamations and Testimonies of public Joy,
that he believed he had no reason to repent himself of his Journey. Things
remained in this state for some time, but the Army wanting Forage about
Chastillon and Mountargis, and not daring either to come nigher, or go farther
off from Paris, it marched to Estampes, where they believed it might remain
some considerable time with surety, and abundance of all things. The Duke de
Nemours was not cured of his Wounds, when news was brought to the Prince of
Condy, that some of the Kings Troops, commanded by the Count de Moissens, and
the Marquis de St. Mesgren, Lieutenant Generals, were marching from St.
Germains to St. Cloud, with two pieces of Canon, with design to beat off a
hundred men of the Regiment de Condy, which had Fortified themselves upon the
Bridge by breaking down one Arch of it; this news made Monsieur le Prince get
on Horseback, and go thither with only those who were about him. The noise of
which being spread through all Paris, all the People of Quality came after him
to Boulogne, who were followed by eight or ten thousand Citizens in Arms. The
Kings Forces contented with Firing some few Shots with their Canon, retired
without ever attempting to make themselves Master of the Bridge. The Prince of
Condy, who was resolved to make an advantage of this good disposition of the
Citizens, having given them Officers, marched them to St. Denis, where he heard
there was a Garrison of Two hundred Swisses: He arrived there just about the
closing in of the Day: Those who were in the Town, having taken the Alarm,
instantly yielded it up to the Besiegers.

Monsieur le Prince being in the middle of Three hundred Horsemen, consisting
of those he believed the bravest and most courageous of his Party, the Swisses
indeavored to defend some Baracado's in the Town, but being too violently
pressed, they retreated into the Abbey, where two hours after they yielded
themselves Prisoners of War: There was no manner of rudeness offered, either to
the Inhabitants or the Convents. Monsieur le Prince retired to Paris, leaving
Deslandes, a Captain in the Regiment de Condy, with Two hundred men in St.
Dennis, which was retaken the same night by the Kings Forces, but Deslandes
retired into the Church where he held out three days: though there was nothing
in this Action very considerable in it self, by any Circumstance, yet it
increased the Citizens affections to Monsieur le Prince; and they were so much
the more liberal of their praises to him, as every one thought himself a
witness of his Courage, and of the Danger which he believed he ran on that
occasion. The Duke de Rohan, and Chavigny notwithstanding, still pursued their
first Design; and took the advantage of so favorable a juncture, to make
propositions of Peace: they believed that the Court would fulfill with all
sincerity, those things which they knew Faber had only made overtures to them
of to engage them with the Cardinal, who endeavored to make use of them, to
draw the Duke of Orleans and Monsieur le Prince into that abyss of
negotiations, whereof the bottom was never seen, and always proved the means
of his preservation, as it was the ruin of his enemies; to say truth, from the
very first day of Monsieur le Princes Arrival, Intrigues, and Cabals, were
received on every side; and whether he was weary of maintaining so laborious a
War, or that staying at Paris had given him both an inclination and a hope of
Peace, at length he quitted for a time all other thoughts, but only to seek all
means to conclude it as advantagiously as he had designed. The Duke de Rohan
and Chavigny, gave him great hopes, to oblige him to lay upon them the care of
this negotiation, and to permit them to go with Goulas alone to St. Germains,
Loaded with his and the Duke de Orlean's interests: it was also proposed to
send the Duke de la Rochefoucault, and Monsieur le Prince desired it for many
reasons, but he excused him in that he believed the Peace to be already
concluded between Monsieur and the Court, by the secret meditation of Cavigni,
without Monsieur le Princes having any share in it; or that it would not be
then concluded, not only because Monsieur le Princes pretencions were great,
but also that the Duke de Rohan and Chavigny would secure their own, whereof I
have already spoken, preferring it before the rest. So the Duke de Rohan,
Chavigny, and Goulas went to St. German with express command not to see
Cardinal Mazarin, nor treat of any thing with him: Monsieurs demands consisted
Principally of the expulsion of the Cardinal, but those of Monsieur le Prince
was of greater extent, because having engaged both the City and Parliament of
Bourdeaux, and a great number of persons of Quality in his party, he made many
particular treaties with them, in which he engaged himself not to make any with
the Court, without comprehending their interests in the manner that I shall
relate to you hereafter: there was no body doubted of these Gentelmens success
in their Journey; besides there was no likely hood that a man so capable as
Chavigny was, and so knowing both in the Court, and the Cardinal by so much
experience, would engage himself in so weighty a Negotiation, (having managed
it three Months) without being assured of the Success. But this opinion lasted
not long, for they found by the return of the Deputies, that they had not only
treated with Cardinal Mazarine, against the express order, that had been given
them; out also in stead of demanding for the Prince of Condy, what was in their
Instructions; they insisted Principally upon establishing a necessary Council,
in form almost like that which the late King ordered just before he dyed; only
with this addition, that they should persuade Monsieur le Prince to give his
consent, that Cardinal Mazerin should go instead of himself with Chavigny, to
treat about the general Peace, and that he might return again into France,
after it was concluded. as these Propositions were far both from the Interest,
and intentions of Monsieur le Prince; he received them mightily dissatisfied
with Chavigny, and resolved from thence forward, never to let him know of any
of his secret Treaties with the Court: to which end he sent Gourvill with an
instruction framed in the presence of the Duchess of Chastillon, and of the
Duke de Nemours and Rochefoucault: the contents whereof were as follows; First
that all the Negotiations which had passed that day, should be null; and that a
positive answer was required to every point, I, or no; it being impossible to
be more moderate upon any one; therefore as nothing but sincere dealing was
intended, he would promise nothing that he would not justly perform, but then
he would be secure of every thing that should be promised him. It was demanded
that Cardinal Mazarin might instantly go out of the Kingdom; and that he
should retire to Bouillon, and that the power of concluding the general Peace
should be conferred upon the Duke of Orleans and himself; and that they might
immediately proceed in it, to which end he would yield to any condition that
should be just and reasonable, and that he might send into Spain to agree the
place of Conference; That the Council should consist of People not suspected,
whom they should consent to; that the high Treasurer should be discharged from
his Office, and that the Treasury should be governed by faithful Officers; That
all those who had served either the Duke of Orleans, or the Prince of Condy,
should be restored to their Estates and Offices, Governments, Pensions and
Assignments, which should be secured upon good Funds, as also the Duke of
Orleans, and the Princes; That the Duke of Orleans should be satisfied in what
he should desire on his part, either for himself, or his friends; That all the
Soldiers and Officers which had followed the Princes, should be treated in the
same manner as they were before, and should be in the same esteem which they
had ever been; That those things might be granted to the Town of Bourdeaux,
which they had asked before the War, and for which they had sent Deputies to
the Court; That they should yield that the Taxes might be moderated in the
Country of Guienne, which should be sincerely consented to; That the Prince of
Conty might be allowed to treat with Monsieur d'Angoulesme about the Government
of Provence, and that he might either give him his Government of Champagne in
exchange, or sell it to whom he should think fit, to give him the Money for it;
and for the surplus of the Money, that he should be assisted as it should be
judged most convenient That the Government of Auvergne should be given to the
Duke de Nemours; That permission might be given to the President Viole to treat
about the Place of President Au, Mortier, or of Secretary of State, and that
they should give their Words that he should be the First; and that a Sum of
Money should be ordered that minute to make the recompense more easy, that the
Breviat which the Duke de la Rochefoucault demanded like that of the Messieurs
de Boulogns, and de Guimene might be granted him, as also the Government of
Angoulmois, and of Xaintonge, or else the sum of Six score thousand Crowns
given him, besides Commission to treat for the aforesaid Governments, or any
other whatsoever; That a Breviat should be given to the Prince de Tarante,
concerning his Rank, the same as that of Monsieur de Bouillon's; and that he
should be put into immediate possession of it, and that they should make him
satisfaction for all the losses he had sustained by the taking and raising of
Tailleb urg, according to the estimation that he should give in; and that
Monsieur Marsin, and Monsieur de Dognoin should be Mareschals of France, that a
Patent for Duke should be given to Monsieur de Montespan; That the Duke de
Rohan should be restored to his Government of Anjou, and Angers, and have the
Bridge of Ce, as also the Jurisdiction of Saumeurs delivered to him; That the
Government of Berguerac, and St. Foy, should be given to Monsieur de la Force,
and the Reversion to Monsieur de Chasteau-neuf; and also Monsieur le Marquis de
Persan might be assured to be made Knight of the Order of the Holy Ghost the
first vacancy; and that a Breviat might be given him to that purpose, as also
the sum of Fifty thousand Crowns to buy him a Government; to which was added a
promise to lay down Arms, and unfeignedly consent to all the advantages that
Cardinal Mazarin should propose for his Justification; and for his return in
three Months, or till such time as Monsieur le Prince having agreed upon every
particular of the general Peace with Spain, being upon the place of Conference
with the Spanish Ministers, should send word that the Peace was ready to Sign,
which he would defer Signing till Cardinal Mazarin was returned.

The Cardinal gave ear to these Propositions of Gourville, and appeared very
willing to consent to them, either because he really intended to agree to what
was proposed, or because he was willing to have the obstacles seem to come from
some other; but the Duke de Bouillon, who was in fear that the Peace should be
made without his having the Duchy d' Albret, which was to be given up to him
by Monsieur le Prince, as part of his satisfaction for Sedan, told the
Cardinal, that since he believed it just to oblige the Friends of Monsieur le
Prince, who were his sworn Enemies, he could not but think it yet more
reasonable to do justice to those (who had assisted him, and maintained his
interest against Monsieur le Prince, and against whom he could find nothing to
say) rather than to the Dukes de Nemours, and la Rochefoucault, Marsin, and
others. Therefore for his part he thought that having so considerable an
Interest, as the Duchy d' Albret, nothing ought to be concluded without
obliging Monsieur le Prince to satisfy him concerning that. With whatsoever
intention the Duke de Bouillon offered these Reasons, they stopped the Cardinals
proceedings, who sent Gourville to Monsieur le Prince to raise this difficulty;
but though all great affairs are subject to delays, this Peace had more reason
than any other, because it not only depended upon so many difrent interests,
and regarded so many opposite Parties, which endeavored to break it; but above
all, because it was managed by the Prince of Condy on one part, and Cardinal
Mazarin on the other, who though they had sundry qualities directly opposite,
yet still they agreed in many things, and particularly to treat of all sorts of
Affairs, with unlimited Pretentions; so that as soon as ones demand was granted
them, they still believed it in their power to obtain more, and so much
persuaded themselves that all was due to their good Fortune; that the balance
could not hang long enough in a just poise betwixt 'em, to give them time to
resolve of a Treaty, and to conclude it; besides, many other obstacles were
joined to these; it was the interest of the Cardinal de Rets to hinder the
Peace; because it being made without his having a hand in it, and the Duke of
Orleans and the Prince of Condy being united to the Court, he would be left
exposed without protection; then again, Chavigny enraged at the ill success of
his Negoation, being exasperated both against the Court, and Monsieur le
Prince, rather wished to see the Peace not effected, than to see it concluded
by any other Expedients than his own; I cannot tell the conformity of Interests
which was then between the Cardinal de Rets, and Chavigny, which made them act
unitedly to oppose the Treaty of Monsieur le Prince, or if either of them moved
the Duke of Orleans to act in it; but I have been since informed by one whom I
ought to believe, that even at the time that Gourville was at St. Germains, the
Duke of Orleans sent to Cardinal Mazarin by the Duke d' Anville, to forbid him
to conclude any thing with Monsieur le Prince, for that he alone would have the
merit of making the Peace with the Court; and that he was ready to submit
himself to the King, and by that to give an example, which should be followed
both by the People and the Parliament of Paris; There was appearance that a
Proposition like this should be preferred before all the rest, and to say
truth, whether it was for this reason, or whether it was for that which I have
already said, of the natures of Monsieur le Prince, and the Cardinal, or, as I
always believed, that the Cardinal was ever against the Peace, and that he only
made use of those Negotiations, as so many snares wherein to take his Enemies.
In fine, things in a little time grew so confused, and were so far from coming
to an issue, that the Duke de la Rochefoucault was against any of his Peoples
having farther concern in a Negotiation which ruined his Party; therefore he
charged Gourville to press the Cardinal to return a positive answer, the second
time he went St. Germain, with order to return to more thither. Besides, though
the Prince of Condy himself was never constantly fixed for a Peace, he was
continually opposed by the different Interests of those, who endeavored to
divert it; the Enemies of Cardinal Mazarine thought themselves not sufficiently
revenged, if he stayed in France, and Cardinal de Rets, judged that an
Agreement with the Prince of Condy would take away from him all the esteem he
was in, and expose him to his Enemies; but on the contrary a War could not
last, but that it must either destroy Monsieur le Prince, or force away
Cardinal Mazarin, and then he alone possessing the Duke of Orleans, might by
that means make himself considerable at Court, and from thence make his
advantage. On the other side the Spaniards offered the Prince of Condy
whatsoever they thought most capable to tempt him, exposing all to prolong the
civil War: his nearest Relations, his Friends and menial Servants buoyed up
this Sentiment by their particular Interests. In fine, all was divided into
Cabals, either to make the Peace, or continue the War, the most refined and
most judicious Reasons in Politics were by both Parties set in view of
Monsieur le Prince, to incline him to their side. When Madam de Chastillon
invited him to a desire of Peace by a more pleasing means, she believed that so
great a good ought only to be the effect of her Beauty, and adding Ambition to
the design of a new Conquest, endeavored at once to deprive the Court of the
advantages of the Negotiation, and triumph over the Heart of Monsieur le
Prince; neither were these the only reasons which produced these thoughts, the
Interests of Vanity and Revenge, had no less a part in them, the emulation
which Beauty and Gallantry often brings forth amongst Ladies, had caused an
extreme hatred between the Duchess de Longueville and Madam de Chastillon;
which though for a long time they had hid, at length it broke out openly on
both sides, and Madam de Chastillon not only extended her Victory to oblige
Monsieur de Nemours to break off all Commerce with the Duchess de Longueville
with the most exasperating and public circumstances, but endeavored also to
take from her the knowledge of all affairs, that she alone might govern the
Actions, and Interests of Monsieur le Prince: The Duke de Nemours, who was
deeply engaged with her, approved of this Design, for he thought that he could
govern Madam de Chastillons behavior toward Monsieur le Prince, and that she
being able to inspire him with whatsoever sentiments she pleased, he should
govern Monsieur le Prince by the power he had over her. The Duke de la
Rochefoucault had at that time a greater share than any one in the secrets of
Monsieur le Prince, and was also in a strict Bond with the Duke de Nemours, and
Madam de Chastillon; he knew how irresolute the Prince of Condy was about the
Peace, and apprehending what really afterward came to pass, that the Spanish,
and the Duchess of Longueville's Cabals would join together to remove Monsieur
le Prince from Paris, where he might daily treat without their participation,
he also believed that Madam de Chastillon's design would remove all obstacles
to the Peace, for which reason he persuaded Monsieur le Prince to join with
her, and to make her a Present of Merlou; he also worked her to manage Monsieur
le Prince, and the Duke de Nemours in such a manner, that she might keep them
both, and make the Duke de Nemours approve of that League, which he ought not
to suspect, since nothing was to be acted that he was not to be informed of,
and no other use to be made of it than to advance him to the principal
management of Affairs; this design being framed and guided by the Duke de la
Rochefoucault, he had almost the entire disposition of it; and thus all four
finding equally such advantage in it, it had at length without doubt found its
proposed success, had not fortune opposed it by so many unavoidable accidents:
Nevertheless Madam de Chastillon appeared at Court with all the luster, that
her new Trust could give her; she went thither with so general a Power to
dispose of Monsieur le Prince's Affairs, that it was rather taken for an effect
of his complaisance to her, and a desire to flatter her vanity, than for any
real intention of accommodation; she returned to Paris with mighty hopes, but
the Cardinal drew solid advantages from this Nogotiation, for he gained time by
it, and increased the suspicion of the opposite Cabals, as also delayed
Monsieur le Prince at Paris, till such time as he should lose Guienne and his
other Holds; and that the Kings Army commanded by the Mareschals de Turenne and
d'Hoiquincourt, kept the Field, whilst his was retired into Estampes; neither
did it remain long there without receiving a considerable loss; for the
Marshall de Turenne's being informed, that Mademoiselle passing by Estamps had
desired to see the Army drawn out, marched straight thither, and arrived at the
Suburbs before the Enemy, who was log'd in it, returned, and was in a condition
to defend their Quarters, which was forced and plundered, the Mareschals de
Turenne and d'Hoiquincourt retired back to their Camps, after having killed
1000 or 1200 Men of the Princes the (...) choicest Troops, besides many which
they carried away Prisoners.

This success increased the hopes of the Court, and gave birth to the design of
the Besieging Estampes and all the Army that was in it; and how difficult
soever this Enterprise appeared, it was resolved, on, for their hopes depended
upon disheartened Soldiers, and divided Leaders the Towns being open in several
places, and every where ill fortified and impossible to receive relief from any
but the Duke de Lorrain, with whom the Court believed they had made an
Agreement; but for all this, in my opinion, they considered less the event of
the Siege, than the Reputation so great an Enterprise would give to the Kings
Forces; and the truth of it was, that though they still continued their
Negotiations with such eagerness, and that Monsieur le prince so extremely
desired a Peace, it could not be reasonably expected, till such time as the
success of Estampes had regulated the Propositions; In the mean while the
Adherents to the Court made use of this conjuncture to gain the People, and to
make a Party in the Parliament; and although the Duke of Orleans appeared very
firmly united to Monsieur le Prince, he had nevertheless daily Conferences in
private with the Cardinal de Rets, who was bent to destroy whatever resolutions
Monsieur le Prince persuaded him to take. The Siege of Estampes still
continued, and although the Kings Army made no considerable progress, the noise
that it made through the whole Kingdom was advantageous to the Court, insomuch
that Paris expected the Succors of the Duke of Lorrain, as the only
preservation of the Party; he arrived at length, after so many delays, and
after having given suspicion of his Agreement with the King; but his presence
soon put a stop to that opinion for a time, and he was received with all marks
of joy; his Army was encamped near Paris, and all other disorders were suffered
without complaints.

At first there was some coolness between Monsieur le Prince and him for place,
but seeing that Monsieur le Prince was resolute, he declined his Pretentions,
so much more easily, in that he had only raised this dispute to gain time to
make a secret Treaty with the Court, to raise the Siege of Estampes without
hazarding a Battle, which was concluded by the Duke of Lorrain, without ever
acquainting either Monsieur, or Monsieur le Prince with it; the first news they
heard of it was that their Troops were marched out of Estampes, and that the
Kings Army was removed from thence, and the Duke de Lorrain retired into
Flanders, pretending that he had fully performed the King of Spain's Orders,
and also the Word that he had given to Monsieur: This news surpised every
body, and made Monsieur le Prince resolve to join his Forces; fearing left the
Kings Army should fall upon him in his march, he left Paris with 12 or 15
Horse, exposing himself to be taken by the Enemies Party, and having joined his
Army, he marched to Ville-juif, where they quartered, and from thence passed to
St. Cloud, where they remained, in which time not only the Harvest was
destroyed, but also most of the Houses thereabouts were reduced to Ashes.

With which proceedings the Parisians were so dissatisfied, that Monsieur le
Prince had like to have received fatal marks thereof in the Battle of St.
Antoine.

Nevertheless Gaucourt had secret Conferences with the Cardinal, in which he
declared that a Peace was desired with all earnestness, and went so far as to
agree upon the principal conditions, but he so much insisted upon those lesser
points, that he became suspected, not to intend to treat; this new uncertainty
gave new strength to all the Cabals, and an appearance of truth to all the
reports that were spread amongst the People. paris was never in so great an
agitation, Monsieur le Prince's thoughts were never so divided, which to
resolve of, Peace, or War: The Spaniards endeavored to remove him from Paris,
to hinder the Peace, and the Duchess de Longueville's friends contributed all
they could with the same design, to remove him also from Madam de Chastillon,
and likewise Mademoiselle aimed at the same mark with the Spaniards, and the
Duchess de Longueville, for on one side she desired the War should continue, to
be revenged upon the Queen, and the Cardinal, who had opposed her being married
to the King; and on the other, in hopes to force Monsieur le Prince to leave
Madam de Chastillon, that she might have as great a share both in his esteem,
and trust, as also to win him, who was most in her affection. She raised Men in
his Name, and promised to furnish him with Money to levy more.

These Promises joined to those of the Spaniards, and the Artifices of the
Duchess of Longueville's Friends, removed from Monsieur le Prince the thoughts
which he had of a Peace; but that, which in my opinion put him the farthest
from it, was not only the little confidence he could repose in the Court
afterward, but (what can hardly gain belief of one of his Quality, and Merit)
a vast desire of imitating the Duke of Lorrain in many things, and particularly
in his method of treating his Soldiers, and Officers; he was persuaded that if
the Duke de Lorrain being robbed of his Country, and with so much less
advantage than he had, could make himself so considerable by his Army and
Money, he who had such infinite Qualities above him, would make a progress
proportionable, and in the mean time might live entirely conformable to his own
humor.

This is the real motive which induced Monsieur le Prince to join with the
Spaniards, and for which he renounced all that his Birth and Services had
acquired him in the Kingdom, though he labored to hide it as much as was
possible, by showing still the same desire for the Peace, which was still
pursued with fruitless Treaties: The Court went to St. Denis, the Marshall de
la Ferte joined the Kings Army with those Troops which he had marched out of
Lorrain, Monsieur le Prince's Army, weaker than the least of the two Bodies
which opposed him, till then had maintained the Post of St. Cloud, that he
might make use of the Bridge to shun an unequal fight; but the arrival of the
Marshall de la Ferte enabled the Kings Army to divide, and attack St. Cloud on
both sides, having made a Bridge of Boats about St. Denis, which made Monsieur
le Prince resolve to leave St. Cloud with design to gain Charenton, and to post
himself in that neck of Land, where the River of Marne joins with the Seine; he
marched his Army the first day of July about the close of the evening, hoping
to reach Charenton before the Enemy could overtake him; he marched by the
Queen-Mothers Court, and by the backside of the Town from the Port St. Honor
to the Port St. Antoine, to come in there into the Road to Charenton.

He would not ask to pass through Paris, for fear it should be refused him, and
a refusal at such a time as that, would have made the ill condition his Affairs
were then in, too visible, besides he feared that if he should obtain it, his
Army might scatter in the Town, and would not be got out again if there were
occasion; The Court was immediately informed of his march, and Marshall
Turenne went the very minute with all his Forces to attack him, and to stop
him, till such time as the Marshall de la Ferte, who was following, had time
to arrive. In the mean while they carried the King to Charonne, that there, as
upon a Theater, he might be present at an Action, which in all appearance,
would be the inevitable ruin of Monsieur le Prince, and the conclusion of all
the disorder, and which really proved one of the boldest, and most dangerous
that was ever seen in War; where the great and extraordinary qualities of
Monsieur le Prince appeared with all advantage, and Fortune her self seemed to
court him in this action, and claimed a share in the success, wherein both
Parties extolled his Valor, and his Conduct, for he was attacked precisely at
the time when he could make use of those Trenches which the Citizens of the
Fauxbourg de St. Antoine had thrown up to fortify themselves from being
plundered by the Duke de Lorrain; he had only this place in all his march
(which he endeavored to reach) where he could hinder himself from being
entirely defeated; some Squadrons of the Reer-guard were charged in the
Fauxbourg de St. Martin, by those whom the Marshall de Turenne had detached to
amuse him, which retreated disorderly within the Entrenchment of the Fauxbourg
de St. Antoine, where he was drawn up in Battle.

He had scarcely time enough for this, and to set men to maintain all the
places by which he might be attacked, he was forced to place the Baggage upon
the Ditch de St. Antoine, because it was refused entrance into Paris, which
also had pillaged some of his Wagons, for the Court-Party had so managed it,
that they stood as Neuter, and Spectators of the event.

The Prince of Conde kept still about him all his own Servants, and all the
Gentlemen of Quality that had no Command, who were about thirty or forty in
number. The Marshall de Turenne prepared to attack him with all the haste, and
confidence of a Man that believed himself secure of Victory; when the Men whom
he had detached were about thirty (...) yards from the Entrenchment, Monsieur
le Prince sallied out with the aforenam'd Squadron, and with his Sword in his
hand, entirely defeated the Battallion that came to attack him, and took some
of the Officers Prisoners, carried off their Colors, and retired again into his
Retrenchment.

On the other side the Marquis de St. Mesgrin attacked the Post that was
defended by the Count de Tavannes Lieutenant General, and Langes Marshall de
Camp, where the resistance was so great, that the Marquis de St. Mesgrin,
seeing his Infantry decline, transported with heat and passion, advanced with
the Kings Light Horse, into a narrow Street, which was barricado'd, where he
was killed with the Marquis de Nantouillet, le Fouilloux, and others; Manching
was there wounded, whereof he died some time after.

They continued the Attacks on both sides with extreme vigor, and the Prince of
Condy charged the Enemy a second time with the same success that he did the
first; in what place soever he went, though he found himself in the middle of
Fire and Arms, he gave Orders with an eveness of Mind; which is so rare, and
yet so necessary in a time like that: At length the Kings Army forced the last
Barricado of the rue due Course, which leads to the Bois de Vincennes, and was
entered into Battalia as far as the Market House of the Faux-bourg St. Antoine,
when the Prince de Conde made a violent Sally, charged them, and cutting in
pieces all that withstood him, regained that Post, and beat off the Enemy, who
was nevertheless Master of a second Barricado, which was in the Street that
leads to Charenton, about forty yards beyond a large open place, which is just
by the same Street: The Marquis de Nouailles having possessed himself of it,
the better to defend it, made holes through the houses round about, and set
Musketeers in them, as also in all those Houses of the Street through which
they must pass to come at the Barricado. The Prince of Condy had a design to
dislodge them with his Infantry, and to beat them off with a greater violence,
which was really the way he ought to have taken; but the Duke de Beaufort not
being one of the nearest to Monsieur le Prince, and growing dissatisfied that
the Duke de Nemours was always so, pressed Monsieur le Prince to attack that
Barricado with his Foot already weary, and repulsed, which instead of marching
toward the Enemy, leaned themselves against the Houses, and would advance no
farther.

At the same time a Squadron of the Flemish Troops, which was posted in a
Street, one end whereof came to the corner of the aforementioned open place, on
the Enemies side, not being able to stay there any longer for fear of being cut
off when the Enemy should be possessed of the adjoining Houses, came into the
middle of it. The Duke de Beaufort believing it to be the Enemy, proposed to
the Dukes de la Rochefoucault and Nemours, who were just come thither, to go
and charge them; so they gathering together, the Volunteers made toward them,
and exposed themselves to no purpose amidst all the firing both from the
Barricado, and from the Houses round about, for coming nearer, he knew 'em to
be of his own Party; but at the same time perceiving an astonishment amongst
those that defended the Barricado, the Dukes de Nemours, Beaufort, and de la
Rochefoucault, and the Prince de Marcillac pushed at it, and beating the
Enemies from it, they seized it, and kept it their own selves, when the
Infantry which was commanded would not assist them. The Prince de Condy
maintained his ground in the Street, with only some of his friends who followed
him. In the mean time the Enemy, who were possessed of all the Houses in the
Street, seeing the Barricado kept only by four, had undoubtedly retaken it, had
not the Prince of Condy's Squadron opposed them; but their being no foot to
hinder the Enemies shooting from the Windows, they began to fire upon them from
every side till they had made them quit the Barricado. The Duke de Nemours for
all his Arms, received thirteen wounds, the Duke de la Rochefoucault received
also a Musket Shot upon his Face a little above the Eyes; which blinding him,
obliged the Duke de Beaufort, and the Prince de Marcillac to retreat to carry
off the two wounded; they were pursued, and the Prince de Condy advancing to
succor them, and give them time to get on Horseback, left the Post again to the
Kings Forces, which just before he had gained from them: Almost all that
followed them into the open place were either killed or wounded. Amongst the
rest there fell the Marquis de Flamerin, the Count de Castres, and Bercennes,
Captain of the Duke de Rochefoucault's Guards, the number of the Officers dead
and wounded on each side were so great, that each party appeared rather to
think of repairing its losses, than of attacking the Enemy: but this pause
proved nevertheless more advantageous to the Kings Forces, for though they had
been repulsed as often as they assaulted, nevertheless the Marshall de la
Ferte, marched with all speed, and prepared to make a new attack with his Army,
which was fresh and entire, when the Parisians, who till then had been only
spectators of so great an Action, declared themselves for Monsieur le Prince;
they had been so blinded on one side by the Policy of the Court, and on the
other by that of the Cardinal de Rets, as also being so much persuaded that
Monsieur le Prince had concluded the particular Peace without including their
Interests, that they considered the beginning of this Action to be done with
Cardinal Mazarin's consent, and the Duke d'Orleans confirmed them in that
opinion by giving no Orders in the Town to succor Monsieur le Prince; the
Cardinal de Rets was always about him, who still increased the trouble, and
irresolution of his mind, by framing difficulties in every thing he undertook:

On the other side the Port de St. Antoine was guarded by a Regiment of the
Citizens, the Officers whereof being gained by the Court, hinder^d every body
almost from either going out, or coming in. In fine, there were but few in the
Town that inclined to receive Monsieur le Prince into it; when Mademoiselle, by
using all her Power with her Father, at length drew him from that Lethargy, in
which Cardinal de Rets still held him, and prevailed upon him so far as that
she carried his Orders to the Townhouse for the Citizens to take up Arms, and
at the same time commanded the Governor of the Bastille to fire the Cannon upon
the Kings Army; then going her self also to the Port de St. Antoine, she
disposed the Citizens not only to receive Monsieur le Prince and his Army, but
even to sally out, and skirmish till such time as his Army was entered in; but
what yet moved the People more in favor of Monsieur le Prince, was to see so
many Persons of Quality brought in, either wounded, or dead; the Duke de la
Rochefoucault endeavored to make the best of this opportunity to serve his
Party; for though his Wound had almost blinded him, he rode from the Place
where he had been hurt to the Fauxbourg St. Germain, exhorting the People to
succor Monsieur le Prince, and from that time to be more sensible of their
designs, who had accused him of treating with the Court, which then worked the
effect that was desired; for Paris was never more inclined to serve Monsieur le
Prince than it was at that time.

In the mean while the noise of the Cannon from the Bastille made Cardinal
Mazarin conceive two very different opinions; for at first he thought that
Paris had declared it self against Monsieur le Prince, and that he was going at
once to triumph over the City, and his Enemy; but when they saw that they fired
upon the Kings Forces, he sent Orders to the Marshall of France to retreat,
and return to St. Denis.

This was one of the most glorious days of Monsieur le Prrinces life, his
Valor and Conduct never had a greater share in his Victory; and one may say,
that so many Persons of Quality never led on a smaller number of Men. All the
Colors they took were hung up in Nostredame Church, and all the Officers, that
were taken Prisoners, were dismissed upon their Parols; The Negotiations for
Peace still continued, and each Cabal was laboring either to make, or hinder
it according to its Interest; as for Monsieur le Prince, and the Cardinal, they
were neither of 'em resolved whither they should conclude it or no. Monsieur de
Chavigny in all appearance was now well again with Monsieur le Prince; it was
hard to say what opinion he was of till then, because his natural fickleness
made him every day directly opposite to the other; for when he was in hopes to
destroy the Cardinal, and re-enter into the Ministry of Affairs, his Counsel
was to push things to the last extremity, but would have them beg a Peace upon
their knees, as often as he imagined that his Lands would become the Prey of
the Soldiers, and his Houses razed; but still in this juncture he was of the
same opinion with the rest, which was to make the best of the good disposition
of the People, and to propose to them a meeting at the Townhouse, to resolve
that Monsieur le Prince should be made Lieutenant General of the Crown of
France, and to associate themselves inseparably to remove the Cardinal; and
that the Duke de Beaufort should be made Governor of Paris instead of Monsieur
de l' Hospital, and Broussel-Provost des Merchant in the place of Monsieur de
Febure; but this Assembly, wherein it was believed would consist the security
of the Faction, proved one of the principal causes of its ruin, by a violence,
that in all probability might have destroyed every Man that was in the Hostel
de Ville, and have made Monsieur le Prince loose all the advantages that he had
gained in the Battle of St. Antoine.

I cannot say who was the Author of so pernicious a design, for all disowned it
alike; but when they were met in the Townhouse, there gathered together a
company of all sorts of People in Arms, which came crying to the very doors,
That not only all things should pass according to the intention of Monsieur le
Prince, but likewise that all those who depended upon the Cardinal Mazarin,
should that very minute be delivered up. This noise at first was only looked
upon as an ordinary effect of the impatient Rabble; but seeing the Crowd and
Tumult increase, and that even the Soldiers and Officers bore their part in the
Sedition, and at the same time began to set the Doors on fire, and shoot in at
the Windows; all that were within, believed themselves alike utterly lost.

Many to evade the danger of the Fire and Shooting, exposed themselves to the
fury of the People; there were many killed of all sorts, and of both Parties,
and every one believed that Monsieur le Prince sacrificed his Friends, that he
might not be suspected, to have destroyed his Enemies; not the least part of
this business was laid to the Duke d'Orleans charge, and all the hatred for it
fell upon Monsieur le Prince, though I believe they both made use of the Duke
de Beaufort to injure those that were not of their Parties, but in reality, not
one of them had the least design to hurt any body; Howsoever it was, they
presently appeased the Disorder, but could not blot out the impression that it
had made in the Peoples Minds.

It was proposed afterward to establish a Council which should consist of the
Duke d'Orleans, the Prince of Condy, the Chancellor of France, and of all the
Princes, Dukes and Peers, Marshall of France, and the general Officers of the
Party, where two Presidents an Monsieur should have always place from the
Parliament, and the Provosts of the Merchants from the City, to judge
definitively in all Cases Military, and Civil.

This Council increased instead of diminishing the Disorder by the pretentions
of taking place in it, and the Consequences of it were at length as fatal, as
those of the Assembly in the Townhouse; for the Dukes de Nemours and Beaufort,
either had not so clearly forgot their passed Differences, but that they still
bore a grudging to each other, or else by the Interests of some Ladies,
quarrelled for Precedence in the Council, and fought on Horseback, where the
Duke de Nemours was killed by the Duke de Beaufort his Brother in Law; his
Death moved both compassion and sorrow, in all who knew him, and even the
Public had reason to lament him: for besides his great and eminent Qualities,
he contributed all that was in his power to the concluding of a Peace, for he
and the Duke de la Roche Foucault, had renounced all the advantages that
Monsieur le Prince had engaged to obtain for 'em in the Treaty, that it might
be so much the more easily concluded, but the Death of one, and the Wound of
the other gave the Spaniards and the Duchess of Longueville's Friends all the
opportunity they could desire; They no longer apprehended, that the
Propositions for inviting Monsieur le Prince into Flanders would be disputed,
they dazzled him with hopes, and now Madam de Chastillon appeared less charming,
because there was no longer that illustrious Rival to combat in her Affection,
nevertheless he did not at first reject the propositions of Peace, though he
still took his measures for War; he offered to the Duke de la Roche Foucault
the Duke de Nemours's Command, which he could not accept, because of his hurt,
so he gave it afterward to the Prince de Tarante.

Paris was then more divided than ever, the Court daily gaining one or other of
the Parliament, or People; the Slaughter, which happened at the Townhouse,
appeared horrible to all Men: the Army durst not keep the Field, and its
quartering in Paris increased their dissaffection to Monsieur le Prince: in
fine, his Affairs were reduced to the worst estate they could be in, when the
Spaniards equally desiring to hinder either his Ruin or Advancement; that they
might prolong the War, ordered the Duke de Lorrain to march a second time to
Paris, with a body of Men considerable enough not only to put a stop to the
Kings Forces, but to invest them in Villenuefue St. George; they also sent word
to Paris, that the Enemy should be constrained either to give Battle, or to die
for hunger in their Camp.

This hope flattered Monsieur le Prince, who thought to draw great advantages
from the event of that action, though the truth of it was, the Marshall
Turenne wanted no Provisions, and had always liberty to retreat to Melun,
without hazarding a Battle, which he did, without finding any resistance;
whilst the Duke de Lorrain was at Paris, and Monsieur le Prince lay sick of a
violent Fever, at the same time Palluau joined the Forces under his command
with the Kings Army, after having taken Montrond, in which the Marquis de
Persan had been blocked up from the beginning of the War by a small number of
Men, commanded by the Count de Palluau; but the Garrison growing weak, they
assaulted it, and took it with less resistance, than could be expected from so
gallant Men, in one of the strongest places in the World, the loss whereof
ought so much the more to touch Monsieur le Prince, in that it happened by his
negligence, since that in the time when the Kings Army lay toward Campaigne, he
might easily have relieved Montrond, whereas his Army ruining all about Paris,
so much increased their hatred to him.

Though Monsieur le Prince's Distemper was violent, yet it was less fatal to
him, than to Monsieur Chavigny, who one day having been very eager with
Monsieur le Prince about clearing some things, went back sick of a Fever,
whereof he died a few days after; his misfortunes ended not with his life, and
death, which ought to put a period to hatred, rather seemed to awaken it in his
Enemies; they imputed to him all manner of Crimes, but particularly Monsieur le
Prince complained, that he had given ear to the propositions of the Abbey
Fouquet, without acquainting him with it (though he had writ to him to do it)
and that he had promised to remit some part of the Articles, which he could not
consent to; Monsieur le Prince also published Copies of a Letter which he
intercepted from the Abbey Fouquet, of which I have seen the original, where he
sends word to the Court, that Goulas would certainly persuade the Duke d'
Orleans to break with Monsieur le Prince, if he did not accept those conditions
of Peace, which were then offered him, and some Copies that Monsieur le Prince
gave with his own hand, he writ Chavigny's name in the place of Goulas, and so
accused him of betraying him, without giving any other Proofs than the false
Copies of that Letter written by the same Abbey Fouquet, with whom Monsieur le
Prince treated every day, and gave Chavigny an account of it.

I can attribute so extraordinary, and so unjust a proceeding to no other
cause, than the extreme desire that Monsieur le Prince had to continue the War,
which being opposed by his Friends, made him alter his behavior toward them,
and wholly confide in the Spaniards; he began from that time to take his
measures, in such a manner, that he might depart with the Duke of Lorrain, and
to say truth, his Conduct had made this Council so necessary, that he had now
no other choice to make, for Peace was too generally desired at Paris for any
one to live there securely who designed to oppose it.

The Duke d'Orleans for his part, who had always desired the Peace, and who
still apprehended the mischief that Monsieur le Prince's presence might draw
upon him, contributed the more willingly to remove him, in that he knew he
should then have a greater liberty to make his particular Treaty.

Though all things were thus in confusion, they did not interrupt the ordinary
course of the Negotiations, for at the time that Cardinal Mazarine left France,
in hopes to root out all pretenses of a Civil War, or to show that Monsieur le
Prince pursued other aims than his removal, he sent Anglade Secretary to the
Duke de Bouillon to the Duke de la Rochefoucault, and whether it was that he
had really a design to treat, in hopes to make his return more easy, or that
he designed to draw some advantage by showing the World that he desired a
Peace; at length Anglade brought much more ample conditions, than any before,
and almost the same that Monsieur le Prince had demanded, but they were also
refused, and his destiny, which drew him into Flanders, never let him see the
Precipice till it was no longer in his power to retire; at length he departed
with the Duke de Lorrain, after having in vain contrived with the Duke
d'Orleans to oppose the Queens being received into Paris; but his reputation
was not then in a condition to lie in balance with the Court, he received
orders to leave Paris the day that the King was to make his entry into it,
which he instantly obeyed, that he might not be a witness of his enemies
triumphs, and of the public joy.

Cardinal Mazarin's Letter to Monsieur de Brienne.
SIR,
THE Queen, as far as I understand, believes that you should have only sent me
a Letter from the King, as it is usually done to all National Cardinals, when
news is brought from Rome that the Pope is in danger, and that I had a
particular Privilege granted me; since, besides the first from the King, and
the Duplicate, I have received another, and three from you, all conceived in
terms so pressing to make me without any delay depart from Rome, that I confess
I was surprised to the last degree, being not able to imagine wherein I have
been so deficient in my Duty to their Majesty's, that they should press me to
take a Journey with so much Ignominy and Danger, and without any means of
subsisting. To think that a Letter of Recommendation to the Pope would satisfy
all! as if they knew the World so little at Rome, that they could not infer
what sort of Protection I was to expect there, since I was abandoned to the
Persecution of my Enemies in France, where the King is Master. Nevertheless if
I had had the honor to receive a word from the Queen to signify, that it was
the Kings and her pleasure that I should go thither (as she had the goodness to
let me know it when she was pleased that I should go out of the Kingdom, and
remove as far as the Rhine.) I do assure you, that after having put my Nieces
into a Monastery, and turned off my Family, I would have gone thither with two
Servants only, to confirm their Majesty's upon all occasions, that my obedience
is blind, and my Fidelity of Proof. I am really ready to do, without any reply,
whatever the Queen shall command me, though I cannot receive a greater
mortification, than to take this Journey in the condition I am in, which besides
cannot but be prejudicial to the Kings honor. Nay, which is another
unhappiness in this affair, they have had the Address to make it pass with the
Queen for an act of Grace, which was done me, that I might yet feel some effect
of the public joy for the Kings Majority. All this has loaded me with sorrow,
when I see to what height my friends have prevailed by my disgrace, and with
what success they have employed their Arts to make me receive such rude usage,
at a time when I might justly hope, that they would give some comfort to the
Persecutions, which I have suffered for eight Months together with so much
Violence, and with so notorious an Affront to the Royal Dignity.

But all this is not comparable to the excess of sorrow which I groaned under,
after having seen (in all the Letters, from a great many of my Friends, both at
Paris and elsewhere) the great pleasure they take at the Contents of the Kings
Declaration, which was Registered in Parliament, and cried about the City. All
of them without having consulted together, agreeing, that since the Monarchy,
there was never so bloody a thing contrived against any body, what Crime soever
he had committed. No body durst send it me, and I may swear to you, that I
never saw it; But to know that the King has declared that I hindered the
Peace, and was the cause of all the Injuries done to the Allies of France, is
enough to persuade me, that my Master would have me looked upon as the most
infamous and villainous Man that ever was, and as the scourge of Christianity:
and after this they send me to the place of my Nativity, to make a parade
(amongst my Kindred and Friends) of the fine Titles, which I have brought back
with me, as a Reward for the 23 years as faithful and advantageous Service, as
ever was done by the most zealous and disinteressed Minister that ever was.

All my Enemies have for these six Months labored with an Industry visible to
every body, sending Commissaries all over, applying themselves to all
imaginable contrivances, and some of them raising false Witnesses to see if
they could blacken me with some Crimes, who justifying to the people the
oppression they laid upon me, did more and more establish their hatred against
me, though all this produced nothing but very advantageous effects to undeceive
them, and let them see my Innocence and the Injustice wherewith it was
attacked. At this time my aforesaid Enemies despairing to do any thing by other
ways, found the means to persuade their Majesty's to declare me (without being
heard) in a most authentic and public form, a Rogue, and to impute the
hindrance of the Peace to me alone.

After this methinks they should rather counsel me to hide my self from the
sight of Men, and bury my self for ever, than to go to Rome, since I have
reason not only to apprehend the people of France, but all those who suffer by
the continuation of the War, have reason to stone him, that is the cause
thereof.

I am confident that their Majesty's could not have a particular knowledge of
every thing, that was contained in the Kings Declaration, they are too just to
be thought by any means, that they would consent to declare me the most wicked
and abominable of Men and a Traitor. And it is a great misfortune to the Kings
service, that there should not be one who would let him know, of what advantage
it was to the Enemies of France, that all Europe by his Majesty's Declaration
was persuaded that his chief Minister hindered the Peace. The Spaniards can have
no greater advantage, than to be able to throw upon France the hatred of
Christianity, for the Evils, which the War makes it suffer, and the Allies of
France will by the Kings Declaration have a right with Justice to demand
reparation for the losses they have endured, which amount to Millions, or in
case of a refusal, to have a just foundation for a quarrel, since it is certain
that the King and State are responsible for the conduct of those who have the
management of Affairs.

I know also that the consideration of me was not strong enough to oblige them
to speak in my favor, but really the Interest of the King, of the State, and
of the Queen her self, was engaged by so many other pressing reasons, than what
are abovementioned, that it must be confessed, that it was a strange
unhappiness that no body should speak to them one word of it, and mine is in
the utmost degree, since, besides what I suffer in my own particular, the
passion I have for their Majesty's and the State, which can never have an end,
makes me feel in the bottom of my Soul the strokes which they receive thereby.

You see, that since the Crimes, which they have obliged the King to declare me
guilty of, I am no more in a condition to intermeddle in any Affair, wherefore
you need not give your self the trouble of communicating any to me, and if my
Enemies have not the satisfaction to see me go to Rome, they shall have the joy
to see me abscond without intermedling with any thing whatever, until it shall
please the King to do me Justice; humbly beseeching him, that he would be
pleased to make me Prisoner wherever he shall order, even in one of the places
of Monsieur d'Orleans, that if I have failed in my Duty, I may receive an
exemplary punishment; and to take away all difficulties that may occur, by
reason of the Dignity wherewith I am invested; I will take it as a singular
favor, if I may be permitted to send a resignation thereof, for I cannot now
be any way useful to his Majesty in my Person. I shall be very much obliged to
you, if you so use your Interest as to procure me this favor, which I will
esteem to the last degree, since it may contribute to the reparation of my
Honor, and I also desire you for this once to excuse my Importunities.

Monsieur de la Castre 's Letter to Monsieur Brienne.
SIR,
SO long as my unhappiness only reached my Fortune, and I believed I had no
reason to fear any thing but the loss of my Place, I bore my disgrace without a
repining thought, and easily resolved with my self, to wait till a more
favorable time gave me occasion of hoping better things. But now that I
understand that they would violate my Innocence, and endeavor to ruin that
little esteem I have desired to acquire in the Queens Opinion, I must confess I
have not constancy enough to bear so rude a shock without complaints. You, Sir,
who know me very well, know that I was never acted by Idterest, that Honor was
my aim in all my Actions, and that I observed its strictest rules that I might
be esteemed by that person alone to whom I had devoted all my services. Do you
judge by this how sensible I ought to be of the Injury they have done me, in
representing me to her under black Characters, and give me leave most humbly to
beseech you, to let her Majesty know, that upon all occasions I will receive
her pleasure with the respect I ought; but on this I beg nothing but Justice;
If I am guilty either of any important or trivial thing against her, I am the
most guilty Man in the Kingdom, and I passionately desire that the Parliament
would examine my faults, and punish them, being ready upon this account to
enter into Custody, whenever it shall please her to prosecute me; I am so
sensible of my Innocence, that I cannot doubt the issue, nay in the despair I
am at present in, though the event should be fatal to me, I should not
apprehend it, judging that I have nothing in the World to lose since the Queen
has lost the confidence she once reposed in my Fidelity: I expect from the
honor of your Friendship, that you will do me the favor to testify to her my
sad thoughts, it is the most sensible and obliging office that He can hope from
you, who is,

SIR, Yours, etc.

The Articles and Conditions which were agreed upon between his Royal Highness
Monsieur, and Monsieur le Prince de Conde, for the expulsion of Cardinal
Mazarine, in pursuance of so many of the Kings Declarations and Acts of the
several Parliaments of France.
I. THat his Royal Highness, and Monsieur le Prince are ready to lay down their
Arms, to return to Court, to reenter into his Majesty's Councils, and to
contribute as much as lies in them, to conclude a general Peace; to settle all
disturbances, and re-establish the Kings Authority, if his Majesty will be
pleased sincerely to command Cardinal Mazarin to leave the Kingdom, and banish
him out of all Places under his Dominion, and to remove him from his Councils
and Person, all his Relations and Adherents, and finally that he would put in
execution the Declarations that he had set forth, to that purpose in such a
manner^ that neither his Royal Highness nor Monsieur le Prince may have reason
to believe that the public Faith will be violated.

II. That if on the contrary, Cardinal Mazarine by his Artifices prevails still
upon the King, and against the desires, and opinion of all France, and so much
to the prejudice of those Declarations, People still persevere to support him,
the Quality of Uncle to his said Majesty, which his Royal Highness possesses,
obliges him to be vigilant in whatsoever relates to the good of the King, and
to oppose whatsoever can interrupt it, during his said Majesty's minority; and
Monsieur le Prince thinks himself indispensibly obliged to the same sentiments,
because he has also the honor to be of the Royal Blood; and considering that
they can have no security for their Persons, whilst Cardinal Mazarine is Master
of Affairs, they have promised, and are reciprocally obliged, and engage, not
only for themselves, but also for the Prince de Conty, the Prince de Conde's
Brother, and the Duchess de Longueville his Sister, whom Monsieur le Prince
promises, and engages, shall ratify the present Treaty, the same time that he
himself does, as also, for all those that are of his Party; that they shall
join their Forces and employ all their Credit and Friends to banish Cardinal
Mazarine out of France, and to send away all his Relations and Adherents, who
have declared themselves such, by the continual Correspondence which they kept
with him, when he was from the Court and Ministry of Affairs.

III. They promise not to lay down Arms till such time as they have obtained
the effect of the aforementioned Article, and not to give ear directly or
indirectly to any Agreement but on that Condition, and with an unanimous
consent.

IV. That they will maintain and increase the Forces which they have raised as
long as possibly they can, and that they shall be employed, either jointly, or
separately, as they shall judge most fit, promising moreover to take all care
for their subsistence with the least grievance that may be to the People.

V. They promise willingly to accept all reasonable Expedients, which shall be
proposed to appease the troubles of the Kingdom, still provided Cardinal
Mazarin be removed, as is specified in the second Article, and to endeavor
continually to establish a general Peace, which is one of the chief ends of
this Treaty: which can find no obstacle when he is gone who has endeavored to
prolong the War, and that the Breaches in the Royal Family (which he has been
the cause of) shall be made up again.

VI. His Royal Highness, and Monsieur le Prince, promise to maintain the
Parliaments, and all supreme Societies of the King, the chief Officers of
State, the Nobility, and Gentry, in all their Rights and Privileges, and to do
them Justice, in all their lawful pretentions, and not to make any Treaty
without them, till such time that all the damages and losses they have
sustained in maintaining this Treaty be repaired; and particularly to take care
that it may not prejudice the observing of the Declaration, published the 22 of
October 1648. and for this reason they are invited to enter into this present
Union, and to do their utmost endeavor to accomplish the intent thereof.

VII. Cardinal Mazarine, who still governed in effect, though banished in
appearance, having hindered the general Assembly of the States, which the King
had promised to convoke the 8th of September last, and having obliged the
Deputies, who met at Tours upon the day appointed, to retire with shame and
confusion, and besides all this, his Royal Highness and Monsieur le Prince
knowing that he would still continue the same condition he then held, and that
he would endeavor to hinder by all means; whatever could be expected from their
meeting, or that if he could be possibly brought to consent to their
assembling, it should be only to get them into some place whereof he is Master;
therefore his Royal Highness, and Monsieur le Prince, to remove these two
inconveniences, promise and engage themselves, to spare no pains, to obtain
that they may assemble at Paris, as the nearest and most convenient Town where
they may act in full liberty, upon which condition they declare they will
submit with all their hearts, their whole Interests, which they protest to be
no other than the Interests of King and Country; to their decision, whereof
there shall be made a perpetual and irrevocable Edict, which shall be confirmed
in the Parliament of Paris, and by all those that enter into this present Union.

VIII. His Royal Highness and Monsieur le Prince neither holding for lawful,
nor acknowledging the Council, chosen by Cardinal Mazarine, one whereof having
bought his place with a vast Sum of Money, which he gave to the aforesaid
Cardinal, they being obliged by the degree of Blood, whereby they have the
honor to come so near his Majesty, to take care of his Affairs, and to proceed
in such a manner, as that they may be well governed, promise not to listen to
any accommodation till such time as the Creatures and public Adherents to
Cardinal Mazarine, be excluded the Council of State, and upon condition that it
shall not hereafter consist but only of such of the said Council, and others,
as cannot in any manner be suspected to incline to him.

IX. And because the Enemies of Monsieur le Prince, are base enough to
endeavor to decry his Actions, by publishing that he is in League with Foreign
Nations, his Royal Highness and the said Monsieur le Prince, declare that they
will never have any Commerce, or Correspondence whatever with them, but only as
far as what concerns the general Peace, and that they will not negotiate with
any Stranger Princes, before it be judged beneficial for the Kings Interest,
and the good of the Kingdom, both by the Parliament, and the chief Persons that
shall enter into this present Union.

X. And in fine, that the ill intentioned, and the persons most zealous for
Cardinal Mazarine, may not have reason to doubt of his Royal Highness and
Monsieur le Prince's good intentions, they have thought fit to declare expressly
by this Article, that they have no other design than the security of their own
Persons; and whether it be that the unhappy Commotions of the State will oblige
them to employ their Arms for the expulsion of the said Cardinal Mazarine, or
that things may be accommodated by his exclusion in the manner as has been
above demonstrated, they will not pretend to any new model of Government, but
put their whole satisfaction in that which France must needs rejoice to see an
end of their troubles, and the public quiet assured.

XI. His Royal Highness and Monsieur le Prince, notwithstanding judge it fit
for many weighty considerations, to agree together to contribute as much as
lies in their power toward an Agreement, for the just and reasonable
satisfaction of all those who are now engaged in the common cause, or who
hereafter shall join themselves to them, that they may receive effective marks
of their protection.

This present Treaty was double signed by his Royal Highness, and by the Counts
de Fiesque, and de Gaucourt, for, and in the name of Monsieur le Prince,
Monsieur le Prince de Conty, and the Duchess of Longueville, by virtue of the
power that Monsieur le Prince gave them which was presently delivered into the
hands of his Royal Highness, by the said Count de Fiesque, the two Counts were
engaged, and obliged themselves to procure to his said Royal Highness, the
Ratifications of those for whom they had engaged within a month at farthest.

Concluded at Paris the 24th day of January in the Year of our Lord 1652.
signed Gaston Charles Leon, de Fiesque, Joseph de Gaucourt.

AN APOLOGY, OR THE DEFENSE OF THE DUKE de BEAVFORT, Against the Court, the
Nobility, and the People.
Gentlemen,
WERE I as Eloquent as those who have written either for the Court, or the
Princes, you should then have a fine Apology in favor of the Duke de Beaufort,
but having spent the most part of my time in Hunting or Playing at Tenis with
him, be pleased to pardon me the labor of Eloquence, and allow me to go on
without Interterruption in the broad common Road.

To come quickly to the purpose, there appear three points in my Discourse, as
also there were in his advice, The first is to justify him to the Court, who
thought him ill-intention'd; The second, to re-establish him with the Nobility,
who despised him; The third, to regain him the love of the public, who
abandoned him. And now do you judge, Gentlemen, if I have not a hard Task, and
if it would not be more easy to overthrow the Cardinal and set the Princes at
liberty, than to succeed in what I undertake.

I say the Court is most injurious to the Duke de Beaufort, to believe that he
has any ill thoughts against it, and these are my reasons, if the Duke de
Beaufort retained a hatred for the Court, if his reconciliation with Cardinal
Mazarine was not really sincere and free, he would have still kept himself in a
condition to have prejudiced him, or at least to have secured himself; but to
take away all subject of fear or suspicion, and to establish himself in an
entire Trust; he was himself Author of his own discredit with the Parliament,
he also drew upon himself the contempt of the People of Quality, and the hatred
of the vulgar; what appearance was there then, that the Duke de Beaufort, doing
whatsoever he could to please the Court, designed not to serve it, or was
willing to be at difference with it.

Moreover, if it was true, that he endeavored to maintain a Confederacy
disadvantagious to the Kings Authority, he would have joined with the
Frondeurs, and both alike have aimed at the same mark; but all the World knows
that he broke with Madam de Chevereuse, lest he might seem to act contrary to
the Testament of Lewis the Thirteenth, if he continued any manner of
Correspondence with her; what likelihood is there then, that a man, who bears
so nice a respect to the memory of the late King, should have such pernicious
thoughts against him that is now Reigning.

As to the uniting of the chief Minister, and the Admiral, it cannot be desired
to be either more strong, or more strict, and they are both too generous to
believe, that there has been given and received Fourscore thousand Livres a
year, as a pledge of a false reconciliation.

But passing by all conjectures, wherein there are a thousand concluding
circumstances, tell me why was Mazarine, proclaimed upon Pont-neuff, in the
Palace, and in all public places? why in the last Assembly of the Parliament,
did he solicit the remainder of his Friends in the Cardinals behalf, if he
was not really true to his Interest?

He is also accused to have made use of his power, to ruin the Duke d'
Espernon, and what could this gallant Prince have otherwise done, unless he had
suffered Injuries with a Christian Patience, and retired himself into a
Cloister? Can it be denied, that no persecution ever equalled that he suffered
from the Duke de Candale? and his eagerness to dishonor so near a Relation, did
it not merit that Revenge?

But to say truth, these are only particular concerns, and in all cases he
revenges himself upon his Enemies in spite of the Court, by a kind of
compensation: he knows how to abandon his friends to please it. Fontrailles and
Chatta once so zealous for his interest, by experience are made sensible of it,
and the Count de Fiesque having received the same treatment, has reason to
condemn himself all his life, for the useless generosity he showed him.

Let us then conclude, that never any Man observed more the intentions of the
Court, and that the Queen would hardly have refused him the Government of
Bretaigne, but that she believed the great Services he had done, to be
sufficiently rewarded by the command of Admiral.

Now after having thus justified this great Duke in what relates to the Court,
I will endeavor to do the same to the true Nobility, and make it appear that
nothing is more unreasonable than the contempt they have lately shown him.

When I speak of the true Nobility, I mean not those, whom his rought manner of
speaking only makes his Enemies, Men bred up in softness and sloth, who by
frequenting the Ladies Chambers, are accustomed to a quite different sort of
entertainment.

The Duke de Beaufort is proud to be unacquainted with too soft and tender
discourse, fit only to effeminate Courage, and soften the mind; he has not made
it his business to study scrupulous, and nice distinctions; he is not delicate
in his eating, nor studious to be well dressed, but he knows how to make himself
be beloved by his Neighbors, and when he has need of Friends, he has an
hundred Gentlemen that will serve him with hand and heart at his command.

This is the manner of this great Dukes living; but I see I am to satisfy the
Nobility upon another point; and there are few Gentlemen that speak concerning
the business of Renard, that do not also speak of how little care he took to
satisfy so many Persons of Quality so much offended. Before I come to
particulars I must tell you that this good Prince repented himself a thousand
times of that action; and to show you that I neither approve the thing it self,
nor the consequence of it, I accuse him of too much Passion and Courage shown
in Renards house, as also too much Reflection and Wisdom in the pursuit of it;
but, Gentlemen, you are so little indulgent to him, you may excuse a Man, who
has only taken one thing for another, who was Valiant when he ought to have
been Wise, and Wise, when he ought to have been Valiant, so that it was at most
but a small mistake, and it would be too severe in you not to pardon it.

And then, if all things were taken in the greatest rigor, with whom should the
Duke de Beaufort have fought? had he fought the Duke de Candall, which was the
right measures he ought to have pursued at the least disadvantage, the whole
Court had rejoiced; the Queen was still dissatisfied for the War of Paris, his
reconciliation with Cardinal Mazarine was not yet well settled, almost all
people crowded to offer their Services to the Duke de Candall, God knows what
joy there would have been, had he been either wounded or disarmed; to have
fought with Bouteville would have been as bad, for no misfortune could have
befallen him, but Monsieur le Prince, and his friends would have gained yet
more advantage; in the manner that he had treated Gerze it was past giving
quarter, and the Vow he made all his life to observe the Precepts of Nature,
obliged him to take care not to be transported to that Inhumanity.

It is certain he had fought with Moret, but that he appointed the place too
far from Chyrurgions, as the Duke de Beaufort judiciously told him; and as to
what Monsieur de Paluau said upon it, that he ought to have been contented with
simpathetick Powder. This was proper indeed for Men like himself without
Conscience; but the Duke de Beaufort is too good a Man to make use of any
supernatural Remedies. The Duchess of Vendosme his Mother having always
preached to him that it was better to dye a thousand deaths than to seek a Cure
from Magic.

These are the reasons why he did not draw his Sword; every one may judge of
them as he pleases; for my part it will be always my opinion, that a gallant
Man cannot be too careful to keep his Enemies from taking advantage of him,
which might have befallen the Duke de Beaufort, had he engaged with such
desperate people; but I grant that he was a little too much transported with
heat, and by the impetuous motion of a great Soul, over which he was not then
Master, he unseasonably offended so many worthy Men, and shall we say, that
there is no way to repair an affront but by death? And if so great a Man as he
will have so much goodness as to own a fault, ought his Civilities to be
despised? What acknowledgments did he not make to all that were concerned? What
satisfaction did he not give except that of Fighting? A satisfaction cruel and
bloody, that all other Nations have reason to reproach us with. Was that brave
Prince as nice in resenting Injuries, as those Gentlemen who complain, how much
ought it to trouble him now to think that he has neglected nothing that could
gain him the love and friendship of the Nobility? You know as soon as ever he
had made his own Peace, he began only to think of making the Fortunes of
deserving Men, and resolved to employ all his Power and Credit for the service
of others, without so much as thinking of his own Interest: to some he
generously offered the security of his protection; to others, all the
advantages that they could gain by his favor; he freely distributed Offices,
and Governments, and yet could not find one that would be his Favorite,
amongst them all, they were so much abused by the hopes of the Court; there was
not one that did not refuse his kindness; the resentment that he felt to see
his liberality thus despised, forced him to mind his own Interest, and in
despite of his former design, he saw himself reduced to the troublesome
necessity of soliciting his own Affairs.

This was the first time that the Duke de Beaufort perceived himself slighted
by the Gentry, and particularly those about the Court; these were the first
marks of their contempt, which passed in a very little time to the most bloody
outrages: In the War of Paris they talked of nothing but of his Generosity, and
Courage; and see but the Injustice of the World! for they now endeavor to
defame him by those very same actions whereby he acquired his Reputation.

Every one knows how much he was complimented upon Nertieu's death, and
supposing really that he had not killed him, the modestest Man might have been
persuaded that he did it as he was, and those same people full of complaisance
and civility at that time, now grown ill humored, design to rob him of that
glory wherewith they themselves adorned him, and by a search as exact as it was
industrious, found, (as they say) that he never came near Nertieu till after he
was dead.

His fighting with Briole was at first esteemed to extraordinary that it might
make all the Roman Heroes tremble.

Now, say they, Briole took his Sword from him, as from a Mad man, whom rage or
some other passion had transported besides himself.

Do these Gentlemen think that he is ready to change his opinion upon as light
grounds, as they have done? and that a Man, who was possessed with the belief,
that he killed Nertieu, when they complimented him upon it, can resolve to
believe nothing of it, when they shall take a fancy to say against it. No, no,
Gentlemen! you ought to be more steady, and not reproach him with your own
inconstancy; it might be indeed that he did not kill Nertieu, but since you
once owned it, your denying it at present will not prove the contrary.

Now from particular actions let us pass to his personal Qualities; they
represent him a Man rude, yet without familiarity, sly, and yet silly, and by
an odd mixture, he at once possesses, say they, the cunning of the Duke de
Vendosme his Father, and the simplicity of the Duchess his Mother; if you will
believe them, he promises to all, but keeps his word with none; he pretends in
Business to dispatch three Posts, whereof not one gets up on Horseback; and
also refuses himself from the Queen what he never asked; What would you have
more? he sollicites for a Man in public, and against him in private: I cannot
tell any one thing that they do not say of his manner of discourse: They make
him write ridiculous Letters to Monsieur Bethune, which I am sure he never
thought of: in all unavoidable Suits in Law they would make appear in him the
accidents of life: When others eat Meat in Lent, he is for bringing in new
Government; Chambers hung with black are wanton, and the most lascivious looks
are mournful: Laval is dead of a bruise that he received in the head; and the
Chevalier de Chabot for having been ill dressed of his Tympany: There is no sort
of thing, that they don't make him to have done; there are no sort of undecent
words, that they don't make him to have uttered; but nevertheless I cannot but
think him a Man of great Sincerity and Parts, who wants neither Probity nor
Understanding.

Can it be imagined, that a Prince bred up in the innocence of Country
Pleasures, should be capable of so many exquisite Cheats? Can it be imagined,
that a Prince of his Birth could be ignorant of the most common things? For my
part, I must instead of believing what appears so strange, and so
disadvantagious to the Duke de Beaufort, still admire his Generosity or
Patience, either to pardon or suffer the Injuries that were done him.

Did not I fear passing here for a Declamour, I would end this Chapter to the
Nobility in exhorting them to live as well with him as he resolves to do with
them; and addressing my self to the Gentry, I must say to them from him; Leave,
Gentlemen, leave off this malicious hatred, and affected contempt, and return
into the same mind you were in at the death of the late King; remember but that
generous time, when every body crowded into his Interest, when the Colonel of
the Swisses, the Officers of the Kings House, and the People of Quality
renounced both the Court, and their Fortunes for the love of him. If you
return, Gentlemen, he is ready to receive you, and in a condition to do the
same things for you, as he has already done; but if you are obstinate, and will
not return, I declare he will have no more to do with you, but will endeavor
to re-establish himself in the love of the People, who have left him: It Is
true, he owes the beginning of his RePutation to you, but he owes also the
greatest part of his contempt to you, so that he thinks himself discharged from
any manner of acknowledgment, by the just resentment of your unkindness.
Therefore, Gentlemen, you see there is now no need to make any longer dispute.

And now it is time to come to his Justification to the People, and as he owns
himself, that he owes his Safety, Fortune, and Reputation to them; There is not
any thing he would not do to wash away the ill impression they have of him,
which comes either from his Misfortunes, or the Malice of his Enemies.

It Is not, but that if he had a Mind not to make any acknowledgment, he could
find Proofs against such an obligation, and whosoever examines things even with
the greatest rigor, will find without doubt, that their love for him was
rather a necessary effect of his Destiny, than a free and obliging motion of
their own; for at the name only of the Duke of Beaufort, the People were
insensibly moved, and I cannot say by what sentiments, but every heart was
transported to an extremity of love. It is certain, that they looked upon him
as their only support, before he served them, or had done any thing that could
attract either, their Gratitude, Love or Esteem; so that they have done for him
only what they could not hinder themselves from doing, therefore he is much
more obliged to the lucky Planet, that ruled his Birth, than to their good
Wills: Notwithstanding he acknowledges that he owes all things to them, and
does not pretend by an exquisite Ingratitude, to pay real obligations.

He does not only protest that he will always endeavor to serve the People,
who have served him, but he declares that he shall retain for ever a particular
love for them, a perfect resemblance of humor, a secret agreement of thought,
a just conformity of words, which will maintain an eternal League betwixt them.

Yet we see the Parisians have not only unjustly broke off this love which
reached to the very brink of Folly, but are passed into as violent a hatred:
These are only to reproach him of Perfidiousness and Inconstancy; but when they
beheld him less miserable, they then began to treat him as a Man both
ungrateful, and corrupted. Permit me, Gentlemen, for I speak without passion,
if I say any thing in favor of him, think me not won to it by interest, nor
imposed upon, nor that I intend to draw upon me a general hatred, to preserve
the kindness of a particular person; I here profess an entire sincerity, and
God is my witness, I follow no other dictates than my own reason.

Three things, if I am not deceived, ruined the Duke of Beaufort in your
opinion; his agreement with the Cardinal, his taking the Admiralty, and his
solicitations in the last Assemblies.

For his agreement with the Cardinal, unless you are unjust to him, you cannot
take it ill. Had he agreed without considering your interests, and had only
taken care of his own, you then would have reason to complain; but it is
certain, the whole aim of his reconciliation, was only to seek a more secure
and easy means to ruin the Cardinal; for when he saw that all France in Arms
could not effect it, and that open and declared hatred was fruitless, he flew
to the appearances of friendship; and as he himself says, he designs to ruin
him when he least thinks of it.

His Mind, which is as capable of Intrigue as of War, which is as quick, as
bold, will furnish him with a thousand adroit and ingenious ways; not to speak
of his politic Star, which will lead him to the government of the State, and
set him beyond the reach of all Italian Politicians.

If any one a little too nice in the rules of Honor, thinks it inglorious in
the Duke de Beaufort, to retain his intention to ruin the Cardinal, after
having received such considerable kindnesses from him: I answer, He treated not
with him as a friend, but on the contrary, I am persuaded, that when he took
upon him the office of Admiral, he showed himself the worst enemy he had in the
World.

And Gentlemen, do you not believe that the Duke de Beaufort less prejudiced
him in the War of Paris, than in the Peace; and in your opinion, was not Vitry
Fight more indifferent to the Court, than the negotiation concerning the
Admiralty?

In all the War he was never in a better condition, than either to run away, or
stand and be beaten; besides his Courage and his Security never agreed
together, he seldom went into the field without fear, and as seldom returned
into Paris without shame; and his most successful enterprises were only to get
Bread without fighting.

At that time the Duke of Beaufort reduced with you to the last necessity, to
say truth, neither much frighted, nor much hurt those Troops that came from St.
Germains; but now let him force the Court, let him take even from the Queen her
self fourscore thousand Livres a year, and you call it still reconciliation,
and true friendship: No, Gentlemen, undeceive your selves, and believe that he
has now performed the most subtle of all revenges.

If in the Complement that he made the Cardinal, to thank him for that affair,
he assured him to be as strictly bound to his interest, as Chamflury, we must
suppose he only added raillery to the first injury; for it is to violate the
respect that is due to the quality of a Prince, to imagine that he could be
capable of such a meanness; those of the very first quality may style
themselves friends of the chief Ministers, but to stoop so low as to make
themselves equal to the Captain of their Guards, that was never done; and all
this only to take away from you all reason of suspicion, I must ask you if the
Duke de Beaufort be less mistrustful than he was before, when a person of
quality sent a Challenge to him, and he sent away the Gentleman to Commeny,
like Creditors to a Treasurer: May not this be called an artifice of the Court?
And is there not a Letter printed, which declares enough his opinion; in all
things he chooses those precautions, which his mistrust furnishes him withal; if
they deliberate at the Palace Royal, if they consult at the Hostel de
Montbason, they have all there particular counsels, and in their Closets
resolve upon all important affairs.

I own that the Duke de Beaufort did solicit for the Cardinal, but you cannot
deny, but that it was not so much in his favor, as against the Princes; and if
you can direct but how he may ruin the Cardinal by the Princes, and the
Princes by the Cardinal, you then will lay upon him the greatest obligation in
the World; it is the unhappiness of the place wherein he is seated, rather than
the malice of his nature, which makes him dread all men, and love no body; he
retains still what goodness can be preserved amongst so many nice interests; he
does not envy Monsieur le Prince the constancy that he showed in the Bois de
Vincennes, and though there may fall out such disorders, as may cast a shadow
upon his glory, he only wishes to put a speedy period to his days, to confirm
his reputation.

The Prince of Conde is in his opinion, of so weak and so tender a
constitution, that the least exercise, one chase of Hunting, one Debauch, one
motion, though never so little too violent, is enough to kill him, if he were
at liberty; in the heat of devotion that he is now in, he never grows weary of
praising God for the conversion of the Duke de Longueville, and the joy that he
has to see him say his Breviary is beyond expression; he is sorry to see the
Cardinal troubled with the government of so tumultuous a people as those of
France, and that the refinedness of his Wit may be still in action, he wishes
him well employed in Italy; besides the goodness which makes him so much desire
the glory of these Gentlemen, We must confess, that his pains and care of the
public let him take no rest, and the interest of the State becomes so precious
to him, that he cannot suffer it in the hands of another, and even Life it self
appears useless to him, if he does not employ it in governing.

Without flattering him, Gentlemen, What is it that we may not expect from his
zeal, and vast capacity? Would you have him hinder the Kings authority from
being acknowledged? Would you have him at the same time oppose the liberty of
the Princes, and draw the Duke d' Espernon from his Government? Would you have
him raise a Sedition for the good of the public, cause the City to put up
their Chains, or arm the factious? Would you have him at every assembly in the
Palace, or at the Townhouse, at all the Councils? There is neither labor nor
danger that he refuses for love of you, there are great services to be expected
from him, and the least suspicion of his fidelity would infinitely trouble him;
for he is always ready to sacrifice his quiet for yours.

Methinks nevertheless some considerations ought to be had, not to exact any
thing from him that is above his strength; don't expect that he should go
imprudently to withstand the Archduke; it is well known, that he is
unacquainted with War in the open field, and to fight with well disciplined
men, to our Hero is a quite new thing; it is to be like the Gascons, and those
who are little by their births, to pass their lives like the people of Croatia,
it is to act like men in despair, to set all the fortune of a Nation upon the
hazard of one Battle; for him, whom both Estate and Birth make incapable of any
action that may be either mean or foolish; he will gloriously maintain his
place in the Council, and employ all his time to give such advice, as will
immediately be in every bodies mouth, as soon as he has spoke it.

The end of the Apology for the Duke de Beaufort.
MEMOIRES OF Monsieur de la Chastre, Concerning what passed at the Death of
Louis the Thirteenth, and the beginning of the Regency.
IT is difficult for him to appear prudent that is unfortunate, and as the most
part of men regard only the appearances of things, success alone directs their
judgments, and no design appears to them either well laid, or well pursued,
that has not a favorable event. In the disgraces that are fallen upon me this
last year, nothing has more increased my sufferings, than to see those of my
own friends, whom I know most zealous for me, blame and condemn me, and without
just examination, accuse me to have been my self, by my ill conduct, the author
of my own ruin: It would be too great presumption in me to believe that I was
guilty of no faults, in all the time I have been at Court, since the most
refined Courtiers are often at a stand on certain occasions, and how skilful
and pliant soever they be, they are often plunged into accidents, from whence
they cannot not well retire. I confess, I may have failed, either for want of
experience, or in not enough constraining my nature, which is an enemy to all
manner of deceit or cunning.

When I first came to wait upon the King, I brought to Court a mind, unfit for
cheating and mean actions, and which was too open and free for that place; but
still that sort of life I thought honest enough to continue ever since, and
though I have apparently found that it was not the way to make a fortune, I
still preferred the satisfaction of my Conscience, an uncorrupted reputation,
and some few friends, men of Honor, to the dignities and advantages that I
might expect in being a spy, or in playing double, promising at the same time
to serve both parties. Perchance it is that I have been too open in this frank
manner of living, which I have always observed, or I have stuck too firmly to
my friends, when they were in a declining posture; it is in one of these two
points that I have chiefly failed; but I believe such faults will appear
excusable with men of integrity, and I hope their ground too honest to have the
consequences condemned.

These are, without disguising any thing, all the crimes that I find my self
guilty of, and to make it yet more clear, I will deduce in few words, and very
faithfully, the most considerable things which passed in the last years that I
was at Court, because that although my private interest was very far distant
from the interest of the State, yet even the most important public affairs
have been in some manner engaged with my particular ones.

Not long after the birth of our present King, Louis the Fourteenth, seeing
that there was nothing for me to expect whilst Cardinal. Richelieu was possessed
of all the power, because I would not be servile to him, and besides that I was
allied and in bonds of friendship with many whom he held suspected; I believed
I ought to think of striking in with some other party, which might one day
raise my fortunes, and none appeared to me either so just or of so great hopes
as the Queen's, for the King her Husband very unhealthful, and in all
appearance not being able to live till such time as his Son was at the age of
majority, the Regency would infallibly in few years fall into her hands; whose
almost continual adversities suffered with so much patience, had raised her
esteem to such a degree, that she was thought the best, and mildest of Women,
and the most unlikely to forget those who had adhered to her in her disgrace;
these glorious qualities charmed me, and moreover, I thought it was honorable
to throw my self upon her side, in a time when the absolute power of her
Persecutor made all weak and interested people shun approaching her, and by
exquisite tyranny left scarcely one about her, but Traitors, or those whom
dullness exempted from suspicion, and made incapable of serving her in any thing
whatever. From that time I devoted my services wholly to her, which I assured
her of by Mademoiselle de St. Louis, (now Madam de Flavacourt) and also by
Monsieur de Brienne: The kind answer she returned, engaged me yet more, so that
from that time I resolved to quit all thoughts of advancement in the Court,
till such time as she should be in a condition to confer it upon me: or that I
believed I might be more serviceable to her in some other employment, than
Master of the Wardrobe to the King, which I then had. I lived in this
resolution till the Cardinal's Death, after which the Queens Enemies beginning
to make their court to her, it was not strange, that I who had before devoted
my self entirely to her, carefully sought all opportunities to testify my zeal
to serve her; and in a very little time I found one, which I carefully
embraced, and proposed to her Majesty by Monsieur de Brienne, and having
afterward spoken to her my self concerning it, she judged that it would be
advantageous for her service, and thanked me in such terms, as both doubled my
desire to serve her, and increased my hopes. What I proposed was the buying the
Office of Colonel of the Swisse, in which I neither regarded the great sum of
Money that I employed in it, nor many other considerations, that the sight of a
Wife and three Children might produce, who were inevitably ruined, if by my
death my place should be lost to them without recompense: I then sacrificed to
the Queen all my Family without regret; and whether it was that my free manner
of proceeding pleased her, or that she believed I might be capable to serve
her, from that time I daily received more of her favors than I had done
before; she spoke of me to some of her greatest confidents, as of a man who had
entirely devoted himself to her, and whom she esteemed for his fidelity,
ordering the Bishop of Beauvais (in whom she then most confided) to communicate
freely to me all things that might be for her service; this was about the same
time that the Duke de Beaufort returned from England, for as soon as Cardinal
Richelieu was dead, the Bishop of Lifieux, by the Queen's order, writ to him to
return; and he, without any other precaution, immediately left England; and as
soon as he was landed in France, writ to me by a Gentleman named Drouilly,
wherein he declared that he reposed much confidence in me, and also desired me
to serve him in what I could with the King; and added, That Monsieur de
Montresor (who he knew not only to be my Cousin Germain, but also my most
intimate Friend, and who likewise was very particularly his,) had assured him
that I would be glad to serve him: The answer that I thought the fittest to
make Drouilly was, That Monsieur de Beaufort did me too great an honor in
confiding in me, and that I beseeched him to tell me in what I might be
serviceable to him; protesting to execute whatsoever he should require of me,
with little success perhaps, but with much zeal and fidelity. Whereupon he told
me, That Monsieur de Beaufort desired, that with some other of his Friends, I
would take upon me to declare directly to the King his return into France; but
at the same time he told me, That having delivered a Letter to Monsieur de
Brienne, wherein the Duke de Beaufort had desired the same thing of him that he
had of me, the good man, a better Courtier than I perchance might have been,
had told him that the way to ruin his interest was to execute what he
proposed: for he himself, who knew better how the World then stood, than he who
was so newly come from beyond Scas; was of opinion that it should be first told
to the chief Ministers, and that he would go that minute to find them out: The
affair being thus, I told him it was now past consulting, and that since the
chief Ministers knew of the Duke de Beaufort's return, it was fit to expect
what they would do, and not to undertake any negotiation with the King without
them, which would but provoke them, and make them his Enemies; for my own part,
I was just returning from Paris to St. Germains, where the King was, with
design that if I saw a favorable moment to serve him, I would not to let it
slip; as soon as I came to St. Germains, thinking to tell the Queen this news,
I found that she was already well instructed of it; I since heard it was by the
Bishop of Lifieux: Some time afterward Messieurs de Sully, de Rets, de
Fiesque, de Chabot, and I, went to Anet to visit the newly arrived Duke; 'twas
in this Journey that I entered into a more strict bond of friendship with him,
for before I was not much acquainted with him, and also in some occasions was
engaged in interests contrary to his; as, in my opinion, the greatest mark of
esteem and love, is trust; 'twas by that I was engaged by him; he expressed
himself to be extremely obliged to me for my frank answer to Drouilly, he
discoursed with me without the least reserve of all his concerns, and at length
upon the present state of the Court, not in very polite terms, (he not being
naturally eloquent,) but yet by words which plainly manifested the most
beautiful and noble thoughts that could be wished, and wherein I observed that
he was much fortified in England, having both carefully studied, and well
retained the maxims of some men of honor and integrity, whom he had there
frequented, but what bound me yet more to him was two things, one whereof was
the straight union I knew he had with Monsieur de Montresor, whose interests
was always mine, and the other was the extraordinary zeal that appeared in him
for the Queens service, which was the party to which I absolutely adhered; this
last consideration it was that weighed down the balance, and 'twas the same
that united me ever since to him; but because it will appear more plain in the
following discourse, I am obliged to return nigher its beginning, to deliver it
more exactly.

After the Cardinals death, all France was filled with an imagination of an
entire change in the management of affairs; all people knew that he maintained
his power with the King only by the awe he had over him, therefore it was
believed that the cause dying with him, the Kings hatred would fall upon all
the remains of his family and party; but these hopes, which only served to
flatter so many, were soon ended, for in a few days after they saw (with
wonder) his house confirmed in its ancient dignity, his last Will entirely
observed, save only in one point, which was the change of the Offices of
Sur-intendant of the Admiralty, and the General of the Galleys, the first
whereof were given to the Duke de Breze, and the last to the Petit pont de
Courlay, Duke de Richelieu, although his Eminence on his Deathbed had desired
the contrary, and had designed the office that was given to the one for other;
I shall not speak of the bustle this business made between the Duchess
d'Aiguillon and the Marshall de Breze, who spoke against her all that his rage
could suggest, I will only say that the Mareschal's ancient familiarity with
the King gave him that advantage, without the help of any body; but although
the disposals of the best Offices and Governments of the Kingdom seemed
preposterous to those who considered it, and though the Government of Britany,
given to the Marshall de Milleray (who we saw poorly quit it a little after)
appeared very extraordinary; people were much more surpised to see Cardinal
Mazarine, Monsieur Chavigny, and Monsieur Noyers, without any others, in the
Kings most secret Councils; I say only, because that although the Chancellor,
the Sur-intendant Boutilier, and the two Secretaries of State, de Brienne, and
de la Vrilliere, were in appearance present at all the deliberations, it is
certain that the private intrigues were only known to the first three; and
besides the great Council wherein all those that I have named did sit, which
was held once or twice a week, those three living assiduously at St. Germans,
held also one at least every day with the King, wherein the most principal
things were resolved. Their Protector was no sooner dead, but they seeing
themselves called to the chief ministry of affairs, judged that the only way to
maintain themselves in it, was to be united together, and to act with one
accord in all things; but whatsoever resolution they had taken, their first
actions, and the different ways they took, soon discovered their secret
divisions; Cardinal Mazarine and Monsieur de Chavigny, who were always united,
were yet more strictly in this juncture; and as the last was not ignorant of
the aversion the King had for him, he believed that nothing could support him,
but to join his interests inseparably with the others, who being but newly
entered into the management of affairs, would for a long time stand in need of
his instructions; the method they took to insinuate themselves into the Kings
favor, was to appear dis-interested in all things, even to affect saying that
the greatest desire of one was to return into Italy, and of the other to retire
from the bustle and noise of the Court, to live more quiet; this first
foundation laid, they next made themselves sure of people to declare their good
services to the King, and who endeavored to persuade him, that the great
expense that Cardinal Mazarin had always made, was an infallible effect of a
humor no ways greedy of Money, and what he believed necessary in the place
which he then held, of first Minister of State; for which reason he recalled to
Court the Commander de Souuray, who by having been bred up with the King had
acquired so perfect a knowledge of his nature, that he appeared now most
capable to serve them, though the deceased Cardinal, after the Siege of
Rochelle, fearing his Wit, had removed him from the King, he had not forgot the
way to insinuate himself into his affection, so that in few days he re-enter'd
into his Majesty's favor, enough to become useful to those who employed him.

But besides this first Emissary, their free and magnificent manner of living,
the profession which they made to oblige all the people of quality, and the
particular care they took to release some who were Prisoners, and recall others
from Banishment, gained them the friendship, or at least the complaisance and
approbation of the greatest part of the Court, and amongst the rest the
Messieurs de Schomberg, de Lesdiguieres, de la Rochefoncault, and de Mortemar;
I omit speaking of Monsieur de Liancourt, for he having been always an intimate
friend of Chavigny, and a particular one of the Cardinal's, 'twas not strange
that he continued in the same condition. The little Monsieur de Noyers had the
same intent as the others, to insinuate himself into his masters affection, but
the method he took was quite contrary, for the two first affected splendor and
show, instead of which his manner of living was low and obscure; and whilst the
others had their houses filled with company, and passed away part of the day,
and often the whole night at play, or some other diversion, he applied himself
closer than ever to business, and hardly ever stirred out of his Chamber, but
only at those times that he was serving God, or waiting upon the King, with
whom his Office of a Secretary of State for the Army gave him more agreeable
Subjects to entertain his Majesty with, than the others; for as great
negotiations hung heavy upon that Prince, the care and examination of his
Soldiers seemed to be his only business; he loved now and then to retrench
from the Officers, and to talk of the particulars of every Office, in the
disposal whereof his greatest power he thought chiefly appeared; the profession
of devotion which Monsieur de Noyers made, gave him besides that a familiarity
with his Majesty above the other two, for he never failed waiting upon him at
all his private devotions, and often in his Oratory; where after having
accompanied him in saying of his Breviary, he had long conferences with him.
The King one time offering to give him 1 or 2 hundred thousand Crowns for a
certain business, he would not accept them, but upon condition that he might
employ them in the building of the Loure; and this proof of his not being
interested, wrought no small effect upon the King. The Prisoners and the exiled
found neither Protector nor Intercessor in him; all the way he took to defend
himself from the burden of the public hatred, was to assure them, That he
would not oppose the Kings favor in their behalf: In this manner of proceeding
he had two aims, one to please his Majesty, who he knew was not naturally
inclined to do good; the other was to show the respect he had for the memory of
the deceased Cardinal, in not consenting so soon to be an instrument of
altering what he had done; and thereby cast upon him all the violences that had
passed: This was the first introduction of those Gentlemen, and their manner of
proceeding, till the end of the year 1642. but before I leave this subject, I
will say what concerns my self in it, that having treated about my place, and
seeing that I should have principally to do with Monsieur de Noyers, as
Secretary for the Army; I spoke to him about it, and was confirmed by him in
the design that I had taken to address my self directly to the King, who
received me with all possible kindness, and without taking advice of any body,
if it be true as the Chancellor then told me, the other two would not have
been kind to me, but the King did not then love them; and I know not if it be
that which I ought to look upon as the first foundation of the Cardinals hatred
to me. In the beginning of the year 1643. those two parties seeing the Kings
indisposition growing daily worse and worse, leaving him but little hopes of a
much longer life, every one of them judged it now time to think of getting a
support; and as they were of different opinions in other things, they were no
less in this Monsieur de Chavigny believed, that his Place, and assiduous
waiting upon Monsieur, and the Services that he pretended to have done him
since the Treaty with Spain, would belook'd upon as very meritorious by his
Royal Highness; and, on the contrary, the Queen would always hate him, as the
having been the Principal Minister of her Enemy; he inclined Cardinal Mazarin
to Monsieur's Side, and both endeavored to persuade the King to recall him to
Court. There is one thing particularly to be mentioned in that, which at first,
perhaps, does not appear of great importance, but which proved of so fatal a
Consequence to me, that I may say, it was the beginning of my Ruin. After the
taking of Monsieur le Grand, the Treaty with Spain being discovered, there was
a Talk that it was by the means of the Count de Bethune; Monsieur seemed to
strengthen that Falsehood, by tacitly confessing it, excited by la Riviere, who
believed he could be no way better revenged of Monsieur de Montresor during his
absence, nor better cut off all ways of his returning again to his Master, than
by making him Author, or at least Approver of so black a Calumny against one of
his best Friends. That Detraction was but short-lived; and the deceased
Cardinal, tho not much a Friend to the Count de Bethune, disabus'd all those
who spoke to him about it. The world may judge how much a Man of Honor ought
to be sensible of such an Offense; but the Cardinal's Authority, which
protected la Riviere exempted him from satisfying the just Resentments that are
due to such an Injury. He maintained this Report during the Cardinal's Life,
without suspicion; but his Death changing the Face of things, and la Riviere
not knowing if his Master would be able or kind enough to support him against
so considerable a Family, and seeing no other Prop, he fell into a mortal Fear;
and some days after being sent for to come to Paris, by Monsieur de Chavigny,
to Treat about his Master's Return, he could not be persuaded to take the
Journey, before he was secure that the Count de Bethune was appeased, and
Monsieur de Chaviguy who had need of him, employed Monfieur de Liancour; and
also spoke himself to the Count de Bethune, who being sensible of the highest
affront that could be given a Gentleman, could not for some time be induced to
give him his Word, till at length he was commanded by a Letter from the King,
(sent by Varrennes, one of the Messengers, to him) which, tho it put a stop to
his Proceeding, did but increase his Hatred, which was both right and justly
founded. Perhaps this Digression may seem a little long; but it will appear
hereafter, that it is to my purpose. La Riviere being at length come to Court,
managed, with the Assistance of the two Ministers, the Interest of his Master
so successfully, that in a little time he was seen with the King his Brother,
in a very good Understanding, as to all appearance; whilst Cardinal Mazarin and
Monsieur Chavigny took so much Pains on their Sides, Monsieur de Noyers took
the other Ship-wrack'd Vessel, and, by Chaudenier his intimate Friend, assured
the Queen of his service, and of an inseparable adherence to her Interest.
After that first Declaration, he had upon the same Subject several Discourses
with the Bishop of Beauvais, in which he clearly enough manifested the Designs
of his Colleagues, who gave him sufficient Subject for Discourse at that time;
for seeing the King's Distemper still increased by little and little, and his
Majesty having several times spoken to them about settling the Affairs of the
Kingdom; they persuaded Father Sirmond, his Confessor, to propose to him a
Corregency betwixt Monsieur his Brother and the Queen; and at the same time
solicited many of the Parliament at Paris to pursue the same Design, and made
use of the Interposition of the President de Maison for that effect. But that
Proposition so much displeased the King, that after he had sharply rebuked
them, and also spoke to the Queen something of it, he gave ear no more to his
Confessor, and dismissing him upon some other pretext, took Father Dinet into
his Place. After this first Attempt, these Gentlemen seeing themselves utterly
excluded from their Hopes, followed another Bias, which agreed better with the
King's Inclination, (who was carried to it enough of himself, thinking the
Queen incapable of the Management of Affairs) which was to propose that same
Declaration which appeared two Months after, and which had been published at
that very time, if Monsieur de Noyers had not dissuaded the King from it. He
gave the Queen notice thereof, whom this Advice about the Regency infinitely
alarmed: At the same time the King's having been in a Fever, which the
Physicians apprehended dangerous, those who understood the Particulars of the
thing, offered anew their Services to the Queen; and I (whom she had forbidden
some time before to ask to serve as Marshall de Camp, judging me more useful
to her in the Court) offered my self to her, (if the King came to the last
Extremity) to go with my Regiment of Suisses and seize upon the Palais, and
hinder every body whatsoever from entering, till such time as she should be
received into it. This Proposition appearing full of Love and Boldness, did not
a little please her; and the Answer she made me showed, that she was satisfied
with me, and believed me entirely hers. A little before, the Cardinal, and
Monsieur de Chauvigny, had persuaded the King to set at Liberty the Mareschals
de Vitry and Bassompierre, and the Count de Cramail. The Means which they made
use of to effect it, deserves to be written, being not unpleasant; for they
seeing that the King was not much inclined to it, attaqu'd him on his weakest
Side, representing to him, That those three Prisoners were an extreme Expense
to him in the Bastille, and they not being in a condition to make any Party in
the State, would be even as well at their own Houses, where they would cost him
nothing. This Design succeeded; for the King was possessed with so
extraordinary an Avarice, that whosoever had pretention to ask him for Money,
seemed to hang heavy upon him, to such a degree, that when Treville, Beaupuy,
and several others that the late Cardinal upon his Deathbed had forced him to
relinquish, were returned, he sought all occasions to find out something to
reproach them with, thereby to take away all Hopes of Recompense for all that
they had suffered for him. The recalling several from Banishment, followed
after the Freedom of those Prisoners: The Marshall d'Estree had leave to
return from Italy, and Monsieur de Merceur to Court, where being introduced by
Cardinal Mazarin, he spoke for his Brother to come to Court, which he quickly
did with great Glory and Esteem: Before he went to the Ministers, he went
strait to the King, who received him with the greatest Marks of Kindness, and
in a moment after his Arrival began to discourse with him about the Affairs of
England, in such a manner, as if he himself had sent him thither. The same day
he granted to the Duke de Mercoeur Permission for the Duke de Vendosme to
return back into France, and also saw the Duchess of Vendosme, whom he had
severely sent away, without so much as seeing her, when she came to wait upon
him, even after the Cardinal's Death. Upon this Return of the Duke de Vendosme,
the Queen showed much Kindness to the Duke de Beaufort; she appeared to concern
her self in the Treatment he had received from the King; she spoke to him with
great Familiarity, and by the Favor she showed him, fully confirmed what she
had said to us at our return from Anet, which was that we came from seeing the
worthiest Man in France: It is certain, although he be unfortunate, that he has
excellent Qualities; and for Honesty, and Fidelity, there are few can compare
with him. I pretend not to say, that he has all the Prudence that one would
wish; and I must own, that a little too much Vanity, and Fire of Youth, made
him commit at his Return many remarkable Faults: perchance there may be a time
(if it please God) that I may see him in a condition to remember him of a
Discourse I had one day with him, wherein I told him, That as he then stood, he
ought not to pursue the Follies of Women, but that the Hero ought to be the
Principal Business of his Life: Had he taken this Advice, he had not acquired
many powerful Enemies, who contributed so much to his Ruin: But it is a common
Fault to People of his Age, to let themselves be governed by Love and Hate:
Without proceeding to farther Particulars, the Hatred of Madam de Monthason to
the Duke de Longueville, and his to his own Wife, was the Cause that when his
Love crossed his Interest, he was carried to act what he little considered, and
having disobliged the Duke d'Anguien, he made him take the Party of the great
Master against him. He made another Enemy at the same time; but this he only
did by his Generosity and Constancy: for, professing himself an intimate Friend
to Messieurs de Bethune and Montresor, he would not salute la Riviere, which
infinitely separated him from the Correspondence and Interest of Monsieur, who
already had a grudging to him, in that he having spoken to him concerning the
Treaty of Spain, he excused himself from entering into it, saying, That he ought
first to have his Father's Advice about it, who was in England, and to whom
they would scarce entrust such a Secret. Most People have wondered, that he
refused to enter into a League made against the Capital Enemy of his House; and
I my self could hardly comprehend the Reason of his being so backward on this
Subject, did I not know, that some time after he discovered it to the Queen, by
one to whom she would not disclose her self, nor scarcely give ear to, not
judging the Person prudent enough to manage an Intrigue of that importance:
and, if I mistake not, it was because before he entered upon so difficult a
Point, he endeavored to know the Queens Opinion, to whom from that time he
absolutely devoted himself. In fine, whatever Reason he had to refuse it,
Monsieur was beyond all measure dissatisfied at it; and this Pretext seemed
plausible enough to furnish la Riviere with matter to incence his Royal
Highness against him. During these different Intrigues, the King grew daily
weaker, seldom going out of his Chamber, and the Physicians began to own the
Period of his Life drew nigh: His sad Condition made the Cardinal and Monsieur
Chavigny labor more pressingly to confirm themselves; and when they saw that
all they had done in favor of Monsieur, had brought forth no other Fruit, than
the publishing the Inclination that almost all France had to serve the Queen;
and that his Royal Highness, losing all hopes of being Corregent, did declare,
that he submitted himself most willingly to her, they tried to regain her
Favor, made new Protestations of Fidelity to her, and also endeavored to work
upon the Bishop of Beauvais; but their Endeavors proved fruitless, and their
Complements but little persuasive, because (besides that they had openly
engaged themselves for Monsieur) Monsieur de Noyers, who from the beginning had
given testimony of his Zeal for the Queens Service, bore away the Merit of all
that had passed till that time; and they, on the contrary, were looked upon as
the Authors of all the ill; and their Change rather thought a want of Power,
than a Proof of their Good-wills: And certainly they had made but little
Progress on that side, had the little Good man Monsieur de Noyers had a little
more patience, or been a little more submissive to the King: His Retreat is
generally imputed to his Discontent, that he could not obtain that Power with
the King that he had fancied to himself, and to see (as is believed) the
Cardinal prevail over him. It Is believed he so suddenly asked his Discharge,
about a Contest he had concerning the Marshall de la Motthe and for the
Expense of the Army in Italy, which he not being able to obtain himself,
employed the Cardinal in, who performed it so effectually, that the very same
Night he brought him leave to go to Dangic; but for my part, I believe, as all
Intelligent Men do, that what appeared the first Motion of a hasty Mind, was
the Master-stroke of a foreseeing and refined Courtier; and that Monsieur de
Noyers, seeing the Declaration, that he had retarded till then, would in few
days be published, (either by the King's Resolution, or by the Suggestions of
the other two Ministers) and that he was comprehended in the number of those
who were set down to be of the Council of the Regency, was persuaded, that if
he retired from Court at a time when the King had not long to live, the Queen
would not lose the Remembrance of his Services, but being justly incensed
against both the others, by reason of that Declaration, which seemed to put her
under Tutelage, as soon as she should be in Power, would recall him; and
removing those two Concurrents, would be necessarily obliged to make use
chiefly of him, as best instructed in the State of Affairs. The following
Discourse will make appear, that this Judgment is not ill-grounded; but before
I go any farther, I am obliged to relate some particular Passages: The first is
of the Government of Britany, given to the Great Master, which gained him the
Hatred of the whole House of Vendosme, which Disagreement divided the whole
Court; the Dukes d' Anguien, de Longueville, de Lesdiguieres, de Schomberg, and
de la Roche Faucault, and some others, took part with the Great Master; and
almost all the rest declared themselves for the House of Vendosme. The Prince
de Marcillac being obliged by Monsieur le Prince, and seeing his Father of his
Party, was just going to enter into it also; but speaking to the Queen about
it, she commanded him to offer himself to the Duke de Beaufort, speaking of him
as a Man for whom she had as much Esteem and Affection, as for any Man in the
World. That Order which he received became known to almost all who were then at
St. Germains; and my self happened to have Discourse with her Majesty about two
things, which being only of my own Concerns, were never public, but only
talked on amongst my particular Friends: The first was concerning the Duke de
Beaufort; and expressing much love for him, I told her, That the chief Reason
that bound me to his Friendship, was the extraordinary Zeal that I found in him
for the Interest of her Majesty; that Point pleased her, and she dilated upon
the Subject that I had begun, in so kind Expressions, as left me no more Reason
to doubt her Confidence in that poor Prince, and how much those pleased her who
took his part. The other Discourse was a little longer; but the Subject was,
That at the same time that I entered into the Office of Colonel-General of the
Suisses, Monsieur de Noyers put in L'isle de Sourdiere, his Creature, to be
Commissary-General of that Nation. Tho this was very prejudicial to me, I had
no reason to complain, because it was resolved on before I thought of buying
that Place; 'Twas nevertheless a very great Inconvenience to me; for Monsieur
de Noyers, who seized upon every thing that came within his Grasp, gave to his
Dependent a very great Authority, which proved very prejudicial to mine. He was
no sooner retired, but the most part of the Court, who were ignorant of my
Concerns, pressed me to think of suppressing that New Officers: For my part,
tho I had no Engagement with Monsieur de Noyers, to oblige me from making use
of the Occasion his Disgrace gave me, knowing the Queen thought him her
Servant, and was not satisfied with the others, of whom I was to seek a
Support, the first thing I did, I resolved to know her Opinion; and and going
to her, told her, That this little Change had offered me an Opportunity to
procure my self an Advantage, which would increase my Authority, and make me in
a better capacity to serve her in my Office; but endeavoring to dispossess one
who was a Creature of Monsieur de Noyers, who had appeared most zealous for her
Service; and it also being necessary for me to apply my self to those who had
so demeaned themselves to her, that I had reason to believe her dissatisfied
with them, I would not undertake any thing, till I came to know what her
Majesty would command me in it; That being absolutely devoted to her, I would
accept no Advantage nor Favor but what came by her; and that I should have
waited without the least impatience, till her Majesty was in a condition to
have done something for me, without ever troubling her with my own Interest,
had I not believed I ought to have rendered her an Account of this, to know of
her if by my increase of Power she would judge me in a better condition to obey
her Commands. After much Kindness, and assurance that she would never forget
the Zeal that I had always expressed for her Service, she answered, That I
might make use of that Occasion, and serve my self in what I could, and that
she should be very glad of it, because the more Authority I had, I should be
the more useful to her; That Monsieur de Noyers had made too much haste, and
had ruined himself for his Fancy: And after some little Discourse concerning
him, she ended without speaking a word of the other two Ministers; and promised
me, as she left me, that if I could not obtain it before she came into
Authority, she her self would grant me that Favor with a great deal of joy.
After this Conference, I desired the Commander de Souvray to speak to the
Cardinal, and Monsieur de Liancour to Monsieur de Chavigny, to be kind to me
upon this Occasion: The Answer they both returned, was, That they would most
willingly use all their Interest in it, but that they must defer it some days,
because it would be the ready way to ruin themselves, to speak to the King so
soon against a Man with whom they had no difference, and who entered into the
Management of Affairs the same way that themselves did. It is certain, that
they were not then too well assured of the King; and from the next day after
Monsieur Noyers Disgrace, he never spoke to the Cardinal about Business, but in
Monsieur de Chavigny's absence: as also upon a Proposition that the Cardinal
made to him, he answered sharply, That it was Italian-like. To return to my
Discourse: I had not time to see the Effects of their Promises; for eight days
after, the King finding himself extremely weak, declared his Will about the
Regency, speaking openly of that Declaration whereof I have already made
mention. I believe the two Chief Ministers did not prejudice the Queen in it;
but, as I have already said, it is certain, that in some Points of it they
seemed exactly to guess at the King's Thoughts, who judged the Queen incapable
of Business, and most passionate for her own Country; and believed nothing so
pernicious to the State, as the Authority of Monsieur de Chasteauneuf, amongst
other things believing him inseparable from Madam de Cheureux, whom he
suspected, and had endeavored to find an Expedient to Banish for ever out of
France. Neither was his Inclination more kind for Monsieur his Brother; and I
know, that he often said to the Queen in his Sickness, That their Children had
reason chiefly to fear him: So that whatsoever related to his Royal Highness,
undoubtedly proceeded from his own natural Inclination. In short: whether this
came from the King himself, or was the advice of his Ministers, the Queen grew
extremely inveterate against them, saying to those who had free access to Her,
That it ought never to be pardoned; and had the Cardinal, Her declared Enemy,
still lived, he could not have done worse to her. The public Marks of her
Anger, and open Hatred she showed them, was the cause that all those who
particularly adhered to her, absolutely forbore all Correspondence with them;
and from the day that the King had the Declaration read before him, and made
the Queen and Monsieur take an Oath to observe it, obliging Monsieur the next
day to carry it to the Parliament the Dukes de Vendosme, Mets, and Rets, the
Prince de Marcillac, the Count de Fiesque, the Count de Bethune, and Beaupuy,
as also many other of her particular Servants, whereof I my self was one,
visited them no more. This was the beginning of our Misfortunes; for this first
Step being made, it was almost impossible to retire again handsomely: But two
Reasons chiefly obliged us to this; one was, a Design to please the Queen, in
going no more nigh those we knew she hated; the other was the King's extreme
Sickness, which gave even the Physicians reason to believe, that he could not
live above two or three days, and made us resolve (seeing those two declining)
to push them to the last, and endeavor to persuade the Queen to put in their
Places Persons very capable, and whom the greatest part of us might hope to
find our Friends. This Design appeared very easy to us, considering what way
the Queen was then inclined. The day that was appointed for the Declaration,
the Physicians gave their Opinions, that the King could scarcely live till the
next day; in consideration whereof, they began to speak to him to pardon and
recall all those who had been exiled: The Duke de Beaufort was the first, who
spoke for his Father, and told the Ministers publicly, that if they did not
that very moment prefer his Suit to the King, he would do it himself: But they,
not to lose their Employments, instantly spoke to the King about it, and at
length obtained the same Favor for Monsieur de Bellegarde, for the Mareschals
de Vitry, Bassempierre, and d' Estree, for the Count de Cramait, for Manicant,
and Belenghen. The Duke de Vendosme returned the very same day that Anet did;
but those who were farther off, arrived one after the management of State
Affairs, and another, all the rest of the Week. The Queen in the mean time,
little accustomed to Business, and finding her self amused through the variety
of Addresses, desired for her own Ease, that they would make their Applications
to the Bishop de Beauvais, in whom for a long time, but particularly since
Winter, she reposed her principal Trust. She could not have chosen a better Man
for Fidelity, nor hardly a worse for Capacity, the good Prelate not having a
Brain strong enough to support such a Charge.

We found what sort of Man he was, the very day that some of the Parliament,
who were very zealous for the Queen, asked him what Service they could render
her Majesty in the Parliament, (not doubting but the first Mark he aimed at
would be to null the Declaration) but he unseasonably pretended to be ignorant
of her Majesty's Intentions, delaying things at a time when the King appearing
so near his End, made the loss of every moment irreparable. He is a Man of
approved Honesty, and most disinterested as to Riches; but he is Ambitious, as
most Devotes are: and seeing himself designed for First Minister of State, he
looked upon every one to cast a Shadow upon his Glory: He began to grow cool,
even to the Duke de Beaufort, with whom he had till then been in a perfect good
Understanding; and went so far in it, that the Queen for some days would not
see him, thinking that 'twas he who would have had her take Monsieur de Limoges
about her; but the Bishop acknowledged his Fault, and immediately changed his
Proceedings upon this Subject, tho he did not the same to Monsieur de
Chasteaunef; for apprehending lest the Queen might renew her former Inclination
for him, and so diminish his Power he ruined him, as far as possibly he could;
and I am still in a doubt, whether it was not by his Advice, that the Queen
some time before promised the Seals to the President le Baillieul.

I know before the King's Death she had changed her Mind, and was resolved to
do Justice to Monsieur de Chasteauneuf; but I can hardly believe that the
Bishop of Beauvais contributed to it, and am certain, that the good Man not
knowing his Strength, would have laid upon his own Shoulders the Burden of the
whole Government; but the Queen found him incapable of so great a Weight from
the first Moment, which gave way to his Enemies to introduce themselves, and
ruin him; in stead whereof, had he recalled Monsieur de Chasteauneuf, tho he
had not possessed the First he had at least retained a very Honorable Place.
Bus (as I have already said) he knew not his own Strength, and for all his
Faults, he is yet worthy of Praise, in that he always dealt faithfully with his
Friends, and that although Cardinal Mazarin and Monsieur de Chavigny daily made to
him some Propositions, yet he never engaged with them in any thing, that he did
not first reveal to those of his Party. Perchance I may be too tedious upon
small Circumstances: but the three last Weeks of the King's Sickness being
passed in little Intrigues, each particular whereof being considerable, I am
forced to relate even those of the least Importance. The Evening of that Day
which gave a Beginning to a thousand different Negotiations, the King found
himself a little better, but not well enough to give any hopes that he could
live above two or three days longer: The next day he was much the same, and
toward Night (in the presence of Monsieur his Brother) chose Cardinal Mazarin
to be Godfather to the Danphin, and the Princess of Condy to be the Godmother.
The following day his Sickness increasing, the Cardinal began to tell him, that
it was now time to prepare for approaching Death. He had no sooner spoke the
word, but the King consented to it with extreme Constancy and Piety; he
Confessed himself, and afterward desired the Viaticum: The rest of the day the
Physicians found he still grew worse and worse; and the next day they judged
him ill enough to receive the Extreme Unction. That Day (which was since named
The Great Thursday) became remarkable in the Court for many things which passed
in it, whereof the Original was, that the Great Master believing the King to be
upon the Point of Death, and fearing lest those of the Family of Vendosme,
having almost all the Court on their Sides, might give him some Affront,
resolved to guard himself the best he could, sending, for that purpose, through
Paris, to seek out all the Officers depending upon his Place, who brought each
one a Friend with him: All this Crowd amounted to about three or four hundred
Horse, which coming from Paris in large Troops, gave 'um a kind of an Alarm at
St. Germains: Monsieur, upon the Report, asked Monsieur le Prince if he brought
all those Men with him; who answered, That he had sent for them, thinking (as
he has said since) that he had only spoke of his Officers: But Monsieur taking
the thing another way, sent at the same time for most part of his Followers;
which being told the Queen, she concluded it must be for something
extraordinary; insomuch that she immediately going from the Old to the New
Palace, where the King was, left Messieurs de Vendosme about the Princes her
Children, recommending them chiefly to the Duke de Beaufort, in Terms which
declared the highest Esteem, and greatest Confidence that could be expressed. As
soon as she was come to the New Palace, she called for me, and commanded me
aloud to send Orders to the Guard de Suisse to be in a readiness to March, and
to send for several other Suisse Officers, whom I had told her were at Paris:
She commanded me also to make sure of all the Friends I could get. Both the
King and she gave afterward Order to Monsieur de Charots to double the Guards
within the Old Palace, where the day before we had set a Guard of two Regiments
before the King's Apartment. Little could be added to the Suspicion that they
both showed they had of Monsieur; and I believe it would have been the same to
Monsieur le Prince, had he not been one of the first that came to relate what
his Royal Highness had done, who reconciled himself that day to the Queen, tho
not without Complaints of her Suspicion, and laid all the Stir that had been
made to Monsieur le Prince's Charge. I must confess, had the Duke de Beaufort
had only that one fortunate Day in his whole Life, I should esteem him
Glorious, to have been chosen Guardian of the greatest and most valuable
Treasure of France: He is blamed to have been too forward; but there are few
who in so advantageous an Opportunity would have been more moderate, and would
not have been transported with Joy to see Five hundred Gentlemen (amongst which
there were many of the best Quality) who only waited his Orders; and to see
even the First Prince of the Blood come to Complement him. If the King had died
that day, the Ministers had certainly been lost without hope; and the Queen,
animated against them by so many powerful Reasons, would never have pardoned
them: But tho that poor Prince found no Ease during all that day, in the
Evening endeavoring to cast off all thoughts of the State, he ordered the
Queen to go and call a Council, (which she did, after having long excused her
self with many Tears) he grew better in the Night, and the next day finding
himself pretty well at ease, was shaved, and passed the Afternoon in causing
little red Mushroms to be strung, and hearing Nielle sing by his Bedside, now
and then speaking to him: About the Evening he told the Queen that he would
call a Council, and commanded her to leave the Room; which she took for a new
Outrage done her by the two Ministers, to whom this lucid moment of Health
having given heart, their Adherents began to say, that if the King recovered,
they were sure of ruining the Les Importans.
Importants, so they already called those who had declared themselves for the
Queen, and were against them: But the following day the King being relapsed
into his first languishing Condition, they had lost all hopes of his Recovery,
and renewed with greater fervor their Designs to gain the Queen, in which they
were assisted by many Persons very differing in their Interests. Madam la
Princess (exasperated against the Duke de Beaufort, for the ill usage he had
showed to the Duchess de Longueville, against whom he had made appear too much
Malice and Severity) was one of the first who spoke for them: Monsieur de
Liancour served them with the extraordinary Zeal he on all occasions expresses
for his Friends; and his Wife, and Madam de Chavigny, let no Opportunity slip:
But the strongest Instruments that they employed, were Father Vincent,
Beringhent, and Mountaigu; the first attaqu'd the Queens Conscience, and
incessantly preached to her the pardoning of her Enemies; the 2d, in quality of
her first Servant of the Chamber, being assiduous at those Hours when no body
saw her, persuaded her how useful they would be to her; and that having been
secret to all the most important Affairs of the State, it was almost impossible
for her at first to be without them: but the third, by Profession devout,
mingled God and the World together, joining to the Reasons of Devotion, the
necessity of having a Chief Minister well-instructed in the Management of
Affairs; adding yet another Reason, (that in my opinion absolutely gained her)
which was, That the Cardinal had it more in his power than any body to make the
Peace, and that being born a Subject of the King her Brother, he would conclude
it to the Advantage of her Family, which she ought to endeavor to strengthen,
that she might make it her Prop to support her against any Faction that might
rise in France during her Regency.

These were the principal Springs that these Gentlemen moved withal; to which I
may also add the Princess de Guienne, since she was one of the first to whom
the Queen opened her Intentions, and one of those who confirmed the Queen most
in her Design to retain the Cardinal. I know not if I ought from that time also
to count Monsieur de Brienne amongst the number; but whether it was before or
after the King's Death, it is certain, he was one of the first that changed his
Side, after having promised us his Friendship. Perchance it will be wondered
at, that all these things could pass thus, and our Cabal stir no more; but this
I have to answer, That, in the first place, the Bishop of Beauvais, who
appeared the Chief in the Queen's secret Thoughts, was the first deceived; for
she not being satisfied with the Answers he returned her to what she first
proposed to him, began to dislike him, and never after let him know the bottom
of her Mind: Sometimes to him, and to us all, she would show an Inclination to
keep the Cardinal in for a time; but the moment that we gave her any Reasons to
dissuade her from it, she seemed to acquiesce to them, and spoke no more of it:
But as her first mentioning of it gave us reason to suspect, so her easy
condescendence to every thing we represented, quickly confirmed us it was true;
but what most deceived us, was, that at the same time that she inclined toward
the Cardinal, she promised the Duke de Beaufort the Superintendency of the
Finances for Monsieur de la Vieu-ville, and gave hopes of the Seals sometimes
to Monsieur de Chasteauneuf, sometimes to Monsieur Bailleul; she assured the
Duke de Vendosm, that in two hours after the King's Death, she would recall
Monsieur de Noyers; and also at last sent for Father Gondy, and the President
Barillon, newly returned from his Exile at Amboyse, to know their Opinions. I
believe there might be much Dissimulation in all that Proceeding; but it is
sure that there was much Uncertainty and Irresolution: In the mean while the
Cardinal labored not only on the Queens side, but tried also to keep himself
in with Monsieur, and to assure himself of Monsieur le Prince; but as for the
last, (although he had rather have seen things remain in their Hands that then
governed, than Monsieur de Chasteauneuf's) he would never promise any thing,
but only to do as Monsieur did; as for Monsieur, whom la Riviere absolutely
governed, he held the Cardinal in suspense to the last; and had not his private
Interest opposed his engaging with us, I believe he had never favored the
other Party.

I have spoken already of his open enmity with Monsieur de Montresor, and of
the black Calumny that he invented against the Count de Bethune, after the
Commands that the last had received from the King: La Riviere so much possessed
his Masters Favor, that his Royal Highness caused a Letter to be written into
England, wherein he desired him to be reconciled to la Riviere: Monsieur de
Montresor, who would not declare his Mind at that distance, answered only, That
when he returned into France, he hoped to have the Honor to discourse with his
Highness upon that Subject, and then obey his Commands. This ambiguous Answer
dissipated not la Riviere's Fear, who seeing the Friends of both his
Adversaries refuse either to speak to him, or salute him, feared lest in the
Confusion of the King's Death, he might be Shipwrack'd for want of Harbor:
Therefore he desired to be reconciled to the Duke de Vendosme, which he was by
the Mediation of the Marshall d' Estree, who also spoke favorably of him to
the Queen, (tho when he left England, he assured Monsieur de Montresor of an
inviolable Friendship) but he still thought he did nothing, unless he also
gained the Duke de Beaufort; for the accomplishing of which Design, the day
before the King died, he desired the same Marshall d' Estree to tell him, That
if he would promise him his Friendship, and protect him against the Rage of his
two Enemies, he would make an equal Return, which was, to hinder the Cardinal's
remaining in the Ministry, and to make Monsieur act conformably to their
desires. I was the first to whom the Duke de Beaufort opened this Proposition;
and as he asked me my Advice, I told him, That private Interest ought always to
yield to Public, and that I thought it very reasonable that he should give ear
to the Offer which was made him; but that he must dispense with me from meddling
in any thing, being Cosin-Germain, and an intimate Friend of Monsieur de
Montresor, he desired me to speak to the Count de Bethune about it, which I
immediately did, with Monsieur d' Humieres; but I found him so prepossest with
the Resentment of it, that he would not yield to any other Consideration, and
all the Answer I could draw from him* and which he gave also to the Duke de
Beaufort afterward, was, That he referred it all to him, but that he could not
answer for his Friend (who was absent) which way he would incline: but he
uttered these words to the Duke de Beaufort in such a manner, as showed it
would mortally offend him to proceed any further in it, so that in a short time
he broke off the Treaty, whereat I was extremely troubled; for though I will be
ever for the Interest of my Friends, yet I confess, I cannot see in this any
thing that could make him in dispute, which way to take: and must own, I found
Count Bethunes reasons but weak, when he said, That without regard to what
concerned himself, it was imprudence to confide in a Knave, though of Quality,
and a professed Cheat; because if he deceived us, we should be acquitted of our
promises, and in a better condition than before, to pursue our Resentments; and
if he was just to his promise, he would make his Services considerable enough
to blot out all that had passed; as also when he said, he made use of what was
proffered him, to become more advantageous to us, which had he: refused, might
have done us harm: This could but be spoke in jest, since we had before
declared against each other, and were in a manner irreconcilable. Be it what it
would, the Duke de Beaufort would think of it no more; and this ought still to
add to his Glory, that on that occasion, and on all others, he still preferred
Honor before Profit, and always the least regarded what concerned himself,
which appeared evidently when the King distributed several of the greatest
Offices belonging to the Crown; and Monsieur le Prince had the great Master
given to him: the Duke de Beaufort might have had the Master of the Horse, if
he would have made Friends for it, and though that the Queen pressed him to
take it, he always answered her, That he would never receive any favor but from
her: And it is most certain, that at that time the Cardinal would have given
any thing to have had him his Friend; and not only him, but all his party,
which I know to be true. The Commander de Souvray being sent to me from him to
found me, told me, That although I was accounted amongst his greatest Enemies,
yet our old Friendship at Rome hindered him from believing me so: To which I
only answered, That I was obliged to him for having that kind opinion of me,
but that I meddled with nothing, but to perform the duty of my charge, and serve
the Queen.

Things were in this posture when the King died, at which time if an affront
had been given to any one of the Ministers, without doubt in the consternation
they were in, all the rest had fled; but it was thought best to let the Queen
take her own course, and the Bishop of Beauvais promoted that Opinion. As soon
as the Queen was returned into the old Palace, and every one had paid their
Homage to our new Monarch, there happened a difference between Monsieur le
Prince, and the Duke de Beaufort, wherein the last behaved himself a little too
haughtily: The subject of it was, the Queen retiring from her Chamber till they
had emptied the Room of the horrible crowd that had pressed in, sent the Duke
de Beaufort to tell Monsieur, that he should make them clear the Room, and that
he should stay alone with her to comfort her. Monsieur le Prince, who was
standing by his Royal Highness, caught immediately at the word, and answered,
That if the Queen would command him any thing, she should send a Captain of the
Guards to him; but as for the Duke, de Beaufort, he would receive no Orders
from him. The Duke de Beaufort answered him briskly, That he would not concern
himself to give him any Order, but that there is no Man in France should hinder
him from doing what the Queen commanded. This little dissension was appeased
again in a moment, though the grudge still remained: The Ministers now
beginning to find that it was talked publicly, that the Queen, as soon as she
was at Paris, would annul the Declaration, believed, that if they submitted to
her, they might defend that stroke, and sent to tell the Queen (as they had
done before) they would absolutely remit all the Authority given them by that
Declaration, and pass whatsoever Act she pleased. This moderated the Queen,
insomuch that when she came next day to Paris, she was not resolved what to do,
but in the two following days they represented to her, that the Regency had
neither its necessary luster nor authority, if it was not confirmed in
Parliament; without restriction, they made it appear also to Monsieur, how much
that Declaration was injurious to him, so that at length they both agreed to
have it annulled, Monsieur le Prince consenting also to it. It is true, to get
them to give their consent, the Bishop of Beauvais promised from the Queen, a
Government, with several fortified places to his Royal Highness, and at length
the same to the Duke d' Anguien. After this Contract, the Queen went to the
Parliament, where was performed all she desired in so glorious a manner, that
nothing could have been added to it; all the Parliament testifying, That they
desired nothing so much, as her absolute Authority; they had taken a resolution
to present to her Majesty a kind of Remonstrance, most humbly to beseech her to
make use of Men of known Honesty, and to remove from her those that were the
causes of the passed Tyranny, there was none but the President Barillon who
said obliquely something about it; but they pressed it no farther, by the
advice of the Bishop de Beauvais, who told them, That it was fit to let the
Queen have the glory to acquit her self of them; the consequence has
sufficiently condemned his advice, and all People must own, that had the
Parliament spoken as they intended, they had Printed so black a Character upon
the reputations of those Ministers, that the Queen, it may be, would have been
ashamed to have made use of them any more; besides, already of themselves they
stood so wavering, that the least wind would have overwhelmed them.

I know not what assurance the Cardinal could then have of the Queens
inclination for him, but if he had, he did not discover it to any one living,
telling even his greatest Confidents of his return into Italy, as a thing
resolved on; and appearing to be extremely offended, that when they annulled
the Declaration they did not except him, but the Scene of Affairs was presently
changed; for about three or four hours after their return from the Palais, the
Queen proposed to him by Monsieur le Prince, to establish him by a Breviat in
the same place that the Declaration gave him, and to make him besides that,
President of her Council: at first he refused this Proposition, but afterward
yielded to it, promising to remain in France only till such time as the Peace
was concluded. You may judge how much we were all surprised, who believed him
just ready to pass the Mountains; when we came at night to the Louvre and heard
this good news, I found the Bishop of Beauvais in the Queens Closet, and
telling him how much I was surprised at it, he replied, shrugging up his
shoulders, That he could answer me as to what was done, but not what would
follow: meaning by that, that he knew how that business would go in Parliament,
but was ignorant what the Queen would do afterward. I went away strangely
confounded at the weakness of our chief Director, and going the same night to
the Hostel de Vendosme, the Duke de Beaufort told me, That the Bishop of
Beauvais having modestly complained to the Queen, that she had so far acted
without doing him the honor to communicate it to him; she answered him, That
she found her self necessitated to keep about her one of those who was
conversant in the principal Secrets of the State, and she believed no body more
proper for this, than Cardinal Mazarin, who as he was a Stranger, had neither
any private interest or support in France; that that ought not to allarum him
or the rest of her Servants, who were not in good correspondance with him,
since she gave them her promise never to leave them; and as a mark, that though
she retained the Cardinal, she embraced not his Interests, she abandoned all
the rest of his Party. This Discourse gave us new assurance, but after such a
stroke we believed we might have always reason to apprehend a change in so
close a mind.

Two days after arrived the News of the Victory of Rocroy, which wonderfully
raised both Monsieur le Prince, and Madam la Princess his Wife; and as their
hatred to the House of Vendosme was manifest, the rise of one still seemed to
be a depression of the other: Madam la Princess, who was insolent and malicious
as she used to be when she was in prosperity, one day when I went to wait upon
her to divert her, began a Discourse full of Satyr, which nevertheless she
ended very obligingly to me, but it was full of reflections upon the Duke de
Beaufort; to whom I replied the best I could, without giving her offense. This
glorious Success made that Family hope, and even with reason, ask many great
things, and made the Cardinal unite himself so strictly to them. 'Twas then I
began to be sensible that I was deceived, when I hoped to receive any great
advantage from the Queens kindness, for only asking her a Company in the
Regiment de Rambures, for the Brother of a Captain who they thought was killed
in the Battle, she did me the honor to refuse me; but I must confess, that five
or six days after, she granted me a very great favor, in consenting to the
suppression of the Office of the Commissary General of the Suisse, though it
was done after having made many difficulties in it: The Bishop of Bauvais was
the only Man to whom I at first revealed it, and afterwads to the Queen, who
told me, that she would refer her self to the determination of the Marshal de
Basempiere, whom I entreated to be kind to me in it; which he was, and seemed
to rejoice to have the occasion. When I first bought my Place, I sent to tell
him when he was in the Bastille, by the Count de Bethune, that if I believed
not only that he pretended to it himself, but would be the least dis-satisfied
to see it in the hands of another, I would think no more of it. He received
this Message with the greatest Civility imaginnable, and sent back his Nephew
d' Estelan to tell my Wife, that he was ravished to hear that I had the Place;
that he himself would instruct me in my Duty, and be a Father to me: When I saw
him in the Bastille, he still continued his Caresses, and said also the same
thing when he was at liberty; and when he came to Court, after a hundred times
embracing me, he said aloud, That if he had yet remaining any Friends amongst
the Suisse, he would also make them mine: In the business of
Commissary-General, he behaved himself with an extreme care, and till such time
he saw me in disgrace, he still lived well with me; but all that will appear in
the following Discourse.

And now to begin where I made this Digression, a thing so considerable for my
establishment settled without my troubling, the Cardinal gave me reason to
believe, that our party was not really so desperate as we thought it; and
though the Bishop de Beauvais's capacity was but small, yet there was still
something that appeared Great, to see him declared Minister of State, and
designed for a Cardinals Cap, the Queen having written to Rome for him; and
perceiving also at the same time she promised the Duke de Vendosme the
Government of Britany (which the Great Master had renounced) or an equivalent
recompense: but nevertheless, the Cardinal still advanced in her affections,
and though that she protested he should never obtain any thing prejudicial to
those who had been her approved Servants, she confessed, That he had something
very taking in his Conversation, and always praised him for being
dis-interss'd. He on his part, was extraordinary civil to all the People of
Quality; and except the House of Vendosm, which had openly declared it self
against him, visited all the Princes, Dukes and Peers, and the Officers of the
Crown; People then began to wonder that we did not begin to think of some way
to reconcile our selves to him, but it was impossible ever to see him again
with kind looks; for we having broken with him for the Queens Interest, 'twas
her part to prescribe how we ought to live together: But besides this public,
there was also a private Interest, which was the good understanding between him
and the Chancellor, against whom the whole Family of Vendosm, the Bishop of
Mets, Monsieur de Montresor, Monsieur de Bethune, Monsieur de Beaupuy, and my
self, had openly declared, chiefly because of the death of Monsieur de Thou; so
that we believed we could not see him again with honor, as long as he was
joined with a Man that we had so much reason to hate: And to say the truth, it
was a thing hard enough to be understood, that the Queen, to whom he had reason
to appear more odious than to us, continued him still in his Office: But as she
is susceptable of whatsoever impressions are given her, the strong
intercessions that was made for him, by little and little diminished her just
Resentments of the Injuries he had done her. The first that spoke to her for
him, was Montague, a Creature that had formerly depended upon Monsieur de
Chasteauneuf, and since gained to that Party during his retreat to Pontoise, by
Jane a Carmelite Nun, who was Sister to the Chancellor: Monsieur de Brienne
seconded him in it, and preferred (as he himself said) the Interest of a living
acquaintance, before the memory of Monsieur de Thou, though he had been his
most intimate Friend; but he is accused to have chiefly considered Twenty
thousand Crowns, which they say was given him for his trouble: but that which
wholly confirmed him in the place, was the consideration of Monsieur de
Chasteauneuf, who was the only Man whose return the Cardinal feared; and seeing
that now, in this time of general Indemnity, it would be impossible for him to
oppose his liberty, since the chief crime that appeared against him, was, that
he had too much adhered to the Queens Interest: He let no opportunity slip, but
took his Measures in the just time, and he was wonderfully assisted by Madam la
Princess, who in her new-blown Pride for the Victory of Rocroy, thought all
things due to her, and declared publicly, That all the Family of Condy would
be forced to leave the Court, if the Queen recalled him to the Council, who
prefided at the condemnation of Monsieur de Momerancy her Brother. There needed
no more to turn the Queen from Monsieur de Chasteauneuf, who was already so
cool in her kindness to him, that she began to say, He was none of hers, but
Madam de Chevreuses Martyr; separating thus her own Interests, from the
Interest of that Person whom she once so dearly loved, whose return now she
much more feared than desired: She would have been content to have let her
remained still in Flanders; but since the Duke d'Epernon, and Monsieur de
Montresor, were already returned from England, and Fonetrailles and Aubijoux,
who were supported by Monsieur, appeared publicly in Paris; and that also
Madam de Senecey and Madam de Hautefort, were not only returned to Court, but
in their places again, and all the rest of the proscribed were daily expected:
It would be most unreasonable to leave a Princess any longer in Exile, whom all
Europe knew to be so, only for having been most zealous in her Service. If I
were asked from whence proceeded so great a change in the Queens mind, I must
freely answer, that I impute it to two things: The first is, That when we have
extraordinary Obligations to any one, we are apt to dread their presence, as if
their sight continually urged an acknowledgement, and condemned us of
Ingratitude every moment that we delaid returning them. The other is, That her
old love for Madam de Chevreuse was worn out by little and little, by her new
one; for the Cardinal, which was daily seen to increase, and which in a little
time reached so far, that her Conversation with him, instead of an hour or two,
now lasted all the Evening; so that the poor Bishop of Beauvais, who was always
used to take that time to entertain her, waited in another Room, and had
scarcely time to say Grace to her, or to see her one minute after Supper. But
nevertheless, to confirm in some manner what she had said, that she would not
favor all the Party, she gave command that Monsieur de Boutiller should quit
the Finances. The Cardinal had not as yet fixed his Anchor upon sure ground
enough, but that he was forced to yield to this stroke; and all he could
obtain, was, that it might be done in a favorable manner, the Sur-Intendant
himself asking leave to lay it down: it was given between Mesieurs de Bailleut,
and d' Avaux, to hinder the last from being in a capacity to take Monsieur de
Chavigny's Office, which the Cardinal endeavored himself to fulfill; and the
reason why the first was put into that employment, was to show, that the Queen
now intended to advance her old Servants, and to remove him from all
pretentions to the Seal, for the Cardinal intended to keep the Chancellor still
in that, knowing that a titular Officer was much fitter to oppose Monsieur de
Chasteauneuf, than to have it in a Commissioners hand, as the Keeper of the
Great Seal always is. To these Reasons may be added, one that is yet more
unknown, which is, that in putting in these two, the last being obliged to go
Plenipotentiary to conclude the general Peace at Munster, the Finances would
remain wholly in the hands of the first, who by his inability would give way to
Monsieur d' Emery, the new Controller-General, and faithful Dependant of the
Cardinal, to act with full Authority as if he was himself Sur-Intendant. A
little after this promotion, the Cardinal believing that he should show an
extraordinary deference to the Queen, by endeavoring to acquire the Friendship
of those, whom she had always believed her faithful Servants: He began with the
Prince de Marcillac, as being the first that the Queen had openly protested to
be kind to, he desired his Friendship in the most civil and most pressing terms
imaginable, making him be told, That he begged he would wholly abandon him,
when he perceived him pursuing any private Interest, either to procure Riches,
Offices, or any other Advantage whatever, or had any intention to prejudice any
man of Quality. The Prince de Marcillac related to the Queen all that the
Cardinal had told him, asking her what she pleased to command him upon it, she
answered, That the greatest pleasure he could ever do her, was to receive him
for his Friend; and spoke of him with such an esteem and eagerness, as plainly
enough discovered her Inclination: after which, the Prince de Marcillac had
nothing more to consult; but however, before he went to see him, he imparted
all that had passed to his particular Friends, and amongst the rest, was so
obliging as to tell it me with all the Circumstances: This began to make us
look at home, and think of our selves, it happening at the same time that
Monsieur de Chavigny (according to his Fathers method) obtained leave to quit
his Office, which was given to Monsieur de Brienne; and it was talked of his
being sent either to Rome, or into Germany, as a Man lost for ever at Court, We
believed, that the Cardinal then having no body whom he particularly loved in
Council, it would be easy to enter into League with him, and that for our
Friendship he perhaps would willingly forsake the Chancellor. Having weighed
this Design, the Bishop of Metz (to whom he had also made Propositions of
Friendship) went to the Queen, and after having spoken to her almost in the
same manner, as the Prince de Marcillac, received the same answer, with only
this addition, That upon the Overtures that the Cardinal had made him, she
conjured him to gain him as many Friends as was possible; the Bishop of Metz
having told all his Discourse with the Queen to the Duke de Vendosme, both the
Duke and his Children desired, that all their Friends might be informed of
every thing that had passed, and for that reason desired the Bishop of Metz,
the Duke d' Espernon, the Count de Fiesque, Monsieur Beaupuy, and my self, to
meet at their House: Campion, who was then his menial Servant, was also at that
Conference; Monsieur Bethune, and Monsieur Montresor, having been their oldest
and chiefest Friends, ought to have been sent for, but I believe the Duke de
Vendosme did not desire them, perhaps for the reason I have already said, of la
Riviere whom he would preserve his Friend by the mediation of the Marshall d'
Estree. The Queens command cutting off all occasions of farther differences.
The Count de Fiesque took upon him to go, and tell the Cardinal from all the
family of Vendosme, the Bp. of Metz, and the D. d' Espernon, that they desired
his Friendship with all freeness and sincerity, but that they desired to have
nothing to do with any body but himself, and for that reason they had not sent
to him till such time that they saw Monsieur de Chavigny out of all bufiness,
and that the only mark that they asked of his kindness, was the Chancellors
ruin, whom the death of Monsieur de Thou, and his manner of proceeding in the
business of the Hermits, and the trial of the Duke d'Espernon, had made odious.
The Cardinal, after he had assured them that he received the Proposition they
had made him with a great deal of Joy, and that he esteemed their Friendship at
the highest rate, answered, That he was obliged to them that they did not speak
to him of this, whilst Monsieur de Chavigny had any part in the Ministry of
Affairs, because he could never have abandoned him; but for the Chancellor, he
was an infamous Man, and that at the Kings death he had renounced him, and
consequently cared not for him now; but if he put him out, he was not able to
hinder Monsieur de Chasteauneufs entering into his place, whom he confessed he
could never endure in the Ministry.

This first Conference ended thus, but it furnished matter for many others,
wherein the Count de Fiesque told the Cardinal, That the Gentlemen for whom he
spoke, desiring to enter into the Bonds of Friendship with him, would not begin
to shock him in what appeared so much his Interest, therefore they only asked
of him, that whenever he could secure himself from Monsieur de Chasteauneuf,
he would remove the Chancellor: he made a difficulty to promise that he would
remove him, and only said at first, that he would abandon him, but at length he
acquiesced: and did the same concerning the Duke d' Anguien: for having said,
That he desired to live civilly with him, and that he had no design to break
off, he received no answer, when the Count de Fiesque told him, That those
Gentlemen making choice of him for their chief Friend, desired a preference in
his mind before all their Competitors. This Treaty lasted five or six days,
because on one side the Cardinal showed now an ardent desire of their
Friendships; and then a little after appeared cooler in it, speaking with
greater reservedness. And on the other side, the Duke de Beaufort would have
been willing, before they came to a conclusion, to have seen Campion returned,
whom he had sent to meet Madam de Chevreuse, who was then just come to France,
and with whom his Father the Duke d' Espernon, and himself, were in a most
strict League: And as it was necessary that the Count de Fiesque should give
them from time to time an account of his Negotiation, and be instructed what
they would have him say, we met, during that time, five or six times, either at
the Duke de Vendosm's, or the Duke d' Espernons, or at the Bishop of Metz, or
at the Capucins, or else at my House: And although in all those Meetings there
almost nothing passed but only to obey the Queen, nevertheless they have since
endeavored to represent it as a Crime, and the Plottings of a Seditious Cabal,
though the Cardinal cannot deny but that the Count de Fiesque daily told him
whatsoever was resolved amongst us. In five or six days Campion returned, who
informed us, That Madam de Chevreuse had received Letters from the Queen before
she left Flanders, wherein her Majesty seemed to desire, that there might be a
right understanding between the Cardinal and Her, and that she came prepared to
do it, and advised all those Gentlemen to the same; upon which, they immediately
resolved, and went the very next day to visit him, with whom they had then
reason to be satisfied, having been received with the greatest Civility that
could be expressed. Perhaps many will wonder, that having always been in the
same Interest with those Gentlemen, I was not also comprehended in the Treaty;
but the reason was, I did not desire it, for that being in an Office that
depended only upon the Queen, I would act in nothing without Her order; which
was the answer I made to the Duke de Beaufort when he spoke to me of it, and I
know not if he said any thing to the Queen concerning it or no: But two or
three days after, as I received Orders from her, she told me, I knew that the
Duke de Vendosme, and his Sons, had seen Cardinal Mazarin; I answered her, Yes,
but with a tone of voice, and in a particular way of speaking, whereby I
endeavored to let her know, that it was my Opinion that that would be no
advantage to me; whereupon she continued that she believed him true to her
Interest, therefore she desired all those that were so, to live well with him:
I answered, That I most humbly beseeched Her Majesty to remember, That I left
him only when I concluded him an Enemy to Her Interest: That Is true (said she:)
And now, Madam, (I replied) I am still all Obedience to whatsoever your Majesty
commands me. Taking my leave thereupon, with design to make him a visit the
next day; it is true, that before I went any farther, I was willing to see
Monsieur de Bethune, and Monsieur de Montresor, whom I found extremely netled,
that an Agreement had been made without them; and though the Duke de Beaufort
acquainted them with it before they saw the Cardinal; they believed still that
there was more due to their ancient Friendship, than simply to render them an
account of what was already resolved of: But they took it most ill of the Duke
de Vendosme, and particularly Monsieur de Montresor, who remembered, that when
he left England he had promised him his Friendship, giving him also all
assurance to serve him toward Monsieur, which he performed so ill, that la
Riviere was one of the first Men with whom he endeavored to engage himself, the
remembrance of which was a little hard to him, chiefly at that time; for at his
return from England, Monsieur pressing him again to live kindly with la
Riviere, and employing Monsieur de Bellegarde upon that subject, tho without
any effect, Monsieur de Montresor persisting still in saying, that he looked
upon la Riviere as the same Man that Monsieur had formerly painted him, which
was a Rogue and a Traitor; His Royal Highness lived with him afterward in
another manner than he had done, using him with the greatest indifference that
could be, which made him resolve at length to sell his place, and to retire
himself wholly from Court, which he did in a little time after. When I had told
them what concerned my self (which they approved, as being an effect of my
obedience to Her whom I had wholly dedicated my self to without reserve) after
I had been at Mont-rouge to acquaint Monsieur de Chasteauneuf of it, who was
also of the same Opinion, I went to the Cardinal, whom I found just coming down
stairs, with some Ladies, going from thence to Council; so that the first time
I could not have much Discourse with him, but what he did say to me was very
civil and obliging, so far as to make an excuse that he could not go up stairs
again to entertain me: The next day I went again, and finding him in his
Chamber with very few People with him, I made him a Complement whereof he has
since very much complained, and declared, That I told him that I only came to
see him by the Queens order, though my words signified quite another thing: I
know, that when the Prince de Macellac went to see him, that the Queen had
spoken to him concerning him, I believed she might have done the for me;
therefore after having assured him of my respect and service, I told him I
hoped that he would do me the honor easily to believe what I protested to him,
since he knew that for a long time I had professed beign his most obedient
Servant, but that if any thing could be added to the Inclination I had always
to do him honor, it would be without doubt, the Trust and the Esteem the Queen
showed him, which would oblige all those who were wholly hers, and particularly
my self, to respect him yet more: I also beseeched him to think, that
whenever the Queen should command me any thing relating to that, I would not
only execute it with that blind Obedience I ow to all her Orders, but also with
extreme Joy and Satisfaction: I leave it to be judged, if this Discourse can
reasonably receive that sense which he gave it; and if this be a just
foundation for those Mischiefs that he has since done me, and began the very
next day: for the Marshall de Bassompiere going to see him, he spoke to him of
me in such a manner, as showed plain enough he had no great love for me, and
endeavored to put it into his mind to re-enter into his Office, which the
Marshall let me know the very next day, by two or three people. This News
surprised me a little, and desiring to know the bottom of it, I went to
Monsieur Liancour, and desired him to speak to him for me, which he did
immediately, with that goodness which he has always shown in my Concerns; and
having only told him, that he had been informed that he was dis-satisfied with
me, He made as if he knew nothing of it, and without discovering any
displeasure at me, said, That after I had a long time left off visiting him, I
came again and told him, That it was by the Queens Order, but now he assured
him, that if I would be his Friend, he would be mine; Monsieur de Liancour
having answered, That he might confide in me, put an end to the Discourse; and
having afterward given me a relation of it, I believed that this little
dissatisfaction was past, and that I might be good Friends with him again.
During this, Madam de Chevreuse was arrived, and went down directly to the
Louvre; but if the Queen was impatient to see her, she was much more so to send
her to Dampierre; for immediately after the first Salutations were passed, she
told Her, That the Allies of France might grow jealous, if immediately after her
return from Flanders, they knew that she was near Her, and that for this reason
she must take a short Journey into the Country. Madam de Chevreuse, for all she
was surprised, answered her without any concern, That she was ready to obey
her, but beseeched her to confider, That all Europe knew she had been
persecuted for her extraordinary love to Her Majesty; and that it might perhaps
reflect upon her self if she sent her away so suddenly, and desired that she
would be pleased to ask the Cardinals advice in it, who being in the Closet,
and sent for in, told the Queen, That Madam de Chevreuse had reason, and that
her Majesty would be too blame if she should use her so. Thus Madam de
Chevreuse fenced off this first assault, which might well have let her see,
That she had not that power in the Queens Breast, she once had: but if she
perceived it, she hid it at least from her most intimate Friends, and imparted
this Adventure to no Body till a long time after: In this, following the humor
of all those that pretend to favor who will never discover that they are
declining in their Princes affection. Nevertheless, the Cardinal did not think
her entirely ruined, nor absolutely useless to his Advancement, for the next
day he went to visit her, and for the first Complement told her, That he knew
that the Assignations of the Exchequer came slowly, and that she having been so
long a Journey, might perhaps want money, therefore he came to offer and bring
her Fifty thousand Crowns; but because he knew also that an Ambitious Soul,
like hers, would not be so much moved with these fair Offers as with Actions,
he asked her a few days after, What he might do to gain her Friendship,
protesting, That he would spare nothing that might procure it. She presently
put him upon a fair Trial, asking him two things of very great Importance: One,
that the Duke de Vendosme might be satisfied for his pretentions to the
Government of Bretayne, for which he had as yet nothing but fair Words: And the
other, That the Duke d'Espernon might be restored to his Place and Government.
He proceeded in both these very obligingly: For as to the first, Monsieur de
Brienne had immediately a Commission to treat with the Duke de Vendome, and in
the Queens name to promise him the Admiralty, which they sent to the Duke de
Breze to give a Resignation of: And as to the second, the Duke d 'Espernon was
immediately after restored to his Honors, and neither pains nor cost was spared
to draw the Count d 'Harcourt from Guienne. After these two first Affairs, she
put him to a third, to which he would scarce consent, yet did at last, though
it took no effect; it was to procure the Prince de Marcillac the Government of
Havre: To this he Remonstrated to her, how much he owed to the Memory of the
deceased Cardinal, and that it would be unjust in him to become an Instrument
of injuring his Heirs: But she still insisting upon it, he at last yielded.
After such great Trials, she thought nothing would be impossible for her with
him, and at last proposed to him the Re-establishment of Monsieur de
Chasteauneuf: but this being his most sensible and nearest concern, he could
not dissemble, and flatly replied to her, That he would never give his consent
to it, and from that moment broke off with her, excepting some few Civilities
which since passed, there was never after any sincere Intelligence or
Friendship betwixt them. Monsieur de Chasteauneuf had now been a long time at
Montrouge, having arrived there at the same time that Madam de Chevreuse came
to Paris: and it may be, if he had immediately come to the Court without
capitulating with the Queen, he might have engaged her by this freedom not to
have abandoned him, whereas because he followed the example of Madam de
Senecey, who would not enter into Paris till she was reestablished in her
Place, he gave the Queen time to accustom her self to know that he was near
Paris, without desiring his presence, and considered not that Madam de Senecey
had only a Person whom the Queen had no affection for to oppose her, whereas he
(besides the whole Family of Monsieur le Prince who were against his return)
gave the chief Minister reason to be jealous, and could not gain but by
Address, and by little and little, what that Honorable Lady did at the first
step: But without doubt, he was deceived by the belief that the Queen had a
mighty Inclination for him; and 'twas by this also that the Bishop de Beauvais
lost himself insensibly, and that, after having possessed the first Place, and
been nominated for a Cardinalship, a private Countermand was sent to Rome, and
he left in the Antichamber, whilst the Queen quietly entertained the
Cardinal, whose Wit she did not much esteem at first, and said, That he was not
a Man knowing in Business, since he understood not the Regale, nor the
Finances, qualifications indeed very necessary in a great Minister. Thus all
our Affairs began to decline, and as to what concerns me, Monsieur de Tellier,
following the steps of Monsieur de Noyers his Predecessor, from that time began
to thwart me in my Charge, and desiring to appropriate to himself the Authority
of appointing Commissaries for Mustering of the Suisses, designed to take from
me by little and little, what the Queen had given me in gross by suppressing
the charge of the Isle: Yet at first, he took a method which gave me occasion
to think that his Design was rather against the Marshals of France, than
against me; and by the Civilities he did me, kept me for some time under this
mistake; but at last, when I saw that all these fine words came to nothing, and
that they did but defer to resolve upon what I asked from day to day, I
perceived that these shifting tricks came from another Principle, and that the
Cardinal had as great a hand in them, as in delaying to conclude Monsieur de
Vendosme's business, wherein they every day raised a thousand Obstacles to
hinder the Execution of what was promised him: It Is true, he himself
contributed much to his own unhappiness, for he made a difficulty of taking the
Admiralty without the Anchorage, and considered not that he should have entered
upon the Office at any rate, it being easy for him afterward to extend his
Rights: In the mean time, his unsteady and confused way of carrying on his
business, gave opportunity enough to do him ill turns. Sometimes he addressed
himself to the Cardinal, and declared, That he would owe to him the Obligation
of what they did for him; in a moment after, he sought an opportunity of
getting Marshal d'Estrees to speak to la Riviere, and conjure him to make his
Affair succeed; and after that, attempted by oblique ways to engage Monsieur le
Prince to serve him. In fine, there did not an hour pass over his head wherein
he did not more then once change his Opinion and Party: Nor did he only change
from this side to the other, but would have also played the same tricks with
Monsieur de Beaufort, who for his part having particular Designs, and
intermixing his most important Affairs with trifles, lived in so fantastical a
manner with the Cardinal, that it was impossible for him to repose any
assurance in him; not that I believe he ever harbored in his Breast any such
Designs as were laid to his charge; only his entertainments of the Cardinal
were either full of coldness, or civility, according to the humors of those
Ladies, Madam de Chevreuse, and Madam de Monthazon, insomuch that if he gave
him occasion to be satisfied with him one day, he disobliged him as much the
next, saying, That he only came to see him by his Fathers order. If in the
condition he is in, I had a mind to complain of him, I should have some reason
to do so, it being very true that at this time, though he did me the honor to
dine at my House often, and pass the greatest part of the Afternoons with me,
yet he imparted to me very little of his Conduct: And I dare say, (though I am
not the greatest Politician in the Kingdom) that if he would have opened
himself more freely to me, he had never been embarrass'd in that ununluckly and
shameful Intrigue of Madam de Longueville's Letters, which happened about this
time, and into which his Love for Madam de Monthazon hurried him, without
considering the bottom of the thing, and imputing the Malice to those who could
not possibly be guilty.

I can say further, That to take this Affair right, nothing at all of it is to
be believed, I never inquired into the thing to get more knowledge of it: But
if Monsieur de Beaufort had spoke to me of it at the beginning, I would have
advised him without examining the falsehood or truth thereof, to have given the
Letters into Madam de Longueville's hands; and I think that this service done
to a persson who was once passionately beloved, and who is even yet as much
hated, is a very sensible reproach, and the most honest and glorious Revenge
that could be taken. But he suffered himself to becarried away with another
Passion, and by the breaking out of this cursed Quarrel, absolutely threw
himself upon a Precipice. From that time there was little familiarity betwixt
Monsieur d'Anguien and him; and besides the remembrance of what passed in the
Quarrel of the Grand-Maistre, and the report that this Prince had asked to have
his Brother-inlaw, the Duke de Breze, protected in his charge, he gave an
answer to a Letter (which Monsieur de Beaufort wrote to him upon the Birth of
his Son) wherein he treated him rudely, and in a kind of revenge, which his
little Pride prompted him to, only subscribed himself, Your most humble, and
affecttionate Servant. But though these little peeks betwixt two such haughty
and ambitious Minds, were enough to carry them to extremes, yet they might have
been qualified with some moderation; whereas after an Affair, which directly
wounded their Honor, there was no way left for a Reconcilement. I confess, I
speak not upon this subject with a cold heart, and that of all that has passed
since the Kings Death, this is the only thing I look back upon with regret, and
would say with some fort of Repentance, if I did not find an infinite number of
Reasons that forced me to take that side which I did. Those which ought to have
dissuaded me, were first of all Interest; almost all my Estate lay in le Berry,
and under the Government of Monsieur le Prince. I saw the Duke de Anguien
likely to return to Court within a little while, having augmented the glory of
his Victory at Rocroy, by the taking of Thienville, which was judged
impregnable; and that after such Services, it was hard to believe that the
Queen would favor any other Party than his. The Duke de Longueville had always
dealt very obligingly with me, and there were few that he spoke to with more
confidence. In fine, it was to be observed, that I had the honor to be nearly
related to Madam la Princess, whom I should mortally offend, if I offered my
Service to Madam de Montbazon, my relation to whom was further off, and less
Honorable: But also very strong considerations invited me to the other side,
almost all my Friends were embarked in it, and above all Monsieur de Guise, who
caressed me extraordinarily at his return into France, and seemed to choose me
for his principal Friend: I had the Honor to be nearer him than any of his
Quality; I had all along dearly loved and very much honored him, and was the
first Author of the strait Union betwixt Monsieur de Beaufort and him which
seemed to be one of the principal causes that put him upon this Intrigue: I
believed, that the Women's Quarrel would certainly breed one among'st the Men,
and resolved not to embrace one Party to acquit it again the next day. But to
speak freely, the most essential reason that made me declare, was, That I knew,
whatever Caresses the Cardinal made me, he had no kindness at all for me, and
thought that I must of necessity get some other support near the Queen. I knew
very well, if I should hope for one in Monsieur le Prince, that he would not
displease the first Minister for me, if in Monsieur, la Riviere, the mortal
Enemy of my Friends, was an invincible Obstacle; so that I saw none but Madam
de Chevreuse, who hiding her Disgrace the best that she could, and continuing
her ancient familiarity with the Queen, seemed to me to be yet in a condition
to protect me. Being joined in Interest with her common Friends, I had in a
little time gained a great deal of Freedom, and received from her Assurances to
serve me upon all occasions: But I had a mind to oblige her to it with
something more extraordinary, knowing well, That she being Vain and Ambitious,
would be touched therewith, and told her, That 'twas she I had chiefly respect
to, when I ranked my self on Madam de Montbazons Party; which she received as
well as I could wish, and promised me all the assistance imaginable.

I will say nothing of all that afterward passed in this Affair, because it
was so public that no body can be ignorant of it, only, that if the Opinion of
Monsieur de Longueville had been followed, it had stifled all. But Madam la
Princess following the heat of her Natural Temper, and finding an opportunity
of satisfying her old Animosities, carried it to the utmost extremity, to which
I know not whether she was pushed on by the Cardinal, who looked upon our Party
as formed against him, and thought it not so much designed against Monsieur le
Prince, as against his Authority, which increased every day. At the Hotel de
Madam de Chevreuse there was a meeting of fourteen Princes, at which I was not
present, and would have been sorry to have been so, thinking it very useless
and impertinent, Two days after, the Amend Honorable which Madam de Montbazon,
was to undergo at the Hotel de Conde; the Queen being in the Circle, called me
to her, and said, That she believed I did not know that the Officers of the
Kings House should strike in with no party in the Quarrels at Court, because
they ought to stay for her Orders: I answered, That I did not know it, but that
whatever Party I should take, it could not prejudice the Obedience I would
always pay to Her Commands. She replied, That this by rendering mesuspected by
one of the Parties, would make me incapable of following her Orders; and ending
her Discourse, signified unto me, That I should once more stand Neuter. The day
following I was to see the Cardinal, who having received me with an appearance
of more freedom then before, told me, That the Queen had acquainted him with
what She had said to me, and having informed my self what might be alleged
thereupon, I answered, That since the Queen disapproved my Action, I for ever
stood corrected; but if I had failed in my duty, my fault was not without
president, and upon this instanced in the late Duke d'Espernon, in the Quarrel
betwixt Monsieur le Count and Monsieur de Guise. He told me, That the Queen had
great reason to desire it should not be so any more, and advised me, as my
Friend, punctually to obey her Majesty. After this I made him two or three
Visits, wherein he treated me so kindly, that I believed he would not be
unwilling to oblige me in my Concerns, since he was pleased to serve one of my
Kinsmen upon my recommendation, therefore I spoke to him of the difference
betwixt Monsieur le Tellier and my self; and in a Memoir which I gave him,
explained the thing to him very clearly; adding when I left him, That it was
the most important Affair he could oblige me in. His Answers were civil and
affectionate, but the next time I spoke to him of it, I found him much more
cold, and he made me a long Discourse, to show me, That what I asked of him was
much against the Kings Service, and concluded with telling me, That as to my
own Interest I must be satisfied, and not attempt to preserve a right which had
too great a Consequence: I replied, That my Predecessors in the Office had
enjoyed it, and as for my self, all those who knew me, knew that Riches and
Interest influenced me very little, and that Honor alone was that which
actuated me, and which I sought for in the Affair wherewith I entertained him.
I question whether this so frank a Declaration of my Humor pleased him, but I
know that he left me without giving me any great hopes. On this or the day
following, happened the last stroke of Madam de Monbazon's disgrace at Renard,
I came not thither till the Queen was coming out, and was extremely surprised
and troubled at the disorder. Monsieur de Mets is witness of what I said to
Madam de Monbazon, and how much I blamed her for having made the Affair of
Madam la Princess become the Queens. In the mean time, the Queen the day after
did me the Honor to reckon me amongst the Counselors of this Fair disgraced,
and declared, That what she spoke before Madam la Princess against those who
advised her to stay in Renerds Lodgings, were particularly addressed to me. I
was immediately advertised of it, but knowing my self to be entirely Innocent, I
thought that I ought not to make Excuses, and believed I could not come to a
clear understanding, without speaking in some sort against the exiled, which
was contrary to my humor. In the mean time I perceived that my Affair was
protracted for one of these two ends, either to make me swerve from my Duty, or
do some foolish Action, or at least to make the Suisses grow impatient by the
delay, and discredit me with them: So that I thought I ought speedily to see an
end of it, and went to Madam de Chevreuse, whom I acquainted how things stood:
I came not to desire her to speak for me, knowing well, that she had her hands
full of more important Concerns, but only to tell her, That I must be pressing
and urgent in the business, and that before I did it, I was willing to give her
an account thereof: She called Campion to make a third in our Conference, and
answered me, That if I could but have patience for eight days, she believed in
that time she could do my business effectually; but since I could not defer it,
that I must seek a support elsewhere, and only continue to be still her Friend.
I believe this Discourse went no further then us three; but I know very well,
that when I went the day following to speak with the Cardinal, he showed very
little inclination to favor me, and after many Difficulties (though I assured
him I desired to owe the Obligation to him) he told me, That he was not the
only one in the Council, and that I must speak to others: by this I judged that
my Affair was lost: but finding no other way to come off, and seeing that
Monsieur Tellier had obtained a Grant of what he desired against me, I was
resolved to speak to his Royal Highness, and to the rest of the Council; but
during this time, the procedure of my Friends ruined all as fast as I could
build. The Duke de Beauford, either out of Love or Pride, showed himself
infinitely vexed at the Exile of Madam de Montbazon; and when the Queen would
have spoke to him, he flung away in such a disdainful manner, that this alone
was enough to have destroyed all the Friendship she could have had for him: I
perceived it one Evening, and reproached him for acting so like a Child, but
instead of returning me Reasons, he answered me only with very imprudent
transports of Passion and Fury. As he had less business than ordinary, he came
very often to seek for me; and though I saw him in an ill posture, yet out of
Friendship and Honor, I would not quite forsake him: It Is true, I saw him not
so frequently in the Evening, and I question whether he staid at Night in
Paris. Monsieur de Vendosme, seeing that he could not finish his concern,
importuned him every day to reconcile himself to the Cardinal, but not being
able to prevail with him in this, he thought he must of necessity strike in
with la Riviere. Therefore he pressed him more than ever by Marshal d'Estres,
and offered him the Friendship of Monsieur de Beaufort. La Riviere listened to
this proposition with a great deal of joy, and having appointed a Meeting at
the same Marshal d'Estrees, he was surprised to see there only Monsieur de
Mercoeur his Father, and none of Monsieur de Beaufort; from that time he looked
upon him as one that was not to be trusted, and tho Monsieur de Vendosme
assured him, that he would bring his Son to him as soon as might be, and
alleged to him some obstacle which hindered him from coming, yet he would not
enter upon the subject; and having civilly taken his leave, the next day
reconciled himself to the Cardinal, betwixt whom till that time there was not a
good understanding. Monsieur le Prince made a third in this Association, the
first Article whereof, (I believe) was the ruin of Monsieur de Beaufort. And,
de facto, two days after, when the Queen went to the Bois de Vincennes to an
entertainment at Monsieur de Chavigny's, he was there, and found but an ill
reception. I know not whether this piqu'd him; but he presently came back to
Paris, and going to the Louvre to wait Her Majesty's return, found the Cardinal
there, whom (as 'twas said) he asked some Questions, whether he was going out
or no, which alarmed him. Soon after he had notice given him, that there were
some Horsemen upon the Quay, who seemed to wait there for something; after
this, he no longer doubted, but that they intended to Assassin him; he cried
out of it highly, and sent to seek for all the stout Men he could get to Guard
him. Monsieur de Metz told me this news the day after, and going to Luxemburg,
I found Monsieur de Guise there, whom I apprehended to have seen embroiled in
this mischievous disorder, but I found that he knew nothing of it. We both of
us waited the return of Monsieur, who spoke very moderately of the thing; but
la Riviere aggravated it highly, and said, that it belonged to his Royal
Highnesses Authority to preserve the Ministers in safety. I would fain have
seen Monsieur de Beaufort, but he was gone into the Country to see his Father,
and returned not before Night, which completed his ruin: for it may be, if he
had gone to the Cardinal, he might have cleared himself, and so have prevented
his Arrest. He was advised to go away to Anet for some days, but he confided so
much in the Queens favor to him, that he would needs come straight to the
Louvre. As to my self, I went to the Cardinals after dinner, to assure him of
my service, and offered to bring a File of Swisses to accompany him: He
received me very civilly (though he refused my offer) pretending to believe
that the report was false, though I saw in him the Face and Countenance of a
Man very much astonished. In the Evening as I was going into the Louvre, I
heard the news of the Duke de Beaufort's being taken, the knowledge I had of my
Innocence, made me go up stairs without doubting any thing. In the Queens
Guard-Chamber I found the Cardinal, who was going out accompanied with three
hundred Gentlemen; he saluted me very civilly, but of all his Train only
Noailles, Piennes, and Megrin, would know or accost me. In the Queens little
Cabinet I met with Madam de Chevreuse, whom I entertained a pretty while; and
having often asked if I could not see this poor Prince, and being told by
Guiteau himself that I could not. I was going away, when the Queen sent for me
into her little Chamber, and commanded me to bring two Companies of Swisses by
six of the Clock the next Morning before the Louvre: That Night I could not see
any of the Hotel de Vendosme, but the day after I went thither to mix my Sighs
with those of this afflicted House, and heard by the Duke de Vendosme (to whom
Monsieur had imparted something of it) a confirmation of what Monsieur de Guise
had told me the Night before, that I was of the number of those that were to be
removed from Court. This Report did not trouble me much, and I know not by what
Presage of my unhappiness, I wished my Banishment more than I feared it. From
thence I went to hear the News at Monsieur de Bethuny and Montresor's House,
who were threatened with the same accident, and an hour after received the
Command in my presence: It was not because they were in so strict a League at
that time with Monsieur de Beaufort that they did share in his disgrace, but
because la Riviere would never promise the Cardinal to make his Master consent
to the Arresting of this poor Prince, unless he would assure him at the same
time to banish his two Enemies; and I believe Monsieur himself contributed
thereto on his own accord, being inveterately incensed against Monsieur de
Montresor, because he had quitted him: and not forgetting also, that all he
could say himself, or caused to be said in his name to the Count de Bethune the
Winter before, to reconcile him to la Riviere, was to no purpose, and that he
was forced to procure the express command of the King to effect it. The same
day they ordered Monsieur de Chasteauneuf, de Mont Rouge, to leave the Court,
and St. Ibar also had Orders to retire. This was the reward for the Services
Beringhen did the Cardinal, who delivered him from a Man who spoke of him every
where with the greatest contempt imaginable. For my part, I believed the number
of the proscribed would increase every day: but in fine, after Dinner some came
to assure me, that I had been certainly Shipwrack'd, if the protection of
Monsieur had not preserved me. I could scare comprehend, that he whom I had
never served, should shield me from such misfortunes, which She, to whom I had
so faithfully devoted my self, had prepared for me. Notwithstanding, this News
being confirmed to me in three or four places, and also in the Hotel de Guise,
I thought my self obliged to go and thank him. That Evening I being at the
Louvre, the Queen would not look upon me, which I did not wonder at, since my
best Friends were so lately disgraced: But I was very much surprised, when the
next day, after I had been to take my leave of Monsieur de Vendosme (whom they
had commanded away, though very sick) I went to Luxembourg, and having made his
Royal Highness the Complement I owed him for the good office, 'twas said, he
did me, I received a very cold Answer, which almost contained a disavowal of
what it was publicly talked he had undertaken in my favor. I begun from that
day to do the office of my Charge as I used to do; and the next day, in vain,
endeavored to see the Cardinal who had taken Physic: I came again the day
after, and found a very cold reception, he never spoke to me but as to a third
Person, and as if he had addressed himself to all the company as well as to me.
I made this first Visit very short, and going again thither twice or thrice the
Week following, he made me very grave bows, but gave me not a word: By this I
judged my Affairs in a very ill condition, but I no longer doubted that they
were entirely ruined, when I heard that Monsieur had in the Cardinals presence
derided the thanks I gave him, and declared publicly, That he had denied he
ever did me that service. I owe this Advertisement to the Duke de Longueville,
who for all the passed differences did me the honor to continue my Friend, and
offered to serve me after the Duke de Beaufort was taken. I made no question
but la Riviere helped in this Rencounter, and desired Monsieur de Brienne (whom
I acquainted with the whole thing) to tell it to the Queen, and testify to
her, That my Complement was not to seek any other protection than Hers, and
conjured him to enter a little further into the matter, if he found it
convenient; which he did, and was answered by her Majesty, That she thought me
too much a Man of Honor, to have intermedled in the Conspiracy which was
imputed to the Duke de Beaufort; but withal, that I had been a little imprudent
in my Conduct. Finding not much displeasure in this Answer, I believed that if
I spoke to Her my self, she would, it may be, open her mind more freely,
therefore I took an opportunity, at a time which she appointed, and having
again confirmed what Monsieur de Brienne had spoken as from me, she only told
me coldly, that she believed it, and went her way. I was advised to be diligent
in seeing her every hour, which I did with all the affiduity possible; and at
the same time Monsieur de Liancour being come to Paris, I desired him to tell
the Cardinal, That I resented the Captivity of the Duke de Beaufort with
infinite sorrow; that it was without murmuring, and without ^osing the respect
I owed him, and desired him to look upon me as a Man that was careful of his
Office, and nothing more: His Answer was, That I had refused to be his Friend,
and that all he could do in generosity, was not to do me any hurt. In the
interim, I observed that Marshal de Basompiers (who till then testified to me a
great deal of Friendship, and came to dine with me but eight days before)
avoided me, and never spoke to me but in fear. One Evening, in the Queens
little Closet he gave me warning to look to my self, and told me of the
disgrace of Bishop de Beauvais, with whom they made Monsieur le Prince quarrel
without any occasion, that they might have a pretense to remove him: He told me
it in general and in a few words, afterward he withdrew, and would not speak
to me any more, as if he feared lest some body should see us converse together.
One day after this, meeting with one of my Friends, he began to blame my
Conduct, and amongst other things to accuse me for seeing Madam de Chevereus^e
so often. It Is true, that having called my self her Servant before her fall, I
did not avoid seeing her, when the unhappiness of the Duke de Beaufort advanced
hers; and going very often (as I said) to the Louvre, which was near her
Lodgings, I went thither to wait till the Queen had done Prayers, and till
Supper-time; but my Visits were not particular, and Monsieur de Guise and de
Rets, with twenty other, went thither at the same time. I was also one of the
first that advised her to endeavor her reconciliation with the Cardinal, and
confirmed her in the Design of employing Monsieur de Liancour to that end, who
served her in it with a great deal of Zeal, but without any Fruit: the Cardinal
complaining that she had broke her word with him, and saying, That she knew
very well what was agreed upon betwixt the Queen and her; we know not what it
was, because she concealed her disgrace to the last: But in fine, we heard the
very Evening that the Duke de Beaufort was taken into Custody, she offered to
do, without repugnancy, whatsoever the Queen would command her: Her Majesty
told her, That she believed her innocent of the Prisoners Designs, yet she
thought it convenient, that she should without any noise retire to Dampiere,
and after having stayed there awhile, go into Touraine. After this Evening she
was never but once at the Louvre, and had not staid so long at Paris, if she
had not thought to have gotten some Money (which was promised her) before her
departure.

Every day there came Emissaries from the Queen and the Cardinal to solicit
her to go; and amongst others, Montague being come one day to speak to her, she
asked him if it was true, that they intended to remove a great many more, and
appeared most curious to know if they would take my Place from me, declaring,
That she was extremely sorry for me, and shared in my unhappiness. This
question being reported to the Cardinal, was the last stroke of my ruin, and
from the very next day the Queen told Marshal de Basompiere, that she would
give him the Place, which he at first refused, as I am told.

This report being spread about the City, came to my ears, and made me desire
Monsieur de Liancour to try the Cardinal once more: He told me, that without my
solicitation, he had spoke to him of me very often, and had received no
satisfaction, so that he judged it necessary to have some other to help him to
begin this Discourse again. The Commander of Souvre promised to do me this
office, and both of them having taken their opportunity in the Evening, found
him so very angry that he would scarce hear them, though he still assured them
that he would do me no hurt. This last Essay being ineffective, I thought I was
to apprehend the worst, and from thence took my Resolutions. My Wife being at
this time come to Paris, went to visit Madam la Princess; with whom, by the
means of Devotion, she had contracted an intimate familiarity. She had a great
deal of talk with her, wherein she declaimed hotly against me; though at the
end of her Discourse she seemed desirous to see me.

After this, she carried my Wife with her to the Carmelites, where she and
Madam d'Aiguillon presented her to the Queen, and endeavored to reconcile her
to me; but they found her too obstinately resolved on my ruin, and already (as
she said) engaged upon her word to Marshal de Basompiere. Madam d' Aiguillon
carried her in the Evening to the Cardinal, who told her the same thing, and
assured her, if she had come but three Weeks sooner, I might have been saved.

When I thus saw that all the World was bent against me, I resolved not to see
the Queen, for fear of receiving a command from her own Mouth, and being
reduced to refuse her to her face; and meeting with St. Luc, who assured me
from his Uncle, that he would not contribute to my misfortune, nor desire my
Place: I told him that I only desired, that he would not take it without my
resignation, and he assured me that he would not.

The day following I was to visit Madam la Princess, who was at first in a
violent Passion against me; I suffered her to say what she would; and being
unwilling to justify my procedure, because I would not altogether offend or
condemn her (for that had seemed immodest in me) I laid all that was passed
upon my ill Stars, and unavoidable occurrencies. She often reflected upon poor
Monsieur de Beaufort, to which I answered with as much modesty and fidelity as
I could, and left her in appearance very much appeased: Indeed, (tho she took
it ill that I did not beg her assistance) she promised my Wife to hinder my
ruin, and bid her desire me to be at her House the day following, when her Son
came thither. I passed the rest of the day in expectation of a Command; and the
Morning after being informed that Marshal de Bassompiere seemed to think it
strange, that for so many Civilities which he had done me, I should not pay him
one, I went to his House, where he repeated to me the same assurances which St.
Luc had before given me in his behalf, and for a remedy against my prepared
Persecution, advised me not to resign, which advice I promised him to follow.
After Dinner I waited for the arrival of Monsieur d'Anguien, to whom his Mother
presented me, and was very well received by him: His Father, whom I saw
immediately after, reproached me a little, but without Passion, and assured me,
that he would do me no hurt. When I saw this Family no more displeased at me,
and on the contrary, that Madam la Princess had said that day, That she would
take care of my Affair as of her own, I still entertained some hopes, founded
chiefly upon the great Reputation of Marshal de Bassompiere, whom I believed
too generous to contribute to my ruin, after what he had promised me, and the
request he had made to the Duke de Longueville, to assure Madam la Princess,
That she was so far from disobliging him in doing me service, that he took it
as a favor, pretending that he would by no means turn me out. In the interim,
because I had not been at the Louvre for two or three days, I thought it
convenient to let the Queen know, that after the report which was spread
abroad, I durst not out of respect present my self before her to do my Office,
though I believed her too just, and knew my self too innocent to apprehend her
digraceing of me. I desired Monsieur de Brienne to do me this favor, and to
visit the Cardinal also, to tell him, That whatsoever was reported, I could not
believe my unhappiness, knowing well that I had never been deficient in the
Fidelity was due to her Majesty, nor in the respect which I owed to his
Eminence. I had an Answer to the last Point the same day, and heard that the
Cardinal did not show any hatred against me, but spoke as if there were yet
left some hopes of a Reconciliation: But as to the first, Monsieur de Brienne
coming to see me the next Morning, told me, That as he began to speak of me to
the Queen, she prevented him, and said, That knowing him to be my Friend, she
chose him rather than Monsieur Tellier (with whom she had heard I was at
difference) to bring me an Order to send her a resignation of my Charge, and
gave him no other reason for this Command, than that she would do Justice to
Marshal de Bassompiere: My answer was, That I thought my self the most unhappy
Man in the World to have displeased the Queen, and that my Comfort was, that my
Conscience did not reproach me with having offended her either in great or
little things; that as to my Charge, she was the absolute Mistress thereof, and
might dispose of it; but I humbly beseech'd her, she would be pleased not to
make me contribute to my own Misfortune: That having taken it eight Months
before in the sight of all France by Her Command, it would look as if I thought
my self guilty of some great Crime, if I should so soon consent to lay it down:
and in fine, that for the little Services which I had endeavored to do her, I
begged no other favor of her, than a permission to retire to my own House,
there to lament my Misfortune, and wait for a time more favorable to my
Innocence, which I hoped to see one of these Days, because I believed her
Majesty just, and was sure that God was so.

Monsieur de Brienne seeing he could not absolutely disapprove of my
resolution, said only, That if I would take another, some advantages (besides a
full recompense for my charge) might be procured for me, as Breviates for a
Knight of the Order of the Holy Ghost; a Marshal de Camp; a Pension of Two
thousand Crowns; and assurance of the first Office that fell: I slighted all
these frivilous Favors, and left him, after I had desired him to carry my
Answer exactly to the Queen. An hour after my Wife told me, that Madam la
Princess had excused her self to her for the assistance she promised to give me
upon the consideration of Marshal de Bassompiere, which she desired of him as
she said (though the other denied it.) Thinking it not convenient to stay at my
own House after my Answer, I retired to one of my Friends, and in the Evening
was told by a Person of great Quality that when he was at the Louvre, he saw a
busslle amongst the Queens Guards, and heard it for certain, that there was an
Order to Arrest me. If I had followed my own Opinion, I should have staid in
Paris to have seen how far they would have extended their Injustice: But my
Friends not approving it, I went into the Country the next Morning. Soon after,
I heard that the Queen, Monsieur, Monsieur le Prince, and the Cardinal, or
rather in a word all those in Power, were cruelly bent against me; and that
Marshal de Bassompiere began to change his first Discourse, and to say, that
having so much right to the Charge, he could not refuse it, if it must be that
I must lose it, and the Queen throw it upon him, but that he would never enter
upon it till I should be entirely satisfied. Against so great a Storm, I found
few or no Friends, Monsieur de Liancour (who alone appeared for me with Vigor
and Generosity) was in the Country, almost all the rest abandoned me by little
and little; and those who remained, were either involved in the same misfortune
with my self, or too weak to assist me. Of the first, some, as Monsieur de
Brienne in particular, proposed to me the advantages in submitting, and
Persecution if I resisted: Others, even of the most qualified, either out of
complaisance to those in Power, or put upon it by my Enemies, wrote me Letters
to intimidate me, and would have made me apprehend, That I should be treated as
a Rebel, and as such have my Goods confiscated, and my Houses razed. In fine,
within a few days I received an hundred different Advices, which shak'd me not
at all; at the Months end, when they saw me still in the same mind, the Queen
issued out a Declaration, by which the King published, that the Resignation of
Marshal de Bassompiere was null (as being made while he was in Prison, and upon
a promise of being set at Liberty, which was not performed) and by consequence,
all the Provisions made to the Marquess de Coissin and my self, were void: This
restored the Marshal to his Charge without the necessity of taking a new Oath,
upon condition that he paid me, within fifteen days, the four hundred thousand
Livers, which he had received in recompense thereof, or consigned this Sum to
the Exchequer, in case that I would not give a Power to receive it. This
Declaration drawn up by the Chancellor, and written with his own hand, left me
to seek for the Twenty two thousand Crowns which I gave over and above;
nevertheless, fearing lest I should recover them against him (with whom I had
treated as a Tutor to Coissin's grandsons) he took the Kings Breviate for the
like Sum, to pay it to me. I heard this News (which moved me not at all) with
another report that touched me much more, which was a Discourse, which Madam de
Brienne would have made my Wife believe she had had with the Queen concerning
me, wherein her Majesty taxing my Disobedience, swore (said she) before the
Holy Sacrament, that she had enough against me to take away my life, but out of
pure goodness would not push it to the utmost. I confess, that this Discourse
made me so very angry, that I wrote a Letter immediately to Monsieur de
Brienne, wherein I told him, that so long as my Charge and Fortune were only
concerned, I suffered without repining; but I could not forbear complaining,
when I heard it said, That my Innocence was wounded, and that they would render
me black and odious in the Queens eyes, of whom, upon this occasion, I begged
nothing but Justice, and beseech'd her if I was guilty, to order the Parliament
to Prosecute me, being ready to enter into Custody whenever she would let them
know my faults. This was the sense of my Letter, though in longer terms:
Monsieur de Brienne thinking it (it may be) too bold, would not show it to the
Queen; and, as I think, only showed it to the Cardinal, which was not the thing
I desired of him. In the mean time Marshal de Bassompiere (seeing that all they
could say to me till then, had not made me alter my Design, and being commanded
by the Queen to resolve dishonorably to take my Place, after he had so often
engaged his word to the contrary) was strangely uneasy, and endeavored every
day, by a thousand different ways, to render me less obstinate. In fine, being
(as he said) extremely pressed by the Queen, he gave my Wife three summons to
receive his Money, and in the third to give him a full Acquittance: She
answered, That she was ready to give him a Receipt, provided that he would
bring her all the Money. This put him to more trouble, having not the fourth
part of the Sum, and all his intention being to consign it in Paper by the
favor of Monsieur d'Emery: He demanded to see my Letter of Attorney, and upon
their refusal (which was because they thought he asked it only to prolong time)
he said, That if he did not show it him within four days, he would consign it
into the Exchequer, and thereupon entered upon the Charge. In this extremity,
though I was yet in the same mind that I was in at the beginning, I found all
my Friends of a contrary Opinion, who remonstrated to me, That it was to lose
both my Place and my Money upon Trust, since if I let him consign it into the
Exchequer (which he would only do by Writing) 'twas as if I should throw my
Money into a Gulf from whence I could never redeem it: That I had to do with an
old Man, an Officer of the Crown and a refined Courtier, whom it was impossible
for me to dispossess so long as he lived, and that after his death I should
never get into my Place again, if I was not well with the Court: That my
disobedience would make them drive things to the last, and that I saw very well
that he, whom they had put in over my head, was too old to answer my
Resentments, and a dishonest Man, that having so many times broaken his Word,
would willingly become the Instrument of all the Cruelties they would exercise
against me. All these Reasons added to the consideration of a Wife big with
Child, and three young Children, whom I might make miserable by my death, made
me at last yield; and I thought, that whatever reason I might have in my
design, the Opinion of so many prudent and generous Persons, ought to be
preferred before my own. So that I acquainted Monsieur de Brienne, that I was
ready to obey and to receive my Money, and he promised me from the Queen all
that he had proposed to me the day that he had demanded my Resignation. Upon
this, I gave my Letter of Attorney to my Wife, after having protested, that they
said that it might sometime be serviceable to me, to which (to say the truth) I
scarce gave any credit; and if I did keep my Resignation, 'twas only because I
had at the beginning engaged not to give it; and not out of any hopes, that
there might ever happen so great a Change as to get any advantage by it, having
never devoted my self to any but the Queen; and finding my self ruined in her
good Opinion, I am irrecoverably lost so long as she is in Power; and when the
King comes to be at Age to govern himself, there will be so great a
disproportion betwixt his Age and mine, that I can never hope for access to, or
familiarity with him.

What passed in my Affairs after what I have above related, is so well known to
the World, that it would be a very tedious Discourse, if I should exagerate the
Frauds of Marshal de Bassompiere, the Weaknesses of Monsieur de Brienne, and
the Delays and Breaches of Promise the Ministers were guilty of. I have, it may
be, already insisted too long upon things not very important; but as I made
this Discourse only for my Relations and very particular Friends, they will
have the Goodness to excuse the Faults therein, and though it seem not very
Eloquent, they will at least find it full of Sincerity and Truth: I shall be
extremely glad, if it give them any Satisfaction, and shall have obtained the
Principal End I proposed to my self, if they acknowledge that in many things I
have been more Unfortunate than Imprudent; and that in those wherein I have
been deficient, 'twas out of the Principles of Generosity and Fidelity, from
which I will never deviate, though they have not been attended with Success.

FINIS.
THE TABLE.
A. THe disturbance at Again. 209 Again keeps a Regiment at its own expense. 211
Articles and Conditions that were agreed upon between Mousieur and the Prince
of Condy, for the expulsion of Cardinal Mazarine. 290
B. The Dauphin and the Duke d'Anjou his Brother, are left in the Duke de
Beaufort's charge, at the death of Lewis the Thirteenth. 11, and 360 An Apology
for the Duke de Beaufort. 299 Bourdeaux besieged by the Kings Army. 146 The
Deputies from the Parliament of Bourdeaux conclude a Peace without
communicating the Articles to the Princess of Condy. 154 The different parties
in the Town of Bourdeaux. 217 Brousell becomes head of that party of the
Parliament, called the Frondeurs. 38 He is seized and carried to prison. ibid.
The Burgers rise, and come to the Court in a tumult to ask his liberty. 39
C. The Duke de Chastillon is killed in attacking Paris. 87 The Dutch ss de
Chevereuse's returning into France. Her coming to the Queen. 20 The Queen sends
her to Dampierre. 395 The Coadjutor of Paris persuades the Prince of Condy to
become the Head of the Faction, but is disappointed. 65 He afterward gains the
Prince of Conty's Brother. 66 The Arguments that were used to the Prince of
Condy to persuade him to join with the Court, drawn from the danger of the
Parliaments having too much power. 69 His violent carriage in the Parliament.
72 He blocks up all Paris with six or seven thousand men. 76 The Reasons of his
difference with Cardinal Mazarin. 133 His taking prisoner with the Prince of
Conty's Brother, and the Duke de Longueville, with the manner how. 137 His
return to Paris after his Imprisonment. 167 He being told that the Court
intended to seize him, leaves Paris. 186 He returns to St. Maur, where he keeps
a great Court. 190 His return from St. Maur to Paris, believing himself too
strong for the Court there. 196 His Quarrel with the Coadjutor in the Palais.
21 He makes War against the King in Guienne, he is forced to retire to Again.
208 His dangerous Journey from Again to join his Army. 210 He attacks the Kings
Army, his Fight with the Marshals d'Hoquincourt and Turenne. 230 His return to
Paris after the Victory. 237 He is followed by eight or ten thousand Citizens,
whereof he makes use to take St. Denis. 239 The Proposals he makes to the Court
to conclude a Peace. 244 He finding himself in a weak condition, endeavors to
pass from St. Cloud to post himself between the Rivers of Marne and Seine, but
is overtaken by the Kings Forces. The Fight of Paris. 261 He being overcome,
leaves Paris the same day the King made his Entrance into it. 280 Monsieur de
la Chastres Letter to Monsieur de Brienne. 288 Memoirs of Monsieur de la
Chastres. 321 His Answer to the Queen about his disgrace sent by Monsteur de
Brienne. 427 The Queens Declaration to establish the Marshal de Bassempiere in
Monsieur de la Chastres place. 430
E. Emery, Superintendant of the Finances, Impost, great Taxes. 29 Estamps,
where Monsieur le Princes Army lay besieged by the Kings Forces. 256
F. The French Conquests in the Year One thousand six hundred thirty five. 26
K. The King and Monsieur le Prince write to the Officers, not to obey Monsieur
de Turenne any longer, whom they heard stood ill-affected. 10 The King and
Queens Entry into Paris, after the War. 112
L. Lewis the Thirteenth consents, that the most considerable of those that
were disgraced should return to Court. page 10, and 34. His death. 30, and 370
The Duke de Longueville's retreat into his Government of Normandy. 113 The
Duchess of Longueville, to escape going into Normandy to her Husband,
persuades the Prince of Condy her Brother, to break with the Court, and prepare
for a Civil War. 180
M. The Objections that were made against Cardinal Mazarin's Governing in
France. 40 The Answer to them. 48 Cardinal Mazarin goes himself to set the
Princes at Liberty. 167 He is chosen by King Lewis the 13th, to be Godfather
to this present King Lewis the Fourteenth, and the Princess of Condy his
Godmothers. 358 Cardinal Mazarins Letter to Monsieur de Brienne. 282
P. The War of Paris. 24 The discontented go to the Parliament for reparation.
31 An account of the three Parties in the Parliament. 33 The Parliament
declares Cardinal Mazarin an Enemy to the Government, and therefore Issue out
Commissions to levy Soldiers. 75 The Companies of Paris voluntarily tax
themselves. ibid. The Fight of Paris, between the Kings Forces and the Prince
of Condy. 264
Q. The Queen sends Heralds to the Parliament, and their Answer. 84 The Queen
is offered to have the Prince of Condy either killed or seized: She refuses the
first, but accepts the last. 183 The reason that persuaded the Queen to keep
the Cordinal in the management of Affairs 375
R. The state of the Court at the Duke de la Rochefoucaults returning thither.
3 He gains the Duke d'Anguien over to the Queens side. 8 The Princes being
Imprisoned, he disposes things for a War. 139 Under pretense of his Fathers
Funeral, he gets Men together, and arms them. 143
T. They that moved Marshal Turenne to leave the Prince of Condy's side, and
join with the King against him. 198 The Marshals de Turenne and d'Hoquincourt,
surprise Monsieur le Princes Forces at Estamps, and kill about 1000 or 1200 of
his best Troops. 245

ERRATA.
Page 23. l. 7. for was also sister, r. by that Montague. p. 52. l. 8. r. at
the Feuillians. p. 66. l. 16. r. of having, p. 67. l. 9. r. that far from, p.
75. l. 14. dele too, p. 98. l, 12. for yet, r. that. p. 99. l. 16. for which,
r. with. p. 100. l. 6. dele they. p. 105. l. 14. for and r. that. p. 128, l.
23. r. with the heads. p. 141. for then r. there. p. 181. l. 11. for gives r.
gave. p. 265. l. 2. r. rue de course. p. 268. l. 21. r. Marshals. p. 274. l. 1.
r. au mortier. p. 281. l. 12. r. Rome. p. 290. l. 12. dele him. p. 295. l. 14.
dele having. l. 17. for they r. and, p. 310. l. 8. for in all r. small, p. 224.
l. 16. for taking r. took, p. 325. l. 22. for Anet did r. from Anet, p. 293. l.
17. for King r. Kingdom, p. 364. for Guienns r. Guimene.

Advertisement.
THe Conclave of Physicians, detecting their Intrigues, Frauds, and Plots
against their Patients: also a peculiar Discourse of the Jesuits Bark, the
History thereof, with its true use and abuse. Moreover, a Narrative of an
eminent Case in Physic. By Gideon Harvey, M. D. Physician in ordinary to His
Majesty, in 120.

The Discourse of London, or a New Discovery of the Scurvy, comprizing the
Nature, manifold Differences, various Causes, Signs, Prognostics, Chronology,
and several Methods of curing the said Disease by Remedies, both Galenical and
Chemical; together with Anatomical Observations and Discourses on Convulsions,
Palsies, Apoplexies, Rheumatisms, Gouts, Malignant Fevers and Small Pox, with
their several Methods of Cure and Remedies: Likewise particular Observations on
most of the forementioned Discourses. By Gideon Harvey M. D. The second
Edition, with many Alterations and new Additions, dedicated to the Kings most
Excellent Majesty, Is now in the Press, and will be speedily Published, in 12o.

The Unsatisfied Lovers: A new English Novel, 12o.

All three Printed for Jo: Partridge, at the Post House between Charing Cross
and White Hall.


