A DEFENSE OF THE RIGHTS and PRIVILEGES OF THE University of Oxford:
CONTAINING,

1. An Answer to the Petition of the City of Oxford. 1649.

2. The Case of the University of Oxford; presented to the Honorable House of
Commons. Ian. 24. 1689/90.

Oxford, Printed at the THEATER, 1690.

Imprimatur,

JONATHAN EDWARDS Vice-Can. Oxon.
Mar. 31. 1690.
THE PREFACE.
THE Privileges of this University have been in so full, clear, and expressive
words, granted to our Predecessors; and have since been used here with so much
moderation, and prudence; That we, their successors, might with reason have
expected rather the happiness of enjoying them, than the trouble of maintaining
them. But so it happens, That those very rights, which were designedly given to
the University, as the best means of securing our peace, and quiet, have
frequently, by the malice of our Adversaries, been made the occasions of our
disturbance. Once at least in every age, The Citizens have renewed their
complaints against us; which have all equally been founded on no reason; and
consequently have all alike met with no success. It is remarkable, that nothing
has formerly been more beneficial to us, than these groundless complaints of
the City; and that to these chiefly we owe almost all those Charters, which we
now enjoy. For when this contentious humor of the Citizens did thus in an
unaccountable manner discover it self, in the reigns of Ed. 3d. Hen. 4th. Hen.
8th. and Car. 1st. it did not only justify the prudence of their Ancestors in
granting us our ancient rights; but convinced those excellent Princes of a
farther necessity of giving greater, and more unquestionable Privileges. Thus
have we been obliged to their bad manners for our good laws; and do faithfully
keep an exact register of their contentions, by the date of our Charters. We
have published therefore these two following Treatises; not only out of respect
to our selves; but out of kindness to the City: For when once the most sober,
and judicious part of them shall be convinced, That their demands are
unreasonable, and unjust; That some turbulent Men, under the popular pretense
of defending the rights of the City, do only carry on their own designs, and
interest, at the public charge; It is impossible to conceive, That the
Citizens will still be imposed on; and not find some better employment for
their, or ratber (as it originally was) for our money. At least if they are
resolved to copy out the example of their Predecessors in opposing the
University, They should be so wise withal, as to have imitated their Methods
of opposing it. Their Fathers took advantage of that lucky Crisis in 1649; When
the University was obnoxious for its loyalty; when learning it self was a
crime; and when the Judges were as bad, as the Petitioners. This Effort was
unsuccesful indeed but well-design'd, for which we may reasonably perhaps
accuse them of ingratitude, but must for once acquit them of folly. But if the
Citizens shall now again renew the same designs, when there is not a return of
the like favorable juncture; It will be justly suspected that they are heirs
only of their Fathers malice, but not of their cunning. For can they think this
a fit time to depress Learning, and Religion? Can they imagine, that those
Charters, which have been always given to us by the best, and greatest of our
Kings will not receive confirmation from their present Majesty's? Or that this
Honorable house of Commons is less a Friend to Learning, and Justice than the
Wise Parliament which first ratified our Charters? If not; if there be no
ground for these surmizes now; we may probably think, That the Citizens will
either wholly desist; or expect a fairer opportunity of undermining their
Benefactours.

But what success any discourse may have, that applies it self to the justice,
and prudence of the City, we dare not determine; More certain we are, That
these Treatises will succeed in their other design, and will give full
satisfaction to all impartial, and unprejudiced Readers. The Articles of the
City have all met with plain, and direct answers: The Charters, that we insist
on, are named, and pointed out; and no subterfuge is taken in general
expressions. The Matter of Fact will be abundantly justified by our Registers;
The pretended difficulty in law, is, for the use of the City, made obvious to
every capacity, and we submit it to others judgments, whether the inferences,
which are few, are not fairly drawn, and warranted by reason. For as the Cause
it self was such, That it needed no other advantage, than to be set in its true
light; so was the dignity of the Body concerned so great, that it disdained any
assistance from sophistry.

The Nature of this work would not allow us the liberty of digressions and
therefore it is still to be wished That all men, in a greater work, were
distinctly informed of the first rise of our Privileges; of the motives upon
which they were first given; and the absolute necessity of the continuance of
them; That they were acquainted with the offenses of the City that occasioned
our Charters; with the signal and Extraordinary wisdom of those Princes, that
granted them; and lastly with the constant success, which, upon all contests
with the Town, attended, and confirmed them. For since above an Hundred volumes
are printed beyond Sea concerning the Rights of Universities and The
Privileges of Students; It is to be hoped, That we, who yield not to any
foreign University in the greatness of our Privileges, will show equal
diligence, in the just History, and defense of them. The only thing, that in
all probability has hitherto prevented their work, has been the integrity,
knowledge, and favor of the Judges; who, having usually been bred among us,
knew the Extent of our Privileges; and have not suffered our rights to be
examined by the unequal standard of the immunities of mean Corporations. For as
our Charters have been such, as have left us no reason to envy the foreign
Authentic; so have the Year-Books hitherto abundantly supplied the place of
Glosses, and Comments. However, though we have no reason at present to doubt of
the continuance of the same justice to us; we may reasonably desire, and yet
probably not need an exact History of our rights; as that, which though it might
not be requisite, as a necessary support; would yet at least be commendable as
an Ornament of this University.

April. 6. 1649. To the Supreme Authority of the Nation, the Commons in
Parliament Assembled The Humble Petition of the Mayor, Aldermen, Bailiffs, and
commonaltie of the City of Oxon. in the County of Oxon.
Humbly shows,
THAT they taking notice of the late memorable Acts of Parliament, made for
regulating of the Privy Council, and for taking away of the Court of
Star Chamber, the high Commission Court, and others of the like nature; and
being thereby made sensible of your worthy intentions to disinslave the free
born People of this Nation from all manner of Arbitrary Judicature or Power,
and enable them to live like Freemen under the known Laws of this Land; are
thereby at this present emboldned to make known unto you, the most intolerable
sufferings and oppressions, which they for a long time past, and yet by an
Arbitrary and unlimited power exercised over them by the University of Oxon,
have under-gone, and at this time suffer, as by particulars hereunto annexed
may appear:

And for redress whereof your distressed Petitioners humbly implore your
gracious assistance.

And whereas your Petitioners at this present, partly through decay of trading,
and partly through the long and daily payments, taxes, and quartering of
Soldiers are very much impoverished, and their City abounding with such
multitudes of poor people, that they are not able to relieve them without
provision of a convenient stock wherewithal to set them on work; for the
raising whereof, there is a certain large piece of ground, called Portmead,
lying near the said City, wherein your Petitioners have the Inheritance, and
the village of Wolvercot only Common of pasture therein by reason of vicinage,
which being enclosed and leassed out for certain years would raise a convenient
stock for the relief and setting on work of the said poor. The which your
Petitioners are very desirous, and have much endeavored to effect, but have
been, and still are hindered in these their pious, and good intentions, by the
Inhabitants of Wolvercot aforesaid; Albeit your Petitioners have been, and are
willing to allow them a proportionable quantity of ground, to be allotted them
out of the said ground in lieu of their said Common.

Your Petitioners likewise humbly pray, that they be enabled by Authority of
this present Parliament, to enclose, and demise for some competent number of
years, the said ground called Portmead for the use aforesaid, leaving a
proportionable quantity of ground, or otherwise allowing some sufficient
recompense unto the said inhabitants of Wolvercot in lieu thereof,

All which we refer to the wisdom and judgment of this Honorable House, humbly
desiring your serious and speedy considerations and resolutions herein, and to
make such order for your Petitioners relief, touching the premises, as you in
your grave wisdoms shall think meet and expedient:

And we shall ever pray, etc.
A Schedule of the Cities Grievances claimed at several times put in execution
against them by the University.
1. THE University claims power to determine all controversies whatsoever,
between any persons whatsoever, if one of the parties be a privileged person
(except in cases of maim felony and freehold) and they claim allowance of their
privileges in all other Courts, without pleading of them, and without fee; and
to try matters of fact without Jury, or without open examination of the
witnesses in the case, but only in private, before a Register; and proceed in
an Ecclesiastical way, by citation, excommunication, and the like, contrary to
the course of the Common Laws, and their sentences are not grounded upon any
certain Law, either Civil, Canon, Statute, or Common Law, but secundum oequum
and bonum, and merely Arbitrary, at the Will of the Chancellor, or his
Vice Chancellor, against whose sentence, how unreasonable soever, nor Writ of
Error will be by them allowed, or other redress admitted, but only by appeal
before themselves, in their Convocation or Congregation, in which particular,
the Citizens find themselves much grieved, being by those proceedings not only
delayed, but oftentimes defeated of their just debts, without any redress at
all.

2. Without any lawful power they take upon them to make Proclamations, thereby
imposing not only pecuniary mulcts, but also imprisonment upon such persons as
shall not obey their matters contained in such Proclamations, and this not only
upon Citizens, but likewise upon all others, dwelling within five miles of Oxon.

3. They claim and exercise a power over the Citizens, to impose 40 s. upon any
Citizen being found out of his house after 9 of the clock, albeit it be in the
summer time; and albeit they be Constable in their search for Fellons, upon
pursuit of hue and cry; or Aldermen of the City, or Justices of the Peace, in
conveying of Malefactors to the Goal, or the like, and for default of present
payment of the 40 s. to send them to prison, there to continue until
satisfaction made to the Proctors.

4. They claim the sole power of Licensing of Alehouses, Brewers, and
Maulsters, and usually take for the making of Licenses for Brewers to Brew, and
for Maulsters to make Malt 17 s. 8 d. and take Recognizances of the
Ale-house-keepers, but never return any of them to the Quarter Sessions.

5. They have challenged to have power and de facto have exercised a power, to
pull down the Citizens houses of Habitation; and some of the Butchers Shambles
within the City.

6. They take upon them power to dis-common Citizens at their pleasure, and to
inhibite all privileged persons, to have any commerce or trading with them;
which power they have also exercised upon diverse Citizens.

7. They exact from the Mayor and sixty two Citizens, an Oath for the
maintenance of the University Privileges; whereas many of their pretended
Privileges are mere Usurpations and Inchroachments upon the Liberties of the
City, which the Citizens by their Oaths are bound to preserve.

8. They claim and exercise a power to enforce the Mayor, and sixty two
Burgesses of the City, to come yearly to St. Mary's Church on the tenth of
February (called by them Scholastims day) to make an Oblation at the high
Altar, of sixty three pence for the slaughter of sixty three Scholars, tempore
Ed. 3. to procure a Mass for the souls of the sixty three slaughtered persons;
for the nonperformance whereof, they give forth, That they will put a bond in
suit, which the City in those days entered into the University.

9. They claim a power to make Bylaws, thereby to bind the Inhabitants of the
City, which are mere strangers, and were never called to the making of them.

10. They take upon them power to make new Officers, as Tole takers of Corn,
and the like, and they constitute Coroners, which Office of Right belongs to
the City by their ancient Charters, and Usage, time out of mind.

11. They claim Felons Goods, and Deodands, by their new Charter, albeit the
City time out of memory has enjoyed, and has right unto them by their ancient
Charters, as they conceive; and albeit, the City be at the charge of keeping of
Felons, and of the delivery of them.

12. The Market, the Soil, and the Streets belong to the Citizens, together
with Toll, Stallage, and Picage, yet the University claims all these; and
diverse times by Proclamation alter the Market days, whereas the University have
only the Clarkship of the Market, and the perquisites, and profits thereof,
belong to the City toward the feefarm Rent.

13. They set up diverse Taverns in Oxon, and will not permit the City to set up
any, contrary to the true intent of the Statute of 7. Ed. 6.

14. They claim power to set up trades within the City, and to authorize
Forraigners to exercise any trade there, as Fully as a Freeman of the City, and
that albeit such Forraigner never served as an Apprentice.

15. In case the City punishes any irregular Freeman for misdemeanor, or make
any By-law for regulating of such misdemeanor, they presently become servant to
some Master of Arts, or else to be an under Gardner to some College, or Hall,
and thereby exercise their Trades, in contempt of the City, and their Bylaws,
and refuse to pay any payments with the City, except such as shall be
warrantable under the Seal of the University.

April. 30. 1649. A Particular of the Grievances of the City of Oxon against
the University of Oxon, together with the reasons thereof exhibited unto the
Honorable Committee for the regulating the said University, according to the
directions of an Order of the said Committee of the 26. of this instant April.
1649.
1. Grievance. THat Scholars and Privileged persons draw Townsmen in suit to
the Vice-chancellors Court for any matters whatsoever (except Mayhem, Felony,
and Freehold) as well in cases where they are Plaintiffs, as where they are
Defendants: in which particulars the Citizens conceive they have just cause of
complaint for diverse reasons.

First, for that by the ancient Charter of Hen. 1. Hen. 2. Edw. 3. and diverse
other subsequent Charters confirmed by act of Parliament and allowed by
Justices in Air and in the Courts at Westminster, they ought not to be
impleaded out of their own Court, but to have their trial in their own Court
according to the Customs and usages of London, for that they are by their
Charters to enjoy the same liberties and customs, and the Perquisites and
Profits of their Court are parcel of their Fee-farme which would be left or at
leastwise lessened in case that their suits and trials should be in the
Chancellors Court, as well where a privileged person is Plaintiff as
Defendant: (there being at this present near about a third part of the
Householders within the City privileged by the University as is conceived.)

Secondly, for that the proceedings in the University Court are by citation
Viis and modis, Libell, Excommunication, and the like, and the sentences of the
Chancellor, or his Vice Chancellor, or Commissary, not confined or tied to any
certain Law, either Civil, Canon, or Common Law. But either according to any of
these, or according to the Customs and Statutes of the University heretofore
used or hereafter to be ordained, or according to his and their best
discretion, notwithstanding any Statute whatsoever either made or to be made,
against whose sentence (be the same just or unjust) there is no remedy either
by removing the cause to any of the Courts of Westminster either of Law or
equity or otherwise than before themselves.

Thirdly, for that diverse Citizens have commenced several suits in that Court
both for just debts due unto them by bond, as also for insufferable injuries
committed against them by privileged men after long and tedious suits of 3 or
4 years standing, and much expense, have been destitute of any redress there at
all.

Fourthly, for that (as the Citizens conceive) that Court and the order and
manner of their proceedings consists not with the present Constitution of the
Commonwealth or the Liberty of the People, this particular not only concerning
the Citizens of Oxon, but all others who shall have any commerce or dealing
with a Scholar or a Privileged Person.

2. Griev. The University claims a power to imprison, and to impose a mulct
of 40 s. upon any Citizen being out of his house after nine a clock at night
without such reasonable cause as the Proctors or Vice Chancellor shall allow
of, the Proctor having the benefit of the mulct: and this has been exercised
not only upon private Citizens but upon the public Magistrates and Officers
of the City, as Bailiffes, Constables, and the like, being in the execution of
their offices to preserve the peace, to pursue Hue and Cries, to keep watch and
ward, Convey offenders to prison by virtue of the Justice of peace warrants, to
prevent escapes from the Goal, whereof the Bailiffes have the charge and the
like, which the Citizens conceive to be a great Grievance contrary to the great
Charter, and other Laws, to their Native and just liberties, the rather for
that the five Aldermen and eight Assistants of the City, besides what the Law
of the Land require, are by their Ancient Charters and by their Oaths bound to
search for and apprehend Malefactors within the City as well by night as by
day, Nevertheless the said Citizens can desire no less, but that if the Mayor
or any Officer of the City find any privileged person disorderly and irregular
they may have power and liberty to secure them until they may be sent to the
Vice Chancellor or Proctor, and they to deal in like manner with the Citizens.
But that the University should impose such a mulct and inflict imprisonment for
Nonpayment upon a Citizen that is abroad after such a time about his lawful
occasions, and to make the Proctor judge in his own cause whether it was a
lawful occasion or not, he being to have the 40 s. And for a civil man to go
to the Vice Chancellor for leave to be out of his house after nine of the clock
or not to stir abroad before 4 of the clock in the morning is conceived by us
to be a greater tyranny than is fit for any freeman to bear.

3. Griev. That the University have heretofore restrained all Bakers and
Brewers within the precincts of the City and Suburbs thereof to bake or brew
within the City, except they first take License from the University, for which
they challenge 17 s. 8 d, and also enforces them to take an Oath to observe
such assize as the Vice Chancellor from time to time shall appoint, the which
the Citizens conceive to be a Grievance and a burden both in respect of the
money extorted from them, there being no such sum of money due by the Laws of
this Land for such license, as also for that they conceive it most proper and
peculiar for the City to set up and order Trades within the City where they
served as Apprentice, and for other reasons hereafter mentioned in the
Grievance concerning Trades being contrary to the Liberty of the People, and a
privilege no ways suitable or proper (as the Citizens conceive) for Scholars
to pretend unto.

4. Griev. The Vice Chancellor heretofore has by power pulled down some
Citizens houses of habitation for which there as yet has no satisfaction been
made either to the Tenant or Tenants in possession, or to the Citizens who had
the inheritance thereof. As namely in particular the house of one Tredwell,
then worth 10 l. per annum, and the house of one Master Chambers, worth 6 l.
per annum, for which it is conceived the University ought to make satisfaction
both to the Tenants and the City.

5. Gr. The Citizens conceive it to be a great pressure and inconsistent with
the Principles of charity, or the liberties of the people, or the Laws of the
Land to inhibit all the Members or privileged persons of the University to
have any commerce, trade, or dealing with such Citizens as the Vice Chancellor
or Proctors at their liberty shall dislike, it being a means to breed enmity
between neighbor and neighbor; and to hinder mutual amity between friend and
friend, as also tending to a Monopoly of Trading, and done for the maintaining
of some private interest, of mere will and power against the public interest
of the Cities Liberties. And also to the utter ruin and destruction at their
pleasure of any Citizen and his family in their Trade.

Touching the Oath that the University demands of the Mayor and of the
Citizens.

6. Gr. The Citizens take it as a grievance and burden to their Consciences,
(which they hope the wisdom and Piety of the Parliament will not suffer) to
have an Oath imposed upon them in General Terms to maintain the Privileges of
the University, the Citizens not knowing what they are. And the University
pretending all to be just which they claim; and besides the Mayor by his Oath
is bound to maintain all the rights and liberties of the City, many of which do
clash and stand in opposition to diverse of those which the University claim.

7. Gr. The Citizens find themselves very much a grieved that the Mayor and 62
Citizens with him should be compelled to come to St. Mary's yearly upon the
tenth day of February to make an oblation there at the high Altar of 63 pence
for the souls of 63 Scholars or Privileged persons slain in the time of Edw.
3 d. This in the Original being gross superstition and the memory and
continuance of it to be totally abolished without any memorial thereof to be
observed: and therefore hope and desire that one Indenture and one obligation
of the penalty of 1000 marks entered into by the City unto the University in
those days of superstition, for the continuance of that superstitious
anniversary, may be delivered up to the Citizens to be cancelled, and the
obloquie put upon the Citizens by reason of this Ceremony quite abolished, And
whereas the University now says that they will be content with the 5 s. 3 d.
per annum and dispense with the superstitious Ceremony, the Citizens desire by
the wisdom and Authority of Parliament they shall be excused from any such
acknowledgment of that servile and superstitious nature. Not that we should
contend with the University for such small matters (toward whom we ever have,
and shall respectively Comport our selves) but that we may not part with our
liberties at any rate, nor bear witness against the truth.

8. Gr. The University claims power to make Bylaws to bind the Inhabitants
of the City, and to lay both pecuniary mulcts and Imprisonment upon the
breakers thereof, as upon Tailors that have made Gowns after other fashions
then have been set down in their Private orders, which the Citizens conceive to
be an unjust and arbitrary practice, That they should be bound by such Laws as
they never knew, nor never consented to by themselves or any representative.
And their estates and persons should be liable to the pleasure of others to
whose Acts or Actions they are no ways Privy, and is as they conceive contrary
to the fundamental Laws of this Land, and the liberty of freemen of this Nation.

9. Gr. The University claims Felon's goods and Deodands, which the Citizens
take as a Grievance, for that by their Ancient Charters they are by apt words
granted unto them. And moreover the Citizens have the Custody and charge of the
Gaol and of the Prisoners, and the power to deliver the Gaol and liable to all
escapes; And it seems unreasonable that the Citizens should be at all the
charge and the University to have all the profit, and such perquisites (besides
for the reasons aforesaid) may seem not very proper nor convenient for Scholars
to trouble themselves withal.

10. Gr. The University inhibiteth the City from setting up any Taverns within
the City, or the selling of Wine by retaile, the which the Citizens conceive to
be against the true meaning of the Stat. 7. Edw. 6. And against diverse of the
ancient Charters of the City, and therefore desire that this Grievance likewise
may be redressed.

11. Gr. The University assumeth power to set up Trades within the City, and to
authorize Forraigners to exercise Trades there, albeit they never served as an
Apprentice, the which the Citizens take as a great Grievance and oppression, It
being granted unto them by diverse and sundry ancient Charters and confirmed in
Parliament, that no person or persons whatsoever, who are not of their Guild,
shall set up any Trades or sell by Retaile with them, much less that such that
have not served as Apprentices, nor are liable to perform duties or services
of the Commonwealth, as they pretend.

The Citizens are willing that the University may enjoy and continue all just
and due Privileges, which either make for the advancement of Learning, or are
fit for them to enjoy, but any privilege or practice, which exalts it self
above the power of the Civil Magistrate, which is founded upon superstition or
Tyranny, or which is inconsistent with the freedom and just Immunities of a
subject or free Citizen, they may hope, and earnestly pray may be by the wisdom
and goodness of this Parliament quite abolished.

JULY 24. 1649. THE ANSWER OF THE CHANCELLOR, MASTERS, and SCHOLARS of the
UNIVERSITY of OXFORD: To the Petition, Articles of Grievance, and Reasons of
the City of OXON. According to the directions of an Order of the Honorable
Committee, 21. of June 1649.
To the Petition.
Whereas the Petitioners charge the University with the exercise of an
Arbitrary and unlimited power over them to their most intolerable sufferings
and oppressions, which they pretend they have for a long time undergone, and at
this time suffer, (although the Petitioners by their Council at several times
before this Honorable Committee have acquitted the present Governors of the
University from any such charge, and although the University for many years now
late past have suffered great wrongs, and diminutions of their just and ancient
rights by the Petitioners, who have taken upon them to dispossess them of some
of them before complaint, and of others while their complaint is yet depending.)

We answer and say, That the University neither has exercised, nor does
challenge the exercise of any arbitrary power or jurisdiction over the
Citizens; But only such just power as they are by Law and Custom, confirmed by
Act of Parliament, warranted unto.

Concerning Port-mead.
1. We answer and deny that the Petitioners have the inheritance of the said
Meadow, but only a right of Common; and that diverse Colleges of the University,
and their Tenants, and other men, are (as we conceive) equally interessed with
the Petitioners in a right of Common in that Meadow. 2. That the number of poor
People, both now and heretofore abounding in the City, is very much occasioned
by the Petitioners illegal erecting of multitudes of Cottages upon the Town
wall and Ditch, which they rent out to such poor people, and thereby much
enhance their own Revenues, to the prejudice and impoverishing of the
University, by whose Free and charitable contributions those poor are
exceedingly relieved and maintained. 3. That if all the Charitable donations
given to maintain the Poor of Oxford by several Members of the University were
rightly employed by the Petitioners to that end for which they were given, they
could not want a convenient stock wherewithal to set them on work, as we
conceive. 4. That the improvement desired by the enclosure of Portmead would
not be only to the prejudice of the right of several Colleges and their Tenants
in respect of their said right of Common therein, but to the general
impoverishment of the poor inhabitants of the City, who claim and use a like
right of Common in the said ground, which has been, and is a great support to
them, and therefore when the like design of enclosure has heretofore been
attempted by the richer Citizens, it has been mainly opposed and hindered by the
poor inhabitants of Oxon; and so (we conceive) they do oppose it at present.
And it is to be considered that the piece of ground which they desire to
enclose contains by estimation eight hundred Acres of rich Meadow. 5. If the
City have the inheritance of Port-meadow, and that it shall be thought fit to
give way to such an enclosure as is desired for the ends by them proposed, the
University will not oppose, so as their interest in the disposing, and the
right of the Colleges and their respective Tenants be preserved; or a valuable
consideration given them in recompense of their said Common in the said Meadow.
To the first Article of the Cities pretended Grievances.
1. WE answer and say. That the University has, time out of mind, (and are
warranted so to do by diverse Charters confirmed by Act of Parliament) exercised
Power and Jurisdiction in all causes mentioned in this Article, whereof or
wherein a Privileged person is one party. 2. We do claim Allowance of our
Privilege for such Persons justly privileged, as the Chancellor shall under
the Common seal certify to any Court to be so privileged; and we have had it
without the formalitie or charge of long Pleading, paying only a fee for the
allowance of the Certificat. 3. We have ever proceeded according to the course
of the Civil Laws, and after witnesses have been openly produced in Court and
sworn, their examinations are taken in writing by the Judge and Register, and
then published, that all parties may have Copies of them, according to the
course of the Civil Law, the High Court of Chancery, and the Admiralty. 4. We
do not Proceed in an Ecclesiastical way, but in causes Ecclesiastical. 5.
Sometimes heretofore we have used the censure of Excommunication against our
own Members at the instance and for the benefit of the Citizens; but not so
these fifteen or sixteen years, and that course being now in effect abolished
by Act of Parliament, it cannot be matter of present or future Grievance to the
Petitioners. 6. We do use Summons or Citations at first, before we grant out an
Arrest against persons of quality, and such as are likely to abide and continue
within the jurisdiction: But against Strangers that have no abiding there, and
against such as are like to fly we do grant Arrests without any previous
Citation. 7. That our Sentences are (as the Petitioners untruly suggest) merely
arbitrary and grounded upon no Law, but at the will of the Judge, we deny; for
in his Sentences the Judge follows the Justice and Equity of the Civil Law,
and Common Law, and the Statutes of the Land, against which he cannot nor does
not judge. 8. If the Judge be thought to have judged erroniously or unjustly,
Writs of Error are not brought to our Court, because the manner of proceedings
there are not as at the Common Law, but the party grieved may either appeal, or
complain of a nullity, and have redress. And if it be appealed in the
University there are there appointed yearly four or five Doctors, and some
Masters from the Congregation and Convocation to hear the complaint, and from
their judgments there lies an Appeal to the Supreme Power in Chancery, where
the Judges of the Land and other learned Lawyers, both Common and Civil, have
usually been nominated Judges Delegates, as in the Admiralty and Prerogative
Court.
To the Third.
The University does claim the Night-walke, and by Custom confirmed by Act of
Parliament, has exercised the same time beyond the memory of man; and that if
any man be found by the Proctors abroad in the night without a reasonable cause
by the same Custom he is liable to pay forty shillings for his Noctivagation;
and this extends as well to Townsmen as Scholars or Strangers. But for barely
being abroad about a man's own private, or any other public occasions, such as
are specified in this Article, we absolutely deny.

2. We further affirm, that if any man be taken in the Night he may put in
Bayl and show a reasonable cause of such his being abroad the next day, or as
soon as he can; and upon his so doing he is to be dismissed without any payment.

3. If any Proctor have at any time transgressed the just bounds of their
power, the University does not avow them in it: the party grieved may take his
course against him.

To the Fourth.
The University time out of mind has used the sole power of admitting or
Licensing Common Brewers.

To the Fifth.
The University never did challenge or exercise any such power as is mentioned
in this Article.

To the Sixth.
The University does not take upon them to Discommon any man at pleasure; but
only upon very great cause and wrong to the University, after monition and due
proceedings, and that by common consent in Convocation.

To the Seventh.
The University by several Charters, confirmed by Act of Parliament, does
require an Oath of the Mayor and sixty two Citizens, to maintain their lawful
Privileges, and so it is expressed in the Oath.

To the Eighth.
The University does challenge by Agreement and Indenture under the common Seal
of the Town-Corporation the Offering of sixty three pence yearly by the Mayor
and sixty two Burgesses: But without any relation to the High-Altar, or Mass,
or the Souls of so many persons slain.

To the Ninth.
The University by Custom, confirmed by Act of Parliament, does claim a power
to make By-Lawes, for the good government of the University and the Peace of
the Place, in such things as belong solely to the jurisdiction of the
University; whereby the Townsmen as well as others are obliged in order to the
peace and good government of the University: But in things that belong to the
government of the City we meddle not.

To the Eleventh.
The University claims Felons Goods and Deodands by an ancient Charter
confirmed by Act of Parliament; and we deny that the City has any right to them
at all.

To the Thirteenth.
The University does license Taverns in Oxford, according to the true intent of
the Statute 7o; Edw. 6^i and the persons so licensed are, and may be, Townsmen
as well as Privileged Persons. And the City has no right to set up any.

To the Fourteenth.
The University by ancient Custom and several Charters confirmed by Act of
Parliament, and special Compositions with the City does Claim, that Priviledg'd
persons may exercise Trades according to the Law, as far forth as any Townsmen;
But against the Law (as not having served as an Apprentice in such Trades where
the Law requires it) we neither challenge nor exercise any more power then the
Citizens themselves.

To the Second, Tenth, Twelfth, and Fifteenth, and part of the Fourth we have
forborne to answer, in regard the Petitioners have omitted them in their last
paper of Grievances of the 10 th of April; and by their Council in the Audience
of this Committee upon the 21. of June did openly declare they would not insist
upon them.

To the Paper of Reasons exhibited by the Petitioners, April. 30. 1649.
1. To the Reasons of their first Grievance.
1. TO the first Reason of their first Grievance. We answer, and deny it to be
true that they have any such Charter allowed in Air, or any such Custom as is
pretended, viz. Not to be sued out of their own Court; Nor ought to have for
the reasons following.

1. For that the University Court and the jurisdiction thereof, is of a higher
antiquity then any Charter of the Citizens legally confirmed concerning their
Court. 2. For that in the most and principal Charters of the City, as also in
such Acts of Parliament as tend to the confirmation of them, there is an
express saving of all the Rights and Privileges of the University. 3. For that
it appears by common Practice that the Citizens mutually sue one another in the
Courts at Westminster and elsewhere, both by original Suits commenced in those
Courts, and by removing their Suits out of their own Courts by Writs of Habeas
Corpus, Certiorari, and Writs of Error. 4. For that they are ordinarily sued by
Strangers both in the Courts at Westminster, and other Courts; and we cannot
find that ever they pleaded any such Charter of Exemption; or if they did, that
any such Plea was ever allowed to them; Whereas the Universities Privilege
has been frequently pleaded and in all ages allowed.
2. Whereas the Petitioners claim by their Charters the same Liberties and
Customs with London.

We answer.
1. The Petitioners have not made it appear, nor so much as asserted, that
London has any such Liberty or custom, whereby They may not sue and be sued
out of their own Courts. 2. That supposing They have such a Liberty or Custom
at present, yet the Petitioners have not made it appear, or so much as asserted
that London had any such Liberty at or before the time of the Grant of those
surmised Charters to the City of Oxford. 3. That diverse other Cities and
Boroughs in England have by their respective Charters like Grants of the same
Liberties with London and Oxon, who yet are not exempted from suing and being
sued out of their own Courts. 4. That it will appear that the most ancient
Charter which the City of Oxon can pretend to, in relation to the liberties of
London, is utterly repugnant to it self as to the principal of those Liberties.
5. That Custom is the work of time, and grows without Charter, and therefore
can not be granted by Charter. 6. That the Customs of London are of great
variety, to some of which (notwithstanding their Charter be general for all)
the Citizens of Oxon do not pretend; and to other some when they have laid
claim by suits at common Law, by petition to the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of
London, by petition in Parliament, and by pleadings in Air, their claim has
not been allowed.
3. Whereas the Petitioners suggest that their Fee-Farm would be either lost or
lessened in case their suits and trials should be in the Chancellors Court, We
answer.
1. That ever since the Borough of Oxon was first rented out to that
Corporation in Fee-Farm, they have continually fallen in their Rent, but
enhaunced their Revenues by Challenging and taking several particulars as
belonging to their Fee-Farm which in truth are no part of it. 2. That granting
the perquisites of their Court from the proper Suitors to be part of their
Fee-Farm, yet their suing and being sued in the University Court, where a
Scholar or privileged person is one party, would nothing impair the just
perquisites of their Court or Fee-Farm, in regard it was never otherwise since
they had either Court or Fee-Farm in Oxon.


4. Whereas the Petitioners conceive there are at this present near about a
third part of the householders within the City Privileged by the University, We
answer.
1. That we conceive a tenth part of the Householders within the City and
Suburbs are not privileged persons; And that as the benefit of their
privilege by the daily growing oppressions and vexation of the Petitioners is
in a manner wholly destroyed, so the number of privileged persons is much less
than ever it was heretofore within the memory of man. 2. That if it were true
which the Petitioners suggest, it thence follows, that the Petitioners by
desiring (as they do in their Article) to restrain all Privileged persons from
exercising any Trade within the City, do thereby desire to expose a third part
of the Householders within the City as (being privileged, as they say) to want
and beggary.


To the second reason, We answer.
That it proceeds wholly upon mistakes of the manner and rules of proceeding in
the University Court which we conceive we have sufficiently cleared in our
former Answer to their First Article of Grievances.

To the third Reason, We answer.
That there is as quick expedition in our Court as in any other Courts, and
they may as well object That diverse persons commenced several Suits in the
Courts at Westminster for just debts due unto them by bond and for injuries
committed against them, and yet (it may be for want of good proof by witness,
or otherwise, (as for want of able Council, or careful Atturnies to look well
to their pleadings and executions, or for want of ability in the parties sued)
after long and tedious suits, and much expense, have been destitute of any
redress; and therefore this manner of reasoning is not at all concludent, being
an argument drawn a non causa ut causa, which if it were of any force, we might
easily turn the edge of it upon the Petitioners, by giving instance in a
Privileged person who has a Cause now or lately depending in the Town Court,
wherein he sues diverse Citizens for a just debt upon Bond, and though his debt
and Bond were well proved or ready to be proved by sufficient witnesses, and no
defect in his Council or Attorney, nor any disability in the Defendants, yet
could he not get his money in that Court, after a long and tedious suit near two
years, and much expense. Yet is not the Court to be blamed, but the dilatorie
cunning of the Defendants, and we cannot think it reasonable to charge the
faylings of men, or other intervening casualties, upon the Law or the Court,
either theirs or ours; the due proceedings of which later are, in themselves,
as compendious as of any other ordinary Court whatsoever.

To the Fourth and last Reason, We answer.
1. That such Courts as ours have been found by long experience to consist very
well with the most flourishing Commonwealths that ever were or are in the
world, and with the liberty of those people who had or have no other order or
manner of proceedings in their Courts then such as is objected to ours. 2. That
(as we humbly conceive) the wisdom of this State in former ages thought it fit
that our Ancestors should use the practice of the Civil Laws in our Court, the
better to train up young Students in the knowledge of them, that they might
thereby be made more serviceable to the Commonwealth in affairs at home and
abroad. 3. That our University Court is of such antiquity that the Common
Law Books, and some very ancient, take frequent notice of it, the proceedings
thereof being always allowed by the Common Law. And the Lord Chief Justice Cook
in his Book Of the Jurisdiction of Courts in England (lately published by
authority of the Honorable House of Commons) makes honorable mention of the
Courts in both the Universities. 4. That if the Citizens be Plaintiffes (as
most commonly they are) besides the expedition which they may find there, they
may have the benefit of the Defendants Oath to ease them in their proof; They
may have good sureties put into Court not only to bring in the Defendants, but
also to pay the Judgment and Costs of Suit; they may arrest not only the Body
of any Privileged person, but also his goods, debts, and things in Action. 5.
That though this particular (if it were a grievance) does not only concern the
Citizens of Oxon, but all others who shall have any commerce or dealing with
Scholars or Privileged persons; yet have no others complained of our Court,
and the Petitioners of all others have least cause. 6. That we do not challenge
or exercise any other jurisdiction over the Petitioners or others in the
University Court than the Citizens of Oxon themselves, and all or most other
Cities and Boroughs in England do claim and daily practice without
contradiction over all other freeborn people of the Land; to wit, to Arrest
and compel them to answer in their respective Courts, if they can be there
legally attached to Answer. 7. That we do not claim or exercise any greater or
other Privilege in this particular than (as we conceive) is granted to and
used by other Universities in Europe as well as ours; to wit, to sue and be
sued before their own Judge: a Privilege indulged to them and us in favor of
Learning; that Scholars may not be called abroad to answer Suits, to the great
neglect of their studies and expense of their time and money. 8. That in mixed
Suits where one party is of the Privilege of the University, and the other of
the City, since it cannot be otherwise but such Causes must be heard and
determined either in our Court, or the Town Court, or both must be subject to a
foreign jurisdiction (which would be equally repugnant to the Privileges of
both Bodies, no way advantageous unto them, and extremely inconvenient for us)
we cannot but conceive it more consonant to justice, and withal more convenient
that the Privilege of the University should herein take place of theirs. 1.
Because this Privilege has been anciently granted to us, and we have been many
hundred years in possession of it, and it is also confirmed unto us by Act of
Parliament. 2. Because the Judges in the University Court, having no interest
in the particular Suits brought before them, cannot be thought other then
indifferent; Whereas if Scholars should be Sued in the Town Court where the
Mayor and Bailiffs, Judges and Jury, are all Tradesmen, it is very much to be
feared it would go hard with the poor Scholars. 3. Because (as we humbly
conceive) the University is still (as it has always been reputed) the more
noble Corporation, more Serviceable in the public, and in which the whole
Nation has a greater interest than in the City or Citizens; who for the most
part are beholding to the University for much of their livelihood and
subsistence (as themselves in the fifth Article do imply) whereas we have no
dependence upon them, but only wares for our money at dear rates. 4. Lastly,
Because (as we likewise conceive) if the Petitioners should prove so
unfortunately successful in their desires to obtain the liberty of Suing
Scholars in their Town-Court, it would prove in the end very prejudical to
themselves; for besides that it would minister occasions of discontent and
continual quarrels betwixt the Bodies, it would deter Scholars from having any
dealing or commerce with their new Judges the Citizens.

II.
To the Reasons of their second Grievance, made up with diverse specious
instances to cast aspersions upon the Universities Right and Privilege of the
Night-walk.

We answer.
1. That the Right and Custom is so ancient, so strengthened by confirmation of
Parliament, and the benefit thereof so great to all inhabitants by the careful
practice and exercise of it, and the continuance of it so absolutely necessary
for the good government of the University, (especially for securing younger
Scholars against the many temptations to lewdness and looseness, which they
ordinarily are exposed to by means of such Townsmen as make their own advantage
out of the others luxury and deboystness) that no man of any civil
conversation, Stranger, Sojourner, Citizen, or other, has ever expressed the
least reluctance against it: As for such disorderly walkers, who are of a
contrary disposition, it is used only to reduce them to civility; and the
Proctors exercise the like power over them, which the Constables and
Magistrates in other places are allowed by the Laws of the Land, to preserve
the quiet of the place, and to punish the misdemeanors of such as are
disorderly. 2. We do not know that any Proctors ever exercised such power over
the Public Magistrates of the City in the due execution of their offices as is
charged in this Article: Or if any did the parties grieved might have their
remedy against them; the University does not claim any such power. 3. We answer
and deny that the City have any such ancient Charters concerning five Aldermen
and eight assistants of the City as is pretended in this Article. 4. We
likewise deny that in the case of Noctivagation the Proctors are any Judges at
all, but only Relators of the Offenders; nor are they to have the forty
shillings, but only the half in case of legal conviction, as in all other cases
of mulcts. 5. As for what the Petitioners have proposed as an expedient in this
point, That the Town Officers may have as much power over us, as she University
Officers over them, we conceive it would be neither just nor safe for them to
endeavor, or us to consent to the dividing that power with them which by Law
and practice is wholly ours, and which is so absolutely necessary to the well
governing of the University. Besides, we conceive that if both parties should
walk in the Night, it would breed occasion of quarrels and tumults, if not
Bloodshed. And how little cause the Petitioners have to complain of Tyranny in
the exercise of this power, we dare appeal to the consciences of the best and
gravest Citizens, whether they have not enjoyed both quiet and profit by the
vigilant care of the Proctors in the Night-watch: To the knowledge of such
others of their Body, whose disorders made them justly obnoxious to that power,
whether they have not usually been much more favorably dealt with than the
members of our own Body: Lastly, To the Testimony of many other civil Gentlemen
both of our own and foreign Nations, who in times of peace did use to come and
sojourn in Oxford; whether they did conceive it any Grievance to them to be
subject to this and other rules of Government of the University, which the
Petitioners are pleased to traduce as arbitrary and Tyrannical.
III. To the Reasons of the Third Grievance, We answer.
1. That the University having the undoubted Assize of Bread and Beer (and the
Oath for the observing that Assize being a necessary consequent depending on
it) the right and custom of admitting and Licenceing of common Brewers and
Bakers in Oxon is not only ancient, but for the fitness thereof has also
received and had confirmation by Act of Parliament. Neither is it without
examples of like nature in the Book-cases, where time has indulged the like
custom to persons of quality in other places. And this particular Right of
the University has not many years since been declared by the free and
voluntary acknowledgment of the Brewers of Oxon themselves, as in due time will
be showed in writing. 2. As for the Fees of such Licenses or admissions, we
answer, they have been anciently paid to several Officers of the University for
their pains about that business, and are (as we conceive) in themselves but
moderate, far short of such Fees as are required by the City, and their members
in other like cases, But the University claims no Fee to their Body for any
such Grant or License. 3. We further conceive it is not improper for the
University to have this right, (which in all probability) would be worse
practiced and with greater prejudice to the public, if exercised by the City;
whose chief Magistrates are for the most part men of the same Trades, and who
by several Acts of Parliament are prohibited from entermedling with the
Assizing and Correction of victuals, or the defaults therein.
IV. To the Reasons of the Fourth Grievance, We answer.
1. The University never challenges, nor did any Vice Chancellor ever exercise
any such power of pulling down, or abating, Townsmens houses. 2. As to the two
Instances, we say, those houses were both erected by the City and those who
derive from their Title, with such prejudice to the common passages adjoining,
that they were presented at the Leet as Nusances, whereupon they were ordered
to be abated, viz. so much of the first of them as might enlarge the passage at
Smithgate (which had been obstructed by that encroachment) to the convenience
of a Coach or Cartway, and what was done by the Vice Chancellor herein, was
upon the request of the City, expressed in their Letters to the Lords of the
Privy Council the 17th. of April, 1634. by whose Order thereupon made, the
oversight of doing thereof was referred to the then Vice Chancellor, as
entrusted with the Care and Custody of the Streets there: The second, totally
to be demolished, as being most notoriously disliked and complained of by the
whole Country, and all passengers, to whose great danger it was in their
travel over East-Bridge, whereupon it was newly erected: upon the doing thereof
the Lords then directed that convenient recompense should be made to the Owners
of those houses by those that did abate them; which was in truth the City
themselves, and not the University or Vice Chancellor.
V. To the Reasons of the fifth Grievance, We answer.
1. That the matter here intimated by the Petitioners (for it bears not any
direct charge of Discommoning) is an ancient Privilege of the University,
albeit rarely practiced, and not but upon great provocation, to which the
University has recourse as to their last refuge against the professed
Adversaries of the public rights, peace, and good government thereof; and that
only by their joint and general consent in Convocation, wherein we conceive our
proceedings justifiable. 1. For that of common right trading is free for all
persons, where, and with whom they please; and the same measure we do herein
meet to the Citizens, they may, and we are content (if they see just cause)
they shall meet to us again. 2. For that the Petitioners do the like themselves
not only toward the University and Privileged persons, but even to members of
their own Body.
2. We further answer, That this practice of the University cannot in congruity
be construed as tending to a Monopoly of Trading, in the intentions of those
that use it; who are neither so ignorant of their own interest, nor so much
enemies to it, as to desire any thing more than an universal Freedom of Trade;
which as it is most consonant to the native liberty of every Freeman, and to
the Common Law of the Land; so would it be more beneficial to Scholars than any
other persons, they living wholly upon the penny, buying all commodities, but
having nothing to fell. But whether the Petitioners themselves, be not in an
high measure guilty of that crime which they here object to the University, we
desire may be considered, for that they have got, by purchase or otherwise,
into their hands several ancient Faires, and Markets heretofore used to be kept
in Oxon, and sometimes belonging to some Colleges, and have suppressed them to
make way for their own sole Trading in that place; and have of late without any
just warrant, erected new Corporations of particular Trades, and by color
thereof engross such Trades among themselves, to the great prejudice of other
Tradesmen, and the enhansing of prices upon all manner of buyers.
VI. To the Reasons of the sixth Grievance, We answer.
1. That the Oath complained of by the Petitioners, as to the form of it, has
been approved and settled upon solemn debate in Parliament above four hundred
years ago. 2. Whereas they object against it that it is conceived in General
terms, We reply, So are all those Oaths which are required by the City of Oxon,
and other places, of all their Freemen, when they are first enfranchised, to
preserve the Liberties of their respective Corporations. 3. Whereas they
pretend ignorance of our Privileges, and thereby insinuate how unjust it is
they should Swear to preserve them, We answer, That neither this Oath which we
require, nor any other of that kind which is conceived in General terms does,
by intendment of Law, bind the takers to any farther observance of the
particulars comprehended within that generality, then as they shall come to
their knowledge; And we farther say; That this reason (if it be of any force)
is much more pregnant against that Oath, which is usually imposed upon all the
Freemen of Oxon at their first admittance, to maintain and keep all the
Franchises, Liberties, and Customs of the City, to which many of them are
altogether strangers at the time of their taking that Oath, whereas none are
required or admitted to Swear to maintain the Liberties of the University but a
few Citizens of the Graver sort, to whom by reason of vicinity and long
conversation amongst us, the Customs and Liberties of the University are
sufficiently known. 4. Though we do confess all Privileges to be just which we
claim, yet we neither pretend to be our own Judges to determine, in point of
Controversy, which are just; neither do we pretend that the Mayor or any
Citizen is bound to Swear, or if he do Swear, is bound to maintain all or any
Privileges barely claimed by the University as just, unless they be so in
themselves, and have been lawfully used by the University, And therefore since
(as is clear by the words of the Oath) we do not claim that the Mayor and
Citizens ought to Swear to maintain any other than the lawful Privileges of
the University: And that it is acknowledged by the Petitioners, that the Mayor
is bound by his Oath (and known by common practice, that every Freeman is in
like manner bound) to maintain all the Liberties of the City, and that many of
those do clash and stand in opposition to diverse of those which the University
so claim, It must follow, that all such pretended Liberties of the City as do
clash with those Liberties of the University, which the Mayor and Citizens are
required by Oath to maintain, must be in themselves unlawful. 5. Lastly, we
crave leave to observe a very preposterous course taken up by the Citizens of
latter times to overthrow the just and ancient Rights of the University, by the
new forged Engines of their City Oaths; for first they frame an Oath contrary
to our Privileges, and then complain of our Privileges for being contrary to
their Oath.
VII. To the Reasons of the seventh Grievance, We answer.
That for the great loss sustained by the University in Edward the Thirds time
by the cruel and bloody outrage of the Townsmen against the persons and goods
of many thousands of innocent Scholars, the Mayor Bailiffs and Commonalty then
entered into two Bonds, one of Five hundred pounds, and the other of a hundred
marks yearly to the University; the former was given up upon the payment of
fifty pounds only, (no way answerable to that loss) the second was suspended by
an Indenture of Composition so long as the Mayor and sixty two such Townsmen as
had been sworn that year to preserve the Privileges of the University, should
yearly upon Scholastica's day repair to St. Mary's Church, and be there present
at such service as was suitable to those times, and should then and there offer
sixty three pence: which was to be distributed two parts of the poor, and a
third to the Minister of the Parish. Upon the Reformation in Queen Elizabeth's
time, by consent of both Corporations, that Service was changed into a Sermon
or Communion, but the Offering was agreed to be continued; which if the City
will redeem, the University expects First recompense for the remainder of the
Money abated upon that first agreement, Secondly a reparation for the Scandal of
this Article and Grievance, there being none more abhorring of Superstition
than they who are herein charged with an endeavor of continuing it.

VIII. To the Reasons of the eight Grievance, We answer:
1. That the University, by ancient Custom confirmed by Act of Parliament,
have used to make Bylaws for the better ordering and government of the
University and Scholars therein; which Bylaws bind not only Scholars but
Tradesmen also in relation to the Ordering and Government of Scholars, and not
otherwise; And this power is adjudged in diverse Book-cases to be binding unto
strangers in the like cases, albeit they never actually consented by themselves
or any immediate Representatives to the making of such Bylaws. 2. That the
Petitioners themselves in other cases, do both claim and exercise a like power
over the Estates and Persons of diverse Inhabitants in Oxon not of their
Corporation, nor any ways privy or consenting to their Orders, either by
themselves or any Representatives.
As to the Instance concerning Tailors, we answer as before, That we have not
made any Bylaws concerning them, but in relation to the Government of
Scholars, and we conceive it inconvenient that it should be in the power of
Tailors to inveagle young Gentlemen into new and chargeable fashions in
Apparel, contrary to the desires of their Parents, the direction of their
Tutors, and the public Discipline and Order of the University, merely to
enhanse their own prices in the making, and the Mercers gains in the selling of
such dear, but unnecessary, trimmings as this Instance relates unto: And we say
farther, That we know none more guilty of the Grievance here objected to the
University than the Tailors of Oxford themselves are.

IX. To the Reasons of the ninth Grievance, We answer.
1. That the particulars here in Question are merely matter of Law, to which of
the two Corporations Felons Goods and Deodands do of right belong; The
University claims them as granted to us in express words by an Ancient Charter
(the only way by which they can be granted) and this Charter is confirmed by
Act of Parliament; and we deny that the City have any such Charter precedent to
ours that does grant them to the City, and upon this we are ready to submit to
a Trial at Law. 2. That if the Petitioners have no good Charter for them, then
their having the Custody and Charge of the Gaol, and the power to try the
Prisoners when they purchase such a Commission, and their being liable to
Escapes, will not entitle them to the Goods of Felons (much less to Deodands)
nothing being more known and ordinary than for several Lords of Franchises to
have the Goods of such Felons as were their Tenants, who yet are not kept or
tried at their charges. 3. We say though the City have one Gaol with the
custody whereof they are charged, yet there is another whithin the Liberties of
the City and used by the County, to which the University does commit most of
their Prisoners, and may do so by all. 4. Though they by charged with their
Gaol and Prisoners, yet it is very little charges to them: such Prisoners as
have wherewithal being maintained out of their own goods; and such as have not,
by Alms, especially of the University and Colleges; the Jailer in the mean
time making a good advantage of his place by Fees, and otherwise. 5. What
charges they voluntarily put themselves to in the trials of Felons, is more
than they need to do: for if the Felons be of the Body of the University, they
may be tried before our Steward at our charges if we please. And if they be not
of our Body, they may and have been tried before the Judges of Assize and
Jail-deliver for the County. 6. Why such Perquisites as are merely matter of
profit should be thought by the Citizens so improper for Scholars to enjoy, we
do not understand; nor do we know how they do or can engage Scholars in such
trouble as is surmised; which the University do receive by the hands of their
Bailiffs, and may (if they please) rent them out to any other person. 7. All
the pretentions of the Petitioners in point of convenience do nothing respect
either Deodands, the goods of Fugitives, Treasure Trove, and other particulars
which are in like manner challenged both by the University and City upon the
same titles as Felons Goods are.
X. To the Reasons of the tenth Grievance.
1. We answer and deny that the City has any power by Charter or otherwise to
set up Taverns; or to License the selling of Wine by retail in Oxon; nor does
the Statute of 7o. Edw. 6ti. cap. 5^o. by Letter, or Equity, enable them so to
do. But the University both at the time, and long before, the making of that
Statute had and used the Privilege of Licensing and suppressing of Taverns in
Oxon. And this our Privilege is saved unto us, by an express Proviso in that
Statute, by virtue whereof we do justify the inhibiting the City to erect
Taverns, or License the sale of Wine by retail in Oxon. 2. We further say, that
in respect of that power which we claim and exercise over Vintners, Brewers,
Bakers, and other Victualers, and in the Market, and for those small
perquisites we receive thence, the Citizens are yearly abated, and the
University was anciently charged with a considerable part of their
Fee-Farm-rent; whereas we do not receive any considerable benefit this way
proportionable to what the City has, or claims to have, as belonging to their
Fee-Farm other ways.
XI. To the Reasons of the Eleventh Grievance.
1. We answer, that it is one of the most ancient Liberties of the University,
that the Privileged persons thereof may use any Trade and exercise any
Merchandise in Oxford, or the Suburbs thereof as freely as any Citizen; and
this has been confirmed unto us not only by Act of Parliament, and Judgment in
Parliament, but also by Indentures of Composition between the two Bodies,
whereby the Privileged persons have been ascertained that should exercise such
Trade and Merchandise; who in that regard are to be talliable by scot and lot
and other charges with the Freemen of the City. 2. We do not otherwise than
according to this Privilege assume power to set up trades within the City; nor
do we authorize Foreigners to exercise Trades in Oxon, other than such as by
the Law of the Land and Privilege of the University are, and ought to be
allowed; however some of them have of late years been unjustly molested by the
Citizens for so doing. 3. We deny that the City has any Charter so confirmed as
is pretended to exclude Privileged persons from exercising lawful Trades, and
selling by Retail within the City, though they be not of their Guild: no such
Charter having hitherto been produced upon former Hearings when this point has
been in debate betwixt us. 4. Lastly we humbly conceive this Liberty cannot in
equity and good conscience be taken from Privileged persons, who are many of
them Butlers, and Manciples, or other Officers and Servants to the University,
and the Colleges, and Halls therein, having wives and Children to maintain,
which they cannot otherwise do than by Exercising lawful Trades; their small
wages and allowances which they receive by their respective places being scarce
sufficient to maintain them in meat and clothes, and other necessaries, if they
were single persons, and had no other charge.
To the Conclusion.
By what has been said on either party we suppose it does sufficiently appear
that some of the particulars in controversy betwixt us (which the University
claims as their just and ancient Privileges, and the City complain of as
Grievances) do concern merely matter of profit and interest; to which if our
Title be good in Law, we hope they will not be thought inconvenient for us to
enjoy; though the City desire to strip us of them. And because a full hearing
and exact discussion of all their and our Charters and Pretensions would
occasion much trouble to this Honorable Committee, we therefore humbly pray
that we may be left to a trial at Law for all such things as are merely matter
of Title, and not be disturbed in our possession till we shall be evicted by
Law.

As for other Particulars which concern matter of Power and Jurisdiction we
likewise humbly desire, that our Right may be cleared and acknowledged first,
and then the matter of Convenience taken into consideration; whereby we hope it
will appear, that as those Privileges are just and legal, so they are no way
unfit, but absolutely necessary for us to enjoy, as tending to the advancement
of Piety, Civility, and Learning, no way derogatory to the Power of the Civil
Magistrate, not founded upon Superstition or Tyranny, nor inconsistent with the
just freedom and immunities of the Citizens. Wherein we desire it may be
considered, That many large immunities and Privileges have been granted and
are enjoyed by the City in respect of the University: That their principal
Benefactors have been members of the University: That they receive an ample
benefit by our continual commerce and trading with them, all or most of our
Revenue coming in from abroad, but expended amongst them: That their Children
receive a liberal education and preferment amongst us, beyond the proportion of
other places: That, if it were not for the University, the City of Oxford would
be but of mean consideration: That there are many other Cities, but only one
more University in the Land, and those two as famous as any in the World: That
the Universities are the public Nurseries of Religion, Piety, Learning, and
Civility, and therefore have ever been the great Care of Parliaments, and the
Glory of the Nation: That though some of the Powers claimed and exercised by
the University over the Citizens may seem Grievous to the Citizens, yet are
they Necessary for us, without which it would be impossible to give a good
account of that great trust which is committed to us for the training up of
youth, upon whose education not only their own welfare, but the flourishing
condition of the Commonwealth (next under God) does very much depend.

We therefore humbly desire and pray, That the Golden reins of that ancient
Discipline by which both the University and City have for so many hundred of
years stood and flourished together, may not be let loose, to the certain
debauching of both Bodies, for the enriching and advantage of one; nor be
committed to other hands; which would (we fear) engage the members of both
Bodies in continual quarrels, and open a gap to such sad consequents, as we
shall be sorry to see, but unable to prevent.

FINIS.
THE CASE OF THE University of Oxford; Showing, That the City is not concerned
to oppose the Confirmation of their CHARTERS by PARLIAMENT.

Presented to the Honorable House of Commons on Friday Ian. 24. 1689/90.



Oxford, Printed at the THEATER, 1690.

THE CASE OF THE UNIVERSITY of OXFORD; Showing, that the City is not concerned
to oppose the Confirmation of their CHARTERS by PARLIAMENT.
THE University desire this Confirmation of their Charters by Act of
Parliament, only to secure themselves from a return of those Encroachments in
any succeeding Reign, which they experienced in the last. For when once the
Grants of Kings to the University in general, and to every College in
particular, shall be affirmed by Law, it is evident, that there will be no
pretense nor color left for any Arbitrary Power to violate our Privileges for
the future. As the University designed nothing more by this Bill, but this
Security to themselves; so were they careful to remove from the City all
grounds of Jealousy on this occasion: And therefore they of their own accord
charged this Act with a Proviso, which fully secures the Rights, Liberties, and
Immunities of the City; and puts them wholly out of the reach of this Bill. As
the confirmation is by Act of Parliament, so is the Proviso made by the same
Authority; and therefore no greater power can secure our rights, than that,
which, as Effectually, restrains our Encroachments. The Town of Cambridge are
so sensible of their own Security in this Clause, that though they have equal
Reason to oppose this Bill, as the City of Oxford; yet they wholly rest
satisfied with the Proviso. But the Citizens of Oxford have taken this
opportunity to present a List of their old pretended Grievances, most of which
were offered to the Parliament, as then called, in 1649, and rejected even by
that Assembly. It is conceived, that the City of Oxford will by force of the
Proviso have the same liberty to dispute the Justice of our Rights after this
Act, as before it; and that therefore they are in no wise concerned to oppose
the Bill, but may, without danger to them, be referred to the ordinary course
of Law. However, since they have represented as new Grants, the ancient and
unquestionable Rights of the University, founded on immemorial Customs, ancient
Charters of Kings, and confirmed all, except one, by Act of Parliament; it has
been thought sit to discover that Fallacy, and to give a full Answer to every
one of their Articles.

I. BY a Charter bearing date the 30. day of March 11. Car. 1. the sole
Licensing of Taverns is Granted to the University, and all Magistrates and
others within or without the University (except the Chancellor, and his
Vice Chancellor) are prohibited to intermeddle with the Licensing of Vintners,
in Oxford; and none are to License any Alehouses there, but by the Express
consent of the Chancellor, or Vice Chancellor; and by color of this Grant they
do License Ale-house-keepers, and take Recognizances; but did never Return any
of them to the Quarter Sessions until about ten years last past, and have since
Returned the same but seldom. Whereas by the Statute made 7. Edw. 6 th. the
Power of granting Wine-Licenses in Oxford is Vested in the City; and also by
the Ancient Charters of the said City, none that is not of the Guild of the
said City ought to sell any Wine by Retail in the same; and the Magistrates of
the said City, by several Acts of Parliament, have Power, as Their Majesty's
Justices of the Peace, to License Inns and Alehouses within the said City.

Answer I. The University claims the sole Licensing of Taverns, but derives
that Power much higher than from the Charter of Car. 1. The recital and
explanation of ancient Privileges in that Grant, will not reduce them to as
low a date, as the Charter it self. And therefore since this Power was
originally vested in us at least under E. 3, We still justify our claim to it
as given by him; and always saved to us in the Statutes of his Successors. The
7. Ed. 6. does not take away this Power, but set limits to it; it restrains the
University to three Taverns only, and neither by Letter, or Equity enables the
City to License any. The 12. Car. 2. saves the Rights of the University, and
takes away all pretenses of any right from the City. For if that power, which
is now lodged in the University, should be taken away from us; It is evident,
That, according to the legal exposition of that statute, the King only, and not
the City could have any advantage by our loss. For since all independent
Corporations, which had once an indisputable right of granting Licenses, are
restrained by this Law; it is easy even for the City to infer, That a
Subordinate Corporation, which could heretofore lay no good claim to that
power, must at least equally be subject to that restraint.

2. The Licensing of Alehouses is a Right of as ancient a date as the former;
but not always perhaps in so express words saved to us. This Power, as a branch
of the Clerk-ship of the Market, was indisputably ours: and in all Compositions
with the Town, was heretofore so esteemed and allowed; nor is it, as we
conceive, lessened by 5. and 6. Ed. 6. For the intent and design of that Act is
to permit none to keep an Alehouse, but those that are Licensed by two
Justices; but not to authorize all to keep one, who can obtain that License.
The Vice Chancellor therefore does still retain his Negative Voice; nor is it
reasonable, since the inconvenience of Ill Houses in Oxford would be so great,
that any should be permitted there without his Consent and Approbation. But
Lastly, it is to be noted, That though in the precedent Statute, the Rights of
the University be not expressly saved; yet that this Law is no otherwise
enforced and continued by 1 Iac. c. 9. than that the ancient Privileges of the
University should not be lessened by it.

II. By the said Charter it is Granted, that the Chancellor, Vice Chancellor,
or Proctors, shall have Power to search by Day or by Night for suspicious
Persons, and for such as can give no Account of themselves, and to punish such
as are faulty by Imprisonment, Banishment, or otherwise, with a mandate to the
Mayor and Officers of the Town to be Assistant to the search after such
Offenders; and by color of this Charter, and a pretended Custom, they claim a
Power to impose Forty shillings upon any Person (whether Citizen or Stranger)
being out of his House or Lodging after Nine of the Clock; which they have
Exercised not only upon Private Citizens, but upon the Magistrates of the City
in the Execution of their Offices, and have Imprisoned the Constables for
keeping Watch and Ward according to the Statute of Winchester; which is a great
Invasion upon the Liberty of the Subject, and has been often so declared in
Westminster Hall; wherefore it is humbly hoped this Parliament will not Affirm
the same by a Law.

Answ. II. The Power of the Night-watch is vested in both Universities by
immemorial Custom, confirmed to the University of Oxford by the Charters of
Hen. 3. and Ed. 3. ratified by Act of Parliament under Qu. El. and only more
largely explained by the Charter of Car. 1. This Power being totally vested in
the Vice Chancellor, and Proctors: those Persons who have set up a Watch, upon
pretense of their Office, with a designed Affront to the University, have
formerly been a merc'd by the Vice-Chan. and that Sentence against them was,
upon an Habeas Corpus brought, in Painter's Case, affirmed in the King's Bench.
But yet if those Turbulent Persons had not other designs, than to aid the
University in their Watch; their assistance is so far from being forbidden by
that Charter, that it is expressly required. The Statute of Winchester indeed
enjoins a Watch to be kept; but takes not away the Universities Power of
keeping it: So that the performance of this Duty by the University, can be no
breach of that Statute; but the neglect of it might be so.

2. The right of this Power being thus cleared, much might be added concerning
the absolute necessity of the continuance of it; especially since the exercise
of it has always been such, that nothing can be reasonably objected against
the good Management of that Office. We have no power to punish men for being
out of their Houses after Nine, if they have any reasonable Cause, for being
so; and we appeal to the Citizens themselves, whether we have ever been severe
in admitting their Reasons or Excuses.

III. By the said Charter the Clerkship of the Market is Granted to the
University, with free Power to Dispose of the Stalls and Standing-Places in the
Markets, to have the full Government of the Markets, and to take Toll in the
Markets; Whereas the University has only a Title to the Clerkship of the
Market, (and that did Anciently belong to the City;) but the Markets, and the
placeing of them, and all Stallage, Piccage, and Toll, and all other Profits
therein, by ancient Usage and Prescription, do yet belong unto the City; and
for the Profits thereof, the City does pay a large Fee-Farm to Their Majesty's.
So that in case the said Charter shall be confirmed by Parliament, the said
City will lose the said Markets and Profits arising thereby, which is a very
considerable part of that Revenue, whereby the Corporation is maintained and
supported.

Answ. III. The University, by the Charters of Hen. 3. and Ed. 3. had the full
Government of the Market, and all other Incidents to that Office. The City
indeed did pretend to take Toll; but upon complaints against it in Parliament
14 Ed. 2. and 28 Hen. 6. were obliged to desist. And in the year 1429, they did
in Convocation openly disown both Toll, and Stallage, and a public Instrument
was thereupon made. The Town do not pay any Fee-Farm-Rent to the King for these
Profits; but on the contrary, the University were obliged in 29. Ed. 3. to pay
five pounds to the King for the Clerkship of the Market, and these Perquisites
thereof.

IV. Power is given to the University, by the said Charter, to hold a
Court Leet, or view of Frank Pledge as well over the Town, and all the
Inhabitants, as over the University; that it shall be a full and complete Leet,
and that the University shall have the Perquisites thereof, and Power to
Distrain for the same. Whereas the City has Five Leets, one Absolute and
Complete for North-gate Hundred, and four other for the Four Wards within the
City, and therein have all the Power of Leets; Except, 1 st. the Enquiry into
the Assize and Assay of Bread, Beer, and Wine. 2 d. The Examination of Weights
and Measures. 3 d. The Punishment of Fore stallers, and Regraters. 4 th. The
Punishment of Putrid Victuals. 5 th. The Punishment of those who wear Arms in
the University; And, 6 th. the Survey of the Highways, and Streets; which
being Anciently likewise in the City, were 29. Ed. the 3d. surrendered into the
King's Hands, and by Him Granted to the University; and for these Six Points
the University have ever since 29. Ed. 3 d. held a qualified Leet over the City
and Suburbs, for so much, and for so many Things and Inquiries as were given to
the University 29. Ed. 3 d. And this Leet is to be served by a mixed Jury, one
half Privileged Men, and the other half Free; and the Penalties imposed by the
said University in this Leet are to be Estreated, and sent to the City, and to
be Levied by them to their own use toward their Fee-Farm.

Answ. IV. The University does not only claim a qualified Leet, by the Grant of
Ed. 3. but prescribes to an absolute and complete Leet; which was ratified to
them by the Charter, 14. H. 8. and confirmed by Act of Parliament, 13. Eliz.
The Town cannot prove, that the Profits of our Leets were ever granted to them;
and if they could, yet the University was first entitled to them by far more
ancient Charters; and consequently could not be deprived of that Right by any
subsequent Grant.

V. By the said Charter it is Granted, that the University shall have Power to
make Orders and Laws to bind all the Inhabitants in the said City. Whereas the
City and University are two distinct Corporations, and the one in no sort
Subordinate to the other; and therefore it is not reasonable that the Citizens
should be bound by Laws, which they never consented to by themselves or their
Representatives.

Answ. V. This Charter does no otherwise subject the City to the University,
than former Grants and Acts of Parliaments had subjected it. They were always
before a Corporation subordinate to us; and in Law, as well as Interest
dependant on us. They are accountable to us in our Courts, they do every year
take an Oath of Fealty to us, and these, if any, are sufficient Tokens of
Subjection.

2. Since therefore our Corporation is superior to them, it is no wonder, that
our Bylaws should oblige them. And this Power was not, as they would pretend,
granted to us by Car. 1. but is an ancient and unquestionable Right, already
confirmed by Act of Parliament.

VI. By the said Charter a Grant is made to the University of two Coroners.
Whereas, time out of mind, the City has had two Coroners, who have sat upon
all Persons, as well Privileged as Free, until the making the said Charter;
and therefore the City having an Interest in the Coroners before the said
Grant, the Grant to the University is void, and Inquisitions taken under their
Grants Coram non Judice.

Answ. VI. The University had long before, by Charters of Hen. 4. and Hen. 8.
power to hear and try all Felonies and Murders, committed either by their own
Members, or against them; and therefore it seemed necessary, in pursuance of
former Rights, that for the better Inquiry into those Offenses, that were
afterward to be finally tried by them, the Coroner should be appointed by
their Authority. This, and this only is the new Grant of Charles the First, and
is such a Privilege, as may indisputably be granted by him; and which cannot
be thought to encroach on the Right of the City, who still have power to
appoint a Coroner for themselves; and were forbidden by former Charters to
assign one for us. The Coroner's Power indeed was before lodged in the
Chancellor and Steward; and Charles 1. did not so properly create a new Office,
as divide the different Powers of a former Officer.

VII. By the said Chahter Townsmen are to be Answerable for their Families in
Buying and Selling all Wares, where either Party is a Scholar; and also for all
such Persons as they shall harbor in their Houses above three Nights; and no
Towns-man is to build any Cottages without the Express leave of the Chancellor,
or Vice Chancellor, which are Restraints inconsistent with the Liberty of a
Freeman of England.

Answ. VII. These pretended new Hardships are reasonable and ancient Customs
agreeable to our ancient Charters. If the Servant sells false Goods, the Master
is obliged to Restitution; if a Man will harbor a Stranger above three days, he
shall be responsible for him. And there is the same reason, if a Man do erect a
Cottage for the Reception of such persons as if he harbored them himself. Now
it is not easy to imagine, that these Customs which were the known Laws of the
Land, even before the Entrance of the Normans, should be now inconsistent with
the Liberty of the People of England, and apparent Badges of Slavery.

VIII. The University has likewise by the said Charter a Grant of Felons
Goods, and Power to search and seize such Goods; whereas the City does claim
the same by Charters more ancient than any the University pretended to claim
by; and the University themselves, under their Common-Seal, have granted, that
Felons Goods do belong unto the City, toward their Fee-Farm: And the City
having the Charge and Custody of keeping the Gaol, and being liable to Escapes,
and being at the expense of holding Sessions of the Peace, and Jail-deliver
four times in the Year, and the Execution of Prisoners; it may seem
unreasonable that the University should have the Profit of those things, which
usually belong to other Cities in the same circumstances.

Answ. VIII. Felons Goods do by no ancient Charter belong to the City of
Oxford; nor can they produce any such Charter antecedent to ours. They were
always, as appears by a multitude of Records, heretofore claimed by the King,
and were by the Sheriffs seized to his use. The University were not first
entitled to them by the Charter of Charles 1. having enjoyed them long before
the Date of that Grant, but by the Charter of Hen. 8. confirmed by the Statute
of 13 Eliz. We did not therefore indeed lay any claim to them in the
Composition under Hen. 6. because there was no reason, that we should challenge
that, which we then had no right to. But the Interest of them being then vested
in the King, was, as it lawfully might, by Charters of several succeeding
Princes, transferred to the University.

2. It is not unusual in other Cases, that Felons Goods should be granted away
from those that maintain the Prisoners. Nor ought the City, especially, to
complain of their Expenses in this kind, whose Prisoners chiefly subsist on the
Alms of the University. However this is matter of Right, We insist on authentic
Records, and Charters; and it is a great sign, that on their side the Records
are deficient, when they have this Recourse to Argument.

IX. The University does pretend to have a Power to discommon Citizens at their
pleasure, and to inhibit all priviledg'd Persons to have any Commerce or
Trading with them, which they sometimes use, to the ruin of the Citizens and
their Families.

Answ. IX. It is here owned, that the Citizens do wholly subsist by their trade
with the University; and that the ruin of them and their Families, is the
necessary consequence of the loss of it. This Consideration has had so good an
effect on the University, that it has always inclined them to pity and
moderation in the Exercise of this power; And it might be justly expected, that
it should likewise have such influences on the Citizens; as might hinder them
from opposing the just rights of that Body; on which they always heretofore
were, and now confessedly are dependant. But if some of them shall still molest
the University, and disturb our peace, and good government; We cannot possibly
take a juster and milder method of procuring our own quiet; than by cutting off
all Correspondence with our factious adversaries: This right of Discommuning
then is a reasonable; and, (as by many precedents can be proved) an ancient
Right of the University, and exercised long before that Charter upon urgent
occasions; but withal so rarely practiced, that those who now complain of it,
will hardly be able to remenber one single instance of it. Nor ought the
Townsmen to complain of this, who have usually made it the Condition of their
Leases: that they shall not let their Houses to a Scholar as an Under-Tenant,
and shall never grind at any other than their Mill.

X. By the said Charter it is granted, that Scholars, their Servants, and the
Servants of the University, shall not be forced to appear at Musters, or
contribute thereunto; and that they shall be discharged of Subsides, Reliefs,
Impositions, and Contributions.

Answ. X. We owe not this Grant originally to Charles the First, but derive it
from Custom, owned and settled in Parliament, 18. Ed. 1. and ever since
allowed, upon solemn Hearings, under Queen Elizabeth and King James. This is
such a reasonable Privilege, that all Foreign Universities enjoy it. Nor is
there any ground left for the City's Complaint, since it is always provided,
that those Privileged persons, who exercise Merchandise in the City, and share
in the Profit, should be equally chargeable with the City for such Merchandise.

XI. The University, by means of a Composition made shortly after the Conflict
29o Edw. 3. and confirmed by the said Charter, do require the Mayor and 62
Citizens with him, yearly upon Scholasticus- Day ( which is the 10 th. day of
February) to make an Oblation there upon the high Altar, of 63 Pence for the
Souls of 63 Scholars slain in the time of King Edward 3. This being in the
Original gross Superstition, is too great a Badg of Popery to be required in a
Protestant University.

Answ. XI. The barbarous Murder of sixty three innocent Scholars, which they
here own, and term a Conflict, and the Plunder of the whole University drew a
great and just Amercement on the Criminals. The City pretended they were not
able to pay this Fine without their utter Ruin; and did humbly pray, and at
last obtained from the University a Mitigation of it.

An annual payment of an hundred Marks was then accepted; and this, by the
further favor of the University, was changed into a small yearly
Acknowledgment. This Ceremony, according to the Custom of that Age, was not
wholly free from Superstition; and was therefore by consent of both parties,
under Queen Elizaheth, changed into a Sermon, a Communion and Offering. The
Custom did not take its rise from any gross Superstition, unless it be so to
make satisfaction for Murder and Robbery; and if the continuance of it still
displeases them, they may put an end to it themselves, by discharging their
Bonds.

XII. By the said Charter it is granted, that Scholars, or Priviledg'd Persons
shall not be impleaded in the Courts of Westminster, for such things as the
Chancellor has cognizance of; and that they shall be dismissed from thence
without pleading their Privilege, or paying their Fees, which does often fall
out to be a very great Oppression to the Officers and Ministers of Justice; for
if upon demand of the Vice Chancellor they do not discharge such Priviledg'd
Persons, the Vice Chancellor, by color of this Clause, does imprison the
Bailiff; as on the 20 th. of October last he did on Edward Adams, a sworn
Bailiff, for not discharging Henry Wildgoose, who was arrested at the Suit of
the City, by a Writ issuing out of the Court of Common Pleas; and by color of
the said Clause, if any Person sue a Priviledg'd Man in any of the Courts of
Westminster, the said Vice Chancellor does cite the Plaintiff into the Court of
the University for breach of their Statutes, and does condemn him in Expenses
for suing a Privilegd'd Person out of the University.

Answ. XII. It seems absolutely necessary, as well for the quiet, and security
of the Scholars, as for the better maintaining of discipline among them, that
their own Governors only should have an immediate jurisdiction over them. And
therefore there is not any University abroad, where the members of it have not
a right to be impleaded in their own Forum only and to be exempted from any
foreign power. This University of Oxford, more particularly has so long
enjoyed this Privilege, that it is not possible to assign the date of the
Original grant. For since we find the authority of our Court frequently owned
and allowed under Hen. 3 d. Ed. 2 d. and Ed. 3 d. We have reason to think that
this power is as ancient, as the University it self. Our right to it then is so
well founded on reason and immemorial Custom, that it is no wonder, if we find
it anciently in the year books not only acknowledged by the Town, but always
willingly owned by the Judges, even before it was, as it is now, confirmed by
Act of Parliament. The Lord Coke, especially who is not usually a Friend to any
other Courts, but those at Westminster, does yet, according to the example of
his Predecessors, make an Honorable mention of this Court; and gives that
Statute the name of Actus Benedictus, that confirmed it. The Procedures of it
have always been within the bounds of their ancient Jurisdiction; and of this
we need have no clearer evidence, than that the only Act of injustice here
alleged, is that we discharge our own members; and arrest those, who deny our
Authority and violate our right. The Citizens were certainly ill informed, when
for a signal instance of our Exorbitances, they charge us only with the due
exercise of that power; which, upon solemn hearings has twice at least, been
acknowledged at Westminster.

XIII. By the said Charter it is Granted, that Privileged Men shall have as
much Liberty to Trade as the Freemen of the said City, and by color of this
Grant, the said University do take upon them to set up Trades, and to License
certain Persons whom they call Priviledg'd Persons, openly to use Trades, and
to sell Merchandises within the said City, and Suburbs by Retail, which is
contrary to the ancient Charters, Customs, and Privileges of the said City,
and to certain Compositions and Agreements made between the said University and
City.

Answ. XIII. Priviledg'd Persons have so ancient a right to the Exercise of any
Trade; that, their prescription to it commences before the oldest Charter to
the City, and is saved by it. This right is allowed in Parliament 18 Ed. 1.
declared by express words 14 Hen. 8. ratified by Statute under Qu. Elizabeth,
and only more largely explained by Car. 1. Limits have since been put to this
Privilege; which the University have never transgressed; nor have ever, as the
Town uses to do, Pleaded their Ancient Rights in bar of the subsequent
restrictions of it.

XIV. Whereas by certain Compositions heretofore made between the said
University and City, the Menial Servants of all Scholars, and all their other
Servants taking Wages without Fraud or Deceit, are to enjoy the Privilege of
the University; the said University, upon pretense of latter Grants, have
fraudulently, and with an intent to weaken the Government of the said City,
granted colorable Privileges to diverse Members of the City; and upon pretense
that they were become the under Groom, Gardener, or Officer of some College,
have matriculated them, and whilst they have continued Members of the City,
have administered unto them an Oath to the effect following, viz. You shall
swear, that you shall not attempt any Cause of yours before the Mayor or
Bailiffs of Oxford, neither shall you answer before any of them as your Judge,
so long as you shall continue a Priviledg'd Person. So God, etc. which in terms
is repugnant to the Oath which every Freeman of the City does take at the time
of his admission into the Liberties of the said City; and particularly they
have within the space of three Months last past, matriculated one William
Turton, upon pretense that the said William Turton was Gardener of Exeter
College: Whereas the said William Turton was, and yet is a Freeman of the said
City, and does continue to use the Trade of a Vintner, and obtained the Title
of the said Office, only to avoid the bearing such Offices in the said City, as
his Condition and Substance had made him capable of. Also one Henry Wildgoose a
Freeman, and one of the Common Council of the said City, being apprehensive
that he should be chosen into the Office of Chamberlain of the said City, to
avoid the same about two days before the Election for the said Office, did
procure himself to be matriculated, upon pretense that he was a Groom to one
Dr. Irish, although the said Henry Wildgoose did, and yet does continue the
Trade of a Painter, within the said City, and has no further relation to the
said Dr. Irish, than to protect himself against the said City; and by color of
the said Matriculation, the said Henry Wildgoose being elected Chamberlain of
the said City, did, and yet does refuse to accept the said Office, and is
protected in his Disobedience by the University, by which means other Citizens
are encouraged to withdraw themselves from their Majesty's Service in the said
City.

Answ. XIV. We have hitherto made good our Claim to these Rights and
Privileges; it remains that we clear our selves from the Charge of abusing
them: We have given no colorable Privileges to any Member of the City; but
neither have nor could deny their just Rights to those that demand them.
Wildgoose, as a Limner, was entitled to his Privilege; the Right to it was
vested in him by his Trade; Matriculation is only declaratory of that Right.
Whoever will plead his Privilege, must register his Name; and Men may lawfully
forbear entry, till they have need of the Plea. His being Servant to Dr. Irish
is a new Right to his Privilege; but his former Title was not destroyed by the
new one that is superinduced. The City surmise that he entered into this
service, to decline an Office there; but he has sworn, that they, in his
Opinion, put the Office upon him, because he entered into this Service: So that
here we have his Oath against their Suspicion; and which ever of the Assertions
be true, certain it is, that the University cannot justly be blamed for
allowing him that Privilege, which, according to their own Charters, and their
Agreements with the Town, they could not lawfully deny him. Wildgoose being
excluded by these Regulators, was not willing to return into the Company of
those that excluded him; and therefore did now embrace the opportunity of
demanding that Privilege, which was long since due to him. However, that we
may judge of the truth of these assertions, it is equally false that he is
Groom to Dr. Irish; as that Turton is matriculated Gardener to Exeter College.
Turton is a Vintner Priviledg'd by the University; and is entered as such; that
he exercises a Trade still is the consequent of his License, that he bears no
Office, is the result of his Privilege; and these are such rights, as the
University can justly give, and he, as a Priviledg'd Man, ought to enjoy. The
Oath of Freemen is founded on their obligation to the City; and the force of it
ceases, when their dependence determines: The University is above those mean
designs, which this Pamphlet charges on them; They force no Man to be
Priviledg'd, nor accept the price of their Privilege; and, if the Citizens are
so pleased, it would be an easy composition, that no Freeman should ever
enjoy it.

2 dly. We have no reason to think, That Wildgoose was guilty of a Fraud;
because we have as yet received no proof against him. However if his guilt was
admitted, it is very hard to imagine, how his crime can possibly affect us, and
be made any part of the Charge against the University. If he had any
unjustifiable design in procuring his Matriculation; is it probable, that he
would acquaint the Vice-Chan. with it; or that the Vice-Chan. should know it
without such notice? A private discourse is said to have passed between Mr.
Recorder and Wildgoose, concerning a small Office in the Town; and shall the
University be thought parties to the Fraud for not hearing it? If a man, upon
the like designs, is entered a Clerk in the Common Pleas; shall the future
discovery of his Fraudulent intentions cast any reflection on the honesty of the
Prothonotary, or the integrity of the Judges? The Matriculation then of this
Person cannot possibly be any crime in the University; and therefore the whole
offense must be resolved into our protection of him in his disobedience. While
his name remains in our Register, he is one of our members; and, as such, has
right to our protection; But if the Fraud shall be proved to us we are ready to
alter the roll; and by consequence to deprive him of his Privilege. We do not
therefore justify any Fraud, because we know of none; and it is the duty, and
interest of the City to take care, that we should be acquainted with it. This
Privilege was so far from being granted, pendente lite; that even, before any
cause of action, it was obtained; and therefore any Fraudulent design cannot in
this Case be pretended to appear by a notoriety of the Fact; but is to be made
out by those means only, which are not yet offered to us, the Evidence of the
Parties concerned. Till therefore Wildgoose's offense be proved to the
Vice Chancellor, He cannot in justice alter the Register; and, as long as his
name shall continue there, we cannot but think, with submission to this house,
that he has a just title to all the Privileges of a Matriculated Person. For
if one of your Honorable house shall by Bribery obtain an Election, and, after
that, a return; and, before any Examination of his Case in the house, be sued
in Westminster Hall; the Judges undoubtedly shall not have cognizance of his
Crime, nor can suffer his Bribery to be insisted on, as a bar to his
Privilege. Till the return be amended he is actually a member of your house;
and consequently has yet a right to those Privileges which you deservedly
enjoy. When the Bribery shall appear to your Committee, They certainly will,
and they only can deprive him of any place in Parliament, and so necessarily
divest him of the Privilege, that attends it. This house is undoubtedly
sensible, that this Case is exactly parallel to ours; we are so far from being
Patrons of Fraud, that we desire an opportunity of punishing it; we require
nothing of the City, but to add proof to their surmizes; and then to receive
justice, as they ought, from our hands.

We have been longer in the answer to this Objection, because the Citizens have
every where laid the greatest weight on it; and because it seems requisite
fully to convince this house; that we are not more careful in maintaining our
just rights than we are cautious in not abusing our power.

Thus have we sufficiently proved, that those controverted Rights were not
originally grounded on a late Charter, but on ancient Customs, and Grants, most
of them being expressly, and all heretofore implicitly confirmed by Parliament.
And now it is time to enquire what credit is to be given to those who have
charged Novelty on those Grants, which are as ancient as our Constitution, and
are the Inheritances of our Forefathers. They are such Privileges, as our
University never did, because they could not want; the absolute necessity of
them was the occasion of their ancient Usage: and since That has given us a
Title to them, we may reasonably hope, that this Honorable House will now
preserve them to us, as well in favor to Learning, as in respect to Justice.

Thus have we fully recited and answered all the Articles of the City; and now
we think it less nauseous to answer, than to repeat their Rhetoric; which has
no other Character of Truth, than that of Plainess and Simplicity: We cannot
own, that Card. Woolsey and Archbishop Laud procured Charters absolutely new
for us; but in this we are obliged to them, that they took care to have our
Ancient Charters explained: For, since we are to deal with unquiet Men, an
Explanation of a former Grant, is an equal favor to a new one. If the
University had Privileges, and declined the use of them, it is such an
instance of their Moderation, as we wish and may wish to see copied by the
City. We have no design on the City; The Present Act can give us no advantage
over them, and if we had purposed, that it should have done so; we would hardly
have added the Proviso. For whatever may seem to those Gentlemen, the Force of
the Clause is so evident, to all Men of Sense and Law; that, in reference to
the City, it wholly disables and destroys the Bill.

We are not concerned to accuse the Citizens, but since some of them have been
ready in surrendering their Charters, and have since been forward Regulators; we
hope that they will take some more agreeable Standard to measure their Deserts
by, than the Merits of the University. And now lastly, if these Privileges
have been anciently ours, transmitted to us from our Predecessors, affirmed by
former Kings, ratified by Statutes, and generously defended by us in the most
dangerous times: We have reason to hope, that our undoubted Rights will by this
Honorable House be preserved to us, both against the Encroachment of an
Arbitrary Power, and of an Unreasonable City.

FINIS.

