LICENSED,

March 20. 1677/8. Roger L' Estrange.

ALMANZOR, AND ALMANZAIDA. A NOVEL.

Written by Sir PHILIP SIDNEY, And found since his Death amongst his PAPERS.

LONDON, Printed for I. Magnes and R. Bentley, in Russel Street, near the
Piazza, in Covent Garden. 1678.

THE BOOKSELLER TO THE Courteous Reader and Buyer of this Book.
IT may seem strange how this Book should lie dormant all this time that is
elapsed since Sir Philip Sidney's Death; therefore I thought it necessary to
acquaint you by what means it came to my Hands.

A Gentleman who came in the Train of the Prince of Orange when he was last in
England, brought this Novel in an old Manuscript, and presented it to a Lady as
a great Rarity of that excellent Authors Sir Philip Sidney, and supposed he
wrote it when he was Governor of Flushing; for soon after his Death it was
found amongst his Papers, and has been several times transcribed for the
English Gentry there: But this that I print it by, is the Original Copy.

I cannot suppose but I shall do many Persons a kindness in publishing this
Novel, by reason that they may now buy that for a Shilling, which so many
Persons have given Twenty for, and have thought it a Favor to have it at that
rate, esteeming any thing of that excellent Authors at what Price soever it
should be valued at.

That this Book shall have a good acceptance in the World, I make no doubt of;
but if it should be otherwise, I shall not be much concerned, because I have in
this considered your Advantage more than my own Profit.

Now let me beg your pardon for detaining you thus long from what is much
better, I mean the Book it self; which if you receive with a favorable aspect,
I will assure you, you shall get this advantage by it, (which is no very
inconsiderable one) That for the future you shall be eased of Prefacing from

The humblest of Your Servants, R. Bentley.

ALMANZOR, AND ALMANZAIDA. A NOVEL.
THE Kingdom of Moroco had for many years suffered under Tyrannical Powers,
when at last it began to breathe, and receive new life, under the just and
peaceable Reign of the Great Abdala, the most accomplished of all Princes; who
having employed his younger years in Arms, had thereby acquired great fame, and
assured a peaceful and quiet Seat unto himself, in the most renowned City of
Africa.

It was there that in a Palace whose Magnificence did surpass even Imagination,
the greatest Beauties of the World spent their days under some severity of
restraint, being deprived from the sight of all Objects but their own
enterview, the presence of a Prince past the flower of his age, and some few
young Slaves that were but just stepped out of Childhood.

Of all Abdala's Women, there was but one absolute, the birth of a Son had
rendered her happy; Roxana had the most absolute Authority: yet Cleonisa did
still preserve such a deserved Power over the Kings heart, as she esteemed
infinitely beyond that public Grandeur, which was the Right of Roxana.

Amongst those Slaves appertaining to the King and Princesses, that had the
liberty of the Women's Apartments, one only had attained to his twentieth year:
He had been presented to Abdala in his Infancy, and some years having given him
the opportunity to discover most exquisite Parts of Mind and Body, Abdala was
taken with them so, that they obliged him to bestow his Love and Favors upon
the Possessor of them, and distinguished him from the rest, by his tender
Affections toward him; and proceeded so far, as to honor him with the
Magnificent Name of Almanzor, so much in esteem with the Princes of Moroco, as
having been that of many of their most ancient Kings. The only Mark that
remained with him of his Bondage, was a Chain of Diamonds: and if his Apparel
had any thing of Abdala's Liveries yet remaining upon them, they were so
obscured under a vast quantity of Jewels, as not to be discernable.

In short, no Captive in the World had a happier Fate; as many as saw him,
became his Admirers; none amongst the most considerable, but thought themselves
highly favored with his Friendship; and to wish, was with him the same thing
as to enjoy.

Yet notwithstanding all this Happiness, he fell into such a profound
melancholy, as became obvious to all Persons; but in a more particular manner,
it was observed by the chief and most ancient of Abdala's Eunuchs, unto whose
particular care had been committed the Education of his Childhood, of which he
had received diverse great Advantages, such as were suitable to Almanzor's brave
Soul. The extreme affection that this Eunuch had for him, made him with the
more exactness observe his Distemper; and not being able to see him in any
discontent, it made him enter one evening into Almanzor's Lodgings, where
having found him, he spoke to him in this manner: I have deserved otherwise
from you, than that you should hide your sorrows from me: I cannot see that
Person overwhelmed with sorrow, unto whose Childhood I have given all my Cares,
and to whose Merits I have sacrisiced all my Affections, and be ignorant of the
cause of his change. Must I have the trouble to see you hide your Sighs from
me? Sir, your Interests are too dear unto me, not to reproach you this
reservedness. Almanzor, I am not unworthy of your considence; and you ought to
believe, that I loving you with that tenderness as I do, I should not desire
with so much earnestness the knowledge of what so much disturbs your quiet, but
to endeavor the re-establimment of it, even with the hazard of my Life:
Therefore I conjure you to speak. At this onset, Almanzor stood for a while in
suspense; after which, casting an obliging look upon the Eunuch, Aristan, (said
he) I should become unworthy of your kindness, if I was so ungrateful as to
conceal from your knowledge any thing that concerns my Fortune. I do not
mistrust a Virtue so well known, and so useful to me as yours has always been:
And if I have hid from your knowledge a trouble wholly contained within the
narrow limits of my Heart, it was that I might not involve the quiet of a
Person to whom I owe a thousand times more than my Life, in such secret
Misfortunes as must be suffered by me alone. Do you believe (interrupted
Aristan) that I can quietly see you suffer, hear your Sighs, and have your
troubled Eyes for continnal objects, and not be moved? Speak your mind,
Almanzor, with this assurance, that of whatsoever you can inform me, you will
less afflict me in the declaration of it, than you do with your obstinate
silence; since there are no such evils, though never so great, but may find
remedies: And if there be a necessity of courting you to it, let me conjure you
by all that love I have for you. Well (replied the Slave, sighing) you must be
satisfied; Aristan, I love; it is love that causes all my grief: the only
secret that I would have kept from your knowledge, because of its cruel
circumstances Your informing of me that you love, is defective (replied the
Eunuch), except you acquaint me with the Object also. Dear Aristan (replied the
amorous Captive), if ever you have observed me when near the amiable
Almanzaida, you could not but perceive it. Almanzaida, (replied Aristan, with
an extraordinary emotion) Roxana's Slave! Yes (pursued Almanzor) it is she that
a thousand Charms makes me adore. Remember (replied the Eunuch) that she is
destinated to an eternal Servitude; and, if it be possible, fix you heart on
some other Object. Dear Aristan, (replied Almanzor) can Almanzaida's ill Fate
make you forget mine of the same nature? Does the glittering of my Apparel so
dazel your eyes, as that you cannot see the Badge of my Slavery on me? And does
this Chain, because of Jewels, alter my Condition? It is, peradventure, that
equality of Fortune, that unites our Souls. Know, Aristan, that my Griefs are
not the effects of Almanzaida's Rigours; for we having been both together bred
in this Palace, with the liberty of seeing and conversing with one another,
have kindled such Flames as have grown more furious by the difficulties they
have encountered, and which will prove eternal, though of a Slave I should
become Master of the whole World: For do not imagine, that none but my single
Heart does justice unto Almanzaida's Beauty; the Prince Abdemar, Son to the
King, and to proud Roxana, is her Captive also: That Rival's he which makes me
unfortunate; it is he, who envious of those Advantages which Love gives me over
Almanzaida's Heart, does by a cruel Jealousy disturb the quiet of two Persons
whom the Heavens have produced designedly to love one another. The change which
I see in your face, Aristan, (continued he, after a little pause) speaks that
particular interest which you take in my misfortunes; therefore to give you
still more occasion of exercising your compassion of my miseries, hearken
attentively unto the Story of my Love. The Eunuch did but cast his eyes toward
Heaven, and Almanzor thus continued.

The History of Almanzor, and Almanzaida.
I Need not give you the Pourtraicture of Almanzaida; she is too well known to
you, to be ignorant of it; and your eyes have too just a discernment, not to
inform you, that she is more beautiful than any thing else they ever yet saw:
But, Aristan, though I am not ignorant of whatsoever her Person has of amiable,
you are not thoroughly informed of the excellency of her Soul: In the whole
World there is not a Virtue more solid than that she is Mistress of; she has a
Generosity beyond all example, such noble Thoughts, such an exact Knowledge,
and a quaintness of Wit so little common, that it may boldly be asserted, that
her greatest Perfections are wholly unknown to those that have not such
familiar Conversations with her, as I have had the happiness to enjoy; in which
all is spoken wi^h absolute Liberty.

I was yet so young, and she so innocent, when she was placed with Roxana, that
all our Pleasures were limited within the bounds of Childrens Sports; yet then
was I infinitely pleased with them, when permitted me; and Love was then
interwoven with them, in a manner proportionable to our age. It was still my
endeavor to insinuate my self in all places that were blessed with
Almanzaida's presence; and the addition of some few years, to those I had
passed already in that agreeable Commerce, did give to understand, that an
innocent complaisancy, and some childish enendearments, had been the beginners
of a most violent Passion. After that, I had no other thoughts, but such as did
absolutely confirm me of the certainty thereof, and would languish in all
places that her presence did not grace: I would be out of patience, when Abdala
would defer some moments in his custom of sending me with an How do you to
Roxana; and I confess, that I would grumble within my self also, when you
detained me upon some Lesson longer than my Affections thought reasonable, of
which I could reap no benefit at all, but what did happen by mere chance,
seeing that I could have no other thoughts but of her: all my Study was bent in
endeavoring to please her, and that took up my whole thoughts: she could no
sooner desire any thing, but I would with all the earnestness imaginable effect
it: And when at last she had learned from her own Heart, and from my Eyes,
rather than from my Mouth, part of my Intentions, she would frequently blush at
the receipt of any Services from my hands.

The Prince Abdemar went but too frequently unto Roxana's Apartment, not to see
her, which he could not do without Love; and I had but too much Interest in
that Love, not to take notice of it: and the Princes high birth, and other
Advantages, representing daily a thousand Evils in that Concurrency, I suffered
infinitely by it. He was not so reserved as I; he would speak of his Love to
Almanzaida in a most tender manner, even in my presence, without the least
scruple, or any thought that his Fathers Slave durst raise his Pretensions to
the same object to which he addressed his. The young Bond-maid would always
answer his Suit with such reservedness as would charm me, and conjuring the
Prince to spare her, gave him to understand, that if she had heard him make his
Addresses to her, he was obliged for it to nothing but his Rank, and
Almanzaida's evil Fortune. Some moments after, he went out, and I remained
singly with her, with an impatient desire to learn the cause of a profound
reasoning within her self, in which she had fallen immediately upon Abdemars
departure. Her Complexion was altered, her Eyes were troubled, and her
Respiration being more violent than usual, gave me to understand, that her
Heart had a great share in this disorder. Good Gods, how heavy did my doubts
and my restlesness lie upon me! I looked upon her for some time with silence;
but at last, taking the resolution to inform my self of the very center of this
business, which till then I durst not attempt, You are surprised, Almanzaida,
(said I) and what is most sensible to me, is, that I perceive with sorrow it
immediately follows the Discourses with which Abdemar has entertained you.
Abdemars Discourses (replied she) have nothing in them but what is a trouble to
me; and whether what he has said to me be true or feigned, I think my self very
unfortunate in being obliged to hear him. Abdemar is so great a Prince (I
replied) that he thinks he may say any thing without caution; but if he could
be what Almanzor is, then acting like a slave, he might, it is like, less
displease the fair Almanzaida in his Addresses. Abdemar (replied she) cannot
become a Slave without a wonder; but though he is the Son of a great Monarch,
his Love is no more pleasing to me, than if he were in Chains, or of a mean
Rank: For my part (added she) with the unhappiness of an unknown Birth, I have
that also of being a Captive; but, Almanzor, I know and feel my Heart, and all
that it does inspire me is so great, that notwithstanding my low condition, I
feel within me a certain natural adversness, which makes me look upon all
things that carry any thing of mean and low in them, with horror; which
flatters me in an opinion, that I am not inferior to Roxana. I am not happy
enough (said I) to have any Intelligence with a Heart whose Motions are so
generous: yet, fair Almanzaida, though I can judge of it but by the outward
appearances, it is long since I am persuaded of the Truth you speak, which
makes me look upon you with that respect as is due to a Person whose bare
Virtue would prefer her to all the Queens of the World. In a word, Almanzaida,
you are worthy to Reign in all places, and therefore it is that Abdemar does
you that justice. Almanzor, ( she replied, with some discomposure, that seemed
to me as disadvantageous to Abdemar) give me leisure to forget his Discourses
to me, I conjure you to it; for I declare, I hate that Love which he has
entertained me with; and no doubt but I should hate his Person likewise, should
he pursue it. Thus, (replied I, in an accent that expressed some disturbance)
thus it is, that those that love you must merit your hate; and the Son of
Abdala is -- Are you his Advocate (interrupted Almanzaida, looking fixtly on
me)? and is it in his behalf that you design to employ that privilege that your
Bondage gives you? Ah, Almanzaida, (I replied, with such an agitation of mind
as she could not but discern) if my better fortune should procure me any with
you, it should not be in his, or any others behalf, but my own, that I should
employ it. I am not his Agent, Fair one, but his Rival; and give me leave to
say, a more bold and more passionate Lover than he, who desires all, but dare
not hope any thing. I did not think (replied Almanzaida, with much coldness)
that Abdemar and Almanzor should at the same time make their amorous Addresses
to me; and I was in hopes that you would have assisted me, in diverting the
thoughts of his Courtship, and not thus add to my troubles: And yet I am not
angry with you, though I should resent it; that esteem which I have for you,
will not permit me; which I promise to continue, notwithstanding what you have
declared, provided you repeat it not, and that you confirm me by your future
silence of your repentance.

Diverse Persons which were seeking for Roxana did interrupt us; I was obliged
to withdraw, where making some Reflections upon Almanzaida's reception of my
Declaration of Love, I fancied to find in it more of discomposure than of
anger. Hopes, though small, do pleasingly flatter. I took enough to persuade
me, that I was more happy than Abdemar, and that she had imposed me silence for
no other reason, than because she found in her self more disposition to hear
and favorably answer me, than she had a mind to discover. I passed that night
passably well, and the next day having waited on Abdala unto Roxana's
Apartment, I had the happiness to see Almanzaida: She appeared neither cold nor
disagreeing, but as if her Eyes, which I observed to be more languishing than
fierce, did take care to shun mine; which I concluded to proceed from a modest
bashfulness, that cannot be avoided, when one would hide the motions of the
Heart, not being absolutely Master of those of the Eyes.

Cleonisa being some few days after at Roxana's Apartment, did tell her so many
fine things in the praise of the Weather, that she set her in a humor of going
into the Garden: Almanzaida took up her Train, and Cleonisa, who ever had an
obliging goodness for me, seeing me in Roxana's Chamber, and having observed by
my assiduous waiting on Almanzaida, that her presence was most dear unto me,
made me take an Umbrella, to give me the happy opportunity of making one in the
Walk. It served only to cross a Plat of Ground that led to the covered Walks,
where being got, Roxana having made sign to Almanzaida to let go her Train, we
followed at some distance, under pretense of respect, and so I had the means of
etertaining her with liberty.

Almanzaida (said I) those that interrupted us at Roxana 's the other day,
prevented my answering you, on that severe silence that you would have imposed
upon me, and of letting you know, that it is impossible to be silent, and love
so passionately as I do. You would not have me have an esteem for you then,
(replied she) the Reward of your silence? since you so wilfully relapse into a
fault that I was willing to forget? I was going to reply, but Almanzaida
continued, saying, You abuse my Indulgence, Almanzor; I was too little moved:
but if you knew how dangerous an Enemy I can be, you would doubtless fear, me
more than you do. There is no resisting of that Power which makes me speak, (I
replied) and I am confident that you would pardon (...), if were sensible of
it: But am I so criminal only for loving you? and if it be an offense, are not
you more guilty of it than my self? Could my Eyes be pardonable, should they
see you without admiration? and would that admiration be as perfect as you
deserve it, if it were not followed with all that Passion which I have for you?
No, fair Almanzaida, none can behold you with quiet thoughts; and I confess,
that I shall ever remain a Criminal toward you, if I cannot become innocent
without ceasing to love you. I should be very sorry (replied she) that you
should cease being my Friend; and to show you, that it is nor Hatred, nor so
little as Indifferency that I require of you, I do protest to You, Almanzor,
that I wish you were my Brother. This is a modest way of wishing me dead (I
replied); for if the amorous Almanzor were Brother to the beauteous Almanzaida,
he would not long outlive that fatal advantage. Judge by these tender
resentments, whether it were easy, or rather possible for me to keep silence
-- Well, ( interrupted Almanzaida) since you cannot resolve your self to it,
see me no more; shun the occasions of being in those places where I shall be,
and I shall take care to forbear those of meeting you. Cruel one (said I) were
you so unjust as to execute what you mention, you would have much to do to
perform it; and in vain would you endeavor to hide your self from such Eyes as
seek after no other Object but you. How obstinate you are, ( replied
Almanzaida) and what pains must I take to convince you? Never hope it (said I)
since 't is easier for me to die, than not to love you, and let you know it. I
must hear you then, it seems, ( replied Almanzaida, blushing in such a manner
as added luster to her Charms) since that I esteem you Life more than what I
required from you. There needed no more to make me apprehend my Happiness:
Almanzaida being vanquished, did from that time no more oppose with fierceness
what I would say to her; and I was made sensible of all the Joys that the
assurance of being beloved could inspire.

Some short space of time did so confirm me in it, that there was no cause left
me to doubt. I am certain, that my Resentments did answer all Almanzaida's
Bounties, and I neglected no means to make her sensible of it. Abdemar mar had
too much Love not to take notice of mine, and of Almanzaida's tenderness also:
He did openly reproach her of it, and came to such threatening terms with me
about it, as made her to tremble, and to advise me to constrain my self for my
Life's security.

From that very time forward the Prince did treat me with so much contempt,
that no consideration could have made me bear, had not Almanzaida forced me to
it, by such Orders as I shall ever submit unto: He never more employed me on
his Messages to Roxana; and when I was sent by the King into her Apartment in
his presence, he would take that Office upon himself: by which, depriving me of
my Happiness, he would bring me almost to despair. Yet I still found some
favorable means to see and entertain Almanzaida, whose Bounties were only
capable of making me happy.

I was one day alone with her, charmed with the assurance which she had given
me, against some fears that troubled me: too much joy was to be perceived in my
Eyes, when Abdemar came in: He perceived it; and that Pleasure which I could
not dissemble, raising a most violent Passion in him, he forgot the Respect
which is due to Almanzaida's Sex, from which no Rule nor Greatness can ever
dispense a gallant Man. I was concerned at it in such a manner, as would have
made me run into some extreme, if Almanzaida's looks had not restrained me
Retire (said he to me, in a disdainful manner), shun with diligence not only
the speaking to this Slave, but the sight of her also; think on those
Consequences that may follow your disobedience, and believe, that it is not in
consideration of your self, that I have spared you till this time. Ending this
word, he went into his Mothers Closet. Almanzaida commanded me to obey, but not
without so much concern for my safety, as forced me to sacrifice all my
resentments to her pleasure. My grief did irritate her more against Abdemar,
than all that he had said to her; and I was but just gone out, when he
returned. I see (said he) that your heart cannot harbor any other thoughts
than such as are proportionable to its condition; and while you disdain a
Prince, you give a favorable attention to a Slave, by reason of the proportion
which he bears with your condition. I am not to give you an account of the
secrets of my heart, ( replied Almanzaida, angrily) and it would please me very
much to remain ignorant of yours: Do not expose your self to the shame of
loving a Slave, who has not a Soul large enough to contain such an esteem as it
should have of such a Conquest as you would be: Leave me and my unworthiness,
with the liberty of not hearing of you; and raise to some higher place those
tenders of Services which I do not, nor never shall deserve.

Roxana's presence prevented her proceeding; and Abdemar retired, so netled,
that his last looks did set Almanzaida into a trembling, with the fears of the
result of his Passion: But he never did break out, and the Prince, as jealous
as he is, being virtuous withal, has never attempted any thing against my Life
or Fortune. But, Aristan, what has he not done against my Love? How often has he
most cruelly torn me away from Almanzaida's presence, to possess my room? What
Stratagems have I not invented to gain the sight of her, mauger all those
Cautions which his Jealousy did suggest to him? In a word, he has so ordered
things, that though I am fully assured of Almanzaida's Heart, the vexations of
seeing her but by stealth, and Abdemar's strict observing of my Actions, have
reduced me unto that restless melancholy which you have taken notice of.

Here did Almanzor end his Recital; and perceiving that Aristan remained
silent, Will you not say something to me (said he) is it thus that you have
promised to comfort me, and to allay my griefs? Ah, Almanzor, (replied the
Eunuch) you know them not all yet; and the greatest Fortitude you can be Master
of, cannot secure you from trembling, when you learn those that I am obliged to
inform you of. Oh, what a Love is this that the Fates have inspired you with!
and from amongst so many others, what a Person have they chosen to give you a
Passion for, such a Passion as cannot be continued but with horror! How,
(replied Almanzor, strangely moved) what horror, and what repentance ought to
follow that Passion which I have for the most amiable Person in the World? I
know (replied the Eunuch) that her Beauty, her Merit, her Mind, and her Virtue,
render you pardonable for that Error you have been in to this present: but,
Almanzor, learn, since it must be told you, that she is your Sister, and that
one and the same Blood does animate you both. My Sister? (said he, in a great
passion) do not deceive me thus, it would be my death, Aristan. You must not
die, though nothing is more true, (continued the Eunuch) Abdemar shall not be
happier than you, since that he shares in the same misfortune, and is
Almanzaida's Brother, as Well as yours. In a word, Almanzor, you are Abdala's
Child, as he is; and both Almanzaida and your self were born of that Prince,
and of the generous Cleonisa. The King knows it not, Cleonisa is also ignorant
of it, and I am the only Depositary of that important Secret. It is that Blood
which is ever acting, though by secret motions, which renders you so dear unto
Abdala. It is the same that affection which Cleonisa has for you: and doubtless
it is that also which restrains Abdemar from acting against you with more
vigor than he has shown. Almanzor was exceedingly astonished at what he
heard; never was sorrow comparable to his: he cursed his Stars, and remained in
a most deplorable condition, while Aristan informed him in this manner of the
whole Mystery of his Birth.

The History of the Births of Almanzor and Almanzaida.
THere were but two years past, since that the Birth of Abdemar had filled all
the Inhabitants of Moroco with joy, and had fortified the imperious Roxana's
Credit; when ^^ly, who commanded the Naval Armies of this Kingdom, a Person
considerable both to the King and his People, through the important Services
which he had rendered, did unfortuuately perish by the strength of an infinite
number of Pirates who had combined bined his destruction, seeing him the Terror
of all the Eastern Seas. He was of an Illustrious Birth, and descended from the
first Princes that had reigned over Moroco. His unfortunate Death having ruined
his Fortunes, which had not always been one of the happiest, he left behind him
his Family, composed of two Daughters and one Son, without Means or assistance.
His Widow felt most sensibly his loss, and finding her self incapable of giving
her Son such an Education as would suit with his Birth, she came into this
Palace, followed by her three Children, to bring them and her Sorrows at the
Feet of Abdala, and humbly to implore his Protection and Assistance for the
Relics of a Person who had been so faithful in his Service. Those Objects
which accompanied Haly's sad Widow, were too moving not to prevail. The Son was
but twelve years of age, the Daughter that preceded him, thirteen; and
Cleonisa, who was the eldest, was going into her sixteenth. It is easy for you
to imagine, that nothing was so beautiful as she: the blackness of her Habit
added more Charms unto her Face, and the King found so much in her Eyes, though
drowned in Tears, that granting both Means and Dignities unto the young Prince
Hily, he made a Gift far greater and more precious than all this unto Cleonisa,
since it was of that Heart over which Roxana had till then had an absolute
Empire. He had too much Love, to caution himself; and mauger Roxana's Rage and
Jealousy, some few days after he espoused Cleonisa. Thus Roxana had the grief
to see her self have a Rival, even an adored one. As she is ingenious, but very
dissembling withal, she took upon her the Art of feigning, she concealed her
Resentments with policy, and frequently visited Cleonisa (who presently after
grew with Child) and became almost inseparable from her; thus obscuring under a
formal and affected Complaisancy, a formed design of ruining her, she deceived
the King and Cleonisa also. I was the only Person that distrusted her real
intentions, and that feared the evil consequences of this disguised Friendship:
Roxana's Endearments were always suspected to me, because I knew her
Inclinations: yet all my circumspection could not prevent an accident which had
like to have been of a most dreadful consequence. The King did love Cleonisa
most passionately; but he feared Roxana's evil spirit, and durst not be wanting
in his complaisancy: therefore he was highly pleased to see them in a strict
union, which to promote the more, he sought all the means imaginable, daily
procuring them a thousand various delights.

Cleonisa's great Belly taking away her appetite toward Fleshmeat, she was
complaining one day of it to Roxana, who caused some Baskets of choice Fruits
to be presented unto her, of which she did eat with great delight and
satisfaction; but she was scarce retired to her Apartment, when she fell into a
Distemper, the violence of which did make us despair of her Life. I found her
in the arms of her Slaves, without color, and almost without motion. The King,
almost desperate, came in running. Roxana was one of the first, and of the most
busied in her assistance; but in her Actions I could observe a malicious Joy
mix: and examining more nearly all Circumstances, I concluded that the had been
poisoned. I have some skill in the choice of Plants, such as I have found
diverse times by experience to be great enemies to Poisons; and after I had
administered a Remedy to Cleonisa, I was confirmed in the suspicion which I had
had, of the cause of her Distemper. The Heavens blessed the means, and the
young Princess seconded their strength; who after she had vomited the Fruit and
Poison, remained without danger of her Life, but much fatigated with the Pains
she had endured.

So soon as she could go forth, she returned to Roxana's Lodgings, with the
same assiduity as she did before, without the least distrust: but apprehending
the future by the late experience, I resolved to make her Partaker of my
jealousies and fears. My Fidelity was well known unto her, and she had reason
to conside in it; so that she fell into such an astonishment at my Discourse,
as would be difficult for me to express. I confess (said she) that not
mistrusting in the least Roxana's dissimulation, I should have at some time or
other blindly precipitated my self in those ambushes that she laid for me, had
I not had this timely advertisement. Madam, you must feign, as she does (I
replied); but let it be so, that she may not have the least distrust of it:
Caress the King, who loves you, and to whom I have lately given to understand
the same as I have now declared unto you: Secure your own life, and that you go
with: for I must tell you, Madam, that Roxana is not only jealous, but highly
ambitious also: She hates you mortally, because she sees that you triumph over
her in the Kings Heart; and fearing lest you should one day produce a Rival for
the Throne unto Abdemar, as there are no Crimes black enough to strike horror
in her, neither will she spare any means to prevent it.

Cleonisa did relish my Reasons: The King came unto us, and we took our
measures accordingly. That which we thought the surest way, was to conceal the
time of Cleonisa's delivery, that your death might be feigned. This took
happily; you came into the World, I delivered you out of the Palace, into the
hands of such Persons which I knew to be very faithful, and which I had managed
beforehand to that purpose. Cleonisa shed such tears at your absence, as
confirmed Roxana in the belief of your death, which for the present settled her
cruel mind: but within the term of a year, we were again in the same trouble,
and Cleonisa's second great Belly did set us in a greater confusion than was
the first: In fine, we overcame it. Cleonisa is tall, her shape easy; and
cruel Roxana was not the only Person that was ignorant of her big Belly; but
every body else of the Palace, except the King, two Slaves, and my self.
Almanzaida came into the World with the same cautions as we had had for you: I
took her from hence also, though but a Daughter, that I might hazard nothing. I
trusted her unto a Man of my own Country, whose Wife had been delivered about
the same time as Cleonisa. Mean time, my Lord, the tender Cleonisa was not long
without entreating me to have you brought secretly into the Palace. I thought
my self too weak not to be overcome at some time or other; therefore I rather
chose to cause some sorrow to Cleonisa for some time, than to hazard your Life,
and Almanzaida's also, by telling her that you were dead, and that the young
Princess had not outlived you above two Months. She grieved for you both a long
time. I told the same story to the King, for fear that through his tenderness
to Cleonisa he might have undeceived her. Six years were expired, before I
durst introduce you into the Palace. A supposed Merchant presented you to
Abdala for a Slave: you from that very moment did please him; and that high
Recompense which he gave to him that had presented you, was a sufficient
testimony of it. He commanded me to take the care upon me of your Education;
and you may easily imagine what joy I received with that order. In fine, two
years after, by other means, I got the young Princess also into this Place, to
whom had been given the name of Almanzaida (you bearing that of Almanzor) who
was presented unto Roxana, to endeavor by that means the engagement of her
Affections toward her, through a familiar frequentation. She took great care
of her; and Almanzaida has rendered her self so worthy the affections of all
the World, that she could not refuse her hers. My dear Prince, this is that
important Secret, of which your particular Interest made me the particular
Depositary: You perceive the Reasons which made me conceal it, though I fear
too long; but I could not foresee that fatal Engagement, the cause of your
afflictions.

Ah, cruel Aristan, (cried out Almanzor, seeing him silent) why did you not
abandon me to Roxana's fury? Ton see that the Heavens disapprove of your pity,
since I am fallen into that sad disaster of loving my own Sister with a more
than Brotherly love. -- My Sister! (added he, a moment after) Good Gods! How
can I pronounce that word, and live? Oh, thou too charitable Friend, why did
you rescue a Victime from Roxana's fury, and did not let it fall unto Roxana's
satisfaction, for the security of Abdemar's future Reign? How many evils had
you spared me, and sorrows to your self? What a Life shall I lead for the
future? What quiet can I ever hope for, being thus linked to a Passion, which I
find that the name of Brother will never extinguish in me? Whatever Aristan
could oppose to his Passions, or that he could allege to moderate the Princes
grief, was all in vain; he could find nothing in him but a rebellious and
disturbed Reason, which would not permit him to hearken to any advice. He
conjured Almanzor to continue the Secret, and took upon him to inform
Almanzaida of all things.

It is easy to imagine what a restless night this miserable Prince had. The
next morning he feigned himself indisposed, that he might not be disturbed; and
Aristan having found out some opportunity of entertaining Almanzaida, related
unto her the same things which he had done to Almanzor the day before. Though
she was less passionate than the Prince her Brother, yet she was not less
sensible; and if she fell into no passion before Aristan, as he had, she, it is
very probable, did it in private, and with as much sorrow. Aristan exhorted her
to silence, till he had disposed the minds of the most concerned for the
reception of such surprising News; and so he left her, as much oppressed with
grief, as was Almanzor. He kept his Chamber three days, and Almanzaida her Bed
during the same time, the better to conceal a trouble which she could not
overcome: She feared to see a Brother whom she loved with too much passion; and
this unfortunate Prince, still fearing to confound his Sister with his
Mistress, had not the power to go toward Roxana's Apartment, though carried on
by such powerful Motives. At last he resolved it. Three days of violent sorrow
had made such an impression on Almanzor, as was sufficient to persuade any one
that he had been sick; and Almanzaida's tears had rendered her eyes so languid,
as if she had thus punished them for having carried her Charms into her
Brothers very Heart. The disconsolate Almanzor found her alone, in Roxana's
Chamber; and never two Persons that feared, and yet passionately longed to see
one another, did feel more equal Passions at their approach. The Princess did
cast down her looks; and Almanzor, who under the name of a Lover, as well as of
a Brother, did still take the same delight in beholding her, fixed his upon her
Face; and after some moments of silence, which were employed in sighing, Madam,
(said he) have you forgot me? have you not one word for me? will you not speak
to me at this time specially that I have so much need of your Virtue, to
consolate a Soul so overcome with sorrow, and grown even desperate by that very
advantage which will prove fatal to me, though in the same moment infinitely
glorious. If I had that pitch of Virtue which you speak of (replied the
Princess) it would be very useful to my sef at present; and you may well
imagine, that being no less surprised, nor less overcome with Sorrow than you
are, Consolation would be as necessary for me, as for you: But, dear Brother,
we must seek for comfort in constancy; and if I cannot be an example of
Fortitude, at the receipt of so unfortunate a knowledge as we have lately come
to by Aristan, but too long concealed from us, I will at least serve you, in
helping you to forget that criminal tenderness which ought not to consist
between such Persons as are animated with one and the same Blood. Oh, cruel
one, (replied the Prince, looking languishingly upon her) I find that it will
be easy for you to effect what you say, since that you can pronounce with so
little concern that Name which shall never be expressed by me. What (added he)
shall a few moments be capable to extinguish those Fires, that I have had so
much pains in a long assidnity to kindle? And I foresee that you will easily be
brought to look with some indifferency upon that Person who, though a Slave,
you had preferred to a Prince. I see, Almanzaida, that you only thought you
loved me, but never did it really. I shall profit but little of the advice you
would give me; and though the merciless Fates have determined, that I must
never be more than a Brother to you, yet they shall never force my passionate
affections from you, but that I shall ever love you, as I have always done: For
it is but just, that since you have changed only in Name, but have preserved
all your Beauties, I should likewise preserve my Love, after the loss of all my
Hopes. The Heavens ( replied Almanzaida, sighing) would punish you, should you
do what you say; and being what we are, such a Love can remain no longer
innocent. Alas! what more cruel Griefs than those I suffer at present, can
happen to me? (replied the Prince) It is not death that I wish for, though it
would be far more welcome to me than life, as I look upon it at present. Know,
Madam, that the more I reflect upon what has past, the more horror I have for
the future. You know, that through your bounty, forgetting the obscurity of my
Birth, and all that could afflict a Man whose Soul was sufficiently raised
above the Vulgar, I was become sensible to my Passion only. You are not
ignorant also, Madam, that proud of that preferency which you had given me
above Abdemar, I esteemed my self incomparably more happy than him with all his
Dignities. And can you think, that this so passionate and constant Heart,
submitting it self unto a timid Virtue, would sacrifice unto it such a Passion
as is to out-last all Sorrows, and even Time it self? In such a case, the
Resignation would be a Crime; and doubtless that Love must be but very
superficial, that can so soon be laid aside. But you, Almanzaida, you that have
honored me with your Love, or that at least would have made me believe such a
thing in you, is it possible that you should so soon be at an agreement with
that thing called Decency, so that a mere scruple can so suddenly triumph over
your Heart? and that in the midst of all my sorrows, I have not so much left
me, as the bare comfort to think, that this surprising change has been unwelcom
to you? Good my Lord, (replied the Princess) do not thus pierce into a weakness
which is so difficult for me to conceal. I seek how to cure, and not how to
afflict you. But you, my Lord, do not do me that Justice. I hid my Tears from
you; yet you are so cruel as to lay all your Sorrows open to me, and add to
them such Reproaches as I do not deserve. Can you imagine, that she that
preferred you before the Prince Abdemar, at that very time also when your
Chains were your greatest Ornament, did but indifferently love you? Can you
believe, that that Preferency was the effect of a wavering Heart, not firm in
its Resolutions? No, Sir, you know not Almanzaida: I share your Sorrows, am no
less sensible of them than your self; but they are past remedy, and I can see
nothing but Time and Reason that can overcome them: Let us wait the one, and
endeavor to make use of the other; and in the mean time, my Lord, in pity of
me, moderate a Passion that overcomes me, and be assured, that I am not of
sufficient strength to bear, without dying, both your Sorrows, and my own.

Almanzaida was going on, when the Prince Abdemar came in: He presently cast
such Looks on Almanzor as were full of indignation; but straight smoothing them
up again at the sight of the Princess, whom he had not seen of three days
before, he took notice of a change in her Face; and then perceiving Almanzor's
trouble, he knew not what to attribute it unto: and being but too well
persuaded of their reciprocal Love, he imagined that their sadness proceeded
from the despair of ever being happy in the enjoyment of each other: And it is
probable, that in this imagination he might have flown into some Passion
against Almanzor, had not Roxana come in. Almanzor withdrew himself, and
passing through a Gallery that led into Cleonisa's Apartments, he met her as
she was coming out of them. Though she was absolutely ignorant of his
Condition, she had a most tender affection for him, and making him sign to draw
near, As I have always been concerned in your Interest, Almanzor, (said she) I
must now give you a most important advice, while I have the opportunity of
speaking to you in private. You love Almanzaida; Abdemar is your Rival, who
intends (in order to your eternal separation from her) to get the King to
enfranchize you, so to turn you out of the Palace, and out of Moroco also. This
I learned from his own mouth some days since, I being hid in a place where I
overheard him, while he was discoursing of it with Zais, who doubtless is of
his Secrets. What Charms soever Liberty can put on, I am of opinion that you
would find but little content in them, whilst separated from Almanzaida. I was
glad of the opportunity of giving you this Advertisement, that you may take
your measures against Abdemar and Roxana's Designs, who will not sail
inconsiderately to execute whatever her Son shall require. During Cleonisa's
Discourse, the Prince found himself agitated in diverse manners, and was often
upon the point of discovering all Aristan's Secrets unto her; but remembering
that he had promised the contrary, he kept them still within himself. I am
infinitely obliged to your Bounties, Madam, (said he) and I know nothing in the
World that I would not do, to render me worthy of it. It is certain, that I
love Almanzaida; and it is no less true, that Abdemar is my Rivalin it: But,
Madam, neither he nor I can have any further hopes: Some day you may learn the
surprising cause of it: Mean time, Madam, continue to protect a miserable
Person, who is threatened with so many misfortunes; watch also for Almanzaida.
Cleonisa could return no answer, because some body came by; so that Almanzor
was forced to retire himself; and she went into Roxana's Apartment, amazed at
his Discourse, where she found Almanzaida all in tears. Abdemar, transported
with jealousy, was resolved to break off all Converse between Almanzor and
Almanzaida; and having found Roxana in a fit humor to open his Designs to her,
he told her, That they had a confirmed private Intrigue between them, which for
some discontents against Almanzor, he entreated her to break off, and to forbid
him her Apartment. Roxana was a declared Enemy to all the Worlds quiet, and
glad of the opportunity of troubling two Persons that loved one another, she
assured her Son, that she would not only forbid Almanzor her Apartment, but
that she would also turn him out of the Palace, for having secret Amors there,
and even out of Moroco also, if occasion required it. Abdemar went forth well
satisfied with this assurance; and Roxana having caused Almanzaida to be
called, I should never have believed (said she to her) that forgetting that
Vertne in which you have been educated, you would have lent an ear after
amorous Propositions, and bound your self in an Intrigue of Love with one of
the Kings Slaves: yet it is but too true, that it is so; and the audacious
Almanzor, abusing of those Privileges which my Bounty and Abdala's Favors had
procured him above many others, has been so bold as to seduce your Heart in
this very place. I am convinced of this by unquestionable assurances, and it is
with trouble that I speak it. I had conceived a sincere affection for you from
your very Infancy; and looking upon you with the Eyes of a Mother, rather than
of a Mistress, I had designed something more than a Slave for you: But since
your Heart has made an unworthy choice, and would not stay for mine, all that
you must hope from it, is, that Almanzor shall turn out of this Palace, never
to enter into it again; and moreover, I shall not only deprive you of those
advantages which I intended you, but of my Esteem and Friendship also.

Almanzaida's Heart was but too sensible, to endure with patience Roxana's
Taunis; she was conscious of her own innocence, and had always lived with
Almanzor in such a manner, as deserved Praises, rather than Reproaches.
Therefore looking on Roxana as on a Person that would have sacrificed to her
own Fury both Cleonisa and Almanzor, with a boldness that had some mixture of
scorn in it; Madam, (said she) I neither deserve your Reproaches, nor your
Menaces; and my Inclinations have ever been so much to Virtue, that
peradventure I have even outgone those Lessons which were given me therein. I
have no commerce that can make me blush; and I dare tell you, Madam, (whar
Respects soever I owe you) that you never did perceive in me any thing that
could give you any disadvantageous thoughts of Almanzaida. I speak with that
freedom, Madam, which perhaps is not wholly suitable to my Condition, but which
is very conformable to the motions of my Heart, and to those sensible wrongs
which I do not deserve, neither, know I any Power that can make me to suffer
them. I have made no unworthy Choice, Madam; and mauger the obscurity of my
Birth, knowing my Soul sufficiently raised above the Vulgar, I leave the
success of my Destiny unto the protection of Heaven; I hope the Gods will
accept of it, and procure me the means of justifying my self. But, Madam,
though you should unhappily deprive me of your Protection, upon such groundless
suspicions, I should endeavor to consolate my self of such a disgrace as I had
not drawn upon my self, and that I had not deserved. I know not (replied
Roxana, fretted at Almanzaida's Answer) which of us two is the Queen, and which
the Slave: Yet when I consider you, I can see nothing but the effects of my
Bounties, and Almanzor's Mistress. I know what I am, Madam, (replied
Almanzaida, resolved to justify her self) I acknowledge my self your Slave:
But if my Person is obliged to you, it was for protecting a miserable wretch,
destinated to bear your Chains, and to serve you; and I am sensible enough,
that this servile condition requires nothing but submission in me: But, Madam,
my Heart and my Condition are at odds, and I may say, that the one is the wreck
of the other; and if I believe my Heart, which is impatient of suffering wrong,
if I am no Queen, at least I am not descen^ed from a place much inferior to a
Throne. A Conquest so Illustrious as that of Almanzor (replied Roxana
scornfully) cannot inspire lower thoughts. Almanzor (replied the Princess) has
a Virtue that would justify all those that I have for him. I know (interrupted
Roxana) that Virtue does affect you so, as to make you fancy your self the more
considerable for it; but such weak Imaginations move nothing but Commiseration:
and for my part, I pity you, for losing in one day that precious Lovers sight,
with all the hopes of ever seeing him again. Go, shut up your shame, and hide
it from my sight, and the rest of the Worlds also. At these words Almanzaida
retired, anger drawing a deluge of tears from her fair Eyes, which was the
condition that Cleonisa had found her in. She endeavored to comfort her, and
to learn the cause of her troubles. Almanzaida informed her of it, not
mentioning in the least Aristan's Secret, though not without great restraint.
Cleonisa was moved at it, and embracing the young Princes, It i^ but a moment
(said she) since I was advertising Almanzor of what you were both to fear: but,
my dear Almanzaida, what Service can I render you? The most cosiderable that I
can expect from your generosity, Madam, (replied she) is to do me more justice
than Roxana. Roxana'sSoul and mine (replied the amiable Cleonisa) are too
different, to have the same Motives: I have but too much cause to believe her
unjust; and though I were not so satisfied as I am of your Virtues, her bare
Accusations would be sufficient to confirm your Innocence to me: But once
again, what must be done in this juncture? Give notice to Almanzor of all that
has passed (replied Almanzaida); bid him to consult Aristan, and that they use
all the means they can imagine to deliver me from these aspersions, and from
Roxana's and Abdemar's Persecutions. Almanzor must no more come into the
Palace, Imperious Roxana banishes him from thence for ever; and since you have
the goodness, Madam, to engage your self in an unfortuntte Creatures concerns,
be pleased to see Abdala's Slave, tell him my condition: Time presses, and one
moment of wrong unto Almanzaida's Virtue, is capable of casting her into
despair. Cleonisa had no more time, than to assure the Princess, that she would
act as she desired; for Roxana's coming in, obliged Almanzaida to retire.

Roxana said not a word to Clenisa of what had happened; she designed that the
business should break out in public: her Slaves Answer had so strangely netled
her, that she could entertain no other thoughts but of her destruction.
Cleonisa staid but little with her, being in an impatiency of assisting
Almanzaida; and because she could not seek out Almanzor her self, so soon as
she was in her Apartment, she writ him a Note, which she gave to an old Eunuch
to deliver unto him, in which were these words.

To ALMANZOR.
A Most important Business is the cause that I must of necessity see you this
day; having such things to impart to you, as are not to be confided to Paper.
Meet me within two hours at the Fountain of the Labyrinth: I shall not fail to
be there, and to let you know whether your Interests are dear unto me, and what
thoughts there are of you in the Bosom of

CLEONISA.


What a World of Troubles did this innocent Letter cause in Abdala's Palace?
The Slave Toxara did carry it in his Hand so that it might easily be perceived,
and was passing into the Kings Apartment to seek out Almanzor, when he met
Roxana, whose suspicious Eyes were immediately cast upon the Note. What Message
are you going about, Toxara, (said she to the Slave)? What is that Paper you
carry? He not answering, and seeming perplexed, rendered Roxana the more
curious, who took the Note out of his Hand, with no further consideration than
of her own satisfaction, with which she returned into her Apartment. Toxara
durst not inform Cleonisa of the truth of the business, but gave her to
understand that he had lost the Note, after he had made a fruitless search for
Almanzor.

Roxana, whose spirit was naturally wicked, presently suspected that Cleonisa
had some private concerns with Almanzor; and howsoever she had hitherto
concealed her thoughts, it is most certain that she always hated her, seeing
with rage and spite her Merits to reign so powerfully over Abdala's Heart:
being overjoyed of having this opportunity of ruining so dreadful an Enemy as
she esteemed Cleonisa, she put up the Note for the present, not without a world
of revengeful thoughts.

Mean time this accident, and the night coming on, had broke all Cleonisa'
Measures; and what desire soever she had of serving Almanzaida, she was forced
to stay till Morning, to advertise Almanzor of her desires to speak with him:
While she was musing which way to compass it, (a Note having already been lost)
Almanzaida in her solitude overcome with sorrow, Almanzor suffering still at
the same rate, incapable of comfort, Roxana was not idle: Abdala coming into
her Chamber that night, according to his custom, she could no longer defer
giving the first onset unto Cleonisa's Happiness: My Lord, (said she to Abdala,
with an affected sorrow) it is with great reluctance that I am obliged to
inform you of a Business which will be unpleasing to you; and were not your
Honor interested in it, I would not be thus instrumental in any trouble to
you: But, my Lord, your Glory is concerned in it; and whatsoever be the event,
you are not to be long kept from the knowledge that Cleonisa is false to you,
and that it is Almanzor, whom you love as your own Child, that insolent Slave,
that dishonours you, and entertains a secret Traffic of Love with her. Ah,
Madam, (said the King, struck with her words as with Thunder) do not distrust
Cleonisa's Virtue, and Almanzor's Fidelity. You know Cleoonisa's Character,
(replied Roxana, giving him the Note) Read. At this sight Abdala had much to do
to believe his own Eyes: He loved Cleonisa more than ever he had loved Roxana,
and Almanzor had always been in a manner as dear to him as Abdemar; and those
kind thoughts he had for them, making them seem much the more guilty, Ah,
persidious, (cried he) you shall both perish, and your criminal Lives shall
revenge me of so sensible a wrong. Does Cleonisa thus betray me? and is it
Almanzor that seduces her? This is too much, and I will no longer defer the
Decree of their Ruin. Roxana, who politickly weighed all things, did fear that
if this Business should break forth more publicly, it might so happen that a
Justification would destroy her Designs, retained the King as he was going
forth to pronounce their deaths, and craftily gave him to understand, that he
was not to publish an Affront which would grow greater by being divulged. This
Advice did something allay Abdala's rage, who retired into his Apartment. At
the same instant Abdemar came in, and Roxana renewed her pleasure, in repeating
to him what had happened. He believed nothing of it, and was too well skilled in
tender Affections, to believe that those which Almanzor had for Almanzaida were
not real: He therefore would have persuaded his Mother, that Cleonisa's Note
was more mysterious than guilty, and that she ought not to expose her to the
Fury of the King, without a further search into the Business had first been
made: But in stead of receiving this good advice, she accused him of timidity
and weakness.

Abdala passed that Night without rest; and the great Love he resented for
Cleonisa, and tenderness for Almnazor, made him conclude them the more
deserving death, which he was preparing for them. Aristan had hitherto been the
sole Depositary of all his Secrets; but he would not make him partaker of this
last: he was Almanzors Adorer, and Cleonisa's faithful Agent, who had too great
a liberty with him, not to employ all his Interests in their behalf. Thus did
all things concur to both their ruins; who not thinking of what was preparing
for them, were entertaining themselves of all that had happened the day before.
Almanzor returned a thousand thanks to Cleonisa, for what she had done for him;
and being sensible of those ill things which Roxana was contriving against
Almanzaida, he took leave of Cleonisa, to go seek Aristan, to conjure him to
declare a Secret that could not have more dangerous Consequences when
published, than it had already. The Eunuch, to please the Prince, run
immediately to the King, who having resolved not to see him till after he had
executed his Designs, feigned to be sick, and pretended to repose; so that the
Fates had a full scope to bring this Adventure to the last extremity. Almanzor
was past all patience at these delays; he durst no longer cast his Eyes toward
the place which contained Almanzaida: Imperious Roxana was insulting over
Cleonisa; and Abdemar durst not complain of not seeing Almanzaida, for having
drawn this evil upon himself.

Mean time, the incensed King would no longer defer his Revenge; and the
evening of that same day the Executioners of such private Deaths had Orders
given them to deprive Cleonisa and Almanzor of their Lives. Roxana was suddenly
informed of the Sentence, and so was feeding her ambitious thoughts with the
pleasure of Reigning solely. She would have the satisfaction to acquaint
Almanzaida first, of that thing which she thought would be the most sensible to
her in the World: She sent for her, and not forbearing at Abdemar's arrival,
because she no longer feared the revocation of those Orders that had been
given, and `tis probable already executed, she informed the sorrowful
Almanzaida both of the Deaths and pretended Infidelities of her Lover, and of
Cleonisa. This unexpected News had like to have cost the Princess her Life; she
fell upon a Couch that was near her, without color or motion. Abdemar run to
her, and discovered unto his Mother, by that diligence he used, what she had
never mistrusted. Roxana's Slaves did second those Cares which he took to
succor her; and while some were flinging of Water in her Face, and others
tearing off her Clothes, Abdala, mortally troubled at what was going to be
done, came into Roxana's Chamber, and found Almanzaida in that desperate
condition: He learned the cause of it, and judged Almanzor the more deserving
death, in betraying not only his Bounties, but the beautiful Almanzaida also;
who at last came out of her swoon, having gathered some strength through an
effect of the very same Sorrow that had deprived her of it before: How
beautiful did she appear? and how difficult it was to see her in that strange
disorder, and not be infinitely moved at it? The discomposing of her Dress, the
languidness of her Eyes, her Tears, her sorrowful Complaints, and, in a word,
all her Actions, did contribute in exciting both Love and Commiseration at the
same time. The discomposure that she found her self in before the King, did not
prevent her from casting her self down at his Feet, Ah, Sir, (said she to him)
preserve Cleonisa, and do not lose Almanzor, if you will not expose your self
to a remorse more cruel than their deaths. Almanzaida (replied Abdala) I ought
to revenge my self of a most ungrateful Woman, and deliver you from a
perfidious Man, who is unworthy of your Tears, and that deserves a thousand
deaths more cruel than that which is going to punish his Crimes. He is not
perfidious, Sir, (cried she); he is your own Blood, your son, and of
unfortunate Cleonisa, who by Roxana 's treachery, after so many years of
distrusts and precautions, falls at last the victime to her fury. Yes, Sir,
Almanzor is your Son, and that unfortunate Creature that speaks to you at this
present is his Sister, your Daughter, Sir: believe it, Sir, and Aristan shall
confirm it; it is he who being convinced by experience of what we were to fear
from Roxana 's rage, deceived you, to preserve us: These are the Criminals that
you sacrifice to her satisfaction. Almanzaida's Discourse found not any thing
in Abdala's Heart that could resist it; and those tender affections which he
always had for Almanzor, were convincing proofs that he was his Blood: It would
be difficult to express his grief; and the first word that he spoke, was to bid
Abdemar hasten to render him a Service more important than his Life, in
endeavoring with all diligence to prevent Cleonisa's death, and Almanzor's
also, if it were yet time; bidding him remember that he was his Brother, and
worthy of that Title by a thousand Virtues. Abdemar deferred not a moment to
obey; he was generous, and really moved with what he had but just learned, he
flew to Cleonisa's Apartment. Mean time Roxana seeing Abdala busied in giving
Almanzaida some Testimonies of his Affections, was reflecting with an inward
rage on the sudden change that some few words had brought to this business, and
was seeking in her Heart and Spirit, ingenious to all evil, some means by which
she might invalidate Aristan's Testimony, and render it of no effect, by making
it pass for a feigned Story, who in a days space did bring again to life not
only that Child of Cleonisa's which she her self had thought dead coming into
the World, but another also, of whose Life she was wholly ignorant.

Abdemar came happily to Cleonisa's rescue, who constant in her adversities,
was writing her last thoughts unto Abdala. He staid with her no longer than to
make known that the Orders were reversed, and run immediately to Almanzor's
Lodgings; but it was too late, and his Executioners, more diligent than
Cleonisa's, having found him upon his Bed, had mercilesly strangled him there.

Abdemar moved at so deplorable a fate, could not stay his Eyes on so dreadful
a Spectacle; and too certain of a Truth which so afflicted him, he returned to
Roxana's Apartment: I have staid too long, Sir, (said he to the King) Cleonisa
lives, but Almanzor is breathless. At these fatal words he King resented his
Sorrows to the quick, and repented that he had so lightly given credit to
Roxana's perfidiousness: The beauteous Almanzaida found her self in the height
of extremity also. Abdemar, whose affections unto her had given way to a real
tenderness, did wholly lay upon himself the cause of all these evils, and being
moved with a sincere penitency, did reproach unto Roxana her barbarousness, unto
which the King added his resentments; and certainly nothing in the world could
be more touching, than to hear all that passed between them. In fine, Abdala
retired from a place in which Roxana's presence did but augment his sorrow, and
went to Cleonisa's Apartment, leading the most aflicted Almanzaida along with
him; where they found the Princess as composed, as if she had had nothing to
fear: but she soon ceased to be so, when she learned at once both the Life and
Death of her dear Son: It was her Hand that had sacrificed him, and without
that fatal Note Roxana could not have destroyed him. In vain did the King
endeavor to recall her Fortitude by his Embraces; Almanzor was no more, and
though innocent of his death, she looked upon her self as the cause of it.
Since that your unjust distrusts (said she to the King) have caused me so much
sorrow as nothing can ever consolate me, and that the unfortunate Almanzor was
not rescued from furious Roxana 's rage, but to become a more noble Victime to
her cruelty; and that without enjoying the happiness of his Life, I have all
the sorrows that such a death could produce, suffer at least that I may give
unto his Heart, as cold as it is, such Embraces as I could not give unto him
living. At these words, without staying for Abdala's Answer, she went toward
the Slaves Quarters, and had already crossed some Galleries that made the
distance between the Kings and the Women's Apartment, when she perceived
Aristan, with that beloved Son which she was lamenting, and whose supposed loss
was going in all probability to cause hers effectually. She was no sooner
certain of his Life, but that she gave a full scope to all her Joys, and to the
tenderness of her Affections; the King was no less sensible of this Happiness:
But Almanzaida, notwithstanding her resolutions to the contrary, did resent it
in a manner which it is like was yet more eminent than the rest. Aristan in few
words did clear more amply that Mystery which had preserved two such precious
Lives, and did receive such Eulogies from all as his Fidelity did deserve.
Almanzor, surprised at so many Accidents, could not be taken off from
reflecting on the dangers unto which Cleonisa had been exposed: As for his
part, he found his Soul in such a condition, as made him look upon Death as a
refuge, and not as an evil. Embraces and expressions of tenderness were often
repeated on all sides; but the Princess Almanzaida, who knew by her own
experience what Sorrows Almanzor did yet feel for her, durst scarcely look upon
him.

Mean time it was unhappy Yoxana who had received that sad fate which was
intended for Almanzor: He had found the Princes Chamber open, and while he was
walking with Aristan in the Garden, he had thrown himself upon his Bed, where
the Executioners had strangled him, taking him for Almanzor. Toxara's loss was
not significant enough to disturb so much joy. After Abdala had left Cleonisa
in her Apartment, where he also parted with Almanzaida, he retired himself unto
his also; and Abdemar, who had nothing but Brotherly Affection for Almanzor,
would not part from him; he being not capable of so strong a Passion as his
Brother, his Reason overcame his Love: But Almanzor was less conformable; he
was more in love than ever: and while the rest were at quiet, his share was
Tears and Sighs.

The next morning he rendered his Dovoirs unto the King, and in the next place
to Cleonisa; who seeing now her Happiness above her own desires and hopes, did
continually ply Almanzaida with Caresses. That amiable Princess did answer her
favoors with a world of affection, but with as much sadness; so that Cleonisa
was persuaded, that the knowledge of her Fortune had not restored her Heart to
its Liberty, and that Almanzor did still hold there a larger place than the
name of a Brother would admit of: Almanzor's presence did confirm her in that
Opinion; and notwithstanding Almanzaida's reservedness, her Eyes would speak
another Language than that of Friendship unto the passionate Almanzor. This
mutual Affection did not trouble Cleonisa, further than as it had relation to
their quiet; and being confident in both their Virtues, she knew that she had
no cause to fear of that side: therefore she busied her thoughts in healing of
such Evils which a long Error had contracted: But he was incapable of it;
neither Time, nor Cleonisa's and Aristan's Cares, could obtain any thing upon
his strong Impressions; but forgetting every moment that Almanzaida was his
Sister, he did speak to her of his Love: and the young Princess, being
sometimes deluded by a too powerful Charm, did hearken unto him without
interruption, and did daily more and more plunge her self into an Abyss, whence
it was impossible to retrive her.

Mean time Roxana looked upon Cleonisa's Prosperity with rage; and never were
so many attempts made for the ruin of her happiness, as then: But all too
late; Abdala was convinced of the Virtue of the one, and of the others evil
Designs: and it is likely that he had resented Roxana's wickedness in an higher
measure yet, but that he looked upon her as on Abdemar's Mother.

Almanzor of a Slave had taken upon him the Name and Rank of Prince, but not
the Pride; and as in his mean condition he had the Art of pleasing all the
World, it was not difficult for any Person to add to that esteem they had
always had for him, those respects due to his Birth. Aristan seeing his Designs
come so forward, did look upon his good Success with delight; only Almanzor's
obstinate Passion did intermix some discontents with it: He was thinking on the
small hopes there was of curing him, when he was advertised, that a Stranger
asked to speak with him: He gave order he should be brought in; and no sooner
had he cast his Eyes upon him- than he knew him to be that Person to whom he
had entrusted Almanzaida's first Years. As he had ever found him most faithful
to all his Secrets, he did entertain such thoughts of him as were full of
Acknowledgments; so that he embraced him, and after the first testimonies of
affection, he offered him his Services at Moroco, in all that he should desire.
I am persuaded (replied Zideus) that you would generously serve a Person in
whom you did once repose the highest confidence: but, as the case stands now,
it is on no particular Interest that I come here at present. Aristan, I have a
business of the highest nature to impart to you, the mystery of which I conjure
you to pardon me, since that all my intentions in it, have been but to save you
from much sorrow. That Child with whom you had entrusted me, was not the same I
returned you back, Death bereaved us of it within six months after you had
committed it to our care; and I being informed of its Birth, I guessed at the
sorrow that you would have for the loss of it; which to prevent for the
present, I supplied the place of the King of Moroco 's Daughter, by another
young Princess, reduced to seek for succor, and exiled from her very Birth,
through extraordinary events, since it had pleased the Heavens to entrust her
into our Hands. I did it, Aristan; and the Age was so well sitted, that you
were not sensible of the change which I had put upon you. But now pray bearken
unto the Story of that Person after whom I am now come to inquire.

You are not ignorant, that Albenzais King of Fez was driven from his Kingdom
some twenty years since, by the ambitious Morat; and that he unhappily ended
his days, being about to defend the Remains both of his and his Queen Zaira's
Liberty. The Queen was then with Child, and near the time of her Delivery, when
the deplorable Albenzais lost his life; the sorrows of his Queen ended hers
also, presently after that she had brought a Daughter into the World. I was
born in Europe, but had given my self from my youth unto Albenzais his Service,
and was married unto one of those Persons whom Zaira did most consider: We were
the only two that did not abandon them in their Adversities; and it was into
our Hands (in the presence of Prince Ortisis, Brother unto Albenzais, who had
never for saken her) that the dying Queen deposited that innocent Creature
which she had newly brought into the World, entreating us to conceal her from
Morat's knowledge, and to retire into some unknown place, to wait for a better
Fortune. Ortisis extremely grieved at the Queens death, sent us away without
delay, assuring me, that either he would perish in the attempt, or tear
Albenzais his Scepter from the unjust Morat's Hands, and restore it unto that
newborn Babe his Brother's Daughter. Thus we parted from Ortisis, who some
time after was taken by the Agents of Morat, as he was on a Design, and shut up
in a close Prison, in which he did languish for a long time.

In the mean time, that I might not be far from some place where I might hear
News from Fez, I come to Moroco, where I met with you, and where you were
pleased to take me into your Friendship: My Wife did appear to you a fit Person
to take upon her the care of Abdala's Daughter: but when, after her death, I
had given you the Princess of Fez in lieu of her, I was well satisfied as to
that particular; and finding my self useless at Moroco, I took a Voyage, and at
my return learned that Ortisis had escaped out of ^^^son. I made some stay at
Fez, and through my care and diligence did learn the place of his retreat. I
came to him, he received me kindly; and I was the more welcome, when I assured
him of the Princesses Life. In sine, after diverse years of needless Cautions,
and of Secret Enterprises, one has taken effect, in which Morat the Usurper has
been massacred by the People of Fez, tired with the Oppressions; of his
Tyrannical Government; after whose death, Ortisis has no sooner appeared, but
the Name of Albenzais, and his also, have been repeated a thousand times. He
generously refusing the Crown, has assured the Chief amongst them, That there
was a Daughter of Albenzais's living, in whom his Memory was to be perpetuated;
That for his part, he had taken up the Sword but as its Depositary, till the
arrival of the Princess. Thus presenting some Papers to Aristan; This is
(continued he) the Prince Ortisis his Testimony, with a Note of the Queens,
which will confirm the truth of my Relation.

The Eunuch was so amazed at this Discourse, as to remain some time in a
profound silence: But after he had read the Letters, being fully persuaded of a
thing in which there was so much demonstration of truth, Ah, Almanzor, (cried
he, thinking on the joy this would bring to the Prince) what happy News are
here for you? And being unwilling to lose a moments time of publishing them, in
few words he informed Zideus of Almanzaida's Condition, and gave him also some
light Informations of what had passed of her Concern. So conducting him into
the Kings presence, they found Almanzor entering the Chamber, with such a
consternation of Spirits, as did speak him worse than ever he had been yet.
Will you thus for ever give your self over to sorrow, Sir, (said Aristan to
him)? and will you never endeavor to overcome it? I should attempt
Impossibilities (replied the Prince) should I design it; but as the Cause has
been from my Infancy, and as it were born with me, so neither can it end but
with my Life. Hope better things, my Lord, (replied Aristan); Here is a Man,
Sir, that boasts of curing you, if you please; but will not undertake a
Business of such importance, but in the King's presence. Ah, ( cried out
Almanzor) save me at once both the labor and confusion of informing him of
what pass in my Breast. At these words they entered, where they found Abdemar
only with the King; who presently conceiving, that this Stranger did not
present himself thus without Orders, but on some extraordinary account,
expected to learn the occasion, when Aristan informed the King of the business.
During the Relation, never was Man more hearkened unto than he was by Almanzor,
neither was there ever so pleasing a surprise as this. Zideus his Relation, the
Queen of Fez's Note, and the Letters from Ortisis, did jointly confirm the
truth, and removed all doubts. Abdala was the first that congratulated Almanzor
with these surprising News, and immediately went with Aristan and Zideus unto
Cleonisa's Apartment, to inform her and Almanzaida of a thing that would so
strangely surprise them. During their stay in that place, Almanzor, in the
midst of his Joys, thinking on Abdemar's concurrency in his Amors, fell into a
sudden melancholy, of which the Prince could not forbear asking him the cause.
Almanzor ingenuously confessed, that he feared a return of Abdemar's amorous
Flames, which he might reasonably fear would re-kindle, the rather because his
own had never suffered the least decay. Abdemar did assure him, in so obliging
a manner, that he was free, and that he had no other Affections left for
Almanzaida, but such as might become a Brother, that far from opposing in the
least his Happiness, he would seek all the ways imaginable to contribute to it.
The King by his return did further confirm Almanzor in his Happiness, in
promising him the possession of the Princess of Fez; to that purpose
immediately sending back with Zideus some of the most considerable of his
Officers to advertise the Prince Ortisis of the state of things, and to demand
of him the Princess of Fez for Almanzor, he being the only Person on whom she
did depend.

Mean time Almanzor run to Cleonisa's Apartment: she took no small part in his
contentment, and was somewhat consolated of the loss of her own Daughter, by
the consideration that her Son should possess the beautiful Almanzaida; to whom
he having expressed part of those Joys he felt, he went from her Apartment into
that in which was the Princess of Fez, whom he found without company: Their
contented looks did speak to each other a mutual joy; but being both filled
with various thoughts, they kept a profound silence for a considerable time,
before they could express themselves; which was first broke by Almanzor, in
these words: Madam, (said he) all my Happiness has its whole dependency on you
only; and the same happy Fate which has brought us out of that confusion in
which all my hopes were lost, without the least decay or alteration in my
affections, does assist me to bring at your Feet both my Love and my Hopes,
here prostrating my self, to demand of the Queen of Fez a continuance of those
Affections which the beauteous Almanzaida did once entertain for the Slave
Almanzor. My Lord, ( replied Almanzaida) you should demand with more confidence
that which you are sure to obtain: The Slave Almanzor was ever dear unto me;
Almanzaida's Brother has been the same, peradventure more than he ought to have
been; and the Prince of Moroco Shall ever be more precious than her own Life
unto the Daughter of Albenzais. I complained against Fortune, when some
Circumstances had made me believe that I was Abdala's Daughter, because that
Greatness was outrageous to the Inclinations of a Heart which could not pardon
any thing that did but check its Passions for Almanzor: But now I am contented
with my change, since that through Ortijis his Generosity it gives me a Throne,
in which I may have something that may please you. It is you only, Sir, that I
can share it with; and give me leave to tell you, that that which renders it
the most considerable to me, is, that I can offer it you. Generous Princess,
(replied the passionate Lover) all that I can boast of, is of a Heart that has
been wholly yours since it first knew it self. I have nothing more to repay
those precious Favors which you so profusely pour upon me. That Heart you
speak of ( replied Almanzaida) which I esteem above the World, has already
acquitted you of all the Favors I could bestow upon you; and no sooner shall
Ortisis say the word, but -- Ah, Madam, (cried out Almanzor) can he be the sole
Opponent to my Happiness? Hope for better things ( replied the Princess);
Zideus has given us an advantageous account of his Goodness, and his Actions
hitherto have been answerable to it: Having so much Virtue, he cannot be
ungrateful; and if he is sensible, he will doubtless share in those Obligations
which I owe you. It is I that owe you immortal ones (interrupted the Prince)
and I should have just cause to fear all things, if I had not more confidence
in both your Goodness, than in all my Pretensions. My Lord, ( replied the
Princess) I hope he will be favorable to you; but should I be deceived in my
hopes, that Faith which I at present give you, to be ever yours, shall never be
altered.

These last words eleveted Almanzor at the height of his happiness. Cleonisa
met him: Abdemar came presently after, and did assure them in a handsome manner
of the joy he resented at their satisfaction.

In fine, after a tedious expectation for our impatient Lovers (though it was
not long) Abdala's Envoys returned with a full consent from Ortisis, for
Almanzaida's marriage; which was no longer deferred, than to prepare the
Gallantry there of, which was worthy Abdala's Magnificence, and suitable to
those Lovers for whom it was made.

FINIS.
A Catalogue of some BOOKS Printed for J. Magnes and R. Bentley.
Folio.
LOrd Bacon's Natural History, in Ten Centuries: Whereunto is newly added, The
History Natural and Experimental of Life and Death, or of the Prolongation of
Life.

The History of Lapland, wherein is showed the Original, Manners, Habits,
Marriages, Conjurations of that People.

The Triumphs of Gods Revenge against the crying and execrable Sin of wilful
and premeditated Murder; expressed in Thirty seven Tragical Histories, digested
into Six Books, which contain great variety of mournful and memorable
Accidents, Moral, Amorous, and Divine. The whole Work now complete. By I.
Reynolds.

Fodinae Regalis: or, The History of the Laws and Places of the chief Mines and
Mineral Works in England, Wales, and the English Pale in Ireland; as also of
the Mint, and Money: With a Clavis, explaining some difficult Words relating to
Mines.

Quarto.
Burnt child dreads the Fire: or, An Examination of the Merits of the Papists
relating to England, mostly from their own Pens; in justification of the late
Act of Parliament for preventing Dangers that may happen by Popish Recusants:
And further showing, That whatsoever their Merits have been, no thanks to their
Religion; and therefore ought not to be gratified in Religion, by Toleration
thereof, unless we intend to inslave our selves and our Posterity.

Romish Doctrines not from the Beginning: or, A Reply to what S. C. or Serenus
Cressy, has objected against Dr. Pierce's Sermon, in vindication of our Church
against the Novelties of Rome. By Dr. Whitby.

Falsehood unmasked: or, An Answer to Truth unvailed.

An earnest Request to Mr. I. Standish.

Plays in Quarto.
Tartuff: or, The French Puritan. A Comedy, acted at the Theater Royal, by
their Majesty's Servants. Written in French by the famed Wit of France Monsieur
Moliuer, and made English by Mr. M. Medburne.

Plays written by Madam Bean.
The Fore'd Marriage: or, The Jealous Bridegroom. A Comedy, acted at the Dukes
Theater.

Abdelazzar: or, The Moor's Revenge. A Tragedy, acted at the Dukes Theater.

The Town Fop: or, Sir Timothy Tawdry. A Comedy, acted at the Dukes Theater.

Plays written by Mr. James Howard.
All mistaken: or, The Mad Couple. A Comedy, acted at the Theater Royal, by
their Majesty's Servants.

The English Monsieur. A Comedy, acted at the Theater Royal, by their Majesty's
Servants.

Plays written by Mr. Crown.
Calisto: or, The Chaste Nymph. A Masque, acted at Court, by the Lady Mary, the
Lady Anne, and many other Persons of the greatest Quality in England.

The Country-Wit. A Comedy, acted at the Dukes Theater.

The Destruction of Jerusalem by Titus Vespatian, in two Parts, acted at the
Theater Royal, by their Majesty's Servants. Price 2 s.

Plays written by Mr. Lee.
The Tragedy of Nero. Acted at the Theater Royal, by their Majesty's Servants.

Sophonisba: or Hannibal overthrown. A Tragedy, acted at the Threatre Royal, by
their Majesty's Servants.

The Court of Augustus Caesar, or Gloriana. A Tragedy, acted at the Theater
Royal.

The Rival Queens: or, The Death of Alexander the Great. A Tragedy, acted at
the Theater Royal.

The Plain Dealer. A Comedy, acted at the Theater Royal, by their Majesty's
Servants. Written by Mr. Witherly.

The Mistaken Husband. A Comedy, acted at the Theater Royal, by their Majesty's
Servants. Part of it written by John Dryden Esquire.

Madam Fickle: or, The Witty Falseone. A Comedy, acted at the Dukes Theater.
Written by Mr. Durfey.

The Fond Husband: or, The Plotting Sisters. A Comedy, acted at the Dukes
Theater. Written by Mr. Durfey.

Mitbridates King of Poxtus. A Tragedy.

The Fool turned Critique. A Comedy.

Books in Octavo.
A Discourse of the Idolatry of the Church of Rome, wherein that Charge is
justified, and the pretended Resutation of Dr. Stilling slect's Discourse is
fully answered. By Dr. Whitby.

The Natural History of the Passions. By the Lord Clarendon. Price 2 s.

Mauger's Letters, French and English, on all Subjects, Moral, Divine, Amorous.
Price 2 s. 6 d.

Covent Garden Drollery: or, A Collection of choice Songs, Poems, Prologues,
and Epilogues: Never Printed before.

Books is Duodecimo.
Zelinda: A Romance. Translated from the famed Monsieur S^udery. By T. D. Price
12 d.

The Happy Slave. A pleasant Novel, in two Parts. Written in French by the
famed Wit of France Monsieur Bromond; and rendered into English by a Person of
Quality. Price 2 s.

The Cheating Gallant: or, The false Count Brion. A pleasant Novel. Translated
from the French, by a Person of Quality.

Bishop Andrews his Devotions, and Manual for the Sick. Price 1 s. 6 d.

Dr. Cole's Devotions, or Daily Prayers. Price 1 s. 6 d.

The Disorders of Love, in Four Histories; full of many pleasant and true
Adventures.

Heroine Musquetier, in two Parts. Prince 2 s.

Almanzor and Almanzaida. A Novel.

The Double Cuckold. A pleasant Novel. In the Press.

FINIS.

