THE Last Dying Speeches and Confessions OF THE Prisoners who were EXECUTED on
Friday the Twenty Second of this instant October: And more especially of
Francis Nicholson, Who is to be Hanged in Chains upon Hounslow-Heath, for
barbarously Murdering Mr. Dimbleby of Hampton Court, for the promised Reward
of Forty shillings. And of the Penitence of Ralph Markland a Notorious CLIPPER,
who was Reprieved. AS ALSO Of JOHN NEALE who was Executed at Tyburn. With the
Behavior of those other five who received Sentence the last Sessions, but
Three were Reprieved, and Two received Pardons.
THough seldom any Sessions ends without being attended with Tragical Eevents,
yet so prone is Man to hurry himself upon dangers, that are still attended with
ignominy and shame, that no Examples are of weight to restrain him from the
villainies that are the causers of his miseries: although the danger is
imminent, and the Law prescribes it death to act them, yet the hopes of
escaping the Eyes of Men, prompts them on in secret, and encourages them to dip
their hands in Blood, and to perpetrate other Crimes, little inferior to the
same; not imagining that the all-seeing God, who never slumbers, but with an
Eternal wake views the large circumference of Heaven and Earth, beholds their
dark contrivances, and when he pleases, brings them to the bar of Justice, to
answer in the open day for deeds of darkness, and receive such punishments as
they have merited; for through the many Ages since the world began, it has been
curiously observed amongst the multiplicity of evils that have happened, that
seldom the shedders of Innocent blood have escaped scot free, but by one means
or other have been brought to light, though many years have intervened, which
(as the Murderers thought) were like veils to hide their guilts or bury them
in oblivion, but like Agag they were deceived, when they flattered themselves
with (surely the fear of death is over-past.)

But the youngster, of whose untimely though deserved end I intend to b^gin
withal, had not so much deliberation; for having done the horrid Murder, and
Robbed the party Murdered, of a Watch, Money, and other things, he made away
to London with all speed, but was taken about St. Martins in the fields, in
another Robbery, so that he was so far wrought upon by hellish persuasion, that
he rather than to ask Heaven pardon for one of the foulest and basest Murders
that has lately been heard of, added guilt to guilt; so that being taken, he
was committed to the County-Goale of Newgate, and the last Sessions brought to
the Bar, where he was Indicted by the Name of Francis Nicholson, for Murdering
on the Sixteenth of September last, one Mr. Dimbleby, a servant to the
Wardrobe-keeper of Hampton Court; and with him as accessory to the said
Murder, was likewise Indicted one George Granger, a Coachman to a person of
Quality; Nicholson being by Trade a Carpenter, upon his first Apprehension and
now at the Bar did confess, that he himself did the Murder; having in a most
barbarous manner cleft his Head with an Ax, which was produced in Court. But he
also added, That the Coachman Arraigned with him did put him upon, and bribe
him to do that horrid Deed; because, he said, he had spoken ill words of
somebody he belonged to; promising to give him Forty Shillings and a better
thing [for so were his words] for the same, and that thereupon he did it; but
had no body could prove any of all this. Only it was proved, that when it was
told the Coachman, that such an one was Murdered, he said, It was no matter,
for he used to speak ill of a Person of Quality, or words to that effect, on
which he was taken upon Suspicion. But this did not seem a sufficient proof to
Convict, several persons of Esteem testifying his honest Conversation, etc. so
he was found Not Guilty. But the other, who confessed he did the Murder, and
afterward took the Gentleman's Money out of his Pockets and his Watch, which
when he was taken he was found exposing to sale, was most justly Condemned, and
received Sentence of death, being much dejected, and looked as if a lumpish
heaviness or stupifying insensibility had seized him: all that could be got out
of him was, that he did the Murder, and that the Coachman hired him, he having
attempted it three times before, but had no power to do it; so powerful is
Conscience to check such bold and unlawful Enterprises, till by obstinacy it is
feared, or put to silence. During the interview of time, between Sentence and
Execution, he many times was observed to retire in private, and strive to pray,
but was often over-powred, with strong temptaions, till by the prevalent
prayers of several Godly Ministers, heaven was entreated, and by power divine
melted his stony heart, so that he was observed to weep and bemoan himself for
his mis-deeds, seeming very willing to Dye, so that he might be sure of an
Immortal state of happiness hereafter, desiring all to pray for him, that the
blood that lay so heavy on his Conscience, might be washed away by the precious
blood of his merciful Redeemer, and so continued for the most part, not being
so much as daunted when the Smith came to take measure of him, in order to the
making of his Chains; for such was his doom, to be hanged up in the same, as a
terrible Example to all such bold and desperate wretches, that shall dare
causelessly to destroy the Image of their great Creator. In the morning betimes
he was conveyed with a great Guard and a numerous company of people, who went
out of curiosity to Hounslow-heath, as near as was convenient to the place
where the Murder was done, and there Hanged till he was dead; and then the
Irons riveted about his Neck, and under his Arms, and there left a dismal
spectacle to all that pass that way.

Where leaving him, I shall proceed to the rest, which was Ralph Markland for
High Treason, he received his Trial with his Wife, and Maidservant, and a
Refiner that dwelt in Grub-street, all Indicted for High Treason, for Clipping
and Impairing the Kings Coin; Markland had formerly been a Brewer, and lived in
good fashion, but failed, and was Imprisoned in the King's Bench, there Poverty,
and an Ill Conscience, and bad Company, taught him this mischievous Clipping
Trade; which he has since followed to great advantage, living like a Gentleman
by the Ditch-side in Black-fryars. The Evidence against him, was, One that
being informed he was a Clipper, got a Warrant, and in searching his House,
found a shilling under a Chest of Drawers, just newly Clipped, and not so much as
rounded; and also two low stools on which they were wont to rub the Money after
they had Circumcised it. Another person a poor woman gathering Herbs in St.
Georges fields, found two pair of shears, and being advised to carry them to
some Workmen that made such Instruments, happened to light on the very Man that
made them, who being examined, swore that he sold them to Mr. Markland, and
that what with new-steeling, and all, he had had of him four pair. Markland was
asked what use he put those shears to, being a Brewer, which Trade has no need
of such Tools; wherefore being able to assign no occasion, he utterly denied
that he had any shears at all of the Witness, which rendered all the rest of his
defense little regardable. But besides, there was one swore, that he had
bargained with him to give him twenty two shillings in Clipped Money, for Twenty
shillings fair and large, and that he had actually allowed him that advantage,
they having dealt so long on that score, as to have Exchanged five or six
hundred pounds. But that which put all out of doubt, was the Testimony of one
of the same Gang, that he had actually seen him Clipping, so that there was no
color of excuse, but he was found guilty. After he had received Sentence, he
behaved himself with great patience, carrying a Map of sorrow in his face, and
with a sincere penitence, bewailing his mis-doing, and the fraud he had put
upon the Nation, by diminishing the lawful Coin, and taking from every shilling
to the value of two pence, and from every half-Crown three pence. His Sentence
was as the Law requires in that case, to be drawn upon a Hurdle to the place of
Execution, and there to be Hanged and Quartered. In Newgate he was observed to
be exceeding penitent, and had abundance of friends and acquaintance came to
visit him; as likewise several good Ministers, Physicians of the Soul, whose
good instructions are the great Preservatives against the second death, by
strengthening them for to resist the temptations that at the near approach of
this dissolution are forcible and many, for then the subtle tempter is most
busy with his false suggestions. He seemed very willing, had it been in his
power, to make restitution for the wrong he had done, but not being in a
capacity, he desired that all good Christians would accept of the will for the
deed, and so continued till the great summons of death bid him prepare him for
Immortality.

The Refiner had been formerly questioned and got off, and so to he did now,
there being no direct proof, but that he held a Correspondence with the other,
etc. so neither could it be fixed on his Wife or Maid, that they were actually
concerned in, or privy to it, though some Evidence and Circumstances were
offered to that purpose; so these three were Acquitted.

A little Boy, scarce high enough to peep over the Bar, was Convicted of petty
Larceny, for stealing a Gentleman's Handkerchief: And an honest Coal-heaver
toward Ratcliffe, who also keeps a Victualing-house, was Indicted on a matter,
which in it self appeared by the Evidence to be a very barbarous Robbery, and a
great deal of Plate and other things of considerable Value stolen; amongst
which was a Watch, which the now Prisoner bringing to a Watchmakers only to
know its value, and there being Bills abroad describing it, the same was stopped,
and thereupon the Prisoner questioned: who proved by sufficient Witnesses, that
the manner of his coming by it was thus; A person owing him eighteen pence (as
he kept a publick-house) comes and pays it, and afterward in discourse tells
him, that if he would lend him twenty Shillings, he would leave him a
sufficient Pawn. The man at first refused, but was at last prevailed upon by
his Importunity to do it, the other promising to return the Money in two or
three Hours; but not hearing of him for a long time, goes as aforesaid to
enquire the value of his Pawn: Nor had he been wanting in endeavors to find
out the Fellow that brought it to him; which as yet he had not been able to do,
though he had been at great Charges therein: Wherefore proving the delivery of
it to him, and also producing people of Credit that justified his Reputation,
he was Acquitted, but just before Execution received a Reprieve.

Elizabeth Hull received Sentence with the former, for stealing Twenty eight
pounds from one Mr. Hadcock, with whom she had lived in the manner of a
Servant, but watching her opportunity, broke open his Trunk, and took out the
aforesaid Moneys. The proof was plain against her, nor could she deny it, but
after Sentence heartily repented her of such her mis-doing, desiring pardon for
her Offense, saying she was persuaded to it, and that she hoped God and her
Master would forgive her, as she freely forgave all that had done her any
injury, and so continued very penitent, bewailing much her miserable state.

Priscilla Wyn, and Katherine Johnson received Sentence with the rest for
several Robberies, the former for stealing a Silver Porringer, and latter for
stealing Cloth, and a Silver Tankard; Johnson had been an old Offender, and
went by several Names; but by pleading their Bellies were found pregnant, and
thereupon Execution was staid till the time they shall be Delivered.

Edward Whitwick and John Watkins received Sentence also for killing of one
Smith a Watchman, he being wounded by the latter on the 29th of May last, and
dyed about the 18th of September; the former was a Coster-monger or Fruiterer,
and the latter a Gardener; they lived both of them in the Parish of St. James's
Clerkenwell. And at their receiving of Sentence, the Jury entreated the Court
to request the Kings Mercy for them; which was accordingly done, and they
received their Pardons.

John Neale, a young Fellow, was found guilty of a Felony and Burglary; he and
Eleven more of the Gang, violently entering into a Countrey-house, and binding
the people, took away Goods of a great value, and Nineteen pound in ready
Money. The Mistress of the House Swore directly that the Prisoner was one of
them, so did also another prisoner who was in the Robbery, and that he himself
made Four pound of his share of the booty; nor did the Criminal at Bar deny the
Fact. But a Broker Indicted as accessory, after having bought a Wedding Ring,
which the Gentlewoman found in his shop, made shift to get off, but he was
Condemned for the aforesaid Robbery, having been an old Thief, as well at the
Foot-pad as breaking Houses. He very much importuned the Bench for
Transportation, but it would not be granted him; so that being carried back to
Newgate, he began to consult his Eternal welfare, and was very sollicitous with
several Ministers to come to bestow their good Instructions upon these dying
wretches in general, and to be instructed how to make his peace with Heaven
before he parted with his Mortal state for Immortality, often desiring to hear
discourse about Eternity, and to be made sensible what that unbounded Infinity
was, whether it was comprehended by time, or had no end, desiring the prayers
of all who came to visit him, saying, He had been a grievous Sinner, but hoped
that God would pardon the follies of his Youth; and if he might live, he would
strive to regain the time he had so vainly spent: But having been a notorious
Offender, received the reward of his Crimes, according to his Sentence.

Thus may all loose people see, and take warning by the untimely Ends of these
poor Wretches, lest the Devil tempt them to the like Villainies, and they wish
they had been so wise as not to have done them, when it will be too late.

LONDON: Printed for T. Davies. 1680.


