The late Famous TRIAL OF Mr. Hickeringill, Rector of the Rectory of All Saints
in Colchester; and Author of The Naked-Truth, The Second Part.

With an INFORMATION exhibited against him for BARRETRY, In XXIV Articles; To
make good the CHARGE against him at the Suit of the King, (as in course, but
really) Prosecuted by one Maltcher, and one Morris, a Proctor in the Spiritual
Courts.

At the Assizes in Nisi Prius held at Chelmsford, March 3. 1680. before Mr.
Baron Weston: Where and when, he was accused (amongst other things) for writing
the said Book, called The Naked-Truth, The Second Part.

Obsequium Amicos, veritas odium.
Published impartially by an Ear-Witness, to quash false Reports.

LONDON, Printed for Fr. Smith, at the Elephant and Castle in Cornhil, near the
Royal Exchange. 1681.

THE EPISTLE TO THE READERS.
MAny have been the Sham-Plots (of late) to conceal the True One; a subtle Age
(no doubt) we live in, Plot upon Plot.

Amongst other Contrivances, certainly this of casting Dirt and endeavoring to
blemish Mr. Hickeringil's Reputation by a grand Conspiracy against him (and
that by no small Fools neither;) to convict him for a Common-Barretor, and
consequently a whisking Fine (ad libitum Judicium) to ruin him; is none of the
least, nor least worthy the Publishing, for the benefit of every true Freeborn
Englishman. Many have set the Fine before hand, some voted to fine him one
thousand pounds, some two thousand, some four thousand pounds, nay, some (went
further) prognosticated that it would cost him all his Temporal Estate.

But neither would this content some of them, but his Benefice must be
forfeited into the Bargain, (so true is that in the Naked Truth,) -- The
Mercies of the Wicked are cruel.

And truly considering the very many pretty Intrigues, the crafty Quirks in Law
and Jingo's (hereafter discovered in this Trial) and the methods of proceeding
against him, you may perhaps find as much Pleasure and Diversion, as Profit in
this Publication.

For the Defendants Adversaries were Great and Mighty, the Conspiracy strong,
the time of his Trial well fitted, in the Interval of Parliament, before a Judge
Impeachd, or ready for Impeachment by the last most Honorable House of
Commons, Mr. Baron Weston, that has mightily improved and 'mended the Matter
(and perhaps his Market) by the last Charge he gave at this Assizes to the
Grand Jury of Essex in the Face of the Country, (a Man well known, and in good
time may be better known) The King's Learned Counsel (Sir George Jeffreys and
Sir Francis Withins) with four or five more of the choice Counsel at the Bar,
all well-fee'd (no small Temptation to an Hackney Tongue) and well instructed
with Breviats (or rather Volumns) of many Sheets of Paper, Witnesses at Will,
fifty for a need (though they were ashamed to call above a dozen of the whole
Grew) never so sit a Juncture (said the Conspirators) to shame and defeat the
Author of the Naked Truth; and the best (if not the only) way to answer his
Book, is to get Power and Authority on our sides, all things conspire and jump
to work his downfall; na^ Flectere si nequeunt superos, Acheronta movebunt.
Some there were so magically zealous, as to consult the Delphine Oracles, (I
mean) the Wisemen, Magicians, and Astrologers about the happy Event of this so
much noised Trial.

And one G -- erecting a Scheme (in answer to an Horary Question to that
Purpose) found the Face of the Heavens to their Wish (or at least he made the
Fools believe so.)

For the Question being put -- Whether the Rumors and Reports against the
Defendant Mr. Hickeringill, were true or false?

The Lord of the Ascendant (which signifies the Querent) and also the
Ascendant, together with the Moon, and the Dispositor of the Moon, were in an
Angle, and the Succedent House in a Fixed Sign, and in good Aspect with the
Fortunes Jupiter, Sol, and Venus, which signifies that the Reports and Rumors
were many and great, and also very true, and would prove so upon Trial.

Besides, The Angles of the Figure were Fixed Signs, and the Moon and Mercury
in Fixed Signs, separating from the Infortunes Saturn and Mars, and applying to
good Fortunes posited in the Angels of the Figure.

Nay, All the Planets (from Top to Toe) from surly Grim-Fac'd Saturn, to the
Fickle Moon, looked asquint, upon the Defendant, and his Significator.

Only Mercury was Retrograde, which portended that the nimblest Wits would be
fooled and baffled, and lose Ground and Credit in the World from that time
following, and (like a Crab) go backward ever after.

Besides Mercury was otherwise afflicted, which put my Man of Magic into a
Dumps, and made him knit his Brows, and scratch his Logger-head; But he was
almost out of his (little) Wits, when he fatally cast his Eye again upon the
Horiscope, and found Jupiter there (the Significator of the Defendant) And Luna
also was at that time unfortunate, which portended that Rumors and Reports
(how loud and many soever) either in City or Country against the Defendant
would speedily vanish and come to nothing, and that his Fame, like the Sun
recovering from a Cloud, would but thereby shine the more illustrious.

Nay, Luna too was void of Course and in Opposition of Mercury, and neither of
them cast either Sextile or Trine to the Ascendent; which put the Wiseman to a
notable Plunge, he was in a Quandare, and knew not well what to think on it.

However, in good earnest, false Rumors, Reports, and slanderous Aspersions,
are certainly not only the most common, but the most effectual Engine that the
Devil or Devilish Men can make use off to batter any honest Man, or Man of
Honor: for though such an one acquit himself never so well, yet Hell has also
broached a Proverb, that shall always fix a little upon him, namely -- There is
never any Smoke, but there is some Fire.

As if Slander could not invent a Lie, a groundless Lie; Slander! I had almost
said -- Almighty Slander, that seems to be able to baffle almost the Principles
of Divinity and Philosophy.

Philosophy says -- ex nihilo nihil fit, of nothing can come nothing. It Is
false, Slander can produce something out of nothing, as you may see in this
ensuing Trial; of all the many and loud Clamours wherewith Malice and Slander
charged Mr. Hickeringill, there was nothing, just nothing proved against him.

Divinity says, That God (alone) can create something of nothing, but here and
often we find that Slander can create something out of nothing; such a
something, that there were very few but gave up Mr. Hickeringhill for a
gone-Man, dead, dead, or as bad; to be buried alive in perpetual Imprisonment.

O most Mighty and Potent Slander! King David could not tell how to resist it,
It non-plust him -- What shall be given thee, and what shall be done unto thee?
O thou false Tongue! and the Wisdom of Solomon could not tell who was able
enough to stand against Envy.

The King's-Guards cannot keep Slander out of the Court, she dares strike
Princes upon the Throne, and the Reverend Judges upon the Bench; and tho her
Neck be sometimes broke, yet she is an Hydra and revives.

The following Verdict for Mr. Hickeringhill has broke her Neck, and made an
end of all those slanderous Clamours, which to give color unto, the
Conspirators against him have raked into all the Actions of his Life, for
fifteen years last past, wherein he had any considerable dealings with any Man.

And as the Waters of a City (clean and unclean) disgorge and disembogue
themselves into the great Sink, and Common-Shore; And as all the little
Diseases, nay, all the Humors of the Body, good and bad, in time of the
Plague, turn to the Pestilence: So all the late Actions that Mr. Hickeringill
has done, or Books that he has writ (except Curse ye Meroz) you will find here
jumbled together (by the malignity and pestilential Malice of his Adversaries)
to make up this filthy and plaguey Crime of Barretry. A Crime that not one of a
Thousand knows what it is, but it will serve, and has served to make an ugly
noise withal -- Barretry, Barretry.

If one Man call another Whoremaster, or a Woman a Whore, and if he was neither
Bolster nor Pillow, and cannot prove it, this is Barretry.

If a Man writes a Book, or tells false News, to the prejudice or hurt of any
of the Kings Subjects, this is Barretry; and in a thousand Particulars more (so
that they be frequently done, for twice or thrice will not do the Feat) Men may
be indicted for Barretry; or else, if his Adversaries (like the Defendants
Adversaries) be Purse-proud and mighty, and dare venture the hazard of being
overthrown; (for it will ruin the Informer if the Defendant be acquit; and the
Pit that he dig'd for another, he must fall into himself,) then an Information
in the Crown-Office is the Mode, like this which follows.

An Impartial NARRATIVE OF THE Most Remarkable Passages in the Trial of Mr.
Hickeringill, for Barretry, March the 3d, 1680. At the Assizes of Nisi Prius,
held at Chelmnsford for the County of Essex, before Mr. Baron Weston.
GReat was the Expectation, great the Concurrence, great the Hopes, the Noise,
and the Confluence, at this so-much-talk'd-of Trial: The Illustrious Duke of
Albemarle upon the Bench by the Judge, (whether by accident, or on set purpose,
is not enquirable at present.)

Old chattering there was by all the Vermin; old clapping of Wings and
hooting, at this merry Day, a Day that promised a wonderful Conquest.

What, (said some) shall this daring Man, this Common Barreter, ever hereafter
find any more faults in Ecclesiastical-Courts, in Bishops, Archbishops, and
Archdeacons? In Proctors, Sumners, and Registers? In Advocates, Doctors, and
Apparitors? and such harmless Men?

Shall we lose our Moneys for Commutations of Penance and Excommunications,
Sentences, Decrees, and Absolutions; Citations, Libels, and Visitations;
Synodalls, Sequestrations, and Produrations? And yet shall he, that wicked He
(that has done our Business) escape, or imagine to escape Scot-free? No, no,
his Business shall now be done, and we will answer the Naked Truth with a
Vengeance: Listen to the Charge or Information of Barretry.

The Heads of the Charge against Edmond Hickeringill, Clerk, for Barretry,
exhibited by Samuel Astry, Feb. 14. 1680.
IMprimis, For purchasing Lands and Tenements of one Westenraw in Bradfield and
Wix in Essex; the said Defendant* Hickeringill, knowing that diverse Sults and
Pleas were then depending for the same, and Westenraw being out of Possession;
and for maintaining diverse Suits about the said Lands.

2. For purchasing diverse Lands and Tenements of one Elizabeth Blois and others
in Thorp and Kirby, or one of them in Essex, the said Defendant Hickeringill,
knowing the said Elizabeth being then out of Possession; and for managing Suits
about the same.

3. For purchasing diverse Lands and Tenements in Thorp and Kirby, and Much
Clacton, or one of them, of Ford and his Wife, and Blois and his Wife, being
out of possession, the said Defendant then knowing that diverse Suits and Pleas
were then depending for the same, and maintaining Suits about the same.

4. For stirring up and maintaining diverse Suits against one Petfield, Hill,
Everet, and Freeman, all of the Town of Colchester, with an intent only to
extort Money from the said Parties; and to ruin them, and to put them to trouble
and charges, and giving a Bill of Charges under his own Hand, and demanding
five pounds for Charges, when there was not ten shillings due.

5. For publishing scandalous Libels against Sir John Shaw, Thomas Talcot Esquire
William Moore Esquire Jonathan Merry Gent. and others, being then Magistrates in
Colchester.

6. For extorting by Threats of Suits at Law, without any just Cause, great
sums of Money, and Bonds, and other Writings, for payment of Money from Tho.
Shortland and others.

7. For concealing the last Will and Testament of -- Andrews, delivered to him,
being a Surrogate, made to prove the same; which occasioned diverse Suits to be
brought about the said Will, which Suits the Defendant maintained.

8. For bringing vexatious Suits, without any probable Cause, in his own Name,
against one Killingworth, letting them, fall only to vex and trouble the said
Killingworth, and to put him to Charges, he himself being protected.

9. For maintaining diverse Suits in another Name, against one Sadler, his
Servants, Agents, and Tenants.

10. For stirring up and procuring diverse Actions of Ejectment, to be brought
against one Wheely of Colchester, on the Demise of Mary Living, and soliciting
the said Causes, and maintaining the said Suits at his own Cost and Charges;
the said Defendant then knowing that the Lessor of the Plaintiff had no Title
to the Premises, and that several Verdicts had passed before the Commencement
of the said Actions for the Defendants Title.

11. For the purchasing Lands and Tenements of one Rolph, who was then out of
Possession; and diverse Suits and Pleas were then depending for the same, and
maintaining diverse Suits about the same.

12. That the Defendant being Surrogate, did grant Administration of the Goods
of one Shortland, to one Shortland the Defendant; then knowing that the said
Shortland had made a Will; but before he would grant the said Administration,
he forced and compelled the said Shortland, to give a Bond to one Sewell, to
the use of himself the Defendant, for payment of a great sum of Money, and did
promise to maintain any Suit that should be brought against the said Shortland,
by reason of his being Administration.

13. For bringing and maintaining several Suits in the Exchequer against Luke
Benny, Robert Car, and others, for Tithes, within the Parish of St. Peter in
Colchester, without reasonable and probable Cause, with a Design to oppress the
said Parties, and unjustly to extort sums of Money from them where none was due;
and by false Suggestions, extorting sums of Money from others, John Beacon, Mr.
Langley, and others upon pretense of Tithes due to him, whereas none was; and
the said Persons were after compelled to give satisfaction to Mr. Thomson Vicar
of the said Parish of St. Peter, to whom the same were due.

14. That the Defendant being Surrogate, did refuse to grant Administration of
the Goods of one Peter Fromanteel, to his Brother John Fromanteel, although the
said John did tender sufficient Securities, according to the late Act for the
due execution thereof; but did grant Administration to one John Rayner, and did
encourage the said John Rayner to break open the House of the said John
Fromanteel; and incited and procured the said John Rayner, to bring Actions
against the said John Fromanteel, and maintaining the same; by reason whereof,
the said John Fromanteel was forced to desist prosecuting in his just Title any
farther for obtaining the said Administration, by reason of the great Charge.

15. For stirring up diverse Freemen of Colchester, to remove Sir John Shaw out
of the Office of Recordership, without any just cause, in making and causing
Tumults and great Hubbubs in Colchester upon that account.

16. For procuring of Mrs Quilter, falsely to deny upon her Oath the Receipt of
three pounds for Gravel.

17. For causing the Wife of Mr. Sidey to be arrested, being a Feme-Covert, at
the Suit of his Son an Infant, and detained her in Custody, for four days,
although he knew she was a Feme-Cov^rt and her Husband living, and although she
proffered an appearance for her self he the said Hickeringill having promised
to save the Bailiff harmless, for so doing, the Bailiff being after arrested
for detaining her, and coming to Hickeringill he refused to save him harmless,
according as he had promised, but bid him take his course, for he was protected
by three Lords.

18. For bringing a vexations Action against Mr. Thompson Clerk, upon the
Statute of Non-residence, without any just Cause, in which Action he became
nonsuit, or found for the Defendant.

19. For the procuring a Person to personate the Churchwarden in the Parish of
Wix in the County of Essex, and to join with him in the sale of the Bells
belonging to the said Church.

20. For threatening to ruin by suit of Law, several Inhabitants of the Parish
of Wix, if they offered to set out their Tithes in kind, and would not compound
with him according to his own Rates, thereby extorting great sums of Money from
them.

21. For taking upon him to give Counsel and Advice to People in Matters of
Law, and for taking of Fees, as Tho. Shortland, Daniel Howler, and Widow Lamb,
and other People, on purpose to stir up contentious Suits; and in order to
carry on his Designs, he has told People, he was a Barrester at Law standing
in Gray's-Inn, and could give as good Advice as any Counsel.

22. For writing two Scandalous and Seditious Books, entitled, the Naked
Truth, and Gregory Gray-beard, the Contents of which said Books are on purpose
to stir up, and animate his Majesty's Liege People to slight the Bishops, and
contemn the Government, and cause Strife, Contention and Sedition.

23. That he knowing that Mr. Harris was Vicar of Fingrin^^ in Essex, and
rightly entitled to the small Tithes, and being also duly made Sequestrator of
the profits to the Churches of St. Leonards, and St. Buttolph's in Colchester;
Nevertheless he the said Hickeringill, has stirred up and forwarned several of
the Parishioners of the said Parishes not to pay any of the Dues to the said
Harris, on purpose to stir up contentious Suits, between the said Harris and
his Parishioners; and further, promised the present Tenant in the
Parsonage-House of the Parish of St. Leonards to save him harmless, if he would
not deliver the Possession to the said Harris, although the said Hickeringill has
no manner of Title or pretense of Title to the same.

24. For vexatiously bringing and maintaining several Actions at Law, against
John Bridge, and one James Sidey, about certain Lands in Dedham in Essex.

Issue -- Not Guilty.
On Thursday the 3d of March, 1680. in the Afternoon, about two of the Clock
the Trial began, and continued 'till after Candle-Lighting.
THe Jury returned was a very Honorable One, the like seldom or never seen on
such an occasion, which was the greatest Honor and Favor, if not, the only
one, in the whole Trial and Proceeding, granted to the Defendant.

Juries are the great Birth right (and one of the greatest Privileges, except
a Parliament) belonging to an Englishman; what would become of us, our Lives,
our Liberties, our Properties, our Honor, our Reputations, or Lively-hoods,
and Estates, if Rage and Malice, Passion and Prejudice (when got into Power and
upon the Bench) might have its Will and bear an Arbitrary Sway? Happy
Englishmen! If they will stick to their Liberties, and stand up for their
Native-Rights, that cost our Forefathers so much Blood to defend, and transmit
to us their Posterity. And unhappy Sycophants and Slaves (Wretches not worth a
Name) that would be Instrumental to defear us (and make a mock) of our
Birthrights.

But the Truth is, the Defendant was allowed the Benefit of Magna Charta; he
had not his Cause tried by ordinary and common Jurymen, but (as the Law
requires) by lawful Judgment of his Peers.

The Names of the Juror's returned, as follows. Essex Com. Inter Dominum Rege^
and Edmundum Hickeringill Clericum.
1. Richardus Everard de Waltham magna Miles and Baronet. 2. More^^ Guyon de
Cogg^shall magna Miles. 3. Cuthbertus Martin de Nettelswell Armiger. 4.
Richardus Godbold de Borcham Ar. 5. Willielmus Maynard de Waltham-Stow Ar. 6.
Johannes Marshal de Finchingfield Ar. 7. Willielmus Clapton de List^n Ar. 8.
Johannes Tendering de Baddow magna Ar. 9. Henricus Pascall de eadem Ar. 10.
Thomas Smith de Blackmore Ar. 11. Alexander Prescot de Mountnessing Ar. 12.
Willielmus Peant de eadem Ar. 13. Richurdus How de Ingate-Stone Ar. 14. Thomas
Reeve de West-Hamingfield Ar. 15. Henricus Humpbneys de eadem Gent. 16. Samuel
Whitebread de Baddow magna Genesis 17. Willielmus Puckridge de Westham Genesis 18.
Willielmus Wiseman de Pateswick Genesis 19. Johannes Everley de eadem Genesis 20.
Andreas Prest^^y de eadem Genesis 21. Robertus Alderman de Daggenham Genesis 22.
Johannes Nicolls de Danbury Genesis 23. Robertus Kerrington de Boreley Genesis Et 24.
Thomas Turner de Fearing Genesis
Eleven (only) of the Panel appeared, to which was added a Tales; Which being
Empannel'd and Sworn, The Defendant (Mr Hickeringill) was called, who appeared
in propria Persona.

Then a Junior-Counsel began to open the Information, saying, I am of Counsel
in this Cause for our Sovereign Lord the King, in an Information of Barretry
brought against the Defendant Edmund Hickeringill of the Town of Colchester, in
the County of Essex Clerk, for being a common-Barreter, and a daily and common
Disturber of the Peace of our Lord the King, and also a Brawler, a Fighter, a
Calumniator, and an Oppressor of his Neighbors, and a Sower of Strife, and
Contention amongst his quiet Neighbors, and amongst the People of this Kingdom
of England, so that the said Edmund Hickeringill at the time of the Information
brought, and 'till now in the County aforesaid, and in the Town aforesaid, and
in other places in the said County, the said Strifes, Differences, Contentions,
Brawlings, Sults, and Quarrellings amongst his said Neighbors, and other the
Liege Subjects of our said Lord the King, has often moved, excited, and
stirred up, to the great Disturbance, Ruin, Impoverishing and Damage, not
only of his said Neighbors, but also of the said Liege People, and Subjects of
our said Lord the King, to the pernicious and evil Example of Delinquents in
the like Case, also against the Form of the Statutes in that Case made and
provided, and in Contempt of our said Sovereign Lord the King, his Crown and
Dignity, etc.

But the said Counsel mumbling all this between his Teeth, The Judge spoke to
him in these Words, viz. Mr. Smith, You open the Cause well enough to my
Understanding, but you must speak out that the Jury may hear you; and then he
began again, as well as he could, and proceeded a little.

But Sir George Jeffreys presently took up the Argument, and began to open it,
and expatiate upon it, after his loud manner of declaiming, and told a long
Story of the heinousness of the Crime of Barretry, so odious to the Law, so
inconsistent with the Peace of the Neighborhood, so unwarrantable in all Men,
more insufferable in a Minister of the Gospel of Peace; such was the Defendant,
and the Crimes he was guilty of were great and many. And (quoth he) if my
Breviate do not fail me, I will now expose before you the greatest Barreter
that ever was heard off; he has by extortion taken five Pounds and eight
Shillings, when but ten Shillings was Due in the Parish of St. Buttolph's in
Colchester, as Fees of his own Court, as Surrogate under the Bishop in
Colchester, (where note by the way, the Modesty of the Man, for of that 5 l. 8
s. instead of 10 s. the Defendant never had one Farthing, nor any Body for him,
nor was one Farthing paid, or demanded; nor ever any such Cause brought before
Mr. Hickeringill, as Judge of the Ecclesiastical Court; but the Cause was
brought in the Bishop's Consistory-Court at London, for very good cause; nor
durst Sir George Jeffreys ever all the whole Trial, or any other of the Counsel
call it to Proof and to the Test, but it served him to baul withal, and to make
a noise against the Defendant.) Then Sir George Jeffreys went on, and told them
of many other Crimes that the Defendant was Guilty of, (before any one Witness
was called to prove any of the Crimes) making a long and loud Harangue; in
which the Defendant interrupted him: Saying, Sir George, Sir George, Prosecute
me in your Place with all the Vehemence and Passion that you are full of, spare
me not, I neither require nor need your Favor; but you have no Authority, by
virtue of your Fee, to defame me, with Stories and Untruths of your own
devising; prove something upon me. To which Sir George replied, with enraged
Eyes staring with Passion, What have you to do to interrupt me? To which Mr.
Hickeringill replied, I will interrupt you, when you transgress the bounds of
Truth and Modesty; you have no Authority, nor can any Body give you Authority
to abuse me. Whereupon the Judge heartily replied, in these Words; Brother,
Brother, when you touch a Man's Reputation, you touch him in a tender Part; I
cannot blame a Man for being sensible of it, prove something upon him, and
leave off your declaiming; or Words to the like Effect. Go on to your Proofs,
open no more than you can prove. Note by the way, That the Judge had with much
ado given the Defendant leave to plead his own Cause, and make his own Defense;
The Defendant alleging that he had not time to instruct his Counsel, and tho
he moved in the beginning of the last Term by Mr. Sampson Ward at the
King's-Bench-Bar, that the Judges there, would be pleased to let the Defendant
know the Particulars and Heads of the said Articles, yet the Justices of the
King's Bench would not allow him more than one Fort-night before the Assizes,
to know the particular Crimes of which he was accused, and to which he might
prepare a Defense; I know not for what Reasons, but longer time would not be
granted him: and that time had been spent in preparing and bringing 20
Witnesses, and in discharging his public Duty as a Minister of the Gospel in
his Rectory in Colchester, (which he neither did, nor would neglect for any
private Concern of his own.) And the Defendant alleged that the Articles
against him were many and large, and all the Actions of his Life good and bad
for 15 Years last past, ripped up, to make him appear a Common-Barreter, and
that the Breviate (which the Defendant held then in his Hand) was rather a
Volumn than a Breviate, and that since he had no Counsel, that his Lordship
would (though it be great disadvantage for any Man to plead his own Cause, and
much more the Defendant that had no Skill, no Practice, no Ability in Pleading
another Man's Cause) yet that his Lordship would with Patience, hear him make
his own Defense, our Law condemning no Man before it hear him; and the
Defendant alleging that it was his Birthright to have his Lordship's Patience
and an indifferent Hearing, in making his own Defense: To which his Lordship
passionately replied in these very Words, Your Birthright, Your Birthright,
this I meet every where amongst these Men, they tell me of their Birthright,
their Birthright, and that they are Freeborn Englishmen. Yes, my Lord,
replied the Defendant; I say again, my Birth right, and if your Lordship will
not permit me your Patience to hear my Defense, then go on, and hear but of one
Ear; I Will not speak one Word more, if you will not hear me with Patience; I
need no other Favor, I have Innocence enough to protect me against the Skill,
and Eloquence of all the Counselors against me, and to defeat them all.

You are very confident, replied his Lordship, I will give you a fair Hearing;
(and so he did (ever after that) a tolerable Hearing) But (says his Lordship)
to stop his Mouth, and to silence his Plea of Innocence, prove upon him some
Article that may be Evidence of the Information; begin with something you can
prove. Whereupon the Counsel skip't over the first eight Articles for that
time, and began with the ninth Article; Namely, Article 9. For maintaining
diverse Suits in another's Name, against one Sadler, his Servants, and Agents,
and Tenants.

To prove this, they produced one Lawrence that told a blind Story of a
Covenant; and sometimes he called it a Bond, that one William Sadler made to
the Defendant; but not able to make any thing of it, at last they produced one
Mr. Thomas Earl an Attorney in Colchester, who swore, that there were Horses,
Lands, and Tenements in Horkesley Magna, that were in the quiet possession of
one William Sadler for ten or twelve Years; and that he, together with the
Mother of the Son and Heir of one Peter Sadler, did persuade the Tenant of the
Premises, to turn Tenant to the said Widow, in the right of her said Son; which
the Tenant did, knowing or believing it to be right and just; and that there
was afterward an admittance of the said Heir to the said Lands, being
Copyhold by the Lord of the Manor, and 25 l. paid down in Court for a Fine in
part, and 15 l. more was to be paid in full; and that there was a Trial at the
Assizes for the said Land, and the Right was found to be in the said Widow and
her Son, who enjoy the Premises to this day. Whereupon the Judge, in much
indignation (interrupting him) said, What is all this to the Matter in hand
charged against the Defendant, Mr. Hickeringill? Did he persuade you to take
possession? Earl replied, He could not say that, but he believed Mr.
Hickeringill had some Money of the Widow Sadler, but he had almost forgot how
much, or for what the Money was paid unto him. Then the Counsel for the King
produced a Receipt of 15 l. under Mr. Hickeringill's own hand, (which was read)
namely, for part of the Fine due (as aforesaid) to the Lord of the Manor (for
a Fine) for the said Copy-hold-Lands: which put the Judge again into a Fret,
that they should make such a-do and Circumstance for nothing; and thereupon the
Judge bid them go to some other Article, if they could thereby prove that the
Defendant had done some Damage (according to the Information) or Detriment, or
Injury (by way of Maintenance or Barretry) to any of the King's Liege People. A
heavy Toss there was then amongst the King's Counsel, which Article of the 24
to insist upon, to make good their grievous Charge; and some named the 23, some
the 18, some the 13, at last, with much a-do, it was agreed to urge the 10 th
Article; which they did, and called their Witnesses thereunto; but so
unsuccessfully, that the Cause began to cool, and they were all at a loss which
Article should next be improved to prove the Charge. For they produced (to
prove this) a Fellow that could make a demure long Prayer, as well as a
thumping false Oath, one John Wheely of the Town of Colchester Brazier, in the
Article mentioned, and he swore home, or (as we say, through an Inch-board)
against Records; swearing, That he had had diverse Suits at Law for the
Premises, with the said Mary Living, in the Article mentioned, and he always
got the better of her, and recovered both at Common Law and in Chancery.

What Is this to the purpose? (said the Judge) Did the Defendant bear the Charges
of the Suit by Maintenance, to have part of the same when recovered? No, quoth
Wheely, I cannot say that, but only that he once gave me a Subpoena out of
Chancery, where she was Plantiff against me. What, (said the Judge to the
Counsel) are these your Witnesses to prove Barretry against Mr. Hickeringill,
only for delivering a Subpoena; for shame go on to something that may stick
upon him.

Whereupon the Defendant produced an Exemplification (under the King's Broad
Seal of England) to prove that the said Wheely was a perjured Wretch in
Swearing, that he always recovered and got the better of the said Mary Living
at Common Law and Chancery for the Premises; whereas in truth the said Mary
Living had a Verdict against the said Wheely for the Premises, at the Assizes
for the County of Essex before Judge Keeling, John Robinson Attorney for the
said Mary Living Plantiff Lessor, and one Richard Tiplacts Plantiff Lessee in
Ejectment, and Attorney for the said John Wheeley, Thomas Ruse of Colchester;
the Exemplification beginning, Carolus Secundus, etc. and concluding, J.
Vaughan apud Westminster. 30. Novembris, Anno Regni Regis vicessimo primo. Wyrley.
But the Judge said there was no occasion for reading it at that time, for Wheely
had swore nothing of harm that the Defendant had done; for in the first
Instance, (Article 9.) all that could be gathered, was rather to the honor of
the Defendant, in helping an Infant and an Orphan to an Estate, of which she
was unjustly deprived; and now in endeavoring to help a Widow to an Estate
that once she recovered, and had a Verdict for: and very angrily took up the
King's Counsel, and bid them go to something that might stop the Defendants
Plea of his Innocence; for the Defendant all the while, with cheerful
Countenance, smiled to see them so angry and passionate one with another, in
keeping such a-do for nothing.

After a great puther, it was unanimously agreed by all the Learned Counsel,
that the twelfth Article should next be urged; and to prove it, they brought
two Bum-Bayliffs, Thomas Martin, and John Groom, of Colchester, (Rascals that
be too much honored by naming of them) but, the mischief was, they were too
hot in their mettle, and swore too home, for they swore that the Defendant
granted an Administration to Thomas Shortland, (in the Article mentioned) being
Surrogate of the Court; but that also he refused to grant the same, till
Shortland had first entered into Bond to pay him twenty Guinies. These Fellows
did the Business for which they came; and disgrace enough it was to the
Defendant, to take 21 l. 10 s. for an Administration, when (in the Naked-Truth)
he finds such fault in the Registers for taking so many Shillings for an
Administration. Great hopes and jollity there was in the whole Court, when
these pregnant Testimonies were produced, which were thought unanswerable; and
the Judge demanded of the Defendant, What he could say for himself?

The Defendant answered, That if he did take such a mighty Bribe, it might be
Extortion, but yet not Barretry. Secondly, That it was impossible but that the
Fellows were perjured; for if the Defendant, Mr. Hickeringill, did never grant
any Administration to Shortland, nor that Shortland ever had any
Administration, either from the Defendant, or any other Judges of any
Ecclesiastical Court in all the Diocese of London; then it was impossible that
he should take a Bribe, or commit Extortion, in granting what was never
granted. But to that the Fellows swore; one of them said, the brought he Seal;
and the other swore, he saw such an Administration.

Then to prove them perjured, the last Will of Thomas Shortland was immediately
produced by the Defendant, and read, (and the Executors being Quakers, revoking
the Executorship) an Administration with the Will annexed, was granted (in the
Prerogative-Court of Canterbury, under the Name and Seal of Gilbert late
Archbishop of Canterbury) and where the same ought to be granted, (it being a
Prerogative-Case) and a Court where Mr. Hickeringill had no more Power,
Authority, or Concern, than any other Man in England, signed, Marcus Cottle
Registarius; and beginning with these words, -- Gilbertus Providentia Divina
Cant. Archiepiscopus totius Angliae Primas and Metropolitanus Dilecto nobis in
Christo, Thomae Shortland Filio naturali and Legitimo Thomae Shortland nuper de
villa Colcestria, etc. And dated, August 7. Anno Dom. 1676. Nostraeque
Translationis Anno 13.

Here was an apparent and wilful Perjury in these Witnesses Evidence for the
King, and I believe the whole Court began to be ashamed of them; but to make
them more appalled, the Defendant produced a Record, proved by Mr. George
Catesby, Town Clerk of Sudbury; where one of the Rogues (called Thomas Martin)
was whipped for a Thief; and the Defendant said, That tho his Name was not
Whipping-Tom, yet he was Whipt-Tom. But the Judge made some wonder at the said
Record, because the Clerk of the Court, reading the same in English (out of the
Latin) said, That he was whipped from the Girdle downwards. Downwards, said the
Judge, sure that cannot be! It Is Deorsum, said the Clerk: That Is more than ever
I knew, quoth the Judge, to whip a Man from the Girdle downwards at the
Carts-Arse; That Is the way to whip a Woman, quoth Baron Weston, but I never
knew a Man ordered to be so whipped. Nevertheless it past off with a Jest, and
the Bystanders, with much Edification, learned from the Judges own Mouth, the
right way how and where to whip a Woman, namely, from the Girdle downwards; the
new Mode belike!

In short, notwithstanding all this comical Discourse, the Judge began to be in
good earnest angry with the Learned Counsel, that (after all this loud noise in
Court, City, and Country, against the Defendant, as a Common Barreter) they
should thus trifle and abuse his patience, (with which he is not over-loaded)
at length he told the Counsel, that if they were thus bafled in all their
Attempts, they should not need to charge the Defendant (as in the 21 th
Article) that he could give as good. Advice as any Counsel; for at this rate,
it would prove true, the Defendant would baffle them all.

Whereupon the Learned Counsel laid their Heads together, and resolved to go
backward, and try what work they could make with the second and seventh
Articles together; but here they had worse luck than before, producing two
Witnesses, one Widow Blois, and one Rolf her Son-in-Law, two more infamous
Witnesses than the former; for such shameful and abominable uncleanness
(betwixt them committed) was proved against them then and there, in open Court,
that it would offend any modest Ear to repeat the same.

Besides, The Woman, Elizabeth Blois, swore such damnable Untruth's too; as
that the Land the Defendant bought of her, (for which she had but 210 l.) did
rent for 40 l. per Annum, and now for 30 l. and that she could not tell whether
Mr. Hickeringill gave her the last Will of Thomas Andrews in open Court.

And yet she has sworn in the Prerogative-Court at London, that the Defendant
did give her the said Will in open Court, the same is also in the same Court
sworn by the said wicked Rolf her Son-in-Law, and he also swore the same at
this Trial, against her false Testimony; and so did her own Sister also, Mary
Couch, testify the same.

Besides, it is as true, as that there is a Sun in the Firmament, that Mr.
Hickeringill never had, nor has any more Land or Houses bought of her (in Thorp
nor in any other place in the World bought of her) than 10 l. per Annum, and
yet she swore 30 l. per Annum, which all the Country knows to be false; and
yet Sir Francis Withins, kept a little hussing with it, as if Mr. Hickeringill
bought such a Pennyworth, and yet Mr. Hickeringill proffered in Court to lose
20 l. by the Bargain he made with her; and I am sure he will yet willingly lose
40 l. to any Man that will buy it again of him: Tho he, I am sure, has no need
to sell, for at this Day all the Men in the whole World, cannot demand 5 l. of
him, as justly due to them, or any of them from him, to my certain Knowledge:
Therefore what need has he of a Protection from three Lords (as in Article 17
th objected against him) that is no more indebted than a Lord? Yet the Judge
willing to reprove Mr. Hickeringill for something, if he could have told what,
at last told him that there was cause enough for the Bishop to deprive him of
his Benefice, for meddling with Law Matters so much, and in Temporal Affairs,
and perhaps if the Judge had the keeping of his Spiritualship, Mr. Hickeringill
should neither be so Rich, nor so Fat and Corpulent as he is.

Kind Man! How soon and how ready was he to shoot his Bolt at the Defendant, if
he could have told how, and for which he was not unattentive to improve any
thing against him to render him an ill Man, since he could not make a common
Barreter of him.

But (alas!) the Defendant only smiled all the while to see them tugg and
labor in vain, and pitying the Judge when he saw him in a fret, and most
especially when he talked of the Bishop's depriving a Minister for dealing in
Temporal Affairs, when the Bishop himself (being a Parliament Man and a
Privy-Councellor) is forced (above any other Priest in the Diocese) to deal in
Temporal Affairs.

Besides, That Man talks without-Book, and against Law, and Magna Charta, that
dare avouch that any Man can deprive another of his Freehold (in this Kingdom)
but by Judgment of twelve Men of his Equals. The Bishop can deprive no Minister
in the Diocese, but by the Law of the Land; namely, by the Judgment and Verdict
of twelve Men of his Equals; other Doctrines are dangerous, and destructive:
And so much the more, when spoken by one that should tell the Law in Truth, and
not in Sycophantry; no Man is too great to be good, and subject to the Laws.

The Counsel, in brief, made some little Assay with the 17 th, 18 th, and 24 th
Articles which proving more unsuccessful than the former, and worse and worse,
the Learned Counsel in as great Rage and Indignation, as Despair (without the
least mention of the Naked Truth, in the 22 th Article, or offering at any
other Article) furiously threw away their Breviate's at the Teeth of the
Prosecuter, that Proctor Morris then in Court, and as much dismayed, as the
Learned Counsel were enraged and ashamed. The Thunder ceased, the Judge himself
could not forbear reproving that loud speaking Man, Sir George Jeffreys, that
kept such a blunder at first in his noisy-way of defaming and huffing Men (that
have not the luck first to retain his Tongue) with which he kept such a
splutter at the beginning of the Trial; but by this time he was become as
Patient as any Ram* and though he did at first ( classicum canere ante
Triumphum) wind his Horn before the Victory; yet by this time he begun to be
almost as tame as he was at Kingston the last Assizes, before the same Judge
Weston; who gave him such smart Repartees, and royl'd his Welsh-Blood, that for
very madness he sat down and Wept, (Good Man!) His Courage being so cooled,
that his boiling Blood turned to Phlegm and Water in such abundance, his Body
could not contain the same, but it found vent and run out at the Rivulets of
his Eyes; And the sadder he was and heavy, the more Jocund was the by-standing
Counsel, who could not forbear to laugh when he cried (poor Man!) And the more
he Cried, the more they Laughed, hard hearted that they were!

In fine, the Judge (very calmly too) upbraiding some of the Counsel with Folly,
and the Witnesses with Impertinency, told the Jury that they must find for the
Defendant; which they did, after a little, a very little Pause, without
stirring from the Bar. Magna est Veritas, and praevalebit.


Truth is always strongest at long-run, and will at length prevail.

The Conclusion.
IT is not easy to determine whether Machiavel was more wise or more wicked,
more subtle, or more malicious, more full of policy, or more full of (evil)
Craft, in that Maxim of his -- Calumniare fortiter and aliquid adhaerebit; cast
dirt enough, and some of it will stick. However if it be wiped off, it costs
trouble and vexation to do it; and how causless soever, it is not easy to wipe
away the Dirt so clean, but that the censuring World will imagine some stains
left to blemish the greatest Beauty.

In this same Trial against Mr. Hickeringill, it is evident, that his
Adversaries have been right Machiavellians, and have copyed after their great
Master of Politics to the life, in a loud, loud Cry against the unstained
Innocence of the Defendants Life and Conversation.

Many Men, many great Men (I had almost said great Churchmen) had a hand in
the Work. Lucr. -- Soepius olim
Religio peperit scelerosa atque Impia facta.
Religious Men (though sometimes good)
Were often, of old, a cursed Brood.


There was a Law amongst the Romans, that no Virgin should be executed;
whereupon, when the Daughter of Sejanus was condemned to die; the Hangman first
deflowred her, and then beheaded her.

Thus, just thus do the wicked World with Men's Virgin Innocence; they cannot
pass upon it ('it is against Law) 'till they have first defiled it with Lies and
Slanders. Thus have they dealt with Mr. Hickeringill in the whole Process;
first, They array him in their own slanderous Bearskins, then and set on their
Dogs upon him, not only to bark and bawll, grin and show their Teeth at him,
but they would have bit him too.

But he that sits in the Heavens shall laugh them to scorn, the Lord has
had them in derision; no Weapon that they have formed against him did prosper*
and every Tongue that has stood against him in Judgment, is condemned. Let his
Enemies hereafter learn to say with the wicked Prophet Balaam, How shall I
curse, whom God has not cursed? And how shall I defy, whom the Lord has not
defied?

FINIS.

