THE Last Dying Speeches, CONFESSION, AND EXECUTION OF John Stokes, Isaac
Davis, and Mary Williamson, who were Executed at TYBURN, the 5th. of March,
1684.
For FELLONIES and BURGLARIES, together with the manner of their Behavior in
Newgate, after their Condemnation; As also the Last Dying Speech and
Confession of Alice Paddison, who was Burnt at Tyburn for High Treason, on the
5th. of the same Instant.
Entered according to Order.

IT IS too apparent that the many Severe Examples of Justice, cannot deter
Depraved and Infatuated People from rushing without any further consideration,
upon their own Ruin; no, not the earnest Desires and Entreaty of those that
have justly Suffered, and ought to stand as a Sea-Mark, to prevent the
Shipwreck, and Inevitable Ruin of their Associates; but to be brief: The last
Sessions, there being Twelve Persons Sentanced to Dye at the Sessions House in
the Old Bailey, on the 28th. of February last, viz. Thomas Rolph, Robert
Barbados, Gerard Middleton, Jane Conyers, Alice Cranfield, Joan Nicols, Mary
Desoe, Edward Conyers, John Stokes, Isaac Davis, Mary Williamson, and Alice
Paddison; of which Number, the former Eight found the Mercy of a Reprieve, and
the latter Four Executed, their Crimes for which they suffered their department
in Newgate, after Sentance, and their last Dying Speeches and Confessions,
being as follows.

Edward Conyers, Being Tried upon an Indictment of High Treason, Pleading
thereto not Guilty, the Evidence against him, was that his Daughter coming to a
Bake-House for Bread, with two newly Clipped Shillings, and being there
Questioned where she had them, after much stamering, Consternation and
Amazement, declared she had them of her Mother, and Related that her Father was
a Cliper, etc. whereupon a Warrant to Search being obtained, Shares, Files,
Melting-Pots, Melted Silver, and many other Implements appertaining to that
illegal Practice were found in the Prisoners Lodging; upon which, both he and
his Wife, were found Guilty: but she being Reprieved as aforesaid, when he
being conveyed back to Newgate after Sentance of Death Received as in Case of
High Treason, he became exceeding Penitent, Expressing abundance of Sorrow, at
his failing and often conversed with such Pious and Charitable Ministers as
came to affoard Spiritual Consolation to him and his Condemned Fellows, that so
they might not droop under the Terrors of Death, and give further, way to the
Enemy of Mankind, (who always at such times is most busy) to bring in despair,
he likewise was observed to Pray often most fervently for Life and Imortality
in the World to come, especially when he was acquainted that his Offense had
barred firm of all hopes of Pardon, and so he continued to bewail his
Deplorable Condition, and the near approach of his untimely Fate, till at last
he, through the Intercession of his Friends and his Majesty's great Clemency,
received a Reprieve.

John Stokes, a Notorious Pick-Pocket, being at his Trade near Py-Corner, was
apprehended for Picking the Pocket of one Elizabeth Ross on the 11th. of
February last, for which at the ensuing Sessions being Indicted and Tried, upon
his Trial, it appeared that he had Picked the Prosecutors Pocket of a Purss,
and in it 38 s. with which upon his being discovered, he Run away, but was
quickly overtaken with the Money about him, and that being in Newgate, he sent
some of his Accomplices to Compound the Felony and Robbery, upon which proof
he was found Guilty, and after Judgment of Death Received with his Fellow
Offenders, reconvey'd to Newgate, to expect the Execution of the Sentance,
where for a while (having as it is supposed some hopes of a Pardon or Reprieve
with which Vanity those miserable Wretches too often flatter themselves: even
on the Brink of Eternity) he remained much unconcerned, seeming rather
resolutely obstenate, then sensible of his Condition, but having certain notice
some days since that he must dye; for that his reitterated Offenses, would not
admit of Mercy, he became more serious; Deaths dismal aspect being to terrible
to be outbraved, and often applied himself to good and sober advice, being the
Precedent Sabbath very attentive to the Sermon, which was for that purpose
Preached, and so continued till he was brought to the Place of Execution. Where
being in the Cart, and the Rope put about his Neck, he seemed, as it were, in
an Obstinate Mood, yet showed some Remors for his Crimes, declaring to the
Minister, That he had been a great Offender, and desired him to tell the People
as much; and that he desired Heartily, that they would put up their Prayers to
Almighty God for the Salvation of his Soul, and take warning by his Fall,
owning the Fact for which he Suffered. But being desired by the Minister to
join in singing the Psalm which his Fellow Sufferers desired might be Sung,
viz. the 25th, beginning at the Fifth Verse, he refused it, and did not seem
much concerned, yet attentively listened to the Prayers of the Two Ministers,
who supplied the place of Mr. Ordinary, and with a Christian Zeal discharged
that Charitable Duty to the utmost of their power, by Praying with, and
Exhorting the Wretched Miscreants to a Candid Confession, and Hearty Repentance.

Mary Williamson, Alias Jones, Alias Smith; Being Tried upon an Indictment the
last Sessions, for Robbing Henry Powny, and it appearing upon Evidence that she
had Stolen a Silver-Salt, value 20 l. A Silver Plate of the same value, a
Caudle-Cup of 45 l. value, a Tankard value 10 l. Silver Hamper, value 5 l. a
Silver Chain, and diverse other Pieces of Plate of considerable value, besides
44 l. in Money; which she did under the Color of Hiring her self in the Nature
of a Servant to the Prosecutor, with whom she Lived, at his House in St.
Laurance Pountny, London; from Michaelmas last till the 26 of October, and
effected the Robbery in the absence of her Master and Mistress, upon proof of
which, she received Judgment, and was reconveyed to Newgate; having ^rit
Pleaded her Belly, but not proving with Child, when being in Retirement, she
much bewailed her miserable condition, and said she was tempted to it, being
very desirous to Live, and earnestly praying for Pardon, more temporal then
otherwise, and so continued till the day of Execution; when with the rest she
was conveyed to Tyburn, the common Place of Suffering. Where the Ministers
prayed with her, and entreated her for Christ's sake to Repent from the bottom
of her heart of all her Sins, and confess her Crimes both to God and Man, that
thereby (like the Thief upon the Cross) she might obtain Pardon and Remission,
to which she gave great attention, with Hands and Eyes lifted up to Heaven,
desiring the great and Righteous Judge of all the Earth to have mercy upon her
poor departing Soul, which she commended into his Hands, then being asked by a
Party that stood by the Cart, what was become of the Plate and Money, she said
what Plate, she knew of no Plate, then it was told her her Mistress would speak
to her, to which she replied, if she had any thing to say to her she-must come
to her, for she well knew she could not come to her, and then desired God to
forgive the Man that swore against her, saying, she desired to Die in Charity
with all Men, and so continued to Pray, without making any public Speech to
the People, as also to Join in singing the Psalm to the last, not owning that
she had either Plate or Money.

Isaac Davis, formerly Living at Knights-Bridg, with one Mr. Marshfield, being
Tried, for that he and two others his Accomplices, not taken, on the 30th. of
December last, Broke into the House of the said Marshfield, and thereby made
such a Noise that Marshfield coming down to know what occasioned it, was set
upon, shot at, and wounded by the Burglars, and had been undoubtedly Murdered,
had not his Son come to his Rescue, upon which they fled, yet there was left a
Hat behind, which was Sworn to be his, and it being farther proved by the
Person assassinated, that he knew him by several Tokens, he was found Guilty of
the Burglary, and putting the People in Corporal Fear of their Lives, and
receiving Judgment with the rest, was remanded to Newgate, where he continued
to be deeply sensible of his Prosleygate Life, and to be very attentive to
those that gave him Directions about his Eternal Welfare; saying bad Company
had been the cause of his shame and Ruin, and if he might Live, he would amend;
being often seen to Pray and Weep alowd, when this Morning he was conveyed to
the Place of Execution, where being come, and desired to unburthen his
Conscience, he declared in the Presence of Almighty God, and before the People,
that he was Innocent of what he dyed for, desiring that God would show some
Imediate Judgment on him if he was Guilty, yet desired of God to forgive his
Prosecutors, and prayed one Harris (that spoke to him and asked him about
Stealing of Poultry, and breaking open a Shop, which he likewise deneyed to
have any hand in) that he would remember him to all his Friends in
Knightsbridg, and tell them that he took it upon his Salvation, and wished that
he might never enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, nor Receive Mercy at the Hands
of God if he had any Hand in the Fact for which he Suffered, protesting with
the like Asseveration that he was in his own House, at the time the House was
said to be broken open, and that for the Hat, Charged to be his, he never saw
it till he saw it in the Hands of his Prosecutor, and that he never did any
Crime in the like Nature, but geting Money, he had spent it as freely, and had
been a great Drinker, been guilty of Sabath breaking, and many such heinous
Sins, for which he believed God suffered him to come to such an untimely end,
desiring that his Innocence as to the Robbery might be made known, nor did he
waver in his Asseveration, though often introgated by the Ministers, and
desired not to dally with his Soul upon the Brink of Eternity, whereupon one of
the Ministers declared to the People what he said, as also he himself did twice
or thrice, and so with much Penitence and Divotion, and again Prayed God to
forgive his Prosecutors, saying he desired to dye in Charity with all Men, and
so Singing his part of the Psalm, and Praying to God to recieve his Soul, he
passed into Eternity.

Alice Pattison, Alias Kirk, Being Apprehended for High Treason, in Clipping
the Lawful Current Coin of this Kingdom, etc. was the last Sessions brought
upon her Trial, where it appeared against her upon Evidence, that she had
Clipped diverse half Crowns of King Charles the First, and diverse other Pieces,
and that she had purchased several Gunies, at 1 l. 1 s. 8 d. with Clipped
Money, and changed it for broad Money, at 1 l. 1 s. 6 d. and that she cut the
value of 4 d. off each Half-Crown, and that she had been seen Clipping, Filing,
and Diminishing at diverse times, the Principal Evidence against her, being one
Mary Hern, in whose House she Lodged, and one that had been assisting to her in
the unlawful Trade: but what made it out more plain, was a Melting-Pot,
Melted-Silver, and Clipped-Mony, that upon Search was found in her Possession;
upon which Evidence she was found Guilty of High Treason, and reconveyed to
Newgate, where during the Intervene, she continued exceeding Penitent,
bewailing her sad Misfortune, and the dismal and untimely End she had brought
her self to, by her unlawful Practice, being extraordinary Penitent, and much
attentive to those that gave her Ghostly Consolation, continuing in that manner
with abundance of Tears flowing from her, till this Morning, at what time being
drawn upon a Sledg to Tyburn, where a Stake being driven in with two holes in
it, she was brought thither before the other Prisoners, but upon further Order,
her Burning was respited for a while, and she put into the Cart amongst the
other Prisoners, where the Ministers gave her Spiritual Comfort; desiring her
in this her great Extremity to lay hold on the Passion Death, and Merits of her
Merciful Redemer, and that she would unburthen her thoughts, to which she
answered, she hoped for Salvation and Eternal Life, but that she must needs own
she was unworthy of it, for that she had been a great Sinner, and was,
especially Guilty of the Treason for which she was to suffer; having used that
wicked Profession for the space of a Year past, then she desired all good
Christians to Pray for her, and Sung her Part of the Psalm divoutly, after
which, the Cart drawing away, the three former were Hanged, and she reconveyed
to the Stake, where she again desired the Prayers of all good People,
confessing her Crime, and entreating the Executioner, who took a Crown out of
her Pocket, to strangle her before the Fire came at her, he set her upon a
Block, and fastened the Rope through the holes about her Neck; when after she
had Prayed a while, he struck it away, and let her Hang whilst he placed the
Wood about her, which being Kindled, Consumed her to Ashes.

Printed for L. Curtis, near Fleet-bridge. 1684.


