A True and Faithful NARRATIVE OF The late Barbarous Cruelties and hard Usages,
exercised by the French against PROTESTANTS AT ROCHEL, AFTER Their Meeting at
the Marketplace there; By Order of the Intendant of that Province. Ar it was
faithfully related, by a Person of good Crehit, that has made made his Escape
from thence, and Arrived at London on the 24th of September last.
THis saying of our Blessed Lord, In the World you shall have Tribulation, but
be of good Cheer, I have overcome the World, was never more seasonable to be
meditated on, then in these latter times, when Wickedness is so great, and
Malice so mischievous; that such as profess the Truth of his Gospel, are
thereby exposed to all the Miseries and Calamities that Hell can Assault them
with. There is no Torment, nor no Cruelty which the Church of God has not
undergone, since she has repurged and cast out of her Communion the Errors of
Rome; so as they may very well say, as in the 44th Psalm, For thy sake (O Lord)
we are killed all the day long; were counted as Sheep for the Slaughter.

I will not undertake here, to describe by particulars, all those Torments
which the People of God have always suffered, and which have been as many and
various as their Adversaries Rage was fiery against them; seeing that this has
been already discoursed at large, by several impartial Men, whose Religious
purposes therein, was to show the World that the Compassions of Rome are Cruel.
But my Design in this Paper is, to give a true and sincere Account of a late
Persecution exercised against the Protestants of Rochel, by the Intendant
there; by whose order they being assembled in the Marketplace of that Town,
about the beginning of this instant September 1681, he made them several
questions concerning their Religion, and told them that the intention of His
Majesty (by whose Special command he had called them theither) was, that all
his Subjects should be Catholics, and that none of 'em should profess the
Heresy of Calvin, which was but a new Opinion contrary to the Principles of the
ancient Catholic Faith, and most prejudicial both to the intrest of his Crown
and welfare of his People.

Therefore he advised (and would absolutely have) them to convert themselves
and return to the Bosom of the Church, from which they were gone astray,;
intimating that this would be of a great advantage to them, and that they could
not fail of bettering their condition hereby, for His Majesty intended to make
them a considerable abatement of the Taxes and Subsidies they did now pay, and
to admit them into Places of Trust and Honor (as his Catholic Subject) which
their Religion had been all this while a bar to their being preferred to. But if
they would not turn, they might expect to receive such punishments as his
Majesty or his Officer should think fit, to inflict upon them for their
Rebellion and obstinacy. To which discourse these poor distressed Protestants
giving no answer, and holding their peace as the People of Judah did to
Rab-shakeh's Blasphemous words, the Intendant told them that if within three
hours time they did not come to a final resolution, so as to give a positive
answer to the proposition that was made to them, they should be held guilty of
contumacy, and proceeded against according to Law. Whereupon they unanimously
and with a Christian-like courage replied that they would die in that Religion
wherein they were Born and brought up, and hoped that his Majesty would be so
gracious to them as to let 'em peacefully follow the same according to the
dictates of their own Consciences since this Religion of theirs was so far from
being destructive to his Majesty's Government, that it did teach them to bear
an awful obedience to it, and to promote the Peace and welfare of the same;
which they always did, and would still endeavor to do as much as in them lay,
with a deep submission to his Laws as being his most faithful Subjects.

At this discourse the Intendant fell into a great passion; and sending them to
their several homes told them with anger, that since they so little sensible of
their own good, as not to answer the Kings desires, as he might justly expect,
and accept of his gracious profers to them with a dutiful thankfulness to his
Majesty for the same, they should see within a small time what should be the
reward of their disobedience to his Orders, and slight'ning of his Royal
Bounty. But notwithstanding all this specious and threatening Speech of the
Intendants they persisted still in their former purpose and resolution of being
constant to the true Religion, and answered him, that as no promise of reward
could work upon him so as to engage them to embrace a Religion which they knew
to be contrary to the Gospel, so no threat of punishment could ever make them
depart from that, which they were satisfied did entirely agree with it. Here
the Intendant left them, and declined urging them any further by wors; But
bethought himself of another way to try whether he could win them; which was to
make good his promise of entreating them very severely. He therefore sent
presently into every of these Families a considerable number of Blood-thirsty
Soldiers, with order of living there at discretion (as they call it) and doing
all the mischief they could. Which unjust and cruel order they did not fail of
executing very punctually, and would have outdone it, if it had been possible
for any hellish envy and malice to go beyond the injustice of it; their
profession of Soldiers, with that of Romanists, making them breath out nothing
but Destruction and slaughter. And their rage and barborousness was such as
that they did not aim at taking away presently these poor Protestants lives,
but did make them to go through all the long and tedious tormemts their cruel
heart could devise: For they did not content themselves to make a havoc of
these poor Creatures houses, and to abuse them pittilesly; but violating all
Laws, both of God and Nature, did pull Men, Women and Children out of their
houses into the Streets, and drew them all along by the hair. Then taking them
in again they bound them, scourged them, threw scalded hot water upon their
naked bodies, put their feet into hot Oil, cut their bodies all over
especially those parts that are most sensitive, and did them several other
cruelties, so as in Nero's time no more barbarous and inhuman usages were ever
heard of. And yet their fury and malice did not stop here and could not be
satisfied till they had starved some to death, and treatned others to do the
same or worse to them, if they would not abjure their Heresy (as they call it.)
so that some of a weaker spirit in the sense of resentment of the tormens they
had already suffered, and apprehension of those they were threatened with, for
the future, not thinking themselves capable of abiding the brunt of a second
assault, did turn indeed, and had amends made them for their losses, though not
for their wounds.

But others of a firmer courage, and whose Principles are to be faithful to the
end as they may obtain the Crown of Life, being still constant to the truth
they profess are daily put on the rack, and so cruelly tortured that it would
make the Christian Readers heart bleed if there were words expressive enough to
describe thoroughly the inhumanity of this persecution, which is so violent,
that such as are exposed thereto endeavor every day to run away and leave
their Estates behind them, to obey that Command of our Savior's, when you are
persecuted in one place fly into another. But such care is taken by the
adversaries, that none of the Protestants should depart that Place, as there
are but few that can make their escape and be so happy as he is, who has made
me the relation of what I now give to the Public, and who has been so lucky as
to save himself out of the Tyranny of Rome and find an apportunity to come into
these Blessed Countries where Protestancy flourishes and Charity abounds, and
where so many of other poor distressed Protestants resort from all places where
Persecution is hot against them; who are so kindly welcomed and so carefully
provided for here, that I cannot (though I am not in that condition as to
partake of this Public Charity my self) but express (as I do in the Paper) my
due acknowledgments for the same both to his British Majesty and the whole
English Nation, in regard that it is done to my flesh and blood, that is, those
of my Religion and Country, who as they ought to be most sensible of the
extraordinary favors they daily receive here in England, so do I not doubt but
that in time they will endeavor to own this their obligation, by all the most
Faithful Services they shall be capable to return to a Prince and a Naion,
that are so bountiful to them; and J do further Persuade my self, that they
will now join their prayers with mine, that God Almighty, the Father of all
Mercies, and giver of all good Gifts may reward Both by blessing them with all
Temporal Blessings in this life, and Eternal Felicity in that which is to come.

Which is the constant Prayer of A Born French, but desirous to die An English
Protestant, P. L.

FINIS
LONDON, Prindted by D. Mallet, 1681.


