THE Last Dying Words AND EXECUTION Of Jonathan Tue, and John Richardson. Who
were this 17th. Day of September, Executed AT TYBURN Also an Account of their
Behavior in Newgate after Sentence, to the day of Execution.
AT the last Sessions, at the Old Bailey, twelve persons received Sentence of
Death, ten of which, by his Majesty's great Clemency were reprieved, and only
Jonathan Tue, and John Richardson this day suffered.

Jonathan Tue lived in Newport-Street, and kept a Victualing House, where there
happening some dispute between him and another person, about four Shillings,
which the said person charged him withal, he refused to pay it, urging that
upon the Account he was not so much indebted to him: the other person
threat'ned to Arrest him if he did not satisfy him in it, and accordingly
ordered an Officer to take out a Writ against him, who did so, and going to the
said Tue's House, with William Graves, a follower of his, and three more, they
called for a Room and a Pot of Drink; Tue passing by the Room where they were,
suspected them to be Baliffs, and ran directly into the Kitchen, whither they
pursued him; but taking down an Halberd, he resolutely defended himself against
them a long while, and wounded one of them in several places, and at last
cleared the Kitchen of them and made fast the door, but the Bailiffs by main
force, broke open the door upon him, whom Tue afresh engaged and had probably
defended himself with greater mischief to the Assailants had not William Graves
got in at a back door, whom Tue espying, turned suddenly and darted his Halberd
at him, and wounded him under the left Breast, upon which he dropped down
without speaking a word. All the defense that Tue made was, that they assaulted
him, by offering to seize his person, without giving him the word of Arrest, or
showing him their Writ, and that he thought he might fairly defend himself
against their apprehending of him, so long as they had not laid hands on him,
nor did he think himself their Prisoner till he was in their Custody. But it
did appear in the behalf of the Bailiff, that they both showed him the Writ,
and gave him the word of Arrest, upon which he ought to have rend'red himself,
which was proved by four Witnesses, and the Writ produced in Court, upon which
he was found Guilty of wilful Murder, and received Sentence of Death.

John Richardson a Tinker, lived in Killingham in Middlesex, and was Indicted
for the Murder of his Wife Martha Richardson. It did appear at his Trial, by
the Testimony of several Neighbors, that in July last, he Barbarously misused
her, by throwing her upon the ground, kicking and beating her over the Head,
Breast, and Belly; of which blows and bruises she languished till the 6th. of
August; and then dyed. It was sworn against him by her Sister, that during the
time of her sickness, she did often complain of his cruelty to her, charged him
with being the occasion of her death, and most earnestly obliged her said
Sister to prosecute and revenge her untimely end upon that wicked wretch, who
had been the cause of it. Several of the Neighbors gave in Evidence, that in
all the time of her sickness, she would frequently express her resentments of
the cruel usage of her Husband, and notwithstanding their good and Christian
advice to her to forgive her Enemies, and all those who had any ways injured
her, yet could they not prevail with her to express, she had so much kindness
or charity for her Husband to pardon him. The next day after she was thus beat,
she spit Blood, and bled at least a pint and half, which though she endeavored
to wash from the place where it was shed, she could not do, but there still
remained the visible marks and stains thereof. The Prisoner had nothing
material to offer in his defense, but that his Wife was drunk at the time she
said she was beaten, and by a fall she received, had thus bruised and
mischieved her self, but several of the Neighbors swore possitively they saw
him drag her by the hair of the Head along the Street; that she was a young
Woman of about 25 years of Age, and of a good Reputation, for her honest Life
and sober Behavior. The Prisoner was upwards of 50. and of very ill Report
amongst all that knew him, that during the time of his wives languishing he
took no care of her: and was so far from being sorry for what he had done, that
he had declared, if he had not yet done her business, he would do it some other
time. He was farther suspected for the Murder of his former Wife, who it was
said died suddenly, and her Body found under her Husband's Bed, with her hair
about her Ears; all which Circumstances had formerly rend'red him much
suspected by his Neighbors: But this Inhumane and Barbarous Act has now
published his Villainy to the World; and his cruel and Savage Nature, made him
a miserable Example to Mankind.

I shall now speak particularly of the Behavior of these Criminals since their
Condemnation.

On Sunday, the 7th of this Instant, these two Malefactors with six more
appeared at Chapel, where Mr. Ordinary gave them very Pious Exhortations and
Encouragements to Repentance, and a serious Consideration, in what a dangerous
condition their precious Souls were in, if they did not now improve those few
and last Minutes of their Life, to the Eternal Salvation of their immortal
Souls. His Text was taken out of the 22th. Chapter of the Prophet Jeremiah, and
21st. Verse. I speak unto thee in thy prosperity, etc. His whole Discourse
tended to the discovery of the heinousness of sin in general, and particularly
of those notorious Crimes they were guilty of, and justly Condemned for. These
2 persons appeared very penitent and attentive to his Sermon, and particularly
Tue seemed to be truly afflicted for his sins, and spent all his time in
prayer, reading and meditation. Richardson, appeared heartily sorry for his
former wicked Courses, but would not own that he was guilty of his Wives
Murder, but that the bruises she had was by a fall, as he alleged at his
Trial, of which the whole Court was well satisfied to the contrary.

About eight this Morning, a worthy Divine went up to the Prisoners, who gave
them several Exhortations to Repentance, and prayed with them a considerable
time. Jonathan Tue appeared very penitent, both for this, and all other his
former sins. John Richardson who had hitherto denied his guilt now began to be
more softened, in heart and went to prayers by himself, and prayed very
frequently: afterward being told that he ought to give God the Glory by an
open Confession of his Crime, he did no longer deny it, but seemed willing to
apologize for himself in that it was no part of his intentions to injure her,
and that four days before going into Sussex, he took leave of her and then left
her in a very hopeful condition of recovery, and that she expressed her self very
kindly to him, and being asked more pressingly about the Death of his former
Wife, he said that she dyed of a surfeit, and whereas it had been reported that
she was found under the Bed, he declared that as she was putting on her
Stockings by the Bedside she fell upon the floor, when lifting her upon the
Bed, he called in two Women that where his Neighbors, who saw her upon the Bed
speechless, and a little time after dyed.

Afterward Mr. Ordinary had them up to the Chapel to prayers, and then being
carried to have their Irons struck of, each person was asked his Name, and Tue
said his Name was Jonathan, and at the very instant he was tied up, appeared
with a cheerful Countenance, constantly praying: but Richardson appeared more
dejected, afterward they were put into one Cart and car^ied to the place of
Execution.

At Tyburn. Tue had the Halter put about his Neck, when a Friend and Neighbor
of his coming into the Cart to him, he desired him to give his Love to his
Wife, and Blessing to his Children, and then thus expressed himself: O Lord God
I have been a great Sinner, and offended against thy holy laws; more
particulariy in breaking the Sabbath and disobedience to my Parants; but thou O
Lord have mercy upon me, Christ have mercy upon me, Lord have mercy upon me; O
Lord strengthen my Faith in prayer, which I thank God I have found great
benifit by: I repent from the bottom of my heart of all my Sins, and of this
most bloody Crime I now dye for, and I thank thee O God I am now so cheered by
the light off thy Countenance to me, that it is as equal to me to dye as to
live; or in words to this purpose.

Richardson confessed that he did beat his Wife, which he thought might hasten
her death, though he never designed it. Afterward they went to prayers, and
sung part of the 25th. Psalm, Thy mercy is manifold, etc. Afterward he
applying himself in Prayer, Lord have mercy upon me, Christ have mercy upon me,
concluding with the Lords Prayer, saying Our Father, etc. Then the Carts was
drawn away, and they suffered according to Law. Tues hody was by his Friends
put into a Coffin, and is to be interred in St. Murtins. Churchyard.

LONDON Printed by Eliz. Mallet in Black-Horse Alley, near Fleet-Bridge 1684.


