The last SPEECH, CONFESSION AND EXECUTION of the two Prisoners at TYBURN, On
Friday the 23d. of this Instant May, 1684.
Viz. John Gower and Fran. Robinson
ON the 15th. and 16th. of this present Month at the Sessions in the Old-Bayly
for the City of London, and County of Middlesex, five persons recieved Sentence
of Death, the four above mentioned, and one Edward Hubbart, who recieved his
Majesty's Gracious Reprieve.

John Gower, was formerly an Apprentice to a Coach-Maker in Long-Acre and
Indicted for Murdering his Wife, who was the same person found dead at
Green-Berry Hill in March last, which he effected by Shooting her into the back
part of her Head with a Pistol Bullet. This same John Gower being about 26
years of Age was married privately to his late murdered Wife three years before
his time was out, and the Marriage kept private; she living all the time with
her Relations in the Country: his time being now expired he married his Masters
Maid, who was his fellow Servant; his first Wife considering he was now free,
and for himself, came up to London and lodged at Knightsbridge, and sent to her
Husband to desire him to come to her, which accordingly he did, upon the
Wednesday, as soon as he saw her, he earnestly pressed her for money, and she
denying she had any, he ransacked her Box and Clothes, and in all his
Expressions and Behavior, showed himself according to his Natural Temper very
churlish and dogged to her. On the Monday following they were in Holbourn
together at a Farriers House, and some short time after she was found murdered
as aforesaid; nor does it appear that she ever gave him any Provocation, and
though possibly she might know he had married a second Wife which he loved
better being a younger Woman, yet did she never take any public Notice of it,
or show her Discontent by any open Reflections upon him. At the Bar he denied
the Crime, tho he was not able by any considerable Circumstance to clear
himself; but the last Night before his Execution, he was earnestly desired to
Confess, who answered that he was not Guilty of the Fact for which he was
condemned. It is very observable that he was the first person after her Murder
before the public discovery of it, who talked of it and give out News that she
was dead, and a little before had sent to Knightsbridge for her Clothes and
Box; but the Landlady refusing to send them unless she came her self, he sent
word she was very ill of sore Eyes, and that he had taken a Lodging for her in
Witch-Street at the sign of the Coffin, which was all a (...) and untruth.
After Sentence, he was very penitent, and his surviving Wife come in often to
see him in Prison, he cleared her from any ways being Privy to it or having any
knowledge of it. He was always taken notice of, to be of a very morross and
revengeful humor; and it is said, had formerly offered a young fellow 5 l. to
lie with her, that he might have pre^ence for a Divorce, but that design not
succeeding, resolved upon this Inhumane and Barbarous Murder (...) he
deservedly suffers for. His surviving Wife showed a great deal of sorrow, for
her Husband and was often with him, and wears the Character of a modest sober
Woman.

Francis Robinson was an old Offender, tho but a young man about 30 years of
Age, he was Notoriously Eminent amongst those of his Gang for his daring
Exploits of Roguery, which he had frequently Committed both in England and
Ireland; I shall first speak of one, which he committed at Windsor, which was
so bold and confident a piece of Villainy that it very well deserves a
remembrance here, and to proceed to the Crime he now suffers for His Majesty
being at Windsor, he and one Syms both dressed in a good Habit, went as Gentlemen
to see the Court, and passing the Sentinal to Mr. Mays Lodging, Privy Purse to
the King, which they broke open and took in money and plate to the Value of 300
l. they repassed the Sentinal undiscovered, and went off with the Prize. Syms
was afterward taken, but absolutely denied the Fact and some time after
Robinson was apprehended in White-Fryers and tried before the Green-Cloath and
pardoned. There was one Circumstance very remarkable a^ he since confessed,
that as they were busy about their Pillage, a Bird which hung in a Cage in the
Window, fell a singing, and sung so curiously well, that either surprised with
strange thoughts from the sweetness and harmony of the Notes, unfearing that
some person near hand, hearing the Bird sing might be drawn thither by the
pleasantness of the Music, they left the best part of their designed, spoil,
and in a strange confusion made have away. The Fact for which he suffered was
that he and one Mr. Fletcher were Indicted for stealing two Silver Tankards on
the 10th. of March, to the value of 14. l. being the Goods of Henry Boon a Cook
near the Royal Exchange: soon after his loss two men came to desire him to go
into Salisbury-Court to one Mr. Fletcher, who could tell what was become of his
Tankards, accordingly at the Swan he found Fletcher, who told him that Francis
Robinson had stole his Tankards, and that he stood at the door while Robinson
fetched them from the Bar, that the Tankards were sold and melted down. The
next day Mr. Boon having taken some Women into Custody upon Suspicion, Robinson
came to them and privately asked him what they were worth, and offered to make
satisfaction for them, he denied upon his Trial what he had said to Mr. Boon,
but since his Sentence has been very open in his Confessions and penitential in
his Behavior.

He went for the reputed husband of Jane Voss a notorious criminal, one who is
infamously known in Town for her several Cheats and Thefts, and at present a
prisoner in Newgate; but however this poor Wretch seemed before hardened in his
Sins and feared in his Conscience since his condemnation he has been more
seriously thoughtful of his latter end; remembering his former vicious courses
with anger and detestation, constantly praying to God to give him a true sense
of his unhappy condition, and his grace sincerely, and from the bottom of his
heart to repent of all his Transgressions.

More particularly on Tuesday last he desired to have his Coffin brought to him
in the condemned hole which was granted, upon sight of it; this says he is my
Memento, and I hope I shall so prepare my self to lie down in dust, that
through the mercies of God I may rise in glory. That worthy person and Reverend
Divine Dr. Hornneck, was pleased out of his abundant charity, to visit the poor
Prisoners, and with powerful Arguments both exhort and encourage them to a true
and hearty sorrow and contrition: To whom Robinson confessed his manifold
offenses, and said that his Crimes were great and numerous, he would endeavor
in some measure to answer them in a profound penitence and absolute resignation
to the will and pleasure of his great Creator.

This Morning about half an hour after Nine of the Clock, the two aforesaid
Malefactors were put into a Cart at Newgate, and conveyed to the place of
Execution Francis Robinson seemed undaunted; but the other, John Gower, showed
himself very penitent and exceeding sorrowful for so great a Crime; yet, when
arrived at the place of Execution, was assisted by two most worthy Divines; who
asked him what he had now to say it being the last moment he had to stay in
this World, but that he must now think of another, and desireing him to confess
what he had so long and obdurately stood in, though to no effect, and that
there was no hopes of Redemption but only of Redeeming his Soul by his Blessed
Savior Jesus Christ; he still affirming he was Innocent, and knew nothing of
the Crime for which he was now to suffer; but tho he was most earnestly
importuned by the said Divines who also prayed with him, and admonished him not
to go out of this World with a lie in his Mouth, he being but a Young Man.
First they drew from him, that he only had been so far concerned as to contrive
the way how she might be Murdered; then being asked who were the Actors in
this (...) he was the Contriver, which he still refused to confess; then being
prayed with again he seemed something more softened and easier to be worked on
(which especially one of the said Divines observed and and strove to draw from
him): He then confessed to them she was murthred by himself, they still fearing
he might not yet have cleared his Conscience, urged him on still to draw a full
and true Confusion from him, prayed with him again, and sang a Psalm, and after
some short time went out of the Cart, he then being desired by the Sheriffs
Officers and of those of his Friends nearest, to dispatch; and make a True and
Faithful End. He then spoke after these words I have been a great Sinner, and
kept ill Company, of which I desire all to beware: I indeed Married two Wives,
the first of which I married, suffered by my own hands, and I shot the Pistol
my self, which gave that most fatal blow: but he then being asked if his other
Wife knew any thing, he declared she knew her not, and therefere was innocent,
and desired that she might not be questioned about it, and being asked by the
said Divine if he was not Guilty of Sabbath-breaking, he declared he was, and
it was his Original sin, and gave advice to all Masters not to be negligent of
their Servants, for that was great part of his Ruin, and this untimely end, the
other being asked what he had to say, answered he had nothing more to say, than
that he was a great Offender, but that he hoped he had made a sufficient
Confession already for his sins past, and that he had nothing more to say at
the place of Execution; so that after the Prayers of all good Christians: they
were turned off, and accordingly suffered, their Bodies being put into two
Coffins, and disposed of by their Friends.

(...) Whereas George Croom has given an Advertisement, at the end of his last
Account of the Sessions, that he will for the (...) and Print the Dying
Confessions of Prisoners, who shall be Executed, that the W^ (...) not be (...)
by false ones; which (...) very unjust and (...) Reflection (...) hereof, who
has for several years last past published both an Account of the Sessions, and
the Last Speeches of the dying Criminals, without being ever a^ted or charged
with a falsity. This is to acquaint the World, that notwithstanding all his
sober pretensions to Truth, the Printing that abominable Story of the Devils
appearing to a Wapping Waterman and smoking a Pipe of Tobacco with him; It is
so g^ a Lie, that any body but the Author would be ashamed of chargeing where
with a (...) they are purely innocent of, and He so deeply Guilty. The Reader
may farther please, to (...) that the Speeches and Confessions of the Prisoners
who shall hereafter suffer will be Printed with all Truth and G^r,

By E. M. in Blackhorse-Alley in Fleet Street near Fleet-Bridge, 1684


