THE Last Dying Speeches, CONFESSION, AND EXECUTION OF Rice Evans, Margaret
Corbet, Elizabeth Ford alias Jackson, and Katharine Binks, who were Executed on
KENNINGTON Common IN THE County of Surrey, The 19th of March 1683/4.
For MVRDERS, FFLONIES, and Burglaries. With the Manner of their Behavior in
the Marshalsea Prison, after their CONDEMNATION.
IT is appointed for all Men, good and bad, once to dye, Nature requiring it as
a Debt since the Fall of Adam; but the Scandal of Dying, is to dye as an Evil
Doer, when the Prudence of the Magistrate in dispensing the Law, is forced to
cut off some as Rotten Branches, that if longer permitted, would devour their
Fellow Members, and by infecting the rest, bring all Order into Confusion, and
Kingdoms to Destruction: and, one would think, if the Severities of the Law,
with the Miseries, and Disappointment of being forcibly deprived of that Life
which Men generally covet could not deterr Rational Creatures from splitting
upon those Rocks; yet the frequent Examples, and Executions of diverse, at
almost each Assize and Sessions, should at length so awaken the living
Malefactors, as to terrify them into a Reformation. But, an Example to the
contrary being now before us, I shall add no more of this kind, but proceed to
acquaint you, That eight Persons received Sentence of Death at the Assizes held
for the County of Surrey, in the Borough of Southwark, on Saturday the 15th.
of March, 1683. One of which, viz. Margaret Floyd, being reprieved upon
Pleading her Belly, and by a Jury of Women found to be with quick Child; three
others, viz. Elizabeth Tymon, John Broman, and John Norwood, upon the humble
Application of their Relations and Friends, are also reprieved for some short
time. The rest were, pursuant to their Sentence, Executed, at the usual Place
of Execution for that County, at Kennington Common, on Wednesday the 19th of
the said Month of March, 1683. A more particular Account of each of the said
Persons, take as follows, Viz,

Rice Evans of Kennington in the Parish of Lambeth, having been Indicted for
Killing his Wife; upon the Trial it appeared, that the said Evans keeping
several Cows, and his Wise trading as a Milk-Woman; but happening to lie in
Childbed, he in a Week, or two, or before she was in a condition to rise,
forced her to go out and sell the Milk: also, upon her selling a Calf cheaper
than he thought it worth, or some other very little Provocation, he so kicked
and abused her, that by reason of his said ill Usage, she in a few days died.
The Midwife who laid her particularly deposing, that the Blows he had given
her, and unseemly forcing her to work, was the cause of her Death; he was
therefore found Guilty of Wilful Murder, and received Sentence of Death
accordingly: But both at his Trial, and before his Condemnation, when he was
asked what he had to say, why Judgment should not pass upon him to dye
according to Law, he was in one Story, that the Midwife and the rest had sworn
falsely against him, and that he was not guilty: in which Asseveration, he
continued afterward in the Prison; declaring, in his way of speaking (being a
Welchman) to all who came to see him, that he was an Innocent Man, and
particularly to several Ministers of the Church of England, that either by the
Sheriffs Procurement, or their own Inclinations, used all possible Endeavors
to work in him, and the rest of the Condemned Malefactors, a Confession of
their Crimes, and a Sense of their sad Condition. With which the said Evans did
not seem to be much affected, but remained in a kind of discontented, careless
manner, or like a Person stupefied and ignorant.

Notice being sent to seven of them that they must prepare to dye on Wednesday
the 19th of March, herein before mentioned: and that time drawing near, the
Sacrament of the Lord's Supper was administered to them, after which, Rice Evans
used many fresh Asseverations, saying to the Minister, What, Man, do you think
I will damn my own Soul to deny the Truth now I have received God's Holy
Sacrament? No, I will not do it. I tell thee Man, I am not Guilty; but they
have maliciously sworn against me, and I must dye wrongfully: I have not killed
my Wife, the Nurse who looked to her would not swear it.

The Night before they were Executed a Reprieve came for Elizabeth Tymon, who
was condemned to dye for Manslaughter, in killing her Daughter-in-Law at
Croydon; and also John Norwood the Oat-meal-man, of Croydon, who was convicted
upon the Oaths of two poor People who swore a Robbery against him. In the
Morning, before Execution, another Reprieve was produced for John Broman. So
only four remaining, they were put into a Cart together, about Ten in the
Fore-noon, and drawn with three Horses to Kennington Common.

The three Divines who visited them in the Prison rid by in a Coach, and when
come to the Place of Execution, went all up into the Cart, and renewed their
Endeavors to produce a Confession in the Prisoners, and prepare them for their
Death; one of them at least 15 or 20 times pressing Rice Evans with all
possible Earnestness, how necessary it was for him to Confess, and repent of
the Cruelty to his Wife, to which he at length very passionately answered,
What, do you think I am a Madman, to deny it now I am going to dye, if I was
guilty? I tell you man, I am not guilty of the Blood laid to my Charge: It Is
true, I am a Welchman, and have been angry sometimes, but I have done no
Murder. He being particularly asked if he did not beat his Wife at all, he said,
I cannot say but I have strike her about a Year since, but not after her
Lying-in, as they maliciously swear against me. My Wife was a green Woman, and
might get her Death by Cold; but I have not killed her. I forgive them all that
swore falsely against me, and pray God to forgive all their Souls, and give them
a sight of their Sins, and lay not my Blood to them who they have wronged, I am
not guilty of the Blood, as the Nurse can tell, who could not swear it. Using
several such Expressions in his Welsh Tone.

It was observable of him, that he had procured a very white new Shirt, made of
Callico, large enough to come over all his Clothes, which he wore uppermost,
and would be hanged in it, as is supposed, in Token of his Innocence.

Margaret Corbet, a very Young Woman of Wandsworth, in the County of Surrey,
having been Indicted for murdering her Infant Bastard-child, and being tried,
convicted, and condemned for the same, also utterly denied the said Murder; and
in the Prison, after Condemnation, spent her Time in a very careless, sottish
manner, and much of it in Sleeping: when at any time she was admonished to
rouse her self, and think of the short time she had to live, she would take
little or no notice of such Admonition: and when the Ministers urged her very
hard concerning the Murder of her Child, and told her what an unnatural Sin it
was to destroy the Fruit of her own Body, with other such like Expressions; if
she could no ways avoid to give an Answer, she very stiffly told them, she was
not guilty or had killed any Child; in which dejected, careless, and stupefied
humor, she continued till she came to the Place of Execution, (being in truth
but a very ignorant, poor Creature, hardly capable of understanding what the
Ministers said to her,) but being urged how she expected to be saved, she
answered, That she hoped God would have Mercy upon her; and did at length
confess that she had killed her Child, by cutting its Throat: exclaiming a
little against Young Men, and the Folly of Young-Women, being deluded by them.

Elizabeth Ford alias Jackson, was Tried, and found guilty of stealing Goods to
the Value of five Pounds: she was an Elderly Woman, and had for many Years
followed the like Trade, being a kind of Commander amongst Pick-pockets and
Thieves. After her Condemnation, she proceeded to act with great Rudeness to
her Fellow Prisoners, disturbing them in their Preparations for another World;
which she continued to do until her Husband brought her word, that no Interest
that he could use, would prevail for a Reprieve: she then seeing there was no
help, but she must dye, became more moderate in her Carriage, and bewailed her
sinful Life.

When drawn to the place of Execution, she at the last made a free Confession
of the several Offenses by her committed, that she was Guilty of the Fact for
which she now suffered; that had she been Executed several Years ago, it had
been justly; that she went out of God's way by forsaking her Husband, and then
God forsook her, so that she run into all manner of Wickedness. She earnestly
advised all Women to be constant to their Husbands, and not defile their
Marriage Bed, which was the first Occasion of her taking those Courses that
brought her to this Shameful Death. She however very sensibly declared, That
she hoped for Salvation in the Mercy of God, by the Merits of Jesus Christ: and
before she was Executed, she confessed to have had many Accomplices in her
wicked Course; and by Name accused one that lives in the City of London to have
been guilty with her of some very great Crime; whose Name, and Place of Abode;
was taken by the Sheriff.

Katharine Binks was a Young Woman that had been drawn into ill Courses and
Company; who taking a particular Kindness for one Ralph Baldwin, with whom it
was reported she was to be Married: in the mean time Baldwin so behaved
himself, as to be sent to Bridewell; and whilst there, either that she might
get him out of Prison, or some other ways help him, she so acted, as that they
the said Ralph Baldwin and Katharine Binks, were Indicted for breaking into the
Dwelling House of William Allen, in the Parish of St. Olives Southwark, on the
30th. of January last, at night, and stealing from thence one silver Tankard,
one silver Caudle-Cup, one silver Beaker, six Pounds in Money, and some other
Things: but upon the Trial it appearing, that Baldwin was Prisoner in Bridewel
at the time of the Robbery, and that Katharine Binks brought the said Plate and
Money to him thither, where it was seized, he was acquitted; but she the said
Katharine Binks found Guilty, and Sentenced to suffer Death; spending the
remaining time of her being in Prison, with much Penitence, reading the
Scriptures, and giving heed to such wholesome Advice and ^^structions as was
administered to her; receiving the Sacrament with the rest, and increasing in
her said Behavior, to the last; expressing her self at the Place of Execution,
like a true Penitent, confessing several Passages of her Ill Life, and
particularly the Fact for which she suff'red this Death, bewailing her great
Unworthiness to find Mercy with God Almighty at the last Moment, and when she
had no longer opportunity to sin. But yet however, in a very sensible manner
made passionate Application that her Soul might be washed from all its Impurity
in the Blood of Jesus Christ, and that God would receive it into his infinite
Mercy notwithstanding all her Unworthiness.

Each of the said four Prisoners having by the indefatigable Industry and
spiritual Assistance of the beforementioned three Divines (who all stood in
the Care with them till ready to be drawn away) disburdened themselves; and
being made sensible of that Eternity they were just entering into, each also
earnestly desiring the Prayers of Ministers and People for their happy Passage,
two of the Ministers (first one and then another) prayed with them very
affectionately; after that, three Staves of the 25th Psalm was sung, beginning
at the 10th Verse: which being ended, the Prisoners discovered the Advantage
they had received thereby, to the great Encouragement of those spiritual
Laborers: the Ministers then came out of the Cart, and it being drawn away,
the said Condemned Persons were Executed, by hanging till they were dead.

When cut down, the Body of Kice Evens was put into a black Coffin, and carried
on Men's Shoulders, to be buried by his Wife in Lambeth Churchyard.

Elizabeth Ford, alias Jackson, Margaret Corbet, and Katharine Binks, were
brought back to be buried at Newington Butts; the former of the three had a
Coffin, the others buried in their Clothes.

LONDON, Printed By George Croom, at the Blew-Ball in Thames Street, over
against Baynards Castle, 1684.


