THE WAY TO Good SUCCESS. Propounded in a SERMON,

Preached upon November the 24th, 1684. at Trinity-house-Chappel, to the
Wardens, elder Brethren, and Fraternity of Masters and Seamen of the same
House, at Kingston upon Hull.

By N. L. Minister of the Gospel at St. Mary's Church in Hull.

YORK, Printed by John White, and are to be sold by Thomas Clark Bookseller in
Hull, 1685.

The WAY to GOOD SUCCESS.
Psalm. 37.5. Commit thy way unto the Lord: trust also in him, and he shall
bring it to pass.


EVery Man in his particular Calling and Employment, expects and desires good
Success, and the hopes thereof makes him willing to undergo Labor and
Hardship. The Husbandman he takes a great deal of pains to Manure, Till, and
Sow his Ground, hoping that his labor and trouble will be recompensed with a
good Crop, with the joy of Harvest. The Merchant and the Mariner, with much
care and diligence fit their Ship, and then go down to the Sea, and occupy
themselves in great Waters, Sailing sometimes in the midst of great Rocks and
Storms, with the hazard of Lives and Fortunes, and all this hoping for a
gainful Voyage and good returns.

This Success being that which is so much desired and aimed at by all, one
would think that any Project in order thereto should be embraced, or any good
Rule propounded by wise experienced men should be observed. The Royal Prophet
David was a man of great wisdom and experience, both as a Subject, and as a
King: He was one that made great adventures, run through as much business as
any man in his time: He had the trial of as many and great troubles and
dangers, at home and abroad, as most we read of: And he from his own
experience, and being infallibly guided by the Holy Ghost, propounds this as
the most certain method for the obtaining of good Success in all our
transactions; Commit thy way unto the Lord, etc.

In which words we have first a most necessary practical duty enjoined, [Commit
thy way unto the Lord.] 2dly. Good Success promised upon the discharge of this
Duty; [And he shall bring it to pass.]

I shall not need to spend much time in explaining the words, there not seeming
much difficulty. By [way] in Scripture is usually set forth all the whole
course of a Christians Life, all his thoughts and purposes, actions and
sufferings, cares and troubles. [And he shall bring it to pass] Dabit Caeptis
suis successum. verse. Tig^^. He shall give success. Both the parts of the Text
may be included in this Proposition.

It Is every Christians duty and interest to commit his way to God.
A Point very clear from other parts of Sacred Writ as well as this, but not so
well understood and believed in the World, as we may judge without the breach
of Charity: By reason men take such irregular Courses to secure themselves, and
bring about their designs. The same rule David gives, Psalm. 55.22. Cast thy
burden on the Lord and he shall sustain thee. Portabit te and onus tuum. M^is.
He shall not suffer thee to sink under the burden of thy fears and cares, work
and business: And not only David the Father, but Solomon the Son Preach this
Doctrine. Prove. 16.3. Commit thy works to the Lord, and thy thoughts shall be
established. Cogitationes tuae i. e. Consilia tua, pia and proba. Pisc. in lor.
Thy thoughts, that is, thy pious and honest counsels shall be established, i.
e. shall succeed and shall not be in vain. Our blessed Savior and his holy
Apostles, did frequently teach this Lesson to their Followers. Mat. 6.25.
Therefore I say unto you, Take no thought for your life, what ye shall eat, or
what ye shall drinks, nor yet for your body, what ye shall put on. In which
place our Savior disswades them from anxious care about provision, and would
have them commit their way to God: For first, God gave life and he gave the
body; certainly then he will take care of things necessary for you. Secondly,
God takes care of the Fowls of the Air, and Lillies of the Field, that do not
labor; much more will he take care of you that are of greater worth and do
labor: Take one more, Phil. 4.6. Be careful for nothing, but in every thing by
prayer and supplication with thanksgiving, let your requests be made known unto
God. v. 7. and the peace of God, which passes all understanding, shall keep
your hearts in the knowledge and the love of God, through Christ Jesus.

In our further discourse upon this Subject, I shall enquire,

1. What it is to Commit our way to God? 2. What Confiderations may-enforce
this duty? 3. When, or in what cases more especially we ought to discharge it?
Before I answer the first Quaere positively, give me leave to premise these
two things:

1. This Command, [Commit your way to God] does not superseed our diligence in
our Affairs: Men should not give themselves to Idleness and expect that God
should take care of them, and provide for them. Religion binds us to great
diligence, both in our particular Callings as Men, and general Callings as
Christians. Eccl. 9.10. Whatever thine hand finds to do, do it with thy
might. St. Paul looks upon such as are Idle to be disorderly: 2 Thessalonians. 3.11.
For we hear there are some among you which walk disorderly, working not at all;
These he Commands and exhorts, verse. 12. that with quietness they work and eat
their own bread. And he gives a double reason for this, 1. That they may
provide for their family. 1 Timothy 5.8. 2dly. That they may have to relieve the
poor. Epes. 4.28. Let him that stole steal no more, but rather let him labor,
working with his hands the thing that is good, that he may have to give unto
him that needs. Again, in our general Callings as Christians, we are enjoined
to be diligent. 2 Pet. 1.10. Wherefore the rather, brethren, give diligence to
make your Calling and Election sure. The word (...) does denote great Industry
and Vigilance, to make it sure, not in our own Opinion, but to se^^^ it in the
effect by diligent and careful obedience: so verse 5. And besides this giving
all diligence, add to your faith virtue, and to virtue knowledge, etc. So that
you see there is an Obligation lies upon us, not to be slothful in business,
but fervent in Spirit, serving the Lord: That we should be diligent in the
Worship of God, in the carrying on the Warfare against our Spiritual Enemies,
in the Exercise of all Divine graces, in a word, in our whole Christian race.

2. This Command does not superseed our provident care and prudence in the
management of our Affairs: The Laws of the Christian Religion obliege us to
order our Affairs with discretion. The wise man tells us, Prove. 14.8. The
wisdom of the Prudent is to understand his way. His Committing his way to God
is not inconsistent with his propounding a just and honest end to himself, and
choosing the most proper means to attain it: He forsees dangers, and endeavors
to avoid them; He discovers difficulties, and prepares to encounter them:
Religion is so^ far from being an Enemy to the prudent management of our
Affairs in the World, that where it is heartily embraced, it does much assist
us therein, as it frees us from many hurtful lusts and Passions, which darken
the understanding, that we cannot so prudently order our concerns: as it
fortifies us against the troubles we meet with in carrying on our just and
honest designs: therefore it is said of David, who committed his way to God,
and put his trust in him; That he fed his people according to the integrity of
his heart, and guided them by the skilfulness of his hands: or as read by some,
Ruled prudently with all his power, Psalm. 78.72. They are therefore under a
great mistake, who think that because God commands them to commit their way
unto him, they may either be negligent or improvident.

Now I come to speak Positively what it is to Commit our Way to the Lord.
This Committing our Way to God, does imply, our submitting our selves and
ways to the Govemant of God, a yielding up our selves to the conduct of
Heaven; to be ruled and guided by those Laws that God governs his Subjects by:
that God who gave unto us our lives, has given also to us Laws; and when we
observe these Laws to be a Rule for our Actions, then we may be said to commit
our Way unto him. But if we follow the dictates of our own corrupt Minds, or
the evil examples of others, or the sinful Customs of the Times and Places
wherein we live, we renounce God's Sovereignty over us, and disown, as it were,
our dependence upon him. Yea further, if either we have any wicked projects and
designs, or manage any of our affairs by unwarrantable means, viz. Fraud,
Lying, Perjury, or Injustice, we are so far from Committing our Ways to God,
that we may be said to commit them to the Devil; and are so far from obtaining
his blessing, that we forfeit his favor, and the aides of his good Spirit.
When the Devil set upon our Blessed Savior in the Wilderness, Matthew. 4.6. he
would have persuaded him to vain confidence; saying, If thou be the Son of God
cast thy self down, for it is written, he will give his Angels charge
concerning thee, and in their hands they shall bear thee up, least at any time
thou dash thy foot against a stone: and he alleges, Psalm. 91.12. that God had
given the Angels charge of him: but he leaves out part of the Verse which was
contrary to his purpose, viz. He shall keep thee in all thy ways. In omnibus
actionibus loci, munerissive vocationis tuae, In all the actions of thy place,
duty, or vocation. And therefore our Savior, verse 7. intimates, that if he
should do so, he should be so far from trusting in God, that it would be a
tempting God, saying, It is written, Thou shall not tempt the Lord thy God.
Wherefore every good Christian ought to take care in the first place, that his
way be good, that his actions be agreeable to the Law and the Testimonies; and
know this, that there is no doubt, difficulty, condition of life or action to
be performed, which Gods Law does not give particular or general directions
for. Many times indeed we are to seek, and at a loss, and cannot find a
resolution of our Case: yet it is not because the Law is imperfect, but because
our senses are not sufficiently exercised therein, to discover it, and so not
able to accommodate the great Rule to our particular Case: For the Law of the
Lord is perfect, and able to make the man of God perfect. 2 Timothy 3.15.

2. It implies our seeking to Almighty God by Prayer, for his direction and
blessing. Phil. 4.6. Be careful for nothing, but in every thing by Prayer and
supplication; with thanksgiving let your requests be known unto God. This is
not only an indispensible duty, but our great privilege; that in all our
undertakings we may sue to God for aid and for his blessing: We are but weak
silly Creatures of our selves and can effect nothing; all our sufficiency is of
him: We may rise up early and sit up late, and eat the bread of carefulness,
and all to no purpose, unless God Crown our undertakings with his Blessing. Let
us therefore, frequently in the most humble and devout manner, beg earnestly of
Almighty God that he would supply all our wants, support us in all our
difficulties, deliver us out of imminent dangers, prosper our honest and just
undertakings; let us say with David, Show me thy way O Lord, lead me in thy
truth, and teach me, for thou art the God of my Salvation. Great encouragement
have we for the discharge of this duty from Gods appointment, from his gracious
promises, and from the examples of the most pious Men in all Ages, who have
taken this course with good Success, Moses, David, and all the worthies of Old,
have left this upon Record from their own Experience, That God is nigh unto all
them that call upon him. That the Lord is good to them that wait for him, to
the Soul that seeks him. Lam. 3.25.

3. This Committing our Way to God, implies, our trusting in his Word and
Promises, and this is the main Matter included in the Text, and therefore it is
added, Trust also in him. Volve super Dominum; Rest on him who is a Rock. David
says, He is the Rock of my Salvation, Psalm. 18.46. and therefore he will trust
in him. The devout Father St. Bernard, whilst he speaks concerning this Rock,
has these words, Fremit mundus, premit corpus, insidiatur Diabolus non cedo;
The World rages, the flesh pincheth, the Devil spreads Snares: Yet I fall not,
because I am fixed on a Rock. This it is to live by Faith when we meet with
strong temptations, and are in danger to be drawn into Sin, then we seek to God
for help, and use our utmost endeavors, and wait confidently upon him for such
an issue as he has promised. Psalm. 34.22. The Lord delivers the Souls of his
Saints, and none that put their trust in him shall be destitute. I might show
you the Examples of Abraham, David, Daniel, the three Children, how they
Committed their Way to God, and trusted to him in the midst of great
difficulties and dangers, and found that God was as good as his word. From
which instances we might likewise take notice that a good Christian, as he
fears nothing but sin, so he is solicitous about nothing but duty: He need not
trouble himself about Events, for God is faithful, who promises to turn all
for good in the Issue to these who Commit their Way to him, and also trust in
him.

4. This Committing our Way to God implies an humble Submission to him, and
contentedness of mind with God's ordering of us and our Affairs: Such do not
rebel against Gods will, nor murmur at his Proceedings, nor contend against his
Providence, but are ready to say with Eli, under the greatest disappointments,
and the most seeming cross Providence, It is the Lord, let him do what seems
him good. 1 Samuel 3.18. Our Religion teaches us, when God in his Providence
crosses or disappointeth us in our Enterprises, not to fly in the face of God
in a passion, but to fall down at his feet in submission. Our blessed Savior
gave us his own example for this duty: When God put a bitter Cup into his hand
to drink, he said, The Cup which my Father gives me shall I not drink it? The
great Apostle Paul also took out this Lesson, Phil. 4.11, 12. For I have
learned in whatsoever state I am therewith to be content. I know both how to be
abased and how to abound, every where and in all things I am instructed, both
to be full and to be hungry, both to abound and suffer need.

Qu. 2. What Considerations may enforce this Duty?
1. I shall only name two, the first is in the Text, [he will bring it to pass]
or, turn it to good: And the force of this first Consideration will appear, if
we take notice, 1. That God is able to bring it to pass. 2. That he is willing.
First, That God is able; although this be a truth that most men take for
granted, yet seeing it often falls out that our Faith is put to the stretch,
things are so cross, and with Nicodemus are ready to say, How can these things
be? can God furnish a Table in the Wilderness? It will not be amiss to touch
upon these following particulars, that our judgments may be satisfied in the
present truth. Whoever is disappointed in any design he undertakes, it is either
because he wants prudence to manage it, power to complete it, or cannot be
present to carry it on. Now there is that in God which answers these defects.
1. Their wisdom in God, and that infinite too, whereby he is able to forecast
his work, and to overwit the wisest; As Eliphaz says, Job. 5.12. He
disappointeth the devices of the Crafty, so that their hands cannot perform
their enterprise. verse 13. He takes the wise in their own craftiness, and the
counsel of the froward is carried headlong. Whatever ways of Wisdom are to be
met with in the Creature, they are but so many beams of light darted from him
who is the Original. Jam. 1.5 If any lack wisdom let him ask of God who gives
it to all men liberally, and upbraideth not, and it shall be given him. Then as
the Psalmist says, Psalm. 94.9, 10. He that planted the ear shall not he hear?
He that formed the eye shall not he see? He that teaches man knowledge shall
not he know? Yes surely, therefore, Romans 16. last, He is called the only wise
God. 2. There is power in God. It has been observed by some, that this
expression is found no less then 70 times in Scripture, that God is Almighty,
difficulties are no difficulties with him: Whatever is absolutely possible in
it self (excepting that which is inconsistent with perfection,) it falls within
the reach of his power. He can bring about his designs by weak means, without
any means that are obvious to the eye of man, or by seeming contrary means. All
the Creatures are at his beck and command; he can dispose them, take away their
beeings, suspend their Actions; yea, the very hearts of men are in his hands,
and he can turn them as the Rivers of water. 3. He is Omnipresent; oftimes men's
designs miscarry, 'cause they cannot be at several places the same time, or
cannot act at a distance: but God is present in all places, and fills all
things. Can any man hide himself in secret places that I should not see him,
for do not I fill heaven and earth, Jer. 23.24. And this being added to his
Wisdom and Power, make it out that God is able to bring things to pass.

Secondly, God is willing to bring it to pass. He is good and merciful, and
delights to do good and to show mercy. It Is as natural to God to do good, as
for the Eye to see or the Ear to hear. The sweet Singer of Israel, David,
Celebrateth the mercy and goodness of God in Psalm. 106.107, 108. God has no
pleasure in punishing men, and therefore Justice is called Op^^ a lienum, his
strange work; and when at any time he does inflict Judgments upon them he
seems to be troubled thereat. How shall I give thee up Ephraim? how shall I
make thee as Admah, how shall I set thee as Zeboim, Hos. 11.8. He has no
delight in disappointing men in their Enterprises: God has a natural
inclination to do us good, to Crown our endeavors with Success, to gratify
those that please him. Psalm. 35.27. Let the Lord be magnified, who has
pleasure in the prosperity of his Servants. Besides, Gods willingness is
apparent from the many gracious Promises that he has made in his Word: to help
and relieve them that put their trust in him.

2. There is none that we can Commit our Way with safety to but unto God. It
will be acknowledged, that we cannot with safety commit our Way to the Devil;
though there are too many, God knows, who take this course: such as consult
Wisemen, but this their way is their folly. Such as take unwarrantable courses
to bring about their designs, they for certain will find themselves
disappointed in the issue. Neither can a man put confidence in himself with
safety; he is both too feeble and too foolish. Jer. 10.23. O Lord I know that
the way of man is not in himself: it is not it man that walks to direct his
own steps. If a man put confidence in himself, it is the way to want Success:
Neither may we with safety put confidence in Friends, though they be a great
treasure: For the greatest through impotency may, or through fraud will deceive
us, Job complains Job 6.15. My brethren have dealt deceitfully as a brook, and
as the streams of brooks they pass away. Neither can we trust in the greatest
of men: One would think that if any thing was to be trusted in, it was to be in
Kings and Princes: but see what is said Psalm 62.9. Surely men of low degree
are vanity, and men of high degree are a lie: to be laid in the Balance they
are altogether lighter then vanity. Therefore he says, Psalm 146.3, 4. Put not
your trust in Princes, nor in the Son of man, in whom there is no help. His
breath goes forth, he returns to his earth: in that very day his thoughts
perish. Man is but vanity, and God never created him to be trusted in: Trust is
too great a burden for any thing but God. But some think they may safely put
confidence in their Wealth, Psalm. 52.7. Lo, this is the man that made not God
his strength: but trusted in the abundance of his riches, and strengthened
himself in his wickedness. Prove. 10.15. The Rich man's wealth is his strong
City: But it is but in his own conceit. For Prove. 11.28. He that trusts in
his riches shall fall: They take themselves wings and fly away from one Person
to another, from one Family to another: Therefore we are charged by the
Apostle, not to trust in uncertain Riches, but in the Living God.

Qu. 3. When, or in what cases more especially we ought to commit our Way to
God?
David, Psalm. 62.8. says, Trust in him at all times ye people, God is a Refuge
for us. Solomon, Prove. 3.6. says, In all thy Ways acknowledge him and he
shall direct thy Paths. Yet there are some particular Cases, and special
Seasons, which call for the discharge of this Duty, and they are such as
concern our Souls, or our Affairs.

First, Such as concern our Souls.
1. When we are under apprehensions of great guilt that we have contracted upon
our Consciences in the by past time of our Lives, so that we are afraid that
God will never Pardon us, never receive us into his favor: Then, and in this
case, let us endeavor to perform the Conditions required: let us be sorrowful
for our sins, let us acknowledge our Iniquities: let us earnestly beg Pardon in
the name of Christ, and then we may with confidence commit our Souls unto God,
not troubling our selves with those unnecessary Enquiries about Gods Eternal
Decrees: but diligently making use of all these means that he has appointed
for the obtaining of his grace and favor: trust in him who has promised, If
we confess and forsake our sins he will have mercy and forgive. 1 John 1.9.

2. Another special Season is, when we meet with strong temptations, either
from Satan, the World, or our own Corruptions. It may be the condition of good
men, that they may be disquieted with fear, lest these sons of Zerviah should
be too hard for them. In this case they should be active and diligent, and
trust in God for the mighty aid of his Blessed Spirit; knowing, that greater is
he that is with us, then he that is in the World; the Eternal God is our
refuge: Trust in him, for he has not only promised assistance, but has given
strength to those that have already managed this Warfare. The Apostle Paul,
when he was buffeted by Satan, besought the Lord, and committed his way to him;
and God said, My grace is sufficient for thee. 2 Cor. 12.7, 8, 9.

3. In case we have very little comfort in our Christian course, sometimes it
may be the condition of good men, that though they be careful in the discharge
of their duty, yet their minds may be full of doubts and fears, and God seems
to hide his face from them. This was David's case, Psalm. 30.7. Thou did hide
thy face and I was troubled. But then see Psalm 31.1. In thee, O Lord, do I put
my trust; deliver me in thy Righteousness. See Isa. 50.10. Who is among you
that fears the Lord, that obeys the voice of his servant, that walks in
darkness, and has no light, let him trust in the name of the Lord, and stay
upon his God. And thus Job, a Christian of an ancient date said, Though he slay
me yet will I trust in him. Job. 13.15.

4. At the hour of Death, when we are taking our leave of all that is near and
dear to us in this world, and our Souls, as it were, sits upon our lips ready
to lanch out into the Ocean of Eternity: This is a special Season to commit our
Souls unto God. Thus did the Protomartyr St Stephen. Act. 7.59 And they stoned
Stephen, calling upon God, and saying, Lord Jesus receive my Spirit. In like
manner did our blessed Savior. Luke 23.46. And when Jesus had cried with a
loud voice, he said, Father into thy hand I commend my spirit; and having said
thus he gave up the Ghost.

2. Such as concern our Affairs in this World.
1. When we engage in any weighty business, where there is difficulty and
danger: Now, though we ought to commit our way to God every day, and in all our
Affairs, (for this duty is not only to be exercised in the Church, and upon the
first day of the Week, but in our Shops, and in our Houses, in our Trades, in
eating and drinking and Recreations, and that every day in the Week) yet more
especially when we are in danger of meeting with temptations, and much
opposition, then we are to beg from Heaven direction and aid, and to trust in
him for good Success. Thus did Eleazar Abraham's Steward, Genesis 24.12. O Lord God
of my Master Abraham, I pray thee send me good speed this day, and show
kindness unto my Master Abraham. Thus Jehoshaphat, 2 Cron. 20.12. Lord we have
no might against this great Host, but our eyes are toward thee.

2. When men's good Names are taken away, and they are reproached and falsely
accused, as Joseph by his Mistress, David by Doeg, and this seems to be the case
of David in the Text: for verse 6. He shall bring forth thy righteousness as
the light, and thy judgment as the noonday. Job was charged by his friends
for an Hypocrite, and he trusted in God, and he was pleased to vindicate him,
and make his Innocence apparent to the whole world. Christ Jesus who did no
sin, neither was guile found in his mouth, yet did he not escape the reproaches
of men, and under those reproaches discharged this duty, 1 Pet. 2.23. Who when
he was reviled, reviled not again; when he suffered, he threatened not: but
committed himself to him that judges righteously. Eusebius tells us, that
Narcissus Bishop of Jerusalem, was accused of a foul Crime by three men; he had
no way to clear his innocence but by committing his Cause to God, and he was
pleased to inflict heavy judgments upon two of them, so that the third seeing
Gods hand stretched out against the other, became penitent and confessed all,
so then the cloud of Reproach vanished, and his Innocence shined as the light.

3. When we are in straits about the things of this Life, and have no prospect
of any means visible for a supply, then is a special Season to commit our
selves and ways to God in the discharge of those duties we ought to perform:
For he has promised, The young Lions shall lack and suffer hunger, but they
that fear the Lord shall not want any good thing. Ps. 34.10. Then trust in him
who can bless the little Meal in the Barrel, and the Oil in the Cruse: who
could feed Elijah by Ravens, and the Israelites with Manna and Quails from
Heaven in the Wilderness: and will not suffer those that trust in him to want
necessaries.

4. When we are full of fears and troubles about Posterity, this is the case of
many good men, who are very sollicitous about their Posterity, what will become
of them when they are dead and gone: Indeed they have reason to be troubled if
they have raised Estates for them with a Curse, by Injustice, Fraud, or
Extortion: for then they expose them to the Judgments of God, who visits the
iniquity of the Fathers upon the Children. Exodus 20.5. For I the Lord thy God
am a jealous God, visiting the iniquity of the Fathers upon the Children unto
the third and fourth generation of them that hate me. Or else, if they have
been guilty of some gross sins, that draws down the effects of Gods wrath even
upon Posterity: for God is said to lay up the iniquity of the wicked man for
his Children. Job. 21.19. God lays up his iniquity for his Children, (i. e.)
the punishment of it, as in the Margent. Thus Jeroboam left a Curse upon his
Posterity by his Idolatry 1 King. 15.29, 30. And it came to pass when he
Reigned, that he smote all the house of Jeroboam, he left not to Jeroboam any
that breathed, until he had destroyed him, according to the saying of the Lord,
which he spoke by Ahijah the Shilonite: Because of the sins of Jeroboam which
he sinned, and which he made Israel to sin, by his provocation wherewith he
provoked the Lord God of Israel to anger. Thus Gehazi by taking the bribe,
brought Gods curse upon his Posterity, 2 King. 5.27. The leprosy therefore of
Naaman shall cleave unto thee, and to thy seed for ever. Likewise the Jews by
their great sin in Crucifying the Lord of Life and Glory, brought such a Curse
upon their Posterity, that they have been a Vagabound People for above 1600
Years. But now if men have been just and merciful in their Lives, they need not
be troubled about their Posterity, even when they have made but small provision
for them, but may commit them unto God, who has styled himself a Father of the
Fatherless, Psalm 68.5. A Father of the Fatherless, and a Judge of the Widows
is God in his holy Habitation. Besides, God has promised, That the seed of the
Righteous shall be blessed: And he has engadged himself by Covenant, not only
to be their God but the God of their seed. Genesis 17.7. And I will establish my
Covenant between me and thee, and thy seed after thee, in their Generations,
for an everlasting Covenant; to be a God unto thee, and to thy seed after thee.

5. When men are brought into troubles and straits for Righteousness sake, it
has been, and may be the Lot of the Righteous to be brought into great
dangers, to be persecuted for righteousness sake, and to be straightened that they
can see no visible means for their help and deliverance: then is a proper
Season to act Faith upon God, and to commit their Way unto him. Let such be
sure that the cause for which they suffer be good, and then that they suffer
with a good Conscience, and then they may say with Paul, 2 Timothy 1.12. For the
which cause I also suffer these things, nevertheless I am not ashamed, for I
know whom I have believed, and I am persuaded that he is able to keep that
which I have committed unto him against that day. Let such I say trust God
Almighty who will support them in their trouble, as he did the Martyrs of old;
or deliver them out of their troubles one way or other.

Object. 1. There are some that never commit their way to God, and yet have
good Success and thrive and prosper in the World.

Answ. 1. This was that which troubled the Psalmist much Psalm. 73. and shak'd
his Faith, verse 2. For I was envious at the foolish when I saw the prosperity
of the wicked. verse 12. Behold these are the ungodly who prosper in the world,
they increase in riches. When he thought to know this it was too painful for
him, until he went into the Sanctuary of God, there he understood their end,
which was destruction. verse 16.17, and 18. There he understood, that they
should be soon cut down like the grass, and wither as the green herb. Psalm.
37.2, Psalm. 92.6, 7. A brutish man knows not, neither does a fool understand
this: When the wicked spring as the grass, and all the workers of iniquity do
flourish, it is that they shall be destroyed for ever. Then he perceived, and
so may we do too, that the prosperity of fools shall destroy them. Prove. 1.32.
For the turning away of the simple shall slay them, and the prosperity of fools
shall destroy them. So that this their Success and Prosperity, makes but way
for their greater fall: and though God may permit wicked men that commit their
ways rather to the Devil then to God, to thrive and prosper sometimes in the
World, yet this does but prepare them for greater destruction; and therefore
David prays, Psalm. 17.13, 14. Deliver my soul from the Wicked which is thy
sword: From men which are thy hand, O Lord, from men in the world who have
their portion in this life. And upon whom God shall rain snares, fire and
brimstone, and an terrible tempest, this is the portion of their Cup, Psalm.
11.6.

Object. 2. Such as do commit their way to God we find want Success, and thrive
and prosper no better in their undertakings then others do.

Answ. 1. Some men seem to commit their way to God and yet do not, and no
wonder if these be disappointed: men that only have a name to live and pretend
to Religion, but carry on base and wicked designs, these men have no interest
in those gracious Promises, for they are made to those that are really virtuous
and good, and work righteousness.

2. Know, that though this be true for the most part, that God Crowns the
undertakings of good men with Success; yet for some Reasons for their own
Spiritual and Eternal advantage he may disappoint them: as when their crosses,
disappointments, want of Success tends to the improvement of their Graces;
their Faith, Meekness, Patience, Contententedness, and for their better
preparation for Heaven; such Crosses are great favors and blessings in the
Issue. 1 Cor. 11.32. We are chastned of the Lord, that we should not be
condemned with the World. In short, such persons as do really commit their Way
to God, and put their trust in him, shall be no losers in the issue, Eccles.
8.12. Yet surely I know it shall be well with them that fear God, that fear
before him.

Use.
Then suffer a word of Exhortation in the Words of the Text, Commit your Way
unto the Lord, trust also in him and he shall bring it pass. Be sure your
designs be just and honest, and take no unwarrantable means to effect them, and
then betake your selves to the Throne of Grace, waiting upon God with the
Church. Isa. 25.9. Lo this is our God, we have waited for him and he will save
us: this is the Lord, we have waited for him, we will be glad, and rejoice in
his salvation. More particularly to you that are Sea-fairing men, that
undertakes tedious and dangerous Voyages upon the great Deep: let me exhort you
to commit your Way to God, etc. according to all the forementioned particulars.
This is the most probable cause to secure your Persons, Ships and Loading from
the dangers of the Sea; and know assuredly, that if God should suffer you to
miscarry upon the great Ocean, yet by this method you may secure your souls
against the Waves and Billows of Gods Wrath to all Eternity.

Directions for the better Discharge of this Duty that you may commit your Way
to God.
1. Live under the Apprehensions of his Providence. Divine Providence does
concern it self in all Persons and things in the World: which is a truth that
none but professed Atheists will deny. The Epicureans indeed, (but it is charged
on them as a gross piece of inconsistency) grant there is a God, but that he
busies not himself with affairs below: but an idle God sounds something like a
dark Sun, or cold Fire, both contradictions. A God in Heaven not superintending
all Transactions here below, is no better then a Heathen God, That have Eyes
but see not, Ears but hear not, Hands but handle not. Now lest we should
entertain such unworthy thoughts of the living God, he manifests himself to us
in the Scripture by what he is doing, Isa. 40.22, 23, It is he that sits on
the Circle of the Earth, and the Inhabitants thereof are as Grasshoppers: that
stretches out the Heavens as a Curtain, and spreads them out as a Tent to
dwell in: That brings the Princes to nothing, and makes the Judges of the
Earth as vanity: He pulls down one, and sets up another. Ludit in humanis
divina potentiarebus:

Divine Power often dares
Dispart it self in Man's Affairs.
1 Samuel 2.7, 8. The Lord makes Poor and makes rich: He brings low, and
lifts up: He raises up the poor out of the dust, and lifts up the Beggar
from the Dunghill to set them among Princes, and to make them inherit the Throne
of Glory: for the Pillars of the Earth are the Lords, and he has set the world
upon them. Yea our Blessed Savior has put this out of doubt, that the Lord
has not left the World to be ruled by blind chances, but that his Providence
reaches the smallest concerns. Math. 10.29. Are not two Sparrows sold for a
farthing? and one of them shall not fall on the ground without your Father. 30.
But the very hairs of their head are all numbered. Yea these very things that
seem to proceed from the course of Nature, from the malice of our Enemies, or
our own improvidence, or chance, or fortune, are directed by the Providence of
God. Now then, if you firmly believe the extent of this his Providence to all
persons and all Affairs, you will readily commit your Way to him, and wait upon
him for Success.

2. Call to mind what experience you have had at any time of the Power, Wisdom,
and Goodness of God in the ordering your Affairs: your manifold deliverances
out of dangers, relief in straits, especially such of you as have lately been
in great Storms at Sea, and God has in his Providence pointed out a way for
your safety, when many have been swallowed up in the great Deep. Remember this
I say, and write upon this Mercy, Even ever hitherto has the Lord helped me;
and for the future put your trust in the living God, and cast your care upon
him. Thus did David when he was to encounter the great Goliath, he remembered how
God has delivered him from the Lion and the Bear, and this made him confident
that God would deliver him also from the uncircumcised Philistine. And
therefore the Psalmist concludes, Psalm 9.10. And they that know thy Name will
put their trust in thee, for thou Lord have not forsaken them that seek thee.

3. Labor for a strong Faith. The Disciples were sensible of this defect, and
therefore pray the Lord that he would increase then Faith. It Is because of the
weakness of this grace that men turn aside from the Lord, and walk unevenly;
especially where they meet with difficulties and dangers: as appears by our
Saviors rebuking his own Disciples for their weakness in this Grace: How long
shall I be with you? How long shall I suffer you? And will not God take care of
you much more then of Sparrows: O ye of little Faith; Whereas if your Faith
were stronger in God you would the better overcome doubts and objections that
might arise in your hearts against this truth: When Nature and Reason seem to
be against Abraham's Obedience, yet his strong Faith conquered all difficulties.
Romans 4.20. He staggered not at the promise through unbelief; but was strong in
Faith, giving glory to God. Thus Moses, David, Daniel, and the three Children,
in most difficult cases, committed their Way to God, being strong in Faith: Say
ye therefore, O Lord increase our Faith.

4. Lastly, Make God your friend, endeavor to gain his Favor, and then you
may with more confidence Commit your Way to him: Men do not usually commit
their Affairs to them they have no interest in, or acquaintance with: if wicked
men (that by their Rebellions against God by their frequent acts of Hostility)
have affronted the Almighty, should in time of their great straits seek unto
God, or commit their way to him: may not God say to them as Wisdom speaks,
Prove. 1.24, 25, 26. Because I have called and ye refused, I have stretched out
my hands, and no man regarded; But ye have set at naught all my counsel, and
would none of my reproof: I also will laugh at your calamity, I will laugh when
your fear comes; When your fear comes as desolation, and your destruction
comes as a Whirlwind; when distress and anguish comes upon you. Then shall
they call upon me, but I will not answer; they shall seek me early, but they
shall not find me. Yea, God may say unto them, as Judge. 10.14. Go and cry unto
the Gods which ye have chosen; let them deliver you in the time of your
tribulations. Now there is no way Sirs, of making God our friend, or procuring
his favor, but by yielding an universal, sincere, constant obedience to his
Commandments; by avoiding every known sin, and walking soberly, and
righteously, and godly before him: nor no way to maintain and preserve
acquaintance with him, but by frequent performance of all Religious duties,
such as Prayer, Hearing, Reading, Meditation of Gods Word, and receiving the
Sacraments: Therefore to conclude, let us take this method, that so we may with
confidence, and safety, and good Success Commit our Souls, Bodies, Estates,
Affairs and Posterity, to God as our friend, to whom with his blessed Son our
Savior, and the Holy Ghost, be praise and Glory for ever, Amen.

ADVERTISEMENT. A Catalogue of Books sold by Thomas Clark Bookseller in
Kingston upon Hull.
Books in Folio.
SEbald's Scotland Illustrated. Tulii Opera two Volumns. Grew's Anatomy of
Roots and Plants. Bocca's Novels. Baker's Chronicles. Almahide, a Romance.
Breut's History of France. Mezerey's History of France. Cave's Lives of the
Fathers in two Vol. Eusebius Ecclesiastical History in English. Dalton's
Justice of Peace. Meads Works. Hammonds Works in four Vol. Parry's Surgery.
Mariners Magazine. Phillip's New World of Words. Pharmacopoeia Londinensis.
Pembrook's Arcadia. Rushworth's Collections in three Vol. Strafford's Trial.
Books in Quarto.
Seller's Practical Navigation. Markhams Masterpiece. Salmon's Iatrica.
Wedenfield De usu, Spiritus Vini. Falkners 2. Treatise. Dryden's History of the
League. Way to get Wealth. Phillip's Navigation. Godwin's Antiquities.
Baxter's Saints Rest. Clark's Praxis. Flavil's Pnermatologia. Charon of Wisdom.
Cole's Dictionary. Mariners New Callender. Degrey's Horseman. Apprentice time
Entertainer. Merchants Account made easy. Destruction of Troy. Brown's
Architecture.
Books in Octavo.
Molley 's de Jure Maritimo, and navali. Wingat's Abridgement. Jone 's De
Febribus. Patrick on Proverbs. Patrick 's Mensa Mystica. Janua Linguarum.
Kitchen on Courts. Complete Attorney. Clerk's Guide, in four Parts complete.
King Charles the Second's Life. May's Cookery. Harres of the Venerial Disease.
Bate's History of the Late Troubles in England. Leybourn's Vulgar Decimals.
Belgic Hesperides. Cromwell's Life.
Books in Duodecimo.
Bunian's Pilgrims Progress in two Parts. Life of Badman. Sighs from Hell.
Pharisee and Publican. Flavel's Seamans Compass Spiritualized. Flavel's Saint
indeed. Coke Coppy-holder. Foxes Time and end of Time. Plain man's Pathway to
Heaven. Dyer's Works. Two Journeys to Jerusalem. Admirable Curiosities and
Rarities. Harvy on Small Pox. Moral Gallentry. England Monarchs History of
Scotland.
FINIS.

