THE Last Will and Testament OF THE Earl of Pembroke.
I PHILIP, late Earl of Pembroke and Montgomery, now Knight for the County of
Berks, being (as I am told) very weak in Body, but of perfect Memory; for I
remember this time Five years I gave the casting Voice to dispatch Old
Canterbury; and this time Two years I Voted no Address to be made to my Master;
and this time Twelve month saw him brought to the Block: Yet because Death
does threaten and stare upon me, (who still have obeyed all those that
threatened me) I now make my last Will and Testament.

Imprimis, For my Soul, I confess I have heard very much of Souls, but what
they are, or whom they are for, God knows, I know not; they tell me now of
another World, where I never was, nor do I know one foot of the way thither.
While the King stood I was of his Religion, made my Son wear a Cassock, and
thought to make him a Bishop; then came the Scots and made me a Presbyterian;
and since Cromwell entered I have been an Independent. These (I believe) are
the Kingdom's Three Estates, and if any of these can save a Soul, I may claim
one; therefore if my Executors do find I have a Soul, I give it him that gave
it me.

Item, I give my Body, for I cannot keep it; you see the Surgeon is tearing
off my Flesh; therefore bury me, (I have Church Lands enough) but do not lay me
in the Church Porch, for I was a Lord, and would not be buried where Colonel
Pride was born.

Item, My Will is, that I have no Monument, for then I must have Epitaphs and
Verses, but all my Life-long I have had too much of them.

Item, I give my Dogs (the best Curs that ever Man laid Leg over) to be divided
among the Council of State. Many a fair day have I followed my Dogs, and
followed the State both night and day; went whither they sent me, sat where
they bid me, sometimes with Lords, sometimes with Commons, and now can neither
go nor sit: Yet whatever becomes of me, let my poor Dogs not want their
Allowance, nor come within the Ordinance of one Meal a Week.

Item, I give two of my best Saddle Horses to the Earl of Denbigh, for I fear
e're long his own Legs will fail him; but the tallest and strongest in all my
Stables I give to the Academy, for a Vaulting Horse for all Lovers of Virtue.
All my other Horses I give to the Lord Fairfax, that when Cromwell and the
States take away his Commission, his Lordship may have some Horse to command.

Item, I give my Hawks to the Earl of Carnarvan; his Father was Master of the
Hawks to the King, and he has Wit so like his Father, that I begged his
Wardship, lest he in time should do so by me.

Item, I give all my Deer to the Earl of Salisbury, who I know will preserve
them, because he denied the King a Buck out of one of his own Parks.

Item, I give my Chaplains to the Earl of Stamford, in regard he never used to
have any but his Son the Lord Gray, who being thus both Spiritual and Carnal,
may beget more Monsters.

Item, I give Nothing to the Lord Say, which Legacy I give him because I know
he will bestow it on the Poor.

Item, To the Countesses (my Sister and my Wife) I now give leave to enjoy
their Estates; but my own Estate I give to my Eldest Son, charging him on my
Blessing to follow the Advice of Michael Oldsworth; for though I have had 30000
l. per annum, yet I die not in Debt above 80000 l.

Item, Because I threatened Sir Henry Mildmay, but did not beat him, I give
Fifty Pounds to the Footman that Cudgel'd him.

Item, My Will is, that the said Sir Harry shall not meddle with my Jewels; I
knew him when he served the Duke of Buckingham, and since how he handled the
Crown Jewels; for both which Reasons I do now name him, The Knave of Diamonds.

Item, To Tom May (whose Pate I broke heretofore at a Masque) I give Five
Shillings. I intended him more, but all that have seen his History of the
Parliament think Five Shillings too much.

Item, To the Author of the Libel against Ladies, (called News from the New
Exchange) I give 3 d. for inventing a more obscene way of Scribbling than the
World yet knew; but since he throws what is rotten and false on diverse Names of
Unblemished Honor, I leave his Payment to the Footman that paid Sir Harry
Mildmay's Arrears, to teach him the difference 'twixt Wit and Dirt, and to know
Ladies that are Noble and Chaste from downright Roundheads.

Item, I give back to the Assembly of Divines their Classical, Provincial,
Congregational, National, which words I have kept at my own charge above Seven
Years, but plainly find they will never come to good.

Item, As I restore other men's Words, so I give Lieutenant General Cromwell one
Word of mine, because hitherto he never kept his own.

Item, To all rich Citizens of London, to all Presbyterians as well as
Cavaliers, I give advice to look to their Throats, for by order of the States
the Garrison at Whitehall have all got Ponyards, and for New Lights bought Dark
Lanthorns.

Item, I give all my Printed Speeches to these Persons following, viz. That
Speech which I made in my own defense when the Seven Lords were accused of High
Treason, I give to Sergeant Wild, that hereafter he may know what is Treason,
and what is not. And the Speech I made ex tempore to the Oxford Scholars, I
give to the Earl of Manchester, Speaker pro tempore to the House of Peers,
before its Reformation, and Chancellor pro tempore of Cambridge University,
since its Reformation. But my Speech at my Election, (which is my Speech
without an Oath) I give to those that take the Engagement, because no Oath has
been able to hold them. All my other Speeches (of what color soever) I give to
the Academy, to help Sir Balthazar's Art of Well Speaking.

Item, I give up the Ghost.

Concordat cum Originali. NATHANIEL BRENT.

CODICILL.
BEfore His Lordship gave his last Legacy, he mentioned other Particulars; but
his Sense and Words grew so Independent, that they could not make forth into
perfect Legacies: Tet we thought fit to write what he spoke, which was In haec
verba.
Item, I give -- 's Death I am very Sick, and my Memory fails me; Sink me if I
can remember what I have else to give. I have troubled my Mind with things of
this World; but who the Devil thought Death had been so near? Ha! what is that?
now it is at my Bed's Feet all Bloody. Murder! Murder! call up my Men:
Oldsworth, where a plague are ye all? I am well holp up to have such
Comforters. What, was it but a Cat? a Pox mew ye, do you take a Lord for a
Mouse? -- So ho, so ho; there, there; O brave Jowler; plague on that Cur,
couple him to Royster. -- Come to Bed, Sweet Heart; come, Duck, come -- Pox rot
ye all, where is my Coach? My Lord Mayor has staid at Guild Hall this two hours
-- That Cocks worth a King's Ransom; he runs, he runs; a Thousand Pound to a
Bottle of Hay -- Rub, rub, rub; a pox rub; a hundred thousand rubs: 's Death my
Bowl's bewitched, it has no more Bias than a Pudding -- I Will to the House, and
remove the Obstructions for Sale of the King's Goods -- Dam me, there it is
again; Ha, a Man without a Head! speak, what art thou? 's Death, castn't speak
without a Head? -- Ha! and there with Lawn Sleeves, comes just upon me, beckons
me -- Ha! another yet! all in Purple! my own Master! I beseech Your Majesty let
me kiss your Hand -- No, Blood! Blood! Oh, I am undone; help! help! Why,
Oldsworth! Oh! where are ye all? is this a time to stop your Noses? Call up my
Chaplains: where is Caldicut? Pray, good Caldicut, pray, pray; Plague consume
you why do you not pray --

Concordat cum Originali. NATHANIEL BRENT.

FINIS.

