THE LATE Plot on the Fleet, Detected: WITH The Jacobites Memorial to the
French King: And an Account of those Gentlemen, who Invited the French Fleet to
Invade our English Coasts, etc.
TO see the French (in a manner) Masters at Sea, and the English Glory, for the
present, thus sunk in the Eyes of all Christendom by a Complication of
Disasters, has been the occasion of great Enquiry into the Source and Cause of
so important Events. If any are so Ignorant as not to know by what means the
French of late came to have so much Shipping (who, but in the days of Queen
Elizabeth, durst not put a Ship on the Stocks without leave from England) let
him peruse Andrew Marvel's Growth of Popery, and the Secret History of the Two
late Reigns, and he may be sufficiently informed. The design of this Paper is
to Characterize, briefly, the Persons that Invited the French Fleet into the
English Channel: The King and Queen being no sooner settled in the Throne, than
the Spirit of Murmuring began to exercise it self on a sort of Gentlemen, who
had made so great a noise in the World, with their Doctrines of Jure Divine and
Passive Obedience, though to any body, but those that are wilfully Ignorant, the
Inviting and Assisting His Majesty against the late King, before the Crown was
conferred upon him, was a greater Invasion of their darling Principles, than
the Swearing to him, and justly Obeying him, after He is declared and
acknowledged King by the Parliament.

The first step of Contrivance, this part of the Clergy made, was the Writing
against the taking the new Oaths to their Majesty's, enjoined them by Act of
Parliament; and the buzzing into the Ears of their poor Votaries, the
Unlawfulness of these Oaths, and the continuing Right of King James to the
Crown: This piece of their Artillery, it was thought would have done some
considerable Execution: But alas! many of the Gentlemen themselves who had been
to persuade others to Refuse the Oaths, they could so little digest the loss of
their Livings, as they chose rather to take these unlawful Oaths (as they
called them) than to expose themselves to the least Suffering.

The next step of the Plot was, to Cheat the World and their own Consciences
with a ridiculous and foolish distinction of taking the Oaths to a King de
facto, but not de jure. The design of this distinction was first to salve their
own Conscience, and to vindicate themselves from the Reproaches of their
Comrades, who had absolutely refused to take the Oaths. And secondly, To bear
it in upon the Minds of the People, That their Majesty's were not lawful and
rightful King and Queen of England, but de facto only, that is, in plain
English, downright Usurpers.

This distinction did not only give them scope to take the Oaths to their
Majesty's, but also to Pray for them by Name in their Pulpits. But many, of
more Sincerity than the rest, would not Pray for them by Name at all; and yet,
to prevent any trouble from the Law, they wisely prayed in general terms for
the King and Queen. Here was a pretty way of playing fast and loose with God
Almighty, he might sake it in what sense he pleased.

These steps of the Plot were to be backed with another Engine of theirs; and
that was the publishing to the World the History of Passive Obedience; although
most of the Citations of this Pamphlet, be far wide of the Question, and refer
only to Obedience to Majestracy in general, and the unlawfulness of private
Persons, their rising up against the Government upon every frivolous Pretext.
The next and greatest Engine of their Plot, is the happy result of a kind of
Occonomick Council of the whole Party: The Liturgy of the Church of England
must be laid aside, and a new one must be Calculated for the Meridian of King
James's Tottering Fortune; and the greatest wonder of all is, That the Council
which published this new Liturgy, did not usher it in with, It seems good to
the Holy Ghost, and to us.

In this new Liturgy they insinuate to the World, That in effect, we are without
King, without Priest, and without God in the World. A dreadful Doom before a
terrible Tribunal! None are indeed at this rate, within the compass of the
Church, but this Jacobite-Club and their followers. But let us hear the very
words of this part of the Liturgy; Restore us again, say they, the public
Worship of thy Name, the reverend Administration of thy Sacraments; raise up
the former Government both in Church and State, that we may be no longer
without King, without Priest, and without God in the World.

They afterward proceed to pray for the Prosperity of the Arms of King James,
and the French King, against their Majesty's and Government.

But now I come to the main points of this Noble Contrivance. His Majesty from
a Noble and Boundless Courage, will needs venture His Person once more for the
safety of these Kingdoms.

The King being gone; Admiral Killigrew being in the Streights; and Sir
Clowdesley Shovel in St. George's-Channel, and the Holland Squadron not yet
joined ours, nor ours fully met; then was the time for our Plotters to put
their long thought-on design in Execution. In order to which, at one of their
General Meetings in London, where it was necessary some of the Clergy should be
present to Bless so Pious a Work; It was concluded to give in a Memorial in the
Name of the Loyal and Distressed Subjects of England, (for so they named
themselves) to his Most Christian Majesty; Humbly Inviting him out of his
extraordinary Goodness, and for the Affection he always bore to oppressed Virtue,
That he would assist them in restoring Their lawful King, His Ancient Ally and
Confederate to his Throne; and in breaking the Yoke of Usurpation, under which
these Three Nations were at this time so heavily Groaning. But it will be
absolutely fit here to insert the very Words of their Memorial it self, as it
has been discovered by a certain Person of late, and as it was expressed in the
French Tongue, in which it was Originally written, and given in.

The MEMORIAL is thus:
To the Most Serene, and Most Invincible Prince, Lewis the Great, his Most
Christian Majesty; The Memoria of the Loyal and Distressed Noblemen, Clergy,
Gentlemen, and others, of all Ranks within the Kingdoms of England, Scotland
and Ireland, at present under the Fetters of a Cruel Usurpation.
Great and Invincible Monarch,
THe resplended Rays of Your Majesty's Virtue^ have rendered all the World your
Adorers: And that Inherent Goodness of which Your Majest^ stands so
transcendently poss^st, d^es render You the only Sanctuary of all the Distressed.
It Is in the Confid^^^^ which this Your Unparalleled goodness gives us, That we
in all humble Duty presume to lay our sighs at Your Majesty's feet: And that we
Implore your Royal Favor and Assistance, to rid us of the great and
insupportable Afflictions we lie under at present.

It Is in your Royal Arms and Bounty we repose our Hope and Confidence; and
expect to see our lawful King, Your Ancient Friend and Ally, restored to the
rightful Throne of his Ancestors, out of which wicked Men have thrust him. And
because this is the most proper time for your Majesty to assist us with the
assured expectation of success, we have presumed to lay before you the present
favorable Circumstances, that do concur to make your Majesty's glorious
Enterprise the more easy; which are principally these, 1. The Prince of
Orange, the Usurper, is just now on his Journey to Ireland; And b^ing once
arrived in that Kingdom, if a part of Your Majesty's Fleet were able to block
up St. George 's Channel, the Vsurper's Army would certainly be starved, being
all their Provisions come by Sea from Scotland and England; And that part of
the Country they are Masters of, is already harassed and ruined by both the
Armies, both the last Year and This. 2. The Usurper has partly sent before and
partly takes along with himself the whole, almost, and the better Disciplined
part of the Army: And leaves behind him but a very few of the English
Regiments; who serve him mere out of necessity and fear, than out of any Love
to him, or to the Interest. 3. The Forces he leaves behind are so very few,
that they are scarce capable to keep Guards in the Tower, the Savoy,
Somerset House, and at White-H^ll all together: And the three Regiments that
are sent for out of Holland, will not be yet ready for some weeks to Embark;
neither is it thought they will stir a foot, because of want of Pay. Like as
both Officers and Soldiers are not entirely Devoted to the Usurpers Interest,
the most of them being in the service of our Lawful King, before he was
necessitated to leave us. 4. Most of our Fleet are at so great distance one
from another, that they cannot this year make any consider-Body. There being
the best and ablest Seamen and Ships with Killegrew in the S^reights, and with
Shouel in St. George 's Channel, amounting together to more than nineteen Ships
of War. 5. There are likewise employed for Convoys, and about the Western
Coasts of Scotland, to the number of five or six ships, all separately. 6. The
Dutch squadron is in no appearance to be here to join ours of a sudden; both
because they are not yet in a readiness, and that the Admirals of Holland make
scruple, and are highly discontented to serve under our English Admiral
Moreover, tho they were joined us, they will but make up at the most but Twenty
sail of ships; and them none of the best, considering their Tallest and best
manned ships are out upon Conv^y^. 7. Our own Fleet is ill manned, and the
Soldiers and Seamen extremely discontented for want of their Pay; and several
of the Officers were those tha^ belonged to our King before he went away.



There are Five more Articles in this Memorial, that for certain Reasons I will
not Copy out; only I Will tell the Reader, they are of piece with the rest, and
full as ill. Here are some Truths, but a great many more Lies; and such as none
but People of their gang could be capable of. And if the Reader's Curiosity
tempt him to be very inquisitive how this Memorial came to light: let him wait
but a little and perhaps he will see both i^ and the Deliverers and Contrivers
of it made public enough.

The French King giving ear to the Representations and Importunities of these
Gentlemen, put all his Wit on the rack to get Money to equip the greatest Fleet
that ever that Nation set to Sea; and at a vast charge he brought the Thoulon
Sqadron round the whole Continent of Spain, and through the Streights, to join
his Breast Fleet. He left not behind one Seaman that could be found in France,
and scarce one Ship more of any Force in all his Harbors. Upon the notice
given him by his Trusty Pensioners here, he directs this French Armado straight
for the Isle of Wight, where our Fleet was to Rendezvous; and if it had but
Arrived there some few days before it came, we had not had Twenty Ships
together at that place: Yet so near were we to Ruin, that albeit our Fleet was
become by that time pretty strong, and tho most of the Ships arrived; yet if
Heaven had not turned the Wind in a Moment, they had every one of them, in all
probability, been Burned at Anchor. The French Fleet passed in sight of
Weymouth, the Mayor of that place did very wisely dispatch two Expresses, one
for the Queen, and another for my Lord Torrington, the Admiral: But the Wind
blowing a fair ^^^sh Gale, the French Fleet had certainly been amidst ours,
before the Weymouth Express could possibly reach Portsmouth, if the Wind had
continued but some hours longer. Our Fleet being in this immine^^ (...) most
inevitable hazard, and the French being within a few Leagues of them, the Wind
in an instant turned about, and put a stop to their designed and easy Victory,
by obliging them to lie by.

This happy Providence counter-acted all the Plots of our Enemies both at Home
and Abroad; and we had time given us to prevent the Destruction that threatened
us. And to complete the Mercy, it f^ll out, that as that very precise time this
happened, there was a full Discovery made by some Persons here, who had been
concerned in the Plot all along, of their whole Affairs and Transactions both
with France, and at Home.

I am very inclinable to believe; that all the Officers and Seamen of the Fleet
have been Proof against the Insinuations of our Plotters; and that they have
not yielded to the Temptations of French Gold; tho at the same time, I do not
doubt, they have been assaulted with both: And if so, the wonder is the
greater, if it be true, that is talked so freely up and down, That a great many
of the Officers have bought their Places with Money. It Is hard to believe that
there are any such practices in England, as the buying and selling Places,
especially those in the Fleet, upon which depend both the Safety and Glory of
England: But if any such thing be, then the Retreat we have been fore'd to
make, will certainly open the eyes of our Governors, to see the mighty and
almost irrecoverable prejudices that attend such slavish Methods of getting
Commands; and will put them upon employing fit Persons, in whose Fidility and
Valor we may safely trust.

Our Murmurers and Plotters were strangely elevated with the expectation of its
Success. In their fond imaginations King James was already at White Hall; and
some of them were publicly in Coffee Houses ading the part of a Herald, in
Marshalling his Triumphant entry into London. And the ordinary subject of their
discourse was, the Greatness and Magnanimity of the French King, the number and
force of his Fleet, the weakness of ours; and sometimes a defect of his
Majesty's forces in Ireland, to keep them in heart. Their impudence was arrived
at that height, that in open Exchange, one of the long Robe was pleased to say
with relation to the Hollanders loss in the late Engagement at Sea, That they
were well paid off for the Present they had sent us twenty Months ago.

But that none of that Party may want the due praise their Writings deserve,
I Will give the Reader a Dedication made by one of them, and him of the long Robe
too) to the French King not many Months since, when the Plot was just upon the
wheel, and which for the Nobleness of the style I must commend, tho the matter
of it be downright Blasphemy. To the Immortality and Eternity of the Name and
Divinity of Lewis the Great Emperor of France, Victorious, Happy, Merciful,
Allwise, August; in acknowledgment of his Royal goodness and bounty toward the
afflicted Princes of Britrain, These Verses Written in English, are in name of
the Bri^tish Isles most humbly Consecrated by, etc. Thus we see how far an
English Jacobite can outvy a French Poet himself, in the art of Blasphemous
Flattery.

But how soon are all these kind of Peoples hopes laid in the dust, upon the
arrival of the news of His Majesty's Glorious Victories in Ireland? And how far
has it counterpois'd the joy they had some days ago for the Action between the
two Fleets? A little time will show, that notwithstanding of all they have done
to Ruin him, no Body will be more forward than they to fawn upon his Majesty's
good Fortune, whenever once they are quite out of hopes of King James's
retrieving his: But sure the Government will be Wiser, than ever to dart any of
his warm Teams upon such kind of Creatures, any farther than to let them live
the Scorn of all Honest Men, and the Hatred of every one that loves their
Country and their Religion.

FINIS.

