To all you TAILORS AND BROKERS, Who lies in Wickedness: And to all you
TRADESMEN Of what Trade, Employment or Office soever.

This is to you all from the Lord, that you may return from all your evil
ways, words and works; that you may be hid in the day of his fierce wrath.

KNOWING

London, Printed for Robert Wilson, at the Sign of the Black-spread-Eagle and
Windmill in Martins, 1660.

To all you Tailors and Brokers, who lies in Wickedness; and to all you
Tradesmen, of what Trade, Employment, or Office soever.
FRiends and People, The Lord God of Heaven and Earth, is appearing in the
hearts and consciences of the children of men, to search out the hidden works
and deeds of darkness, and to show all men their Iniquities, Transgressions,
and Sins, though never so secretly committed; the Lord is come to manifest it,
and to rip it open, though never so secret, the day of the Lord declares it;
and the apperance of Christ, which is light, makes it known to all men, of what
degree or sort soever they may be, or in what place, trade or calling, (they
are) or office they be of; you all are to mind the light of Christ in your own
consciences, and to it be obedient, that with it you may be led out of all the
evil of your ways, trades, and callings, of what sort soever; the light in
your consciences will make known the evil in them all, and redeem you out of
it; if to it you be obedient, you will find it sufficient to lead you out of
sin, and from under the power of the enemy of your souls, by which you have
long been held in bondage, to many sins lusts and whereby the soul has been
long oppressed, and the spirit of the Lord greived in you, which has many
times groaned for deliverance, and does still groan and travel, that it may be
delivered from under the burden of sin, which so heavily oppresses, that it
cries in many of you for deliverance, from under the burden of your
transgressions, which so heavily oppresses your souls, and it does still cry
that it may be delivered and eased, for it has long borne in many of you, and
the cry of it is entered into the ears of the Lord, and he has heard its
groanings, and will also plead its cause against its oppressors, by which it
has been long held in bondage, by your cruel sins and grievous transgressions,
which you wilfully have committed, and daily have resisted; though it has
secretly smitten you in your inward parts; you have not returned but have
grieved it more and more, by your open rebellion, and perverse walking; whereby
many of you have and do still grieve it, yet more and more; and though it still
cries in many of you, you will not regard it; but vex it still more and more,
for which the Lord God is grieved and greatly offended, for these your heinous
transgressions, which you have daily committed and done against the witness of
God in your own consciences, which cries for deliverance in many of you, that
it may be delivered from under the burden of your corruptions; and from under
the power of sin, which lies upon your Souls, that he may heal you of your
backslidings, and cure your deadly wounds, which by your sins you have made,
and do make; for which the Lord God is greatly offended, that when he called,
you did not hear, but still profaned his holy name, by your sins, while you
mention him with your mouths, and lie in open profaneness, for which the Lord
our God is grieved, with these your hanious sins, and hipocritical profession;
which you pour out before him, while your hearts are not upright, but lie in
all manner of profaneness against my holy name says the Lord God, I will
have none of your sacrifices, nor yet of your offerings, therefore come no more
with them before me, for they are grief unto me, I have no pleasure in them at
all, take from me the Ringing of Bells for I connot away with them, they are an
abomination unto me; I will not smell in your solemn Assemblies, neither has
my soul pleasure therein, they are all an abomination to me, and to my taste,
they are even as an unsavory smell which comes in my Nostrills, I have no
pleasure therein, they are even all poluted, and your hands are full of blood,
wherefore come before me no more, for I have no pleasure in your Assembling,
nor coming together; wherefore come so no more for your paths are unclean, and
your ways are polluted; and your hands even full of blood, your sins are very
high, and your abominations very great; wherefore I will reckon with you; and
for all the transgressions, which you have done since you rebelled against my
witness, which I have placed in your Consciences which bears record of all
your sins, and of all the evil of your doings, even for these many years,
which you have heaped up as wrath against the day of wrath, that you may be
confounded by a sudden destruction, and swift overthrow; which is coming upon
you, even this City and Nation, if it speedyly Repent not; and this is as (...)
warning unto you all, that you speedily return and repent, before the swift
hand of the Lord break out against you, and there be none to deliver you, nor
to appease my wrath says the Lord of Hosts, who has spoken it; who shall
perform this, and much more is he coming to do.

Wherefore fear the Lord God, all ye the Inhabitants of London, and elsewhere;
And in it men of all sorts, Offices, Trades, and Callings of what sort, Trade,
Office, or Employment soever you are of; leave off the evil in them all, and
from it all depart, for the Lord is wearied with it, and therefore leave it
off, that your Consciences may be cleared, and the spirit of the Lord eased,
which is oppressed in any of you, by the evil used in your employments, which
you daily are exercised in, and led to by the Enemy of your souls; so that you
cannot truly serve the Lord God, nor be obedient to his holy Spirit, which
calls for Deliverance from under the burden of your sins, that it may serve the
living God, and be redeemed from all your evil ways, both in Trades and
Callings, and from the evil in them all, that all deceit may be denied, and
evil judged by the witness of God in you all, which he has placed in your
hearts and Consciences, a witness against your sins, which so greatly
oppresses your souls, that it cries to the Lord for Deliverance, that he may
avenge his cause upon his deadly enemies, by which its held in bondage, and
long has been oppressed by these cruel enemies, which are many sins and lusts,
for which you all must come to judgment that lies in such things and know a
Notable Terrible day, which is appearing against transgressions, and
disobedience to Gods witness, which shows the secrets of the heart in every
man; and therefore take heed how you, or any of you do evil, or deceive,
cozen, or cheat any one, for the Lord beholds it in you all: And where will all
you Tailors, and Brokers, who lies in wickedness appear, that make a trade of
sin, to deceive, and take that which is not your own, and sell it to an other,
who knows you came not justly by it, and furnish your selves with that which is
stolen, and dishonestly come by, and keep it in your shops in whole bundels of
remnants and pieces? and such like things as are unjustly gotten, which the
Children of the Lord cannot buy, who are redeemed out of such things, as you
are in bondage to; with your many vain fashions which you invent, and beget
people into, that it is even a grief to see how you are servants of sin, and
inventers for peoples lusts, and Instruments of Satan's will, whereby his work
is done: Therefore do so no more, but rather seek how to suppress them, and
learn to beget people into true moderation, and out of pride, which you have
been a leader into, and a preparer of the way for pride, and vanity; and
delight in it, when you can most do it, then you are most esteemed; and the
more foolish, the more you pleasure their vain fancies, and your own; when
people looks like Apes and Fools, that it is even a shame to see them, how they
are gone out of true moderation into foolish toys and fancies, not like to
sober men and women, that the very Creation even groans under your pride and
abomination, which you live in; and deck your selves and servants Liveryes
foolishly withal, that its even a shame to see them how foolish they are
decked; and their Masters are not wise in these things, who by their foolish
Habit are known to serve such or such a man; and these things are amongst the
Rulers and Wise men of this generation, whose wisdom the Lord will confound and
lay waste, together with all their profession that yields no better fruits; but
grieves the Lord by their vanities day by day, and seek not to amend it: So
here men of all sorts, and men of all degrees and employments grieves the Lord
by their sins and transgressions which they commit, whilst they reject Gods
Wittness, by which they should learn to amend their ways, and return from the
evil of them to the Lord, that they might find mercy, and be hid in the day of
his fierce wrath which is coming on the wicked, for their wicwickedness; and
therefore all ye Tradesmen in City, Town and Country, learn to amend your
ways; for the Lord is coming near to Judgment, even to Judge all men for the
evil of their ways, who have rebelled against Gods faithful Witness, which
has cried in you many days; Therefore hear what it speaks to you concerning
your sins, that it may redeem you out of them all, to serve the living God in
newness of life, the remainder of your days, that you may walk before the Lord
with a pure and perfect heart, to his praise and glory for ever; as you own the
light of Christ which you are enligtned withal, you will in it find power
against the enemy of your Souls, and strength against your sins, when you are
tempted to any evil; the light will let you see it, and preserve you out of it,
as you come to believe in it, and blot out that which is past, and make up the
breach betwixt God and you, that your sins have made while you denied his
light, which should have saved you; and that is it which shows you should not
swear, lie nor steal; and if you have sworn, lied or stolen, do so no more;
but repent, and return from it, and leave it of, and follow Christ Jesus the
light, which is placed in your Consciences to condemn your sins, as they do
appear before they are acted, and give you power to resist the temptation, and
preserve you from condemnation due for transgression, and give you peace and
rest for your Souls;

Which is the desire of a Friend to all your Souls, whose Name is, GILBERT
LATYE.

THE END.

