THE LATE BARBAROUS AND INHUMANE CRUELTIES Inflicted upon certain Persons
CALLED QUAKERS For their PEACEABLE Religious Meetings, In the County of
Leicester, by the Instigation of Thomas Cotton Priest, and diverse Officers of
the Parish of Broughton; and his man being present when some of these wretched
Abuses were Transacted. Intimated in a Letter from the Sufferers themselves.

London, Printed for Benjamin Clark in George-Yard in Lombard Street, 1682.

A short Account of some of the Violent and Inhumane Cruelties Acted upon the
Peaceable People of God called Quakers, at Broughton Meeting in Leicestershire:
From 27.9 Month. to the 30 of the 11 Month, 1681.
FRIENDS, being met together in the Name and fear of the Lord, to wait upon
him, there came in four Rude Youths, viz. Thomas Towers, William Towers, John
Groom, and John Copson, who did much Abuse Friends, and the Constable coming in
and taking a view of our Meeting, after a little stay, went forth to an House
near the Meeting: Then the Rude Youths said we will go to the Officers, and if
they will Charge us, we will soon have them out, for they say we can do it
better than they. So they going to Richard Moore the Constable, William Read
Churchwarden, Robert Bent Over-seer of the Poor, and having stayed but a
little time, returned to our Meeting again: Which Rude Youths, beginning to
exercise their Cruelties upon us, we asked for their Warrant, and they said
they were set on by the Parish. So in the Execution of their Cruelties,
Throwing at us Turnip Tops, Punching us with sticks, Throwing into the House
Pieces of broken Punchins, Pulling our Hoods from off our Heads, and then laid
Violent Hands upon us, and plucked us out of the Meeting, and then dragged
Friends to and fro in the Dirt, The Officers standing by and not reproving
them, saying, You may keep at home. So being thus in danger of our Lives,
William Read said he would speaks to the Youths, That we should pass quietly
home; but when Great Cruelties had been Acted on us, William Read said, they
had a Warrant to break up our Meeting, after what manner soever they would: and
the same day a Lass coming to the Meeting she was taken by Violence, and forced
up (...): And indeed it is too hard for us, to remember all our great Abuses,
we being weakly Women, and having but one Man Friend with us that day, who was
Sorely Abused, till he was almost Spent, and drawing Blood of another Friend;
and an Ancient Friend a Woman much Abused; so Praising the Lord for his Mercies
to us, in supporting and preserving us Alive, notwithstanding these inhumane
endeavors ^o bereavd us thereof; we returned home. The Truth of this might be
Testified by many, but being at a distance, we who were there give this under
our Hands. Elizabeth Hilton. Jane Hilton. Ann Griffeth. Alice Griffeth.
Elizabeth Hill, with several others.


ANd the next Meeting being the 4th day of 10th Month 1681. Friends being going
to the Meeting, and some Friends being come before the rest, the rude Youths
being there (before several Friends were come) quickly began to Act their
Villainies, pulled down the Fire and thrower about the House: Then pulling out
Elizabeth Hill with some other Friends, so the rude Youths dragged Elizabeth
Hill through the Dirt, till she was almost Spent. Then some Neighbourly Women
came out and said, What will you Kill the Woman: The rude Youths said, What
care we, Mr. Cotton bid (...) so, the Woman said, Did he indeed, they said, Aye
indeed; she said, Then he may be ashamed of it: He is the Priest, his Name is
William Cotton. It seems more probable, that the said Priest Cotton did
Encourage those Rude and ^iotous person; seeing that above three Years ago, he
himself did Violently Pull and Hale Thomas Pitston out of his Lodging at Edward
Earby's House in Thorp in the Parish of Broughton; and forced him before
Justice Stafford, without any Legal Authority, or Warrant; and caused the
Justice to put the Oath of Allegiance to the said Thomas Pitstow, and also to
Edward Earby and John Swan lun. who only went along with him to Accompany him,
and give the Justice an Account of their knowledge of him: Whereupon they a^l
three were committed to Prison for refusing to take it; the said Edward Earby
being an Ancient man of about seventy years of Age.
So Elizabeth Hill being ^^^r Spent, the Youths said, Let us see if her Teeth
be set, and one of them put his Finger into her Mouth, and perceiving her to
Breath, said, Let us at her again; and said, The Devil is in her, and we will
sqeeze him out. And then one of the Boys went to the Constable, and came again
and said, He bid them do so; and if any take their parts, we must serve them as
bad. So the Neighbourly Women took her and led her in at the
Metting-House-Gate; so when we came to go into the Meeting, they left Elizabeth
Hill, whom they had so much Abused, and came to the rest of Friends, and began
to fling Dirt at us in a Violent manner, and Tore our Clothes; and through
much hardship Friends got into the Meeting place. The Constable and the Youths
came to us, and they laying Violent Hands upon John Brooks, drew him out by
force, Tearing his Clothes, and drew out William Brooks, and then threw some
of us on Heaps upon the Floor: So fearing there might have been Murder
committed, a Neighbourly Woman came in several times, and said, Will you
Murder the People that do you no harm. So she going out, said to those that
were pulled out, I do not know, but one lies Dead on the Floor: Then John
Brooks pressed in amongst them to see by whom it might be Acted; but they would
not suffer William Brooks to come in: Then the Youths lifting up Elizabeth
Hill, they said to the Constable, See if she do not breath. So having no Mercy
(she being near Dead) They carried her out, and said her along in the Dirt; and
then Dragged out some other Friends by the Head and Heels, and laid them also
in the Dirt: And when they came in again, they fell Violently upon John Brooks,
and drew him backwards over a high Doorsil, but through Mercy had not much
hurt; and then Dragged him out of the House. And when they had thus used us;
then they took Clouts, and dipped them in the Dirt, and threw in our Faces, and
upon our Clothes, and so continued rubbing of our Faces with Dirty Wisps of
Straw; and said, If any took our Parts, they should be served as bad as they;
For the Youths said, The Constable bid them do so. And further said, We have
good backers, the Parson bid us also. The Constable came to us in the Morning
and bid us come; and we should be paid when we had done. These Cruelties with
other shameful Abuses, which for Modesties sake we forbear to mention in this
place. To the Truth of this we are Witnesses: William Brooks. John Brooks.
William Webster. Elizabeth Hill. Elizabeth Hilton.


ANd also here follows the Testimony of John Parker (one of Priest Cotten's
Parishoner and Hearer) I looking into the Meeting, saw the Rude Youths Lugg and
draw and throw on heaps, the like I never saw in my Life before: And I asked
who set them on work, and the Rude Youths said, Mr. Cotton: And I fearing there
might have been Murder, spoke to them and said, Will you Murder them, that do
you no Hurt: I saw them Hale and draw Elizabeth Hill out, and threw her in the
Dirt, until her Life was almost Spent; and I helped to get her into the House,
though they haled her out again. And I saw them so daub, and throw Dirt, it is
hard to relate it. This and much more I saw the 20th of the 11th Month, 1681.
This Testimony was taken from. John Parker.

THe Testimony of Jonathan Phillips. I saw them much Daubed with Dirt, and
Dragging John Brooks by the Collar. Jonathan Phillips.

THe Testimony of Sarah Philipps I saw the Rude Youths Lugg and draw Elizabeth
Hill into the dirt, into several places. And I saw them throw at William Brooks
and John Brooks and others, and Chid them; And they said, they were set on by
the Parson, And they said, they would tell the Parson of me. And said, if I
talked, they would do as much at me.

And I Mary Moor likewise saw all this. Sarah Phillipps.

ANd again upon the 11th day of the same Month, Friends coming to the Meeting;
they found a Lock on the door, and the Gate nailed up: But we got into the yard
and stood there; Then the Constable Richard Moor and William Read Warden, with
other Officers came with their Warrants, and took our men Friends as Prisoners,
And then caused the door to be opened, and kept them Prisoners in the
Meeting House; and then the Constable with William Read and others, Inhumanely
drew out the Women, not regarding the Conditions of any as if they had been Men
Void of reason. So the next day they took John Brooks and William Webster to
the Justices, the Priests Brother (a Grand Persecutor) called Samuel Cotton of
Daddlington and Beamont Dixey of Market Bosworth, both Justices (so called) who
to Gratify the desires of the Persecutors, Ensnared them with the Oath, and
sent them to Prison, where they now remain. Thus having left us few Men, then
forcing us from our Meeting place hanging a lock on the door: The Woman Friend
of the house being dead and her husband Edward Earby being cast into Prison
upon the oath some years ago, who held the house but for his Wife's Life: so we
presently got another place to Meet in, In the same Parish.

Again the 18th of the same month, Friends being come to the other Meeting
House, where they were permitted to go; and quickly these Rude Youths came in
again and fell to drawing us, and throwing us on heaps on the floor, then
dragged out some by the Head and heels, and went and fetched dirt and Rubed on
our faces. And the Priest's Man whose name is Thomas Ambrose came into the Home
and said to the Youths, daub them soundly; for it is no matter if they were all
put into the Millstream. So the Youths going on with their Cruel pulling and
Hailing, whilst the Priest's Man was there, pulling of us by the heads, as if
they would have strangled us, and by our Arms, as if they would have pulled our
Joints asunder. And thus they continued (as Friends suppose,) about half an
hour: And the Priest's Man said, His Master was one of the best Men in England,
For if every one would serve them so; This See how like Papists this is, and
that of the worst sort.
Heresy would be rooted out. So when we were off from the Meeting Ground, and
in the street, coming homew^rds, one of the Youths fell to gathering up dirt,
and threw in the face of Elizabeth Hilton, and took an handful of dirt, and
following of her, caught her by the hood and holding her behind her head with
one hand, Crammed the dirt in her mouth with the other, So Elizabeth being near
spent, and Leaning on a Gate, he caught her by the Head, and daubed her so that
her Life being in danger Two Friends (so soon as they could get to her) Came
and led her toward an house. But before she could get to the house, the Youths
came on again, add threw Elizabeth Hilton and Elizabeth Hill down in the
street, and said, That before they should go into the House, they would spend
their Blood. And with much Striving Elizabeth Hilton got near to the Door, to
go to a Houses but one of the Youths caught her by the Hood, and held her by
the Hood till she was near Strangled; and when his Hands were Loosed, Elizabeth
Hilton had a sore Fall over the Door Sill to her great Hurt: So the Neighbors
came in, and they being affrightened, and Friends much spent by their Barbarous
Cruelties: The Constable was sent for, but he came not, but one of the Youths
coming in, and seeing how it was, said, I think she is dying indeed, but if she
do, she is fitter for the Devil. Nevertheless all necessary means for her
Recovery were used, yet she lay at Broughton (where she had the hurt,) near
three Weeks before she got home, It being near Two Miles from the place of her
outward abode, and then they brought her home though weak.

TO this preceding Meeting, here follows the Testimony of Thomas Stretton,
one of the Priests Hearers* I saw Elizabeth Hilton going toward Richard
Bayliffes: And as she went up the Steps to his Door, Thomas Towers Caught her
by the Hood; and I saw him throw her over the Threshold: Then the Rude Youths
came into my House, and Cracked how one held her, and the other Crammed Dirt in
her Mouth, at William Harman's Gate. Thomas Stretton.

THe Testimony of Elizabeth Stretton, another of the Priests Hearers: I saw
Elizabeth Hilton her Mouth Daubed with Dirt; and so Abused she had been, that I
thought she would have Died forthwith: And I saw the Youth Lugg her about, and
throw her down in the Street. Elizabeth Stretton.

THe Testimony of Jane Miller: I being going to Church, was called into Richard
Bayliffes House, where I saw Elizabeth Hilton, had been much Abused, her Mouth
being all Dirty: And though I did not see when she was so wronged, yet I heard
Thomas Towers say twice, I for We, have Killed their Preacher, and she was very
weakly. Jane Miller.

THere was but one Young Man a Friend, at this last Meeting; they having
(before these Cruelties were Acted) been by a wicked Informer John Smith, very
much Ruinated by spoiling of their Goods; and since (by the Instigation of this
Vile and wicked Priest Cotton) sent most of our Men Friends to Prison, and have
now struck at the Lives of those that are left, by his wicked Agents.

Before these Transactions were thus Acted, Thomas Ambrost this Priests Man
said, That nothing would drive them away, but either Fire or Water; and if the
House was his, he would burn it on their Heads. And said to the Officers, That
Elizabeth Hilton would be put into the Well: And they asked him, who should do
it, and he said, He would, Witness. William Brooks.

The four Youths mentioned herein; one of them was about 17, or 18 years of
Age, and another about 15 or 16. And the other two about fourteen.

Here follows some Account of the wicked and Illegal Proceedings of John
Smith an Old Informer, and William Cole a Justice (so called) an Old Assistant
of his.
THe 15th day of the 3 d. Month 1681. this Informer John Smith and his Man came
to Thorp in Broughton Parish, where Friends Meetings used to be: The Meeting
being ended a little before he came, and Friends being on their way homewards:
This Informer met with William Brooks in his way homewards, and did very much
abuse him, and then left him, and came Riding after some other Friends, viz.
Thomas Followayes and three Women Friends, and did much abuse them also;
Offering to Ride over them with his Hosel, and Tone one Friends Clothes, and
forced them back again, pretending to have them before a Justice; and had them
back to the Town to an Alehouse Door, and there got their Names, and let them
go again: And then they went forthwith to Justice ^^^e and got them Fined; and
presently brought Warrants of Distress, and Distrained for the Fines. Thomas
Followayes, Fined 10 l. 5 s. William Brooks 6 l. 10 s. Edward Earby 3 l.
Elizabeth Norman 10 s. And her Husband being not a Friend paid the Money;
Thomas Followayes Fine was part of it paid by a Relation of his contrary to
his Mind. And the Constable of Whetston, with other Offcers of the Town,
strained for the rest, and took to the value of 12 l. and upwards in the whole.
And of William Brooks for 6 or 7 l. they took to the value of 15 l. and
upwards. And Edward Earby, they having before taken all he had, and he having
got or bought some necessary Goods again; them they also took away again, to
the value of 3 l. 10 s. all that he had which was worth carrying away.

From Leicester County-Goal the 30th. of the 11 th. Month 1681.
THE END.
MEMORANDVM,
THat these preceding Sufferings of the County of Leicester, are not Divulged
in Print by the Sufferers themselves; but by others Commiserating their Case.


