A Funeral Oration OR SERMON UPON The Most High, Most Potent Lord, Francis
Henry De Montmorancy, Duke of Luxembourg and Piney, Peer and Marshal of France,
Governor of Normandy, Knight and Commander of the King's Orders, Captain of
the Guards of His Majesty's Body, And General of His Armies.

Pronounced at PARIS, in the Church of the Professed House of the Company of
Jesus, the 21st. of April, 1695, By Father De la RVE, of the same Society.

From the French Original.

LONDON Printed, and Sold by Richard Baldwin at the Oxford-Arms in
Warwick Lane. 1695.

TO THE READER.
THE following Sheets contain a Funeral Harangue upon the Duke of Luxemburgh,
composed and pronounced by a Jesuit. And it is a consummate Piece of
Jesuitism. For it neither speaks Truth to Man, nor to God. To make his Champion
of France Great, he falsifies the Story of the Greatest Hero at this day in
the World. He knew he had undertaken a Hard Task, to Praise a Man, who setting
aside that he was a Soldier, had long labored under a very Immoral Character.
No wonder then he employs all the stock of his Rhotorical Flourishes to varnish
over the Conduct and Actions of his Great General, by mis-representing the more
Noble Exploits of his Antagonist. We can allow him the Gingling Rhodomontado's
of a Panegyrist, so long as the Event has made it evident to the World, that if
Luxembourg were able to Cope with the King of England, it was more then his
Master the French King was ever able to do. Moreover, to be convinced of the
Jesuit's Double-dealing with Man, and his Falsifying the Records of open Story,
there needs no more then to read on the Second Part of his Oration, and seeing
him using the same Flourishes of Humane Oratory to God, and borrowing plausible
Insinuations from Deduction, and his General's Affection to the Virgin Mary, to
lift him up into Heaven. This Piece has made a Noise in the World, and has been
spread over Europe in the French Language (an Effect of Gallick Ostentation)
and therefore it was thought requisite to expose it in English, that the Vanity
of the Orator might be derided here, as well as in other Places. Autoritatem
nullam, nec fidem Commentitiis Rebus adjungere debet (says Cicero.)

A Funeral Oration UPON Francis Henry, Duke of Luxemburgh.
For we do not present our Supplications before thee for our Righteousnesses,
but for thy great Mercies.

Dan. 4.18.
THESE are the Moans of a Prophet, in the midst of a Captive People, remote
from their Country, and panting after Liberty. What a Force was not this able
to give to Prayer, by representing to God the Services of David, of Jacob and
Abraham, and by striving to draw down his Compassion upon the Children, by the
Remembrance of their Forefathers? To these vain Subjects of Presumption, rather
then Confidence, Daniel closed his Eyes. He found a surer Support in the mere
Mercy of God, then in all the Virtues of Men; and without losing any thing of
that Zeal which inclined him to Prayer, and of that Hope which ought to uphold
Prayer, he Prayed, he Hoped, but still his Prayers and his Hopes were grounded
upon the Mercies of God.

What are we now come to do, my Beloved, in the Presence of the same God? Come
we to bewail the Dead in vain, where it becomes us only to shed the Tears of
Repentance? Come we here to vaunt their Victories, and Heroic Labors? It Is
only to the Saints, the Vanquishers of Sin, that Religion permits us to pay
Duties of this Nature, to Honor their Tombs, and to Extol their Virtues in
Hymns and Songs, even to the Footsteps of the Throne of God; because they reign
with Glorious Him, in the same Glory. But as for Princes and Hero's, whose
Virtues, frequently Humane, were no other, for the greatest part, then Passions
disguised under specious Names and Veils, when You are called to their
Interments; it is to set before Your Eyes, Grandees of the World, a Moving
Spectacle of that Inevitable End which you never think of. It Is to set before
your Eyes that Death, which you look upon with Disdain in the bloody and
precipitated Heat and furious Motion of Combat, but which you can hardly look
in the Face, when Cool and Serious, exposed to your Reflections in this Funeral
Pomp, which forces you to Lessons of Repentance. In short; If at any time, by a
Custom established in the First Ages of the Church, we presume to interrupt the
Holy Mysteries with an Elogy of their Actions, it is not with a Pharisaical
Pride, that vaunted before God the Justice of their Works, Not for our
Righteousness: it is with the Modesty of the Publican, who begged for Mercy
only, but for thy great Mercies. The sad Recitals of so many Exploits, that
exalt the great Names and Fame of Mortals, were never made to move God's
Compassion, but to touch the Hearts of Men. And it is with this Intention, my
Beloved, that I undertake this day, the Elogy of the Most High and Most Potent
Lord, FRANCIS HENRY of MONTMORANCY, PEER and MARSHAL of FRANCE, KNIGHT and
COMMANDER of the KING's ORDERS, GOVERNOR of NORMANDY, CAPTAIN of the GUARDS of
the KING's BODY, and GENERAL of His ARMIES.

Upon the only Pronouncing of this Name, what a Crowd of Things present
themselves to our Minds? What Wonders, what Courage, what Resolution, what
Justice also, in the Opinion of Men! But in the Sight of God, all this is
nothing; Not for our Righteousness It Is for You, my Beloved, and for all
France, who have reaped all the Fruit of his Great Actions, to find therein the
Motives of Acknowledgment, and by consequence a Zeal to Pray for him. But in
these same Actions, and in all the Events of so Turmoyl'd a Life, how many
signal Traces of a particular Mercy applied to his Salvation! It Is there that
we are to fix our Hope, and to seek the Support of our Prayers which we pour
forth before God; But for his manifold Mercies.

Reducing my self therefore to the Intention of the Church, and the Simplicity
of the Text which I have chosen, I shall only show to all the Faithful whom
Piety concerns in his Salvation, in the Two Parts of this Discourse, I. The
Obligations that France has to Pray. II. The Reasons that she has to Hope.


Her Obligations to Pray, from what he has done for France. The Reasons she has
to Hope, from what God has done for Him. But, Lord, what has he done for Thee,
and for his Salvation? For this is that which makes the Personal Merit; and
weighs down in the Decisive Balance of Eternity. We shall find it included in
these Two Points, which will fill our Minds with this comfortable Idea, That
this God, who only crowns his Gifts, when he crowns our Merits; and who making
the Virtues of Saints Meritorious, is pleased to make the Tears of Sinners also
Meritorious, will have found in this Great Man whom we lament, what is
sufficient to procure him that last Mercy which he bestows upon whom he
pleases, and which no Man can deserve.

St. Paul, instructing the Faithful in their Duty toward Great Men, proposes to
'em, among other Motives of Respect, the Authority which they have received
from God, to protect the Good, and suppress and punish the Wicked. For (says
he) they bear not the Sword in vain. And upon this establishing the Right not
only of Kings, but of all Persons advanced in Dignity, he requires that those
Honors and Tributes should be paid 'em that are their due; Tribute to whom
Tribute, Honor to whom Honor is due. But besides these Tributes settled by
Humane Laws, the Apostle, in favor of Great Personages, imposes upon Us
another far differently Precious Tribute, Entreaties, Prayers and Petitions.
And the Reason which he gives, is, Because that under their Authority, we live
secure in Peace and Piety.

Now, if there be any one in the Degrees inferior to Sovereigns, to whom this
Tribute is due from all among us that are True Frenchmen, and True Christians,
is it not to this Famous and Warlike Champion, from whom the Kingdom and the
Church have received such successful Services? And to search for the
Foundations of his Merit in the Deserts of his Ancestors, is there any Descent,
among those whose Names and Renown we Honor, of which it may be more justly
said, in the words of St. Paul, They have not borne the Sword in vain? And how
long since, my Lords? The Crown has not been more ancient upon the Head of our
Kings, then the Nobility of the Blood of these Hero's. The Faith of Jesus
Christ ascended the Throne with Clovis, but it entered into the Court with a
Montmorancy. Whence that singular Title of First Christian Baron, which is
Hereditary to 'em, and which equally denotes, as well their Antiquity, their
Nobility, as their Descent. Let us leave these. Times of Obscurity. Are Seven
hundred Years, I will not say, of Distinction, but of Constant Advancement,
enough to merit our Esteem? We no sooner behold their Name issuing forth from
the Darkness of Antiquity, but immediately we see it clothed with the Luster
of the Highest Dignities, and more-especially Military Employments. The Name of
Constable never began to appear in the World, at least in our Histories, till
they wore it. Ever since, those Transcending Dignities have been as it were
perpetuated to their Family. Seven Constables, Seven Marshals, Four Admirals,
Great Officers of the Crown, Governors of Provinces, Generals of Armies, almost
without number, and at all times. Never was the Kingdom or our Religion in any
Glorious or Dangerous Condition, but Providence, still careful of our Affairs,
has supplied us out of this Noble Family most extraordinary Succors either of
Wisdom or Valor. Consequently, how greatly is the Church and State obliged to
pay with a zealous Fervency this Tribute of their Prayers to all those that
bear this Name, seeing we have proved, that for so long a time, they have not
borne the Sword in vain.

But Oh, the Depth of God's Designs and Judgments! That this Grandeur, so
Ancient, so steadfastly fixed upon such Solid, and such Just Foundations,
supported by so many Arms, Allianc'd to all the Thrones of Christendom, should
be now upon the Brink of being Extinguished! That the Principal Pillars of this
so Potent Family should now be Tottering! Alas! and under those Fatal Strokes,
the sole Remembrance of which makes us Tremble. That their Honors and their
Merits should be so near Extinction: shall I say, their Glory with their
Merits? One only Child, born in Tears, an Orphan before he came into the World,
scarce able to make his Way into the Seats of Daylight, in the Midst of the
Ruins of his Family, is destined to re advance the Fortune of his House, and to
recall to the Elder, that Honor and Grandeur which for Two hundred Years
together the Younger have acquired. And this same Infant, so dear to
Providence, is the Great General for whom we Pray.

Let us pass over the First Years of his Life, and the First Exercises of his
Valor. 'Twas not He alone that needed this Indulgence; it is due to the
Misfortune of those Times. He was envelop'd in 'em, less by his own Choice,
then by the Condition of his Fortune. What Illustrious Exploits, which we dare
not remember, and which we cannot forget.

What Use did he make afterward of that lucky Habit! Shall we enumerate the
Particulars of Thirty Years Labors, if I may not rather call 'em Successes?
Nor think, my Lords, that I go about to degrade any one of our Hero's by
Comparisons, always rash and odious. There are so many Ways that lead to
Honor, and so many different Traces of Merit and Valor, that they may
severally serve for Objects of Public Admiration, without defacing or
resembling each other. But it is enough to say in Praise of Monsieur de
Luxemburgh, That there have been few of our Great Generals, his Contemporaries,
who have proved more Formidable to their Enemies, better Beloved of the
Soldiers, or more Daring and Resolute in Enterprises. The Qualities of a
Perfect Soldier, which Solomon paints forth in his Book of Wisdom, Terrible
Kings shall fear me: I shall be able to lead a multitude, and stout in Battle.

But when, to the end I may display what is included in these Three Qualities,
I have made it manifest, that there were few who were opposed by more Puissant
Enemies, and who kept himself still more then Superior; few that governed more
numerous Armies; and governed 'em with more Ease; few that sustained more
doubtful and hazardous Enterprises, and sustained 'em with more Resolution and
Undauntedness: what Rank will you allow him among those our Generals which you
most esteem? Now, it is this Superiority, this Facility of Genius, this
Resolution and Undauntedness, that form the Character of Him we now lament.

It Is no new thing for France to see all her Neighbors become her Enemies. The
Novelty is this, to see all her Enemies united against her, by one and the same
Tie; not only a Tie of Passions and Interests, but a stronger Tie; it is the
Ascendant of of one Captain over all the Members of the League. In all other
Leagues this Union being wanting till now, France had always in the Union of
her Chieftain, and the Union of her Forces, a Puissance easily superior to the
Number and Efforts of her most Potent Enemies. But they have at length found
out a Genius proper to reunite all their Hatred against us. To give more Force
to the Instrument of their Passions, they have helped him to dethrone Virtue it
self. To make an Enemy sufficient to find us Work, they have set up a Master
over themselves. And who is this, my Lords? The same, upon whom some looked as
the Hereditary Guardian of their Liberty; who was by others called in to defend
their new Laws against the false Terrors of Arbitrary Power, and whom others
feared as the Natural Enemy of their Religion: That same Holland, so jealous of
the Freedom of her Trade: That same England, that doates so much upon the
pretended Privileges of her Parliament: That same Germany, so accustomed to
share in Sovereign Supremacy: That same Austria, so intoxicated with her
Notions of Universal Monarchy: That same Spain, so zealous for the Purity of
her Faith: Lastly, That same Italy, so passionately desirous of her Repose,
have rooted out of their Hearts all these so Ancient and Natural Sentiments,
that they might make it their Common Interest to advance one Prince, whose
Grandeur can never hurt us, but by overwhelming 'em with their own Weight. A
Foreigner, and Absent, he is the Soul of their Counsels, the Head that governs
'em.

One would think that those Sovereign Princes, in yielding him the Title of
King, had paid him the Homage of their Crowns, and that Lewis is only now
become the Object of their Jealousy, and their Hatred, for no other Reason but
because he has taken upon himself alone to defend against 'em all the Rights of
Royal Majesty; and he does uphold 'em, and Triumphs in despite of all his
Enemies. They are not become so potent by their Union, as by being more
sensible before him of their real Weakness. Their Efforts have nothing
diminished of the Grandeur of his Empire, nor of that of his Soul. More wise
and prudent then ever; if Heaven from time to time deprive him of the Ministers
of his Designs, it leaves him still his Prudence and his Fortune. This Monarch
imparts it to those whom he honors with his Choice; and that which rears up
great Captains among us, is the exact observance of his Orders.

What Instrument more safe and tractable in his Hands, to uphold against so
many Enemies the Honor and Prosperity of his Arms, then the Duke of
Luxemburgh? What an Ascendant had he over that famous Prince who got the start
of so many others. Accustomed in the Dutch War to fly the Shadow only of the
King, he began to turn head in the presence of Luxemburgh. He thought that the
Cities of Zwoll, Deventer, the Groll, and Coewerden, which this General had
taken, at the head of the Troops of Munster, had rendered him Illustrious
enough to make him his chief Rival. He would therefore measure himself with
him; but his Chief Masterpiece was a Defeat. Nor was he more happy at
Bodengrave, where the frozen Morasses could not protect his Army from the
impetuous Ardour of the French. These two unfortunate Essays, from that time
forward, filled the Prince with such an Idea of his Vanquisher, that he durst
no more contend with him; but only by calling to his Succor, Treachery and
Surprise. This made him so bold at the Battle of St. Denis, at what time the
two Camps ought to have been calm and secure upon the News of the signed Peace.
However, in that, as well as in all other Places, he found by the slaughter of
his Men, that Stratagem as little availed as Open Force, against the Courage of
a General always present with himself in Combat. In short, it is one of the
Wonders of Providence, that whatever Precautions his noble Adversary made use
of, he never engaged in any Battle, wherein he did not find Luxemburgh an
Obstacle to his complete Victory. He met with him in the Right Wing at the
famous Battle of Seneff, and rendering to the Prince of Conde the Fruit of his
Glorious Lessons, which he had received from him in his Youth. He met him
commanding the Right Wing at Gasal; where France acknowledged in the Brother of
her King, that the Princes of the Blood had no need of any Master to teach 'em
the Art of giving or winning Battles.

Instructed by so long and so fatal an Experience, Durst that same daring
Prince sustain the sight of him before Charleroy, though surrounded with an
Army of Fifty thousand Men? Durst he attempt the so much vaunted Sieges of
Maubege and Dinant, in view of him for a whole Campaign together? Durst he sit
down before any one Fortress? And shall we believe his own Testimony? For we
surpised his Letters, wherein imparting in writing the Condition of his
Affairs to a famous General of the Emperor's Forces, he acknowledges, That the
Duke, who had always the good Luck to match him, had worsted him again at
Nerwinde.

But could he make a more solemn Confession to all Europe, in respect of his
Genius to that of Luxemburgh's, then by the course which he took upon the Banks
of the Mehaign? The main Business was to succor Namur. He found himself
obliged thereto by the importance of the Place, which the Confederates looked
upon as their common Bulwark; and which he seemed to have made choice of for
the center of his new Dominion in the Spanish Low Countries, by the addition of
new Works to those that rendered it almost impregnable before, and by honoring
those Works with his own Name. That Name, which in the opinion of the
Confederates was enough to have secured Namur from all Attempts, served only as
a Bait for the Zeal of Lewis the Great, to go and revenge the Injury done
Religion by the false Politics of the Spaniards, in trusting the Walls and
Citadels of their Cities to the Enemies of their Altars. At the very Name of
the King, who was present in Person at that Siege, and to whom the Difficulty
of the Enterprise was a Pledge of the Success; upon the Approach of Luxemburgh,
whom the King had ordered to advance toward the Mehaign, the Prince was soon
sensible of the pressing danger of the Place, and of his own Reputation. A
Victory had saved the Town: Nay, instead of a Victory, of which the past Events
were but bad Prognostics, a withdrawn Battle had been sufficient to have saved
his Honor. He appeared in Battle Array on the other side of the River; he
covered it with Bridges; he thought the King would have disputed the Passage
with him, and that after some Efforts the Honor of which would have been
divided between both Armies, he should have carried off at least the Reputation
of the Fight. The King being informed of all these Motions by the Duke of
Luxemburgh, read all the Enemies Designs in the Recesses of his Soul; and to
ranverse 'em, What Resolution, think ye, did he take? He gave him all the
Liberty to pass over, and left him Ground sufficient to embattel his Army; that
he might reduce him, by that means, either to expose himself to the Hazard of a
decisive Battle, or renounce the Honor of the Passage, which he feigned
himself so desirous to attempt. Then was it the first time that Luxembourgh was
seen to recoil with his Arms in his Hands before the Prince of Orange; but to
the Vexation of the Prince himself, who seemed to wait for that Signal only to
surrender up Namur to her Destiny, or rather to that of the Conqueror.

What will Posterity say of this magnanimous Confidence? I find in sacred
Antiquity, an innumerable Army of Infidels, defended and secured by a Torrent,
cry out, being struck with Terror at the Approach of Judas Maccabeus, If he
comes over to us, we are undone, we cannot withstand him. Our General, on the
other side, inspired with a just Confidence in view of the Enemy, cries out, If
he comes over to us, he is Ruined; he cannot escape us. What a Grandeur of Soul
is required to take such Resolutions? What a Superiority of Courage? Thus have
thou ordained it, Lord of Hosts. Few Enemies more Potent then those whom thou
have raised up against us. But what General ever rendered himself more
formidable to such a Potent Adversary? If that famous Maccabean, out of a Pious
Tenderness, equal to the Resolution of his Heart, thought it an incumbent Duty
to offer Sacrifices to God, for the Souls of his Soldiers, that fell in Battle
by the Swords of their Enemies; it is the least Duty we can pay our General, to
offer up the Sacrifice of our Tears, and the immortal Victim of our Altars, to
a Warrior always Victorious, and who has rendered us formidable to our most
terrible Enemies. Terrible Kings shall fear me.

A second Advantage, altogether particular to Him, is this; That he had under
his Command, the greatest Bodies of Armies, that ever France brought into the
Field; which was an Effect of the Conjuncture of the Times. With what easiness
did he give all the Motion requisite for the Success of Great Designs to those
vast Bodies comps'd of so many different Parts. I say Easiness, my Lords. I
could have said, Prudence and Wisdom, had I been to paint forth one of those
profound Souls, whose Conduct is the Fruit of a painful and laborious
Application, and who suffer the Importance of their Projects to be read in
their Countenances. But to have his Designs always settled in good Order, to
foresee those of the Enemy with a Penetration almost certain, to find in
himself the Remedies always ready at Hand, upon any sudden Counter-Events, and
to cover all this with a sedateness, with an equal Temper, and to make it his
continual Sport, as I may so say, These are Excellencies which make us call to
mind that eternal Wisdom, of which Solomon thought he gave no mean Idea, when,
to express the exaltation of her Conduct, and at the same time, how easily she
executes all her great Designs, he tells us, That she makes the Government of
the World her sport. Would it be an Injury to the Wisdom of Men, to set forth,
by the same Expression, the sedate and easy Activity of a Mind, superior to
whatever it undertakes? Such was this great General in the Conduct of his
Armies.

There was no need of gaudy Pomp, or Haughtiness, to procure Respect and
Reverence to his Person. There was no Necessity for him to make use of Rigor
or Severity, for the maintaining of good Discipline; nor to employ Force or
Authority to engage his Soldiers to undertake the most difficult Enterprises.
All the Qualities requisite for Command were enclosed in an Air of Noble and
Military Popularity, which was natural to him. By that means, my Lords, he was
so well entered into their Hearts, that with an obliging and familiar Word, he
infused in a moment into theirs, the Courage and Confidence that abounded in
his own Heart. So soon as he showed himself, the Dangers of Assault, the
Difficulties of Battle, the Pains and Trouble of hasty Marches, all vanished.
They knew, that whatever the Labor was, or where ever they marched, he led 'em
to Honor, and they were never deceived.

Can that March be forgot, prodigious for an Army, of above Thirty Leagues in
Three Days, which so absolutely disappointed all the Enemies Prudence, and
crowned all the Actions of the Duke of Luxembourgh? The Confederates had spent
the Campaign in vainly blocking up our Quarters at Vignamont, in hopes to force
us either to re-pass the Meuse, or else to expose our Flank to their Batteries,
while we marched back to Namur. Constrained themselves to give way to the
Victorious Constancy of Monsieur, who by his Presence added new weight to the
Authority of the General, and new Fires to the Armies Zeal, they sought to
repair the Shame of their Retreat by some Signal Act toward the Seacoasts.
They promised themselves at least to surprise at their Pleasure the Strongest
of our Towns. Great Preparations; a Threatening Fleet ready to favor their
Design; the way open, without any Obstacle, in the midst of their Country;
Camps ready marked out to fly about from the Parts adjoining to the Meuse, to
the Banks of the Lis, and Scheld. 'Twas for us to fly after them; and what must
we do to get before 'em?

Nothing, but observe Your Countenance, and follow Your Steps, GREAT PRINCE,
the Happy Son of a Victorious KING, for ever Famous, still more by the Rapidity
of his Conquests, then by their Number or their Grandeur. But what a
Consolation was it to You, in the height of Your Zeal to imitate the Rapidness
of that Monarch, unimitable to any other but your self; what a joy was it to
You, to find a General at Hand so expert and quick to second Your Designs! Upon
the First Orders given for the March, such a Fervency seized the whole Army,
that they never scrupled any longer either the Length of the Leagues, the
Number of Days, nor the Difficult Passages over the Rivers. Every one found in
his Courage, and the Hopes of coming to a Battle, wherewith to harden himself
against the Cries of Drowth and Hunger. We admire those brave Israelites, who
pressed by Thirst, in their March against Midian, under the Leading of Gideon,
durst not stop a Minute to draw Water, but still marching forward, contented
themselves with sucking in the Water which they took up in the Hallow of their
Hands. We see an Army altogether forgetful of their Repose, and their
Necessity, and Refusing the Succor and Refreshments which the Zeal of the
People, and the Foresight of the Officers had got ready upon the High Ways.
They were running, said they, to Victory, and wanted nothing but the Enemy.
They found him at length, but Surpised and Consternated at their Diligence,
and confounded to see the Banks of the Scheld all crowded with Squadrons,
Monsieur at their Head, and Luxemburg next Him. They had not the Pleasure of a
Battle; but they had the Satisfaction to vanquish, and by their appearance to
stifle and disappoint the Boldness, and all the Designs of the Enemy.

If after so many Demonstrations of Consummate Ability, and Gallantry, we
refuse this General the Applauses that are due to Him, shall we not have our
Enemies themselves upbraiding us in his behalf? But he has no need of our
Elogies, he has more need of our Prayers. Let us leave the Care of applauding
him to Foreign Nations: As for Us, who have felt the Effects of his Happy
Conduct, let us take care to discharge that Duty which he expects from us. Let
us cry to God, Lord, this is he who went in and out before us, when we fought
for thy Cause; Save Him, who saved all Israel.

But whence the Source, my Lords, of those two Wonders, his Superiority over
our Enemies, and his Easiness, in governing our Armies? It was at the Bottom of
his Heart, from that Resolution, from that Undauntedness, which produced that
high Reputation, so formidable to the One, and so obliging to the Other: in
bello Fortis.

It would be a dishonor to him, to say, that Fear never appeared in his
Countenance. But let us say, that Trouble and Disorder never showed themselves
there. He never beheld Danger, but with Contempt. He beheld at Lleurus the
danger of Forcing the Passage of the Sambre in view of the Enemy, and of going
to shut up himself to fight 'em between the River and Them. He forced the
Passage, fought 'em, and vanquished. At Leuse, he saw the Danger of meeting
with Eighteen Battalions, all the Enemies Cavalry, consisting of Seventy two
Squadrons. But he faced and defeated 'em. But that we may the better understand
him, it behooves us to look into the two last Battles, of which the One was the
Reflection, and as it were the Image of the Other. At Nerwinde he repaid the
Blow, which they endeavored in vain to have given him at Steenkirk. They would
have surpised him; he was resolved to surprise in his turn. But with what
Success! however with what Efforts!

Assailed at Steenkirk, in the midst of a Camp without defense, he kept his
Ground there, as if he had been in a fortified Place; without any other
Advantage over the Enemy, then the Resolution of his Heart, the Confidence of
his Men, and the Valor of those Princes, who then secured his Victory by their
Example, and honored it with their Blood. At Nerwinde he was the Aggressor;
but he assailed a Camp defended by Art and Nature, surrounded with Batteries,
and secured by Entrenchments. Call to mind, my Lords, the Butchery of that Day,
wherein the Resistance of the Enemy almost Equal to our Valor, made appear in
all its Luster that invincible Obstinacy which fixed our General to the pursuit
of his Designs, and promised him the Success when every thing seemed Desperate.
There it was, if ever, that he stood in need of it. For let us talk no more of
those easy Victories, those General Routs, that in a Day change the Fortune of
Kingdoms. Though we had not for our Enemies the Bravest People in the World, yet
they have been exercising themselves so long time against Us, that 'twould be a
wonder if they should not have learnt by this to make a stout Defense. It ought
to be for our Honor, that They who surmount us, blush not at their Defeat, and
that all Europe gives this Testimony of our Nation, that they know how to
triumph over Valor it self. We saw the Proofs of it then in our Army, seconded
by the Choice of three warlike Nations, faithful Subjects to a King, who
deserves to reign over no other then such Subjects. We saw our Army attacking
so many Nations in Confederacy against us, in the midst of their Lines and
Entrenchments, with as much Courage as if it had been in the Plain Field; a
Battle changed into a Siege: Officers and Soldiers, not in the least
discouraged, returning four or five times to the Assault; the Small and Great
Shot rendered ineffectual by the downright Hacking and Hewing of the Sword: the
General Present every where, giving Orders, and putting 'em in Execution
himself in the midst of the Medley, as if it had been in the midst of his
Friends: the Enemies forced on every side: happy in their Flight, that two
Rivers hindered the Victors Pursuit. Then we saw the Truth of those Expressions
that are looked upon as fabulous, The Field covered with Heaps of the Slain,
Rivers changed into Blood, and Stopped in their Course. We saw renewed in those
famous Fields the Descriptions which the Prophet Ezekiel makes of those Bloody
Defeats of the Enemies of God. There, says he, The Princes of the North
trembling, and ashamed of their Might, and confounded in their Strength. There
the Prince surrounded with the Sepulchers of his Soldiers, in the Place it
self, where he expected to triumph: All run through, adds he in the same Place,
all run through and slain by the Sword. Lord, one Battle more; one Year more,
Lord, might have completed the Work, and recalled that Peace which has been so
long Banished. And why may we not say, while we are sighing over his Tomb, what
the Prophet Elisha said to that Warlike Prince, who had withstood all the
Efforts of Syria, Smite the Earth, said he to the King. He smote it with his
Javelin; but stopping too soon, Oh! cried the Prophet, full of Sorrow, Had
thou smitten five times, thou had smitten Syria till thou had consumed it.
That Generous Arm, now Dust and Ashes, struck the Earth four times. The Blows
of his Four Battles were heard into all the Parts of Europe. One Victory more,
Lord, a Fifth Victory, had completed our Conquest, restored Peace to the
World, and reared up thy Religion upon the Ruins of its Enemies: Si
percussisses quinquies. Thou have refused to hear our Prayers and our Tears:
perhaps by reason of our Sins; perhaps, by reason of the Sins of this Great
Warrior, who fighting at the same time for his Prince and his God, studied
less to please his God, then he applied himself to please his Prince; and
minded more the Frail Laurels of a Victorious General, then the Crowns of
Eternity.

But seeing that God has deprived him the Honor of putting an end to the War,
and reserved it for the Valor of another Arm, in that, my Lords, we must
acknowledge the Goodness of God toward him, for having shortened his Victories,
that he might call him off to the Care of his Conscience, and give him Time to
provide for his Salvation. But how much the greater Obligation therefore upon
Us to redouble the Fervency of our Prayers for a Christian, perhaps no
otherwise a Transgressor, then for having had a greater care of our Temporal
Advantages, then for the Interests of his Soul, and whom perhaps the Praises
which were daily given to his Valor, might have caused him to forget the
Duties of Christian Dependence; and who perhaps had not fallen into the
Frailties natural to every mortal Man, but because he employed all his Strength
and Courage in the Service of the Kingdom, which he should have made use of to
vanquish his Passions, and to keep up at Court the Honor of the Service of God
against all wordly Respects. Let us Pray then, my Lords: our Prayers are owing
to Him, since he has done so much for Us. But let us Hope withal: we may so,
since God has done so much for Him. This is the Subject of my Second Part.

If the Life of this Great Captain, to whom we are now paying our last Mournful
Duties, were only Illustrious by those Particulars which I have hitherto made
use of, to make you sensible of his Merit, we might be afraid, that so many
profane Exploits and Triumphs, might be only the Reward of those feeble Efforts
of Virtue, which sometimes may escape a Sinner, but for which Heaven has no
Crowns in store. I should look upon him my self with an Eye of Pity, as one of
those Conquerors whom God made use of to magnify Himself in Isaiah, to subdue
Nations, put Kings to flight, and break down the Walls of Cities: and which he
abandoned afterward to the Merits of their Works, and the Punishments
attending their Sins, after he had rewarded their ambiguous Services with the
vain Luster of Worldly Prosperity.

God forbid that our Charity should be cooled this day by such Sentiments as
these. Too many Reasons raise our Hopes, without pretending to dispute the
Rights of God's Justice: so much Care as he has taken for the Salvation of this
Sinner, seems to persuade and convince us, that God has made him an Object of
his Eternal Mercy. And here, my Lords, let us leave him, as a Courtier, a
Warrior, and a Conqueror. All this was for the Eyes of Men: in the sight of
God he is a Sinner, distinguished indeed by all those Titles of Honor which he
bore upon Earth; but at the same time exposed to all those Frailties, and all
those Miseries that seem to be fastened to these dangerous Titles. Yet in the
midst of those Abuses which he might have made of 'em, and what at length might
have led him as they have done so many others, to a Forgetfulness of his God,
let us admire those singular Tendernesses, or rather Wonders of his Mercy
bestowed upon him. He bestowed upon him two of the most precious Graces he
could have bestowed upon Sinners; the Grace of Adversity during his Life, and
the Grace of Repentance at his Death. Let him then eternally sing those words
of David, Blessed be the Lord, because he has magnified his wonderful mercy
upon me.

You believe it not, Grandees of the Earth; and yet you find it by Experience,
at least, you make others sensible of it, that nothing more corrupts the Heart,
then a long and constant Prosperity; that nothing over-casts the Mind with a
thicker Darkness; that generally there is nothing but Adversity that can call
back a wandering Mortal to his Reason, to his Conscience, to his Salvation, and
his God. You believe it not; and this Error is your Ruin. The Subject of
Discourse lay under the same Error, and was subject to those Deviations which
are the usual Consequences of it. He trod the Paths of Ambition for fifty Years
together: What a Progress did he make in it! But the farther we advance in that
Road, the more, Good God, we go out of our Way. Nevertheless, thou did follow
him step by step; Thou did wait in expectation of a happy Moment to pour down
thy Mercy upon him. (...) upon ^eing (...) for a (...) and a ^^ncer.
The happy Moment came, and thy Mercy was poured down. What a signal Kindness,
my Lords, was this for all France! A Man of that Name, that Rank, clothed with
so many Honors, distinguished by so many Services, to be obliged to Justify
himself! Upon what account? For that which cannot fall but into the Meanest of
Souls; not only without Religion, but without Reason, without Fortune, without
Honor. At that very moment he perceives all the Supports of Grandeur failing:
Feeble Bulrushes, nodding with every Tempest, and bowing under the weight of
the Tempest. He was not astonished to see such a Change of Looks and Hearts.
Solomon says, That Slander troubles the Heart of a wise man, and destroys the
strength of his heart. But never did more Prudence appear in his Heart then at
that time; and never did he raise himself so much above his own Strength, and
undaunted Courage. The Sight of the Danger, and the Easiness to avoid it by so
many open ways, and offered to his Choice: On the other side, the Dread of all
things necessary for his Justification, never gave him the least Disturbance.
Considering his Innocence, he looked upon his Liberty as nothing; he sacrificed
it himself; he ran to the Prison with the same speed that the Guilty fly it.
There he only minded the saving of his Innocence and his Honor; and there he
met the Mercy of God that waited for him.

Yes surely, my Lords, it is so; and if what I have said has not proceeded from
the Mouth of Fame, yet has it issued from the Lips of Truth. In view of this
very Church where we are now met together, which was in his way, he made a
stop; and at that very moment, notwithstanding the Confusion of Thoughts which
turmoil'd his Mind, he acknowledged the Hand of God lifted up against him. Far
from being consternated like the Heathen Prince at the sight of the Celestial
Handwriting, which wrote his Destiny; but rather full of Considence and
Humility at the same time, he entered the Church, and pouring forth his Soul at
the Feet of this same Altar, he confessed, that his Sins had been the Source of
his Misfortune; he adored the Goodness of God, who had made choice of that
means, to draw him from the Precipice, and set him in the right way of
Salvation. And less Touched with the Danger his Estate and Reputation were in,
then the Peril of his Soul, he renounces (Hearken Christians!) he renounces his
Justification before Men, if his Justification were opposite to his Salvation.
This was then the Sense and Spirit of his Prayer. He has often explained his
Meaning upon it, at a Time when the Confession he made of it ought to be a
Reproach to his Conduct. Thou, Lord, who heardest him, and have promised every
thing to Prayer, more-especially to that which is put up for Salvation; Thou
who have afforded him this signal Justification in the Eyes of the World, which
he implored but faintly of Thee, would Thou have resus'd him that Salvation
which he su'd for then so earnestly, in the Bitterness of a Soul sincerely
humbl'd?

This was not ineffectual; and if I may be permitted to apply to him, what the
Scripture speaks of a Just Man persecuted, Wisdom descends with him into the
Prison, and forsakes him not in Bonds. He there detested his Vanities; he
searched into the Errors and Disorders of his Life; he solemnly atoned for 'em
by the Use of the Sacraments: nor was he delivered from his Captivity, till
enlivened with more Pious Resolutions. To corroborate him in it, God permitted,
that being Justified as he was, Free and Triumphant over Envy, a Retirement of
several Months should serve as a Trial of his Fidelity. Faithful to God all
that time, he spent his Leisure in the same Exercises, and continued the
Purifying of his Heart by frequent Confessions. 'Twas then another Heart,
formed by Adversity, and consecrated by Repentance: the Work of the Grace of
God. How long, think ye, should any of you have held out? Answer, you that hear
me, and search for the Answer in your own Hearts. After so many Oaths which you
have sworn to God, and which you believed to be sincere, what would it require
to make you forget all? The slightest Occasion presented to your Eyes and
Hearts, overturns all your Designs, and makes ye break all your Promises. What
Occasions assailed at first this Heart so changed by Adversity! Employments,
Commands, Honors, Victories, Applauses; all the whole Train of Prosperity. If
his Heart held not out as it ought to have done, against so many violent
Assaults, let Us bewail our common Frailty. Condemn Him, but at the same time
give Sentence against your Selves: accuse in his behalf, as in your own, the
contagious Air of the World, but more-especially the Air of the Court where
you live. Nevertheless, in all the Relaxations of which he might be guilty
since, admire the several Impressions of Grace and Virtue which Mercy had still
left in his Heart; to show that he was still her Care, and that the Fugitive
should not escape her.

Call to Mind the Scorn and Forgetfulness of Injuries, which was signal in him,
even to the Complaint of his Friends; who judging of his Attention to the
Services he did 'em, by his Indifferency in reference to ill Offices done him;
and of his Gratitude, by his Carelessness in Point of Resentment, made that a
Crime in Matter of Friendship, which is a Virtue, in regard to Revenge.
Insensible, or rather Deaf to scandalous Reports, Railleries, and malicious
Stories and Discourses, you should see him admit with a sedate and caressing
Air those of his Inferiors, of whose Ingratitude he had been informed. He
found 'em more worthy of his Pity, then his Indignation. As he was Easy to
return his Friendship to those who had Contemned him, he was no less Facile to
return his Esteem and good Offices to those who Offended him. Who had ever more
Enemies, more manifest Reasons to repel Injury by Injury, more Opportunities
and Means to Revenge himself? Upon whom did he ever revenge himself? At what
time? and in what manner? Oh, my Lords! after what manner, with what an Air of
Moderation and Humanity did he manage even the Public Revenge! this Minister
of War, which usually infuses Cruelty? While the Vanquished revenged with
rigor the Ignominy of their Defeat upon such Officers of Ours that fell into
their Hands by the Chance of War, this Victor made it the Pleasure and Honor
of his Victories, to treat his Prisoners as he had done his Friends. Did he not
restore that Intercourse of Civility and Generosity which always ought to
accompany Valor, and which was interrupted by the first Furies of the War?

Did he forget the Duties of Charity? You Praise the Christian who is tender
toward the Necessities of the Miserable, who is assiduous to Succor the Dying,
and zealous to Honor the Church. Praise then a General, who coming from the
Field of Battle, over whelmed with Labor, and covered with Blood, takes
diligent care to have the Living separated from the Dead, to rally the
languishing Remainders of those Generous Victims to the Honor of the Kingdom;
to hasten the Spiritual Consolations of Consecrated Pastors and Ministers, by
express Orders issued forth to all the Country round about. Praise the General,
who in the Devastations of War, applies himself, as much as lies within his
Power, to turn the Tempest from the Fields of the poor and defenseless People;
and rather, if there be Occasion, to let it fall upon the Possessions and
Castles of the Wealthy, even to the neglect of the Suits and Lands of most of
his Illustrious Kindred, so that he might spare the Revenues and Estates of the
Church. Commend a General, who out of a Spirit of Religion, at his own Expenses
repairs the Disorders of Impiety; who makes Restitution out of his own Purse,
to the Altars despoiled by the Rapines of the Soldier, and restores the Vessels
appointed to enclose the Sacred Mysteries. Who, lastly, out of the same Spirit
of Piety, and with a Diligence altogether singular, keeps off Fire and Sword
from the Churches and Places where the Saints are honored.

Famous Church, which renders the City of Hall so dear to all Flanders! Ancient
Monument of the Devotion of those People to the Mother of God! You must be also
a Monument of that Veneration which this Warrior paid to the Name of the same
Holy Virgin: and when Posterity shall behold that City surrounded with the
Ruins of her Ramparts, and the Church exalting her Front in the midst of so
many Ruins, while they bewail the dire Necessities of the War, can they forbear
to remember with joy the Piety of such a General? He took the same Care, and
for the same Reason, when he demolished Braine-le-Compte. He made profession of
a particular Veneration for the Mother of Mercy. And his Letters are to be seen
to Persons of the highest Quality, wherein he blushes not to declare, That in
all his Misfortunes he still addressed himself to Her, and had been sensible of
the Effects of Her Protection.

All these Actions of his are certain; and I should desire, my Lords, no other
credit to be given to all these Actions, then what is readily given to Slander
and Envy, when we hear the Reputation of great Personages rent and torn,
without any ground or proof, by the foulest of Lies, can that Credit be refused
me, in this Sacred Place, and this Illustrious Assembly, where I have the
Honor to speak; and upon Actions that cannot be questioned by the malignity of
human Wit, but only because they are advantageous to the Memory of so great a
Man?

All this while, if the Root of Divine Grace and Charity have not conferred a
Soul and Strength, requisite to produce the Fruit of Salvation, these are no
more then unprofitable Leaves that will not save the barren Fig Tree from the
Danger of being cut down. Whatever we expatiate thereupon, would be no more
then, as Saint Paul says, the sound of tingling Brass, or a tinkling Cymbal.
It Is very true: But this feeble Sound, in the celebrated Centurion, then out of
the Pale of Grace, and the true Faith, failed not to reach the Ears of the
Almighty, who was pleased to repay this Sound with the Favor of Conversion.
Would it be too much to presume the same in Favor of a Person full of Faith?
Would it be too much to presume upon the Mercy of God, which was always so
liberal to him, as to look upon the Impressions of his Virtue and Piety, as
Ties, which, as weak as they were, were a Help to bring him again to God, and
to draw down upon him the Grace of Repentance, which at length put an end to
his Life.

Oh! what a Favor, my Lords, was this! To how many of his Equals has it been
refused? From how many Dangers has he been lifted up by the Hand of God, that
he might be reserved to that favorable Minute? There have been seen several of
the Enemy, who have singl'd themselves from their Squadrons on purpose to give
him the fatal Stroke: as it happened in the Medley at the Conflict of Leuze. He
warded off the Blow; 'twas God that gave him the Address and Strength. But what
befell him at Nerwinde? He fought after the manner of the ancient Hero's of his
Race, that is to say, in the midst of his Children. The youngest, at Seventeen
Years of Age, was there the Second time that ever he had been in the Field, and
it was the Second Battle wherein his Courage had been tried. The Third, forcing
the Enemies Trenches at the Head of his Brigade, happened to receive a
dangerous Wound. The Father still advanced and driving the Recoilers to a
dangerous Post, not regarding the Importunities of his Officers, who laid the
Danger before him, the eldest Son, the worthy Heir of his Courage and Name,
here present, and paying his last Duties to his Memory, running with a design
to stop him, received the Blow that was designed against his Father. 'Twas God
that watched over 'em, and who measured their Paces, who by the Danger of the
Son, prolonged to the Father the Minutes of a Life profitable for his
Condition, to conduct him to this Time of Salvation still concealed in the
Bosom of Previdence.

What a short time was this to Prepare for Salvation! A few Days of Sighs and
Tears, after a long Series of Years spent in the Engagements and Passions of
this World. I grant, and upon this Subject I know the Reflections of the Holy
Fathers. I grant that when they admit Sinners to Repentance at the late Hour of
Death, they do not assure 'em of their Salvation. I can admit Repentance, but
not assure Salvation. But let Charity cause you to distinguish upon whom this
Sentence is given. Upon Sinners, whose Faith is without Light, and whose
Religion is without Authority. Upon Sinners, whose Reason is besotted, and
whose Hearts are incapable of any steady Resolution: Sinners, who by a long
Abuse of Holy Things, are become blind to all the Idea's of God: who neither
then submit to the last Duties of Religion, till after they are as it were
constrained by all that Zeal, Prudence, and the respect of the World is capable
to suggest. Sinners, whose Reason, good Sense, Faith, Hope, Confidence, and
Fear of God, must be settled, before you mention Sorrow and Repentance for Sin.
For a Sinner, under this Character, who expects approaching Death, for him to
tell us, That he believes, that he hopes, and that he loves God, We grant him,
says St. Austin, Repentance; but what Assurance of Repentance?

The Case was not the same with our Penitent, whose Salvation is this Day the
Subject of our Prayer. Faith, Religion, the Fear of God, a Veneration for Holy
Things, Contempt of Death, Indifferency for Life, a lively and displayed
Reason, Great and Noble Sentiments: These were the Dispositions of his Soul to
Repentance. It Is then upon this Occasion, or never, that the Sentence of St.
Cyprian ought to be of great Force: That Repentance never comes too late,
provided it be true, nor is there any thing but what may be remitted, provided
the Repentance be a part of the Heart. Now in regard of our Penitent, every
thing demonstrated the visible Marks of a sincere and solid Repentance.

Incapable of Cowardice and Baseness, during the whole course of his Life;
accustomed to raise his Courage proportionably to the Grandeur of the Danger;
upon the Approach of the Danger of his Life, which was declared to him by his
real Friends, or rather at the Approach of the Danger of his Soul, of which he
was more sensible then any Body, he followed Grace, which raised him above
every thing, and forming to himself an Idea of God, according to the
Attractions of that Grace, and the natural Propensity of his Heart, he measured
the Extent of his Mercy by the infinite Extent of his Grandeur. Was he
deceived? 'Twas the measure which the wise Man took: According to his
Greatness, such is the greatness of his Mercy. No Presumption all this while in
this Confidence. It was accompanied with a Humility, proper for a Sinner,
ashamed of his Ingratitude, and the long Abuse of God's Gifts. No dissimulation
in his Veneration of the Holy Mysteries. We found that all he did, when he
disposed himself to receive 'em, all he said when he received 'em was the
sincere and voluntary Act of a Heart accustomed, in despite of Mortal Passions,
to humble it self before God, to adore, invoke him, and to be sorrowfully
sensible of not loving him sufficiently. No honing after the Grandeurs of the
Age. With all the Vivacity, and all the presence of Mind that was natural to
him, he turns away his Eyes from that same glittering Fortune which he saw
vanishing before him: he thought it not worthy of one single Sigh. If there
were any Cares of this World, or any thing of human Thoughts that remained
behind, 'twas only to accomplish the Duties of Justice. He extended his Cares
to his Domestics; there was not one that had not a share in his Remembrance
according to his Merits and his Services. And who does he choose for the
Confident of his last Will? That Son, always by his side in the Confusion of
Battle, was still at hand in his late fatal Conflict, to receive and execute
his Orders: Alas! not with that joy, as when he obeyed him with his Arms in his
Hands. With a trembling Hand, and throbbing Heart, he wrote what with a serene
Air the dying Father dictated. And there it was that he found himself too
unable to imitate him. All his Childern came to his Bedside, lead in by a Hand
which Friendship rendered still more precious; to which we may add the Luster
of Birth, of Merit, and high Dignities, both in the Church and Court. In the
presence of a Friend of this Importance and Reputation, he scrupled not to
discover the tenderness of his Heart, and to take his Friend for a Witness and
Depositary of his Thoughts. But how far does his Tenderness for his Children
extend? To inspire into 'em Sentiments of God above his own, Sentiments for the
King equal to his own, and for themselves Sentiments of Concord and Union
worthy of themselves. With the same Constancy, sensible of the Sorrows of his
Friends, he is touched with it without the least weakness, he distinguishes 'em
all by particular Marks of Esteem, without partiality. To those also, whom he
had no reason to look upon as his Friends, he made it appear, by his
Examinations of himself, and made 'em confess by their Tears, that he had
always deserved to be so, and that he had always been so.

What Thronging! What a Concourse to his Bedside of all that was great in
France, or at the Court! What Surprise and Astonishment at the heavy News of
the pressing Danger he was in! How was the King disturbed for the Loss of such
a Subject, who had conquered and saved so many Provinces! What Lamentations of
all the great Princes who had commanded under him! that is to say, of those who
had had him for their General, the Companion of their Dangers, and their Guide
to Victory. Honored by their Tears, he is as little troubled as mollify'd by
'em; nothing moved, he shows himself a Spectacle to the Grief of some, and the
Pity of others. He calls to their remembrance the vanity of Grandeurs, that
have no other Foundation then the Frailty of this Life. He brings into their
Minds the Importance of the Journey which he is going to take before 'em, and
which they must all prepare for, after him. Penetrated with Sorrow to see
himself defective in requisite Purity, to offer up his Soul a sweet Savor to
God, he offers it as a Victim to his Supreme Will, and believes that God will
vouchsafe him Salvation, seeing that after so many Sins committed, he leaves
him still a lively and humble Hope. He accompanies the Sacred Ceremonies with a
faithful and reverent Attention; and he is desirous to breathe his last Gasps,
embracing the Cross, in Adoration of his Master. Enfeebl'd at length, and
feeling the Approaches of Death, he employs the last Efforts of his Speech, to
desire the Succor of the Holy Ministers, and his faithful Friends, that with
their Voices and their Thoughts they would uphold to the last the Union of his
Heart with God.

In these Sentiments of Submission of a Creature to his Master; of the Fear and
Humility of an Offender before his Judge; of Religion and Piety of a Christian
before his Savior; of the Confidence and Love of a Prodigal and Penitent Son
toward his Father, he expires, he goes to appear before the Sovereign Tribunal:
followed by his Works, it is true; but laden, Lord, with thy great Mercies. They
would never have accompanied him so many Years, they would never have been
redoubled at last with so much splendor, to fail him at the last Moment; that
very Moment to which all the Moments and Favors of this Life tend.

This is that which has hitherto upheld his Hope, and which at this day ought
also to uphold ours in favor of him. Not for our Righteousness, but for thy
great Mercies. Let those that know thee not, O God, blame our Confidence. But
let those that know thee, by a real Faith, by long Experiences of thy Goodness;
those who are entered into the Treasuries of thy Mercy, who know, That thou
have Pity upon all Men, because thou art Almighty; that thou pardon'st all,
because we are all thy Creatures; that for the gaining of their Pardon, thou
only demandest we should turn to thee with all our hearts: That thou art the
good Shepherd that leavest the whole Flock to look after the strayed Sheep, and
take her upon thy shoulders with so much the more Charity, as being more
feeble, and more in a languishing and dying Condition. Let those who know thee
for such a God, Hope in thee, O my God. And let 'em cry aloud with David,
Because thou never forsakest those that seek thee, Lord. The Person for whom we
implore all this Clemency, was full of these Sentiments. He has never ceased to
Know Thee. If he went astray, thou soughtest after him, by Adversity, by
Repentance. Invited by the Enquiries of thy Grace, he has sought after thee by
the Fervency of his Sighs. Lord, thou never forsakest those who know thee, and
who seek after thee. We know thee too well, not to depend upon thee. Let 'em
Hope in thee, that know thy Name, because thou have not forsaken those that
seek thee, O Lord.

The let us not fall into the Snares of the Enemies of Repentance, as also of
Virtue it self. The World is full of Men without Faith, who not being in a
Condition to pretend to the Hopes of Future Life, make it their De light to
think ill of those that go out of This; and strive (as says St. Jerome) to
Comfort themselves with their own Despair, by despairing of the Salvation of
all others. They believe it an Ease of their Pain, that no body should be
Righteous. But let us not afford 'em this false Joy; but let all the truly
Faithful reunite themselves, to uphold the merciful Strength of the Grace of
God, against the false Inflexibilities and aflected Zeal of Libertinism.

Let the Children of this Hero, all so capable to uphold here below the Honor
which he has left 'em, never imagine that they have not more for him. Let 'em be
mindful of that Glory of happy Eternity, where Repentance has a share as well
as Innocence; and striving themselves to attain to the most safe of these two
ways, let 'em be convinced, that God opens the Other, when, to whom, and after
what manner he pleases.

Let Him, among his Illustrious Children, whom Providence has made Choice of
for the Service of his Church, and who was Consecrated to it in his most tender
Years, with such happy Dispositions to the most Noble Virtues and most High
Dignities of that excellent Condition; Let this Son, I say, so justly sensible
of the Loss of such a Father, apply himself speedily to procure him, by his
Piety, the Peace and Glory of the Elect, with as much Fervency, as his other
Children by their Valor shall do Honor to his Memory.

Let that Afflicted Widow, as remote from the Pomp and Corruption of the World,
by Choice and Inclination, as she approaches near to what the World accounts
most Great, by the Blood of Luxembourg and Clermont, the Splendor of which she
has united to the Blood of Montmorancy, now redouble with more Confidence the
Exercises of her Charity, which she made her sweetest Employment while he
lived, for the etetnal Repose of her Husband.

Let that Lady, in the last place, strong above her Sex and her Age, who gave
Life to this Hero, then the Child of her Sorrow, now the Crown of her Old Age,
who saw him covered with Honor, after she had seen him born in the midst of
the Shadow of Death, at this day surviving so many Revolutions, as a public
Witness of the Wonders of Providence, after Threescore and eight Years of
Virtuous Widowhood, equal or superior to the Widowed Prophetess, considering
the Number of her Years, and her Love for her Country, and like to her in
Wisdom and Piety, consecrate the remainder of her Life, to bless the Mercies
which God has exercised upon her Son, and to draw 'em down upon the Flourishing
Family, of which God was pleased that He should be the Chief.

Let Us. My Lords, excited to Pray for Him, by so many Motives of Hope, work
out our Salvation with Fear and Trembling, convinced of this Truth so brightly
shining in St. Paul, That it is God who works in us hoth the Will and the Deed,
according to his Good Will. If God has wrought in Him this wonderful Operation,
Has he wrought it for all Sinners? If this Penitent showed himself Faithful
upon this last Effort of the Goodness of God for Him, Are all others therefore
Faithful? If He have had a Time, Shall you have the same? If the Felicity of
this End seems to harden ye to Sin, let the Seldomness of the Happiness carry
you to Repentance; to this Favorable Death of a Penitent; opposite to so many
Violent, Unexpected, Untimely, and many otherwise Fatal Deaths. In the mean
time, but for this End so full of Consolation, what would become of all the
Wonders of his Life? What Kindness would the Luster of so many Victories do
him before the Tribunal of his God? Nay, What stead would they stand him in,
before the Tribunal of the World, and Public Opinion? Therefore it is by this
End that we ought to measure all the Grandeur of this Man. And God (My Lords)
and the World will Judge of You by your Ends. May it have been for Him, and may
it be for every one of Us, the Beginning of Blessed Eternity.

THE END.

