The last Account from Fez, in a Letter from one of the Embassy to a Person of
Honor in London, containing a Relation of Colonel Kirk's Reception at
Mequinez, by the Emperor, with several passages in Relation to the Affairs of
Tangier.
MY LORD,
THis second account of our Journey into Barbary, is a debt I owe your Lordship
by my promise in my first, with Humble dependence on your Lordships Goodness to
Pardon the Imperfections of both. Leaving the Alazar the 7th of February, we
were Conducted on our way by the Alcade of Tituan, who used us with such
extreme Care and Kindness, that though we met with many Objects worth our
Observation, yet nothing so much, as the Civility and Complement we found from
the Chief Men of this Wild and Rude Race of People; in seven days march we
arrived at Mequinez, which is the Versailles of this Kingdom, Situated so well
for Security and Pleasure, that it is the chosen Seat of this King Muley
Ishmael: It has been the House of the Successors and First Princes of the
Blood; But the King refusing to live at his Capital City of Fez, has so much
Beautified and Enlarged this Place, that in time it will be a most Agreeable
and Magnificent Palace. About a Musket shot off he has laid the Foundation of
a New Castle which by the Misery and Slavery of 500 Christian Slaves
continually working upon it he intends to Build in the nature of a Citadel to
contain his Guards and Household. Their Lines and Fortifications is a thin Wall
with Flankers after the manner of German Bourges which though they be not
rampires of Defense against us in Europe, yet they are sufficient against any
offensive War, they are capable of amongst themselves. It is a great mistake
that is represented to us in England, of their being informed by French, and
other Engineers. They scarcely know the use of Cannon, but by the direction of
some few Christian Slaves, Men they take Prisoners. The next day after our
Arrival, Col. Kirk was received by the King in his Garden, being accompanied
only with four of his Chiefest Counselors and Alcades; his Bashaws and General
Officers of the Army waiting at the Gate with the Guards. After he had
delivered his Letters and made his Complement, the King returned more favorable
answers then could be expected from a Prince so Haughty, that his Person is
very rarely accessible by any body; he told him, that in return of the Honor
he did him in his Complement, he would grant him four years Peace and if by any
Spies he could be informed. of a breach of Peace Committed by his Officers, he
would punish them with extreme Severity, and in great Zeal he was pleased to
tell us we were nothing so much Christians, as the Spaniards or French; they
Worshipping the Cross and Images, but that our Opinion was much nearer
Paganism, and that he would Pray to God to give us Grace to forsake Christ and
follow Mahomet. After many other expressions in this Infidel manner he told us
he referred the terms of the Treaty to Alcade Omar of Alcazor who is his
Viceroy over all his Majesty's Dominions, and whose Character is so
extraordinary as well for Goodness as Greatness, that had I as much Capacity as
Zeal, I would have described it to your Lordship, that the King our Master
might know how much his Majesty's affairs may be advantaged by the Honesty and
Justice of so well Principled a Moor, who has been so industriously kind to the
Proceedings of this Treaty, that it has been his pains alone that has rendered
it acceptable to this King who is difficult of access, beyond imagination; and
I am assured his Majesty's Ambassadors would have met much Impossibilities of
effecting any thing, but for the use we made of this Discreet Honest Man; who
has since his acquaintance with Col. Kirk seemed to do very much for his sake,
and by his Influence on our affairs has prepared matters for an easy method of
conclusion; we owe great acknowledgments for his kind usage of us, not only
supplying us plentifully with Necessaries, but in as much Fashionable Ceremony
as could come from any well bred Man. After some time of Discourse the King
mounted his Horse and at the head of his Guards drew toward a Plain, to give
us the opportunity to observe their Exercise and Horse-man-ship; which as it
was very different to what I have seen in other Services, so the only form I
can express it by, is that of Prison base on Horse back, I have seen in France;
they dividing themselves into two Bodies Skirmish and Charge by Sallies from
each side, and after firing in full speed they made their Wheel, but in so much
confusion, that not a word of Command can be distinguished, not so much as the
Kings Person, who was in the midst of all this tumultuous way of Fighting
without the least Art of Order, which makes me conclude, they are the easiest
People Conquered I ever saw. Our Ranged Armies keeping their Squadrons firm,
and relieving their Charge with loose Parties, after their own manner, must
take their ground from them, and so consequently be Masters of the Field; but
however they are a very Vigorous and Valiant Enemy, their Discipline
proportionable to the confused and difficult passages of this Country,
observing their Ambuscades with the greatest cunning and patience Imaginable;
But what I find here most exceeding other Nations is their chief breed of
Horses which for shape and speed are certainly the most Noble and Rarest Kind
in the World, their Horses Habits and Furniture, on Festival days, make up a
figure of extraordinary State, and show their Emulating one another in Equipage
of that Nature; and though they are plain and poor in every thing else, yet the
Trappings of their Bridles and Saddles are rich and fine to an incredible
degree. The King at his return home gave us the liberty to see some of his
Horses, and the apartment of some of his Lions, he keeps as Prisoners of War;
but though we passed the Out-Courts of his Palace, yet were not permitted to
see the inward Lodgings, each Room being a several Cabinet to lock up the Kings
Treasure of Women, who were almost an Army of Ladies under cruel confinement,
and bare subsistence of one Man's allowance. This insatiable Monarch suffers no
Court to be made on the Queens side, but with the Majesty and Jealousy of a
Game Cock struts in his own Walls, and keeps all but Capons or Eunuchs from his
Flock of Mistresses; and here-if I may be bold with the Character of an Infidel
Prince, he excells all Mankind in Barbarous and Bloody Actions; Massacre and
Murder, being his Royal Game and Divertisement, which that it may not cloy his
Majesty in one kind, he invents every day a new pastime of Cruelty. The day
before our Arrival he threw several Moors to his Lions, taking great delight to
see those Lawless Princes Public Executioners of Criminals. All that are
Sentenced by the Law to die, are brought to receive their Doom from his
Majesty's Sword, or Lance, which Office is not sufficient to satisfy his
inclinations to Blood; he destroys several every day by fits of Rage and ill
humors. This violent Nature in this mighty Sultan does not only make his Common
Slaves, but Chiefest Officers approach him with great Consternation; which
though it would be great inhumanity any where else, yet it is in some degree
Necessary here. This Savage race of People is not to be deterred from
Insolences and Crimes but by hourly and horrid examples of Punishment, and the
Wheels of Government have their only motion from a constant and absolute stream
of Tyranny. As Force of Arms is the only preservation of their State, so it is
alone the means of attaining it: This King mounting his Throne, by stepping
upon his Brothers Children, and successors. So that all young Princes of the
Blood, not having the Force and Affections of the Country at Command, are born
either to a Goal, or a Halter; they never failing to confine or strangle them,
for the Security of him that Reigns. One of the Kings Nephews, Muley-Hamer,
escaping this destiny, has the entire Command of the Kingdom of Sus, the whole
Country revolting to him; and entends to show his Title to the whole Empire. By
rendezvouzing a vast Army near Morocco; the King, in order to prevent him, is
making great preparations for War; his Camp being three Leagues off from hence,
and intends at the appearance of the next Moon, which they religiously observe
as a signal, to take the Field; so that this Summer may produce considerable
action, by the motion of two great Armies. Having received invitation from the
King to see the City of Fez, which is the Metropolis of this Kingdom, about
twelve Leagues from this place, the 25th. of the last Month we were conveyed.
out of Town by the Alcade Omar, who at that time Discoursing with an English
Boy, that we had borrowed for an Interpreter, after a most obliging manner gave
him his freedom from further Slavery, and presented him to Col. Kirk very
generously, desiring him to receive him with the same frankness he gave him;
which good Nature in a Moor, I shall always admire; The next day we arrived at
that part of the City, they call New-Fez; which is divided from the old by a
River, where the greater part is the Kings Palace, the Out-Walls being of
great Circumference. One of the Sultanesses, or Kings Wives, is a Renegado
Christian, who has her Court there, and her Son of the age of twelve years
having the Command of this City Palace, sent us his Complement and Invitation
to see him and his Court; which we did the next day, and passing the
Out-Guards, we were conducted to a stately Room where the young Prince was
seated upon a Carpet, after the Turkish manner, attended by his Governor and
other Men of Quality; who after receiving us with very civil expressions, gave
us the liberty to look about us, and to view what was extremely delightful,
their walks being adorned with rows of Orange Trees, that grew through a
pleasant and glittering pavement of painted Tyles; the Aqueducts and Canals of
Water springing in the middle, represent a most Pleasant and Beautiful Scene,
and Charming prospect; for the inward apartments, their Furniture being the
Queen and her train, we were not permitted to come near; so that from thence we
were had to the largest and most stately Stable I ever saw, for length and
breadth, capable to hold above 200 Horses and supported with lofty Pillars of
at least fifty foot high, being refreshed and cooled by artificial Vaults of
Water underneath, necessary against the heats of this Climate. They use neither
Rack nor Manger, but fasten them by the four feet in the nature of a Tramel and
feed them on the ground; The next day we were conducted through the streets, to
take a full view of Old-Fez: Which we observed to be very populous and by the
marks and ruins at a distance, to have been anciently a City extraordinary
large. Former Ages have had the Honor to find this famous City in great Beauty
and Glory, but time has laid a rough hand upon it, and rendered it so
deformed, that her founders would not in the least know her again; which
besides superior Effects of Providence, is occasioned by a continual rapine,
these Heathens practice out of Ambition who shall Command. Their Mosques,
Churches, Bathes, for Structure and Ornament are great Monuments of the Virtue
and Ingenuity of their Ancestors. But as true Religion and Learning has
deserted this People, so has all manner of Art to that degree, that by their
neglect and laziness, they must in half another Age become a heap of Rubbish
and Confusion. After passing the Morning in the streets of the Town, the
Governor did us the Honor to invite us to Dinner at his House; and receiving
us with the Ceremony of his Guards in their Arms, and seated at his Gate, after
the State and Manner of the Country, Complemented us with great Respect and
Kindness; the inward Courts of his House delighted us extremely, the Canale and
the Waterworks with rows of Orange Trees, not being much unequal to the beauty
of the Kings Palace; our Cheer was extraordinary plentiful, and pleasant,
after their manner, and served by the Officers of his Guard with all manner of
grandeur. When we entered the House we were extremely delighted; it being
Furnished with Carpets and Hangings, after the richest Turkey Fashion. The
Governor and chief Magistrate of the City, after waiting our Dinner time, sat
down to a Collation of their own; our Table and Stools being both equal on the
ground, and with brimmers of pure Element, we made a sober conclusion of our
entertainment; we diverted our selves three days at the place, and at our
return to Mequinez, the King was pleased to send for us; and after examining
our opinion of Fez, and our usage there, he expressed himself extremely
satisfied with Col. Kirk; telling him, that as he had advanced so far into his
Country, and put himself into his Majesty's hands, he would esteem him, as one
deserving his Princes favor by hazarding so much for his Service; but in
return of the Value and Faith he had in his word, he should find greater
favor, then any Man was ever known to have from him; and though he had great
reason to dislike the Ambassadors proceedings in distrust of him, and using
him with so great delays, yet for his sake he would admit him his presence;
and told him, as long as he remained in Tangier, there should never be any Gun
fired at the place, but that it should be furnished with Provisions, and
Benefits of a hearty Peace; which he believes will be more necessary for us at
so far a distance, then a Chargeable War; he desired Col. Kirk to furnish him
with some few Guns for his own shooting: And as he performed his promise to him
in these small things, he would make a faithful return in whatsoever should
concern a long and continued Peace. After Discoursing very morally of Trust and
Honor, perceiving an English Slave at his labor, his Majesty after a very
Gracious manner, gave him his Liberty, and gave him to Col. Kirk. I could
enlarge upon this subject, but I am already guilty of Interrupting your
Lordships more weighty affairs; though with no other design, but to show how
much I am

My Lord, Your Lordships most humble Servant.

FINIS.
London, Printed for Walter Davis in Amen-Corner.


