The LAST SPEECHES AND CONFESSIONS OF Captain Thomas Walcott, John Rowse, and
William Hone, Joyner, At the Common Place of EXECUTION On Friday the 20th. of
this present July, 1683. Who were all found Guilty of High Treason, For
Conspiring the Death of His Most Sacred Majesty, And his Royal Brother James
Duke of York.
THe many and continual Judgments which are inflicted upon resolute Offenders,
but especially such as study and contrive the shedding of innocent blood,
methinks might be sufficient to detect and hinder others from their wicked
progresses; but such is the stubbornness of this Age, that they are rather
hardened than mollified by the threatening dangers of a displeased Deity. How
many Horrid and Damnable Plots have been Conspired against His most Gracious
Majesty; which by mercy and Providence of the Almighty have all proved
ineffectual, and proclaimed the impudence of the Authors to be unparalleld; so,
you may see by this Horrid Conspiracy, lately detected by the goodness of God
Almighty, how, when they thought themselves a good as certain of their carrying
on their design answerable to their own mind, and bloody dispositions, that
then their intreagues were laid open, their Treasons discovered, and their own
lives brought into a share, as you may read in these following Lines.

At the Sessions of Oyer and Terminer, that began at the Old Bailey on Thursday
July 12. 1683. And when the Court was sat, Captain Thomas VValcott appeared at
the Bar, his Indictment being read he pleaded not guilty; but Coll. Rumsey
testified upon Oath that there had been diverse Consultations about killing the
King as He wa^ to return from Newmarket, and that it was designed to be acted
near the dwelling House of one Rumbold a Malster, not far from Hodsoon in
Hertfordshire, and that VValcott was in nomination to be the person that should
perpetrate this Villainy, but he refused to do that, and chose rather to engage
the Lifeguard which was attending His Majesty, that they being cut off, they
might the more readily carry on their purpose.

Colonel Rumsey declared that there was several Consultations hold about this
Diabolical contrivance, which the Lord Chief Justice Pemberton by diligent
enquiry into, found to be at several p^a^^, namely at Mr. Wests Chamber, and or
a Tavern within Ale^gate, and about Mile end Green; to which VValcott pleaded,
that at that time these Consultations were held, he was Lame of the Gout, and
witness offered to justify the same, made answer, that he was certainly sick of
the Gour some considerable time, but whether it was just at that time or not he
could not possitively swear.

Then Captain VValcott replied that it was very hard that four men should
combine against his Life, and impeaching him save their own.

But Mr. Attorney General opened the Case, laying open the danger of
concealing Treason, to which he answered that he was merely drawn in to the
concern, and also that he thought concealing of Treason was but misprision of
Treason, but my Lord answered that to be in Consultation and not to discover
was real Treason.

So the Jury having taken notice of what he Confessed, immediately brought in
their Verdict, that he was Guilty of High Treason.

Will. Hone having been Examined on Thursday was again brought to the Bar on
Friday morning, and then desired the Plea he made yesterday might be allowed,
which was, that he was Guilty of a Conspiracy, but not concerned in raising of
Arms to cause a Rebellion, but the Indictment imported, that as a false Traitor
he had Conspired to Depose the King of His Crown and Dignity, and particularly
at a Consult on the second of March, in the Parish of St. Michael Bishaw, where
Rumbold, Furguson, Holliway Roe, Francis and Richard Goodenough, and many o^
her Traitorous Conspirators were present; and that they called the King, Black
bird, and the Duke the Gold finch; the Prisoner confessing that he did conspire
the Death of the Blackbird but not of the Goldfinch; this with other things
alleged and sworn against him caused the Jury to give in their Verdict,
Guilty, without going from the Bar.

The next that came to the Bar was Mr. Rouse, who had several Witnesses sworn
against him, and accused him of the same manner of Crimes as was sworn against
Hone; He could make but little defense for himself; it being absolutely sworn
against him, That he had a Hand in the Conspiracy against his Majesty's Life:
But, notwithstanding all his slender evasions, the Court soon brought him in
Guilty of HIGH TREASON; And he was charged with several Treasonable Designs,
as, not only to destroy the King's Majesty, but also to Levy War, and by
stirring the people up to Sedition, thereby to raise a Rebellion, and Subvert
the Government; All which the Witnesses for the King positively Swore; and he
being not able to disprove, the Sentence was past against him, and the other
two, in manner following: THat they should be Drawn upon Hurdles to the place
of Exeution, and there to be hanged by the Neck, their Privy-Members to be cut
off before their Faces, and thrown into the Fire; then their heads to be c^t
off, and their Bodies Quartered, and their Quarters to be set up, as in such
Cases of Treason it is usual.

DUring the time of their Imprisonment they seemed very penitent; spending
great part of their time in Reading and Prayer, and other Religious Exercises.
And also lamenting their sad and miserable Condition, which they had brought
upon themselves by following such wicked and treasonable practices; in
conspiring the Death of so Gracious a Prince: Other times upbraiding their
Companions and Accomplices, that they had formerly been concerned with. Only
the Captain seemed the most obstinate, and least concerned.

On Friday the 20th. of this present Month July, being the the day of their
Execution, having taken leave of their Friends and Relations, they were drawn
in Sledges, attended with a numerous Guard of Constables and other Officers;
and being brought to the place of Execution, they made their several Speeches
and Exhortations to the people that stood round about them, intreacing them to
take Warning by their untimely end; and to have a care what Company they keep;
wishing all persons to fear God, and to honor their King, and to avoid all
Treasonable Practices, which will assuredly bring destruction both to Soul and
Body.

But one of them seemed to extenuate his Crime, and to blame others he was
concerned with.

But the CROWD being very great, we can give you but some short Account of what
they spoke before their Execution.

When the Executioner had done his work, the eyes of the multitude were filled
with tears, every one lamenting the sad conditions of these poor and miserable
wretches, who had engaged themselves into this bloody enterprise; but too late
they may lament their sad destinies

It is great pity that so many brave and worthy Gentlemen should engage
themselves in such a horrid conspiracy that the world before never heard of,
because this Plot was contrived by persons pretending to zeal and Religion,
which is not, nor cannot be suitable to rules of Christianity, for we all know
that shedding of blood is clearly contrary to the commands of the Almighty.

Printed for J. Coniers.


