A Thanksgiving SERMON FOR His Majesty's Safe Return, AND FOR The Happy and
Honorable PEACE, Of which GOD has made Him the Glorious Instrument.

PREACHED In Highgate Chapel, on Thursday the 2d. of December, 1697.

By R. L. V. A. L.

LONDON, Printed for the Author, MDCXCVII.

Lord Crewe's Charity Durham, England

blazon or coat of arms

The Prayer before Sermon.
O Blessed Lord God! who art glorious in holiness, fearful in praises, working
wonders. Thou sparest when we deserve punishment; and in the midst of judgment
remembrest mercy. To thee alone we ascribe the Glory of our many Deliverances:
This Church and Nation have been the visible care of thy providence and
protection. We therefore praise thee, O God! We acknowledge thee to be our
Savior and Deliverer! Thou only causest Wars to cease in the Earth; and in
great mercy have put a stop to the Effusion of Christian Blood; thou heardest
the voice of our humble petitions, and have preserved thy dear Servant from all
those Dangers and Deaths he has been exposed to for our sakes: Thou broughtest
him back, O Lord, with the Triumphs and Glories of a Peacemaker. O fill our
Hearts with thankfulness; and in thy good time give repentance to all those who
sit in darkness and error. Grant to us all a spirit of righteousness, peace,
and concord, that we may become one Sheepfold under one Shepherd, the Lord
Jesus Christ. O that love, and union, piety, and charity, may abound amongst
us, that we may become the joy of the whole Earth. O Lord, give thy Servant,
our most righful and lawful sovereign King William, a long Life, and happy
Reign; and let this be the praise and glory thereof, that therein the Righteous
did flourish, and there was abundance of Peace. -- This, and whatsoever else,
thou, O God of thine infinite Goodness, etc.

Colossians III. 15. And let the peace of God rule in your hearts, to the which
also ye are called in one body, and be ye thankful.
LOVE and Gratitude can never fail of a Reward; Joy and Peace attend them in
this World, Happiness and Glory in that which is yet to come. They are just
like the Cherubims, always smiling and looking kindly one upon another.

A readiness and willingness to do all the good we can, a grateful resentment
of all the favors and benefits we have receive'd from others, (which are
Qualities of an endearing nature,) were the only Springs and Engines that moved
and inclined me to undertake the Business of this Day. Had I the golden Mouth
of St. Chrysostom, the Eloquence of Cicero, or the admirable Skill of Orpheus,
I might then penetrate, or mollify, or charm those Men's Hearts which seem now
to be as inflexible, I had almost said as insensible, as the very Rocks and
Stones.

Could I now draw as lovely and lively a Description of all the Advantages of
Peace and Union amongst our selves, as the Subject will bear, I might then
convince Gainsayers, and bring those who seem to be discontented at the present
Dispensations of Providence, to confess, that all our Dangers, our Troubles,
our Miseries and Sorrows did at first spring and arise from the poisoned
Fountain of our own unhappy Divisions. I beseech you therefore, in the Language
of the Apostle, let the peace of God rule in your hearts. What! does the
Apostle mention Peace! Methinks there is a pleasing Charm in that sweet
Appellation! Peace is now become the delightful Theme of our daily Discourse,
and the daily Object of our Joy and Gratitude.

Peace is the fairest Flower of a Prince's Crown, the choicest Blessing of a
Nation; it is one of the mod excellent Gifts of the Divine Bounty: It brings
Relief to the Poor, Bread to the Hungry, Clothes to the Naked, Business to the
Diligent and Industrious; it invigorates the Body Politic; it sets all the
Wheels and Engines of Trade, of Traffic, and Commerce, into a joyful Movement;
and has folded up within her Arms all those Blessings which we poor Mortals can
wish or desire.

God, who governs the World, and disposes and orders all things for the Good of
his Creatures, (which should give full Satisfaction to all Mankind,) has for
eternal Reasons, which we shall all see and understand hereafter, given us a
Prince, whose first Arrival gave new Life to our dying Hopes, and at once both
roused and raised the Courage of a sinking Nation.

His great Understanding, his indefatigable Toil and Labor, his undaunted
Courage, and admirable Conduct, has, since that, not only lowered, but levelld
the growing Pride and Power of a subtle, politic Enemy. And now, after all
the thundering Storms, the frightful and amazing Tempests of War, he has
crowned this, and die neighboring Kingdoms, with the brightest Diadem of this
World's Felicity, a Firm and an Honorable Peace. Thus God has made this most
illustrious Prince the Avenger of our Evils, the Repairer of our Breaches, and
Restorer of our Blessings. For which the Children who are yet unborn, will one
Day rise up, and call him Blessed.

And what shall the Fathers say, who have heard and seen all this! May all the
Blessings of Heaven and Earth attend King William the Third, the best and
greatest Monarch of the World: A Prince dear to Heaven, the Darling of
Providence, born for the Good of Mankind, worthy in all Ages to bear the mod
exalted Triumphs of War, and the brightest Felicities of an eternal Peace.
Great Favors are great Obligations, and so consequently should bind and engage
us, for the time to come, to be more Obedient to God, more Loyal to our King,
and more Charitable to our Neighbors; more resolute in ceasing to do Evil, in
learning to do well: This certainly is the best and only way of returning
Thanks this Day to Almighty God.

God's present Mercies, and our own late Miseries, are such pressing and
invincible Arguments, to persuade us to be Peaceable and Thankful, as none can
be greater; such a Power they have of exciting and moving us to take heed, that
we fall not out amongst our selves, that we never forget nor overlook these
signal Instances of the Divine Goodness, in delivering this Church and Nation
from Popery and Slavery, as must needs render us infatuated, should we not
labor to promote Peace and Union amongst our selves.

Let the peace of God rule in your, hearts; rule in your Hearts, and make them
unanimous; in your Tongues, and make them thankful; in your Hands, and make
them charitable: Rule us all into one Mind, one Heart, and one Faith, that we
may all with one Mouth glorify and praise the God of our Salvation. This Peace
of God we ought every way we can to be ruled by it, and be thankful for it;
neither is our Virtue nor our Felicity complete without it.

He is the best Christian that is most for Peace with his fellow Christian.
This Peace of God must overruled our Passions, advance and crown our Virtues,
heal and decide our Controversies. Have thou Faith? Have it to thy self;
trouble neither thy weak, nor thy strong Brother about it; do not censure or
condemn thy Brother, because he is not just of the same mould and opinion with
thy self; but sit down, and be content, that thy Life, thy Liberty, the Law,
and thy Religion, are all entirely preserved. Let not nice Distinctions and
Opinions hatch and foment any Quarrels amongst us Christians; but let the peace
of God rule in your hearts, to the which also ye are called, in one body, and
be ye thankful.

In speaking to these Words, I shall apply my self to the Duty of this Day, and
will enquire,

First, What is meant by this Expression, Let the peace of God rule in your
hearts.

Secondly, What it is to be thankful.

Peace is a Word of a very large Extent; all God's Blessings are folded up in
that sweet Name: It signifies all the temporal, all the spiritual, and all the
eternal Good we can either expect or desire.

Now that Peace which the Apostle here recommends, is such an one as is joined
with Righteousness, with Truth, with Love, and Charity. If this Peace rule in
our Hearts, it will decide all our Differences, compose all our Quarrels, and
heal all our Wounds; it will work us all into order, and make us cheerful under
all its Commands, both to God and Man. Thus let the Peace of God rule in your
Hearts.

Were it once but truly and sincerely fixed there, it would rule our Words into
a milder key, and our Actions into a smoother dress. We should hear no Whispers
against the present auspicious. Government of great Caesar; no feigned
Jealousies of a Commonwealth coming in; no talk of an absolute unbounded
Monarchy; no canting of sad Times, when we must have seen and felt much worse,
had not God himself interposed, rescued, and delivered us. It were much to be
wished, that our Magistrates would take effectual Care, to suppress and hinder
the printing of Libels, and all such Books, and Pamphlets, as tend to no other
end, but to amuse the People, to dissuade them from admiring and adoring the
best of Princes, to rail at the present Government, and keep them in perpetual
Discontents, and hinder them from Reunion with the Church. These cannot be the
Words of such as seek the Peace of Sion, or pray for the Peace of Jerusalem, or
wish well to their native Country.

But if we stand upon Punctilio's, and will not pray but in our own Words; will
not worship God, unless we may do it in what form we list our selves; will quit
the Church, rather than our Humor, we cannot be said to further, but disturb
the Peace both of Church and State.

The Apostle beseeches us, Col. 3.12, 13. to be tender and compassionate, meek
and humble, patient and long-suffering, forbearing and forgiving one another:
If any man have a quarrel against any, even as Christ forgave you, so also do
ye. O most admirable and divine Exhortation!

As if he had said, I assure you, my beloved Colossians, that these Virtues and
Graces are the best Symptoms, and the best Expressions, of the Peace of God
ruling in your Hearts.

The Looks of Peace are mild and cheerful, her Words smooth and gentle, her
Hands soft and merciful, always stretched out to receive and embrace those who
are ready to come in. Now as we are to live peaceably one with another, so we
are to be thankful for all those Blessings God has bestowed upon this Church
and People.

It Is a Duty that now lies upon us; for it well becomes the Just to be
thankful, Psalm. 33.1. I cannot direct you to any thing more becoming us, in
regard of the Mercies mentioned in the Text: The Peace of God, and the calling
us to it in one body. Each of them so ample Subjects for our Gratitude, that we
cannot show thankfulness enough for either. Peace Abroad and at Home too! This
is so great a Blessing, that no one thing is more pleasant to be seen, more
beautiful to be desired, or more profitable to be enjoyed.

But what shall we say to those Remarkable Instances of God's Mercy and
Goodness to us, in preserving this Church and Nation from the black Designs,
and barbarous Conspiracies of bloody-minded Men.

On November the 5th. 92 Years ago, when the fatal Tragedy of the Gunpowder
Treason was to be acted by the Papists; all the black Scenes of Ruin, of
Misery, and Death, being all fitted and prepared; that then, when the Funeral
of King and Parliament, of Church and State, was to be consummated in a fiery
Cloud; that then, when the fatal Minutes were hastening on to an amazing,
dreadful Period: That God should at that moment of Time, when there was none
could save or help us; that he should come down to rescue and deliver us! That
he should infatuate and discover those desperate Wretches, and bring them all
to Shame, and condign Punishment! is a plain Instance of his Povidence, (which
has hitherto watched over us for Good) as well as a peculiar Token of his Love
and Mercy. On the selfsame Day, November the 5th. above 9 Years ago, when we
looked upon our selves as a miserable, enslaved Nation; our Liberties, our
Laws, our Religion, being all perverted and invaded; that then, when we were
beset with Legions of armed Papists, picked out of this and the neighboring
Kingdoms, ready to receive and execute the bloody Dilates of Priests and
Jesuits; that then, when our Church and Religion were brought to the lowest
ebb; lay languishing and sighing under the Oppression and Tyranny of her cruel
Enemies, who tauntingly upbraided her with her Old Age: That God should then
raise up her Head out of the Dust! That he should bring all the Plots and
Contrivances of her Enemies to naught! That he should save Israel by the hand
of his Servant Moses! That he should send the most Heroic and Renowned Prince
of Orange to save and rescue us from a most cruel Tyranny, and bloody
Persecution, is a Mercy thankfully to be commemorated by all such as love their
Religion, their King, and Country.

God has called who were almost out of Call; some in remote Corners of this
Kingdom, some in foreign Countries abroad, some incognito in dark Corners at
home, some in Dungeons and Prisons, some in the Tower! We are all like dead Men
restored to a new Life! God has called us again into his Church; he has
restored some to their Estates, some to their Wives and Children, from whom
they were forced to fly; not that they had done Evil, or deserved Death, but
because they hated Idolatry, and were ready and able to discover the Actors and
Inventers of all our Miseries and Troubles.

God has called us all to the Enjoyment of our Liberties, our Laws, and our
Religion, he makes our Wars to cease, and has settled us upon the sure
Foundations of an Honorable Peace. This is so transcendant a Mercy, that we
can never be sufficiently thankful.

For Men to be grateful and thankful, is,

First, Humbly and heartily to acknowledge God's infinite Goodness and Mercy to
us, and our own infinite Unworthiness of it. He that thinks light of those
Works and Wonders God has wrought for us; he that knows not how to prize that
Peace and Prosperity we now enjoy, or thinks he did any thing to merit or
deserve it, either understands not God's Goodness, or is not thankful for it.

Secondly, To be truly thankful, is openly and publicly to confess God's
Mercies; to reflect a while upon the Providence of God.

1. In delivering of this Kingdom from Popery and Slavery.

2. In preserving His Majesty's most Sacred Person from the barbarous
Conspiracies of bloody-minded Traitors; and, from all the Perils, the Dangers,
the various kinds of Deaths, he has for our sakes been exposed to. And then,

Lastly, With Raptures of Joy to dwell a while in the pleasant Contemplation of
an Honorable Peace.

Much might be said of his Wisdom, his Valor, his Conduct, and particularly of
his Clemency to his Enemies. These all deserve Hymns and Praises; we ought to
be telling them from Day to Day.

Again, To be thankful indeed, is to show it by our Lives and Actions, to
present our selves, and all that is ours, to the Service and Worship of God; to
offer up our Souls and Bodies, and what else is ours, as Peace Offerings, and
Sacrifices of Thanksgiving; never to fear we can do too much, never to hope we
can do enough, for what God has done for us; in thus reinstating us in our
Religion, and in all other our Rights and Privileges.

He has finished our Wars, and restored our most Rightful and Lawful King,
with the Triumphs and Hosanna's of a Peacemaker. Blessed be he that thus
comes to us in the Name of the Lord; be we thankful unto him, and let us speak
good of his Name for ever and ever.

Thus much for those Words, Let the Peace of God rule in your Hearts; it
follows, to the which ye are called in one body, and be ye thankful: We are
called in one body, How? By Signs and Wonders; by a miraculous Power: Surely
there wanted but a Step between Us and Death. All the Devices and Engines of
our Enemies were all fitted, and almost finished; ready (as they themselves
boasted) either for our Conversion, or Confusion. Now we who should have
suffered and died, or have been murdered for the same Cause, are thus
unexpectedly delivered, and called into one body, let us study how to keep in
one; how to love, relieve, and assist each other. Among the Saints and Angels
there are no Jarrs, or Discords; Peace dwells for ever there: And seeing God
has, of his infinite Mercy and Goodness called us to it, I hope we will bethink
our selves, and walk worthy of it.

If we once fall into our old Divisions, our very Hopes of a Recovery of Peace
and Union are lost in a moment.

If by falling into several Parties, we set open the Floodgates to a Deluge of
Misery and Confusion, it may justly be said of us, We did not understand the
things that made for our Peace, but betrayed and ruined one another.

The Day Star of our Peace and Prosperity shines now from East to West, from
North to South: Like Lightning in a moment of Time, Fame has winged great
William's Name throughout the World.

Before his long wished for Arrival here, above Nine Years ago, there was
nothing but Scenes of Sorrow, of Slavery, and Death before our Eyes. Now that
he is come, has repaired our Breaches, scattered our Enemies, fought our
Battles, and finished all with a glorious Peace: See! all things begin to
spring and revive, to bloom and flourish afresh! Nature puts on a pleasing
Smile! Even the dull and melancholy Soul looks gay and cheerful! Where ever
this mighty Prince comes, how joyfully is he received! how splendidly
entertained! The Eyes of all the World are now with admiration fixed on him.
See! his Enemies are all struck with Fear and Terror, his Friends all
transported with Joy and Wonder.

We are all now like Trees planted by the Rivers of Waters, which should bring
forth their Fruits in due season: And will we, after all this, tear off our
selves by pieces into more Confusions? Who has bewitched us, that we should
think of doing this?

If, after all this, we reflect a little upon our selves, how happlly we were
called, who a little before seemed cast away; called into one Protestant
Church, detesting Superstition and Idolatry; into one happy Government,
abhorring all arbitrary Power, Oppression, and Tyranny; called then, when we
scarce had any Names, but Traitor, Heretic, or Rebel, to be called by. We
Protestants were the innocent Sheep, whom the Priests and Jesuits had marked
out for Slavery or Death.

Indeed, to say the truth, we had by our Sins deserved to undergo and suffer
all that Misery that was then breaking in upon us. That God should,
notwithstanding this, have Compassion upon us, who so little deserved it! Oh!
what can we look upon this to be, but the calling us out of Dust and Death, to
an anticipated Resurrection?

Here we cannot choose but admire at the eternal Mercy and Goodness of God,
crying out, Lord! what is man, that thou art mindful of him? Or what are we,
that thou should thus rescue and deliver us?

And can we so far forget our selves, as to unwind and unravel all our
Happiness, by being divided again? Does not the Mischiefs and Miseries we have
already suffered, make us sensible of all the Arts and Contrivances the Papists
have used, to exasperate and set us one against another? Are the Companies of
armed Roman Catholics, of desperate bloody-minded Irish-men, so blessed a
Sight within our Quarters and our Houses, that we now seem to murmur and
complain? If we are pleased with these things, why then God indeed has done us
an Injury, to scatter and infatuate so dangerous an Enemy, to cease our
Oppressions and Persections, to bring home Peace and Safety to our Doors; and
we do as good as tell him thus, whilst we either run our selves into new
Divisions, raise them or continue them. Oh how unthankful, miserably
unthankful, must we needs be, as well as foolish and inconsiderate, if we thus
contemn and throw away our Peace and Happiness!

And shall we add Ingratitude to the vast bulk of our other notorious Vices! O
God forbid. And yet this we shall do, if we oppose that Peace and Happiness
which Heaven it self now tenders and offers to us by the hand of our most
gracious King. Now what can be more answerable to the Peace of God bestowed
upon us with our Enemies abroad, than a firm bond of Peace and Union with our
Brethren at home? He that returns not this, returns nothing to God for all that
he has wrought and done for us.

How can he be at Peace with God whom he has not seen, that will not be at
Peace with his Brother whom he has seen? He that says he loves God, and
hates his Brother, is a Liar; hereby shall all men know that ye are the
Friends and Followers of Christ, if ye love one another.

To draw to a Conclusion: The redeeming us out of Misery and Slavery, the
scattering of our Enemies, the preservation of His Majesty's Sacred Person from
all the Conspiracies, the Dangers, and Deaths he has been exposed to at home
and abroad, the happy End of the War, and the welcome Blessings of an
Honorable Peace, these are all of no worth or value in our Judgments or
Opinions, if we be not henceforth more Righteous toward God, more Loyal
toward our King, and more Loving and Charitable one toward another, than ever
we yet have been.

And now if ye have any respect to the Righteous Judge of all the World, if any
Consideration of God's Goodness, if any Love to Unity, if any kind of Gratitude
for the Mercies you have received from Heaven, or would be gracious in the Eyes
of a merciful Father; let the Meekness of Christians, the Endearments of God's
Kindness, the Reasonableness of Gratitude, and the Hopes of God's Favor,
engage us all, to the utmost of our Power, to promote Peace, and Charity, and
Union amongst our selves: And may that God who calls us to it, work it in us,
that we may all with one Heart and one Mouth return him Thanks, for his Mercy
endures for ever; and let all the People sing with King David, Bless ye the
Lord, praise him, for his Mercy endures for ever. And let us now beg, that the
God of Peace and Holiness would sanctify every one of us in Body, Soul, and
Spirit, that we may be kept blameless to the Coming of our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ. Amen, Amen.

FINIS.

