The Power of Kings from God.

A SERMON Preached in the CATHEDRAL CHURCH OF SARUM, The XXIX. Day of June,
1683.

Upon Occasion of the DETECTION of the late Horrid Plot Against the LIFE of his
Sacred Majesty.

By Paul Lathom Prebendary of that Church.

Romans 13.2. Whosoever therefore resists the Power, resists the Ordinance of
God: And they that resist, shall receive to themselves damnation.

LONDON, Printed by M. Clarke, for Joanna Brom at the Sign of the Gun at the
West End of St. Paul's. 1683.

A SERMON Preached at the Cathedral Church OF SARUM, On PROVE. 8.15.
By me Kings Reign.

THat the Person here speaking is Wisdom, will be manifest to every man that
peruseth the precedent Verses of this Chapter. That by Wisdom, so frequently
mentioned up and down this Book of Proverbs, is meant, not Derivative and
Imperfect Wisdom, such as is in the Creatures; but Wisdom in the Original or
Fountain, the infinite Wisdom of a God infinite in all excellencies and
perfections, or God infinitely wise, is generally agreed by Divines. And hereby
it is sufficiently evident that the direct and immediate sense of the words of
the Text is this. By the infinite wisdom of the great God of heaven, or by the
all-wise, the only-wise God Kings do reign over their Subjects.

That I may discourse distinctly upon these words, it will be requisite to
consider that Kings may be said to Reign by God in four respects.

1. By the most wise Ordination and Appointment of the God of Wisdom,
Government in general, and Monarchy in particular, was established among men.

2. By the infinite wisdom of God Kings are set over a People, to accomplish
those most wise and just ends which himself has designed.

3. By the powerful and gracious Providence of the all-wise God Kings are set
upon their Thrones, and upheld and continued there.

4. By Authority immediately derived from the onlywise God, the great King of
Kings, Monarchy is established, and Kings do hold their Scepters.

First, By the most wise Ordination and Appointment of the God of Wisdom,
Government in general, and Monarchy in particular, was established among men.
And here it will be worthy our consideration, to trace the footsteps of the
divine Wisdom in erecting Government in the World.

1. The most wise and benign Creator of the world made man an Intelligent and
Sociable Creature. There is an inclination to society even among Creatures void
of Reason. The brute Beasts by natural Instinct do sort themselves into Flocks
and Herds; the Fowls of the Air do fly together in Companies; yea, the very
Infects do Associate: the Bees in swarms do dwell and work together. Nature
enclines them hereto, as that which conduces to the comfort and support of one
another. But Man that has Reason, more clearly discovering the necessity and
sweetness of Society, is more inclined thereunto, as best knowing how to
improve it, and to make the best advantage of it.

2. To incline men the more to Society, the most wise God has thought meet to
leave men to a mutual dependence one upon another, and a need of their
conversing together. It is not in vain that the Wise man says, Woe to him that
is alone, Eccl. 4.10. for God has made no man capable of standing by himself.
The Philosopher therefore compares men to stones in an Arch, which so
necessarily depending upon each other to keep them from falling, by this very
dependence the whole and all its parts are supported. In the Natural body no
part is so great or eminent that it can say it stands in no need of those that
are less considerable: nor any part so small or inconsiderable, but it is
capable of being useful and helpful to the rest. And in the Body Politic there
is no person so great or high that he can live independent on others; nor any
person so mean and but he is low, capable of doing service to the other parts
of the Society. And hereby our Creator has precluded all thoughts of
solitariness, and rendered Society necessary.

3. To answer this necessity, which himself has thought fit to entail upon man
for the mutual help and support of his Kind, he has by his providence digested
men into Societies. Of these, a Family, though the least and most imperfect,
was the first that was constituted. The necessity and usefulness of Society
being better discovered by experience, did encourage succeeding Generations to
enlarge the Territories of their Societies: And ten Families joining together
made a Tything, as ten of these joined made an Hundred, till Society and
Government by degrees were digested into more perfect Form. But still from the
beginning men never lived in Solitude.

4. To form and manage these Societies, the great Governor of the World has
erected a Government in each of them. Indeed to show us how inseparable
Government is from Society, we may observe some rude lineaments of it amongst
the Brutes: not to speak of the Lion being called the King of the Beasts, and
the Eagle of the Birds, it is observable that in all Flocks and Herds there are
some that bear rule, and others that are subject. But here certainly Dominion
is founded in fear: for as the strength and courage of one beast invites him to
usurp rule over others, so the weakness and cowardliness of others prompts them
to be subject to the other. But as Reason makes man more capable to see the
advantages of Government, and to manage it aright; so it has inclined him to
set it up in every Society. So that from the least, that of a Family, to the
greatest, that of a Kingdom, still Government has managed and supported all
Societies.

5. And the most wise and gracious Providence of God does fit some men to rule
and govern the rest, and others to be subject, and to submit to Superiors* In
the natural body each part is fitted for the place it holds, and the Office it
bears. The Head seems made on purpose, to stand in the most eminent part, to
preside over the rest: the Hands wonderfully fitted for such employments as
exercise either strength or activity: the Feet as strongly suited to support
the body, and to help it in moving from place to place. Hereby God has both
provided for the necessities of the whole, and has taken care that each Member
should rest content in its Station and Office: there being no more reason to
tempt the Feet to envy or covet the office of the Head, than there is for the
Head to sneak or crowch down to the place of the Feet. And in the body politic
God has fitted men for different Stations and Offices. To some he has given
great and noble Spirits to design worthy things, quickness of apprehension, and
soundness of judgment to guide them, and dexterity and courage to put them
forward in acting. And these seem cut out by the hand of God himself for
Government. To others he has given meaner spirits, fixing upon lower designs,
shallower judgments fitted to yield to the conduct of others, and a dexterity
for works only of lesser moment: And these are fitted for subjection. And
hereby at once the Divine Wisdom is seen in fitting every man for the business
of his station, and his goodness in disposing all men to be content in the
places wherein God has set them.

6. As Societies do differ in their numbers and other Circumstances, so is
there difference in the Formalities of the Governments set up amongst them. In
great and wealthy Societies of men Government does use to be very August and
Majestical; in lesser and meaner Societies there is abatement of the dignity of
the Rulers. The little Monarch of a poor Cottage does not expect that
Attendance, nor those Regalia, which belong to the chief Magistrate of a
Kingdom: Nor will the little Magistrate of a Parish or Tything expect to follow
such Maces and Swords as are usually born before the chief Magistrates of great
Cities. But allowing for the different state of Governors in different
Societies, there are these things observable in all Governments.

1. That to command has always been reckoned the Office and Privilege of the
Superior, to obey, the Part and Duty of the Inferior. These three sorts of
actions distinguishing the three sorts of capacities wherein God has set all
men; To petition or request being commonly the act of the Inferior; To
covenant and capitulate, being ordinarily the act of Equals; To command or
enjoin, belonging only to the Superior, and must be answered with obedience in
the Inferior.

2. The making of Laws, properly so called, belongs peculiarly unto him that
has a right of Jurisdiction over others. The Schoolmen distinguish between
potestas Dominationis and Jurisdictionis. The former he has who by any means
does bear rule over others: such is the power of the Master of a Family over
his Family. The latter is peculiar to him that has right to govern the
Community. And these two sorts of Authority do differ in three respects: 1. In
reference to the Matter they are exercised about, the Master of a Family
bearing rule over a Society less perfect, as to the integral and constituent
parts thereof, than is a Kingdom. 2. In respect of the End and Design of the
Government. The immediate end of the Master in ruling his Family, is his own
Profit or Wealth; the good and benefit of the other Members of the other
Members of the Family, is but the Secondary or Mediate end: But as to the Power
of Jurisdiction the end of that is quite different. 3. As to the effectual
Administration of each Power. The Masters power in his Family extends no
further, than to urge obedience to his commands by corporal Punishments, or
dismission from his family: But the Prince has Power to attend his word of
command; power over the Estate, the Liberty, and Life of his Subjects.

3. The infinite wisdom of the God of Order has not only appointed that one
man should be governed by another, but amongst Governors themselves has
established Order, that some should be Superior, and others subordinate to
them. Thus the lesser streams are accountable to the greater and eminent Rivers
which receive and comprehend all these little accessions in the vastness of
their Channels: And so among those that govern the earth has God appointed some
that should be subordinate, and others that should be superior in Authority.

4. And he that in Nature allows of no infinite proceeding, has in Government
ordered it so that this subordination and superiority should not be in
infinitum, but that one should be supreme, unto whom all the rest should be
subject, and to whom they should give an account of the Administration of their
Offices. Him St. Peter calls (...), Supreme, 1 Pet. 2.13. St. Paul (...), The
higher Power, Romans 13.1. And (...), Him that is eminently in Authority, 1 Timothy
2.2. Whereas concerning inferior Magistrates, they are said to receive their
power from him, (...), as sent by him, 1 Pet. 2.13. And that unto this Supreme
Power belongs the Authority both of giving life and motion to Laws, may appear
by those expressions so familiar in Scripture. When the Ruler of the People is
foretold to spring from the Loins of Judah, the Scepter and the Lawgiver are
joined together, Genesis 49.10. Moses, tho we do not read of his being formally a
King adorned with a Crown and Scepter, yet when he is called the Lawgiver of
the People, he is also called King in Jeshurun, Deuteronomy. 33.4, 5. When Jacobs
Prophecy was accomplished, and the Throne of Israel established in the Tribe
of Judah, Judah is then called a Lawgiver, Psalm. 60.10. And in my Text, the
reigning of Kings, and their decreeing of Justice, are joined together. And it
being familiar with Solomon, among his Proverbs to make the later expression
exegetical of the former, this shows us that it is the Prerogative of Kings to
decree and make Laws. Yea, in the New Testament we read of (...), a Royal Law,
Jam. 2.8. It will not be necessary to add what might be spoken for the
confirmation of this truth, from Philosophers, Historians, or men skilful in
Laws: For I take it to be an established truth, that as Government in general
is Gods Ordinance, so the subordination of all inferior Governors to one
Supreme, and the power of the supreme Governor alone to put life into Laws, is
likewise from the appointment of the all-wise, the only-wise God, the great
Governor of the World.

Secondly, By me Kings Reign, that is, By the infinite wisdom of God Kings are
set over a People, to accomplish those most wise and just ends which himself
has designed. The Wisdom and Power of the Creator and Preserver of all things
has made nothing in vain, but has designed every Creature for some work
worthy of its nature, and has subjected all other ends and actions to that
great end of serving his own good will and pleasure. And in so noble a
contrivance as Government in Society, the most wise God does design the
promoting of great and admirable ends, Princes being chief workers with the
divine Will and Providence, for bringing to pass what the great Ruler of the
World will have accomplished. And this generally for the singular good and
benefit of the Community over which they preside.

1. As every Creature of God is good, so this of Government amongst men does
generally tend to their great benefit and advantage. And Kings as the principal
Persons concerned in the Government, are of so great advantage to the People,
that David's Subjects, when loyally minded, knew not what measure to take of his
worth, but estimate him as better worth than ten thousands of them, 2 Samuel
18.3. And tho the advantages which accrue to a People from a wise and good
Prince, are very many, yet these four are most remarkable: 1. The restraining
and suppressing of wickedness, 1 Pet. 2.13. which as it is an offense to the
pure and jealous eyes of Almighty God, so both Prince and People are bound by
that love they owe to God, to delight to see it suppressed: As it tends to
bring down Gods Judgments upon a Nation, so it promotes the interest of the
Community to root it out, and thereby to prevent or remove the Calamity: As it
corrupts the Morals of men, so it is for the honor and interest of all that it
be extirpated, that the People may be sound and healthy in their Souls, and
Princes have the glory of reigning over a virtuous people: And as diverse sorts
of vices do naturally tend to disturb the peace, and to hinder the welfare of
the Nation, so it is for the common good that this weed be cut down by the
Sword of Justice. 2. Preserving of Peace among men, and securing each man's
Liberty and Property unto him. If we were here so free from the dominion of of
Passions, and inordinate Affections, as we hope to be hereafter when we come to
Heaven, there would then be little need of the Magistrates Power or Office. But
the activeness of Interest, and the unruliness of Passion produce such
exorbitancies among men, that if it were not for the Rods and the Axes of the
Magistrate, men would be too prone to live upon Earth as the Fishes in the Sea,
where the less are a prey to the greater. The Law therefore was made for the
lawless, and the Magistrate bears not the Sword in vain, but brings the very
Sons of Belial to endure a Yoke, and to the great good of the people, takes
care that the Kings peace be preserved. 3. Stirring up the people, and
encouraging them to Industry. Sloth, and Vice, and Poverty, and Ruin are so
nearly related, that one does almost unavoidably follow upon the other. It is
therefore for the interest and security of a People, that the Prince does with
the Sword of Justice cut off those Vices that hinder men from being ingenious
and industrious, and by providing for their peaceable and quiet enjoying the
fruit of their labors, does encourage them to industry, by convincing them
that their labor will not be thrown away. And this tends at once to keep
people orderly employed, and thereby prevents their doing worse: and it
sharpens their intellectuals, which are commonly dulled and rusted by sloth and
desuetude: and withal it brings Riches and Wealth as its attendant. 4.
Advancing the Interest and Honor of the Nation by foreign Correspondencies and
Leagues. God Almighty has so disposed of the good things of this World, that
what abounds in one place is wanted in another; And if Commerce were not
maintained with Foreign Nations, many of Gods good Creatures would be
depretiated and disesteemed. This foreign Trade therefore lays a foundation of
Wealth and Plenty in a Nation. And without public correspondence between the
Kings of those Nations whose Subjects have Commerce together, this Trade could
not be allowed nor secured to them. For what Nation does ever make
Capitulations of Peace or Trade with the Common People of another Country? The
Correspondence and agreement is with the Prince, and not the Multitude. And
this maintains the Honor of that Nation, and secures its interest in trading,
to the great enriching of a Land. These are some of those blessings which a
People reap by the Government of a good King, assigned by the King of Kings to
promote these good ends. And these are some of those advantages which we in
particular have so long enjoyed under the happy Reign of a gracious, wise, and
Christian King, namely, by promoting those wise and just Ends which God himself
has designed, which was the second branch of my Discourse.

Thirdly, by the powerful and gracious providence of the All-wise God, Kings
are set upon their Thrones, and upheld and continued there. That there is

1. A special hand of divine providence seen in setting Kings in their Thrones,
is very evident Psalm. 75.6, 7. Promotion comes neither from the East, nor from
the West, nor from the South, but God is the Judge, he puts down one, and
sets up another. He is said to have given Nebuchadnezzar a Kingdom, Power,
and Strength, and Glory. Dan. 2.37. And his hand is more especially seen in
preserving the rights of those that have a just title to a Crown. As in respect
of our gracious King in particular. Indeed he suffered him for a time to know
affliction, before he advanced him to glory, as he dealt with David long since.
He suffered his Throne to be invaded, and those that had killed to take
possession; For the iniquities of the Land, many were the Princes thereof:
Prove. 28.2. But he was not long wanting to a righteous cause: He suffered not
the Hypocrite long to reign, that the People might not be too much ensnared.
Job 34.30. And how wonderful were the workings of his Providence, both in
preserving the sacred person of our gracious King, as under his own wings,
until the Tyranny of the wicked was overpast; and also in his happy and
peaceable Restoration at last unto the Throne of his Forefathers: this
generation I hope will never forget, and generations to come will be informed
of it. We must needs say this was the Lord's doing, and it is mavelous in our
eyes, and it is by him that our King reigns.

2. And as eminently is the hand of divine Providence seen in upholding and
continuing Kings upon their Thrones, as Kings are for the praise of them that
do well; and such need not to fear the Power, for they shall have praise of the
same; so are they a terror to evil doers, for they know that the sword is not
born in vain: and of this sort are a great part of mankind, who together with
those that ambitiously aspire to be catching the Sword out of the Prince's
hand, do create much trouble to the reign and hazard to the life, especially of
a Good and Religious King; and as it may be said of all men, that we are
encompassed with so many dangers daily, that without God's good Providence
upholding us, we should not be able to subsist one moment: In him we all live,
and move, and have our being. Act. 17.28. so it may more especially said of
Princes, that their Office exposes them to so many dangers, that without great
help from God they could not escape. And certainly as Kings are great Ministers
of the Divine Providence, and eminently useful to promote the Glory of God, and
the Good of the People; so the same Providence does concern it self more
especially about the protection and preservation of them. If it may be supposed
that the Stars have influence upon all men, for the lengthning or shortning
their lives; certainly stars of the greatest magnitude do attend Kings with
their eminent influences, to protect their persons, and prolong their reigns.
How remarkably was this seen in preserving that wise and pious Princess Q.
Elizabeth, so that no weapon formed against her could prosper: she appeared to
be the Favorite of Heaven in her life, and at last dyed in Peace and Honor,
in a good old age, after a long and glorious reign, beloved by all good men
while she lived, and lamented by them at her death. Did not the same Providence
watch over her wise and peaceable successor, delivering him from many attempts,
and particularly the most horrid that ever the Sun saw discovered. And, blessed
be God, he is still the same to our present Monarch, protecting him from the
rage of those that are his Enemies on both hands, because he strongly maintains
that Truth that is opposed by them both. How many experiences has God given us
of discovering and disappointing their wicked Plots and Conspiracies against
him; and especially at this time in particular. This gives us advantage to
strengthen our Faith in the belief of God's care of our King, and in him of us:
this encourages us to hope, and pray that no Treason formed against him may
prosper; that his Enemies of all sorts may be clothed with shame, but that
upon himself his Crown may long and happily flourish, and that after many and
many years spent in a peaceable and glorious reign, he may at last in peace
exchange his corruptible for an incorruptible Crown; even so Amen.

Fourthly, by Authority immediately derived from the only wise God, the great
King of Kings, Monarchy is established, and Kings do hold their Scepters. And
that I may discourse upon this distinctly, to the clearing of the truth, to the
confirmation of those that own it, and to the conviction of gainsayers, I
shall propose these four Questions.

1. Whether Monarchy be that particular form of Government which God has
appointed, and does approve? or whether there may not be another form of
Government, that may be competitor with it for desirableness, or rather
preferred before it?

2. Whether Kings have their Power immediately from God? or whether it be not
conferred upon them by the People?

3. Whether, supposing that the People did confer the Power upon the Prince, in
the first institution of Monarchy, it does now lie in the Power of the People
to revoke it?

4. Whether the Power of Kings be so immediately subject unto God, that no
earthly Power can call the King to an account for the administration of the
Government?

First, Whether Monarchy be that particular form of Government which God
appointed, and does approve? or whether there be not other forms of Government
(for example a Democracy) that may be commended equally with it, or rather
preferred before it?

I move this Question because we are fallen into an unhappy Age; when men do
assume to themselves, if not a liberty of Prophesying or Conjecturing what form
of Government will come next upon the stage, and act its part amongst us; yet
at least a liberty of arguing pro and con, making it a moot case, whether
Monarchy be the Government that God approves? and whether the Nation might not
be as happy or more, under a Republic than a Monarchy?

In order to the stating of this Point, I lay down these Assertions.

1. It is certain that Monarchy is the most ancient Government of Mankind. He
that epitomized Trogus, an ancient Writer, tells us, that Principio rerum
gentium and civitatum imperium penes reges erat. And if in the search of
Histories, Sacred or Profane, there be no Footsteps of Democracy in the eldest
Times, then certainly a Republic is an Innovation. And Innovations in the
State are as dangerous as in the Church. And if our Savior convicted Practices
introduced in later Ages, by calling them back to the Original of things,
telling them that in the beginning it was not so, Matthew. 19.8. then sure I
think the Antiquity of this Form pleads much for the preference of Monarchy.

2. It is the Government that God set up over his own People of old. I do not
say that we are absolutely bound to the Jewish Model of Government or Laws, any
further than the common equity or benefit thereof does oblige us. But we may
reasonably conclude, that what Form of Government the infinite wisdom of God
did know to be best, that his infinite goodness would move him to establish
amongst that People whom he had chosen out of all the Nations of the Earth, to
be unto him a Peculiar People, Deuteronomy. 14.2. Now Monarchical Government was that
which he set up among the Jews. Even Moses was a Monarch, and King in Jeshurun,
Deuteronomy. 33.5. Joshua and the rest of the Judges or Dukes were virtually though
not formally Kings. After them followed those that bore the Name and State of
Kings: but still their Government was Monarchical: which is a great argument
for its excellency.

3. We read of no other Form of Government in Scripture but Monarchy. This
Argument is chiefly ad homines, those that are ready so pertinaciously to stick
to that Principle, that the holy Scripture is a sufficient Rule in all things
appertaining to Faith and Manners, that they are ready to think an argument
concluding negatively ab hac authoritate, to be firm and cogent; that press us
so much with the prohibition of adding to, or diminishing from the Word of God,
and urge the great Curse to deter us; these I hope will accept of what
consequences do necessarily follow from those premises. And for as much as no
other Form of Civil Government but Monarchical is found in Scripture, therefore
to attempt to set up another, must be either adding to that Word, or detracting
from it, or both. And this Argument must hold strongly amongst all men of that
persuasion.

4. Monarchy does most nearly resemble the Power and Authority of God the great
King of Kings. Originals give Pattern to all Copies, and Copies must be
corrected by them. Now the Power of God, as the Governor of the World, is the
Original and Pattern of all Government; And consequently the nearer any Form
comes to the resembling of his Government, the better it is; and the further
off the worse. But the great God of Heaven rules as a Sovereign Monarch, whose
Vicegerents all earthly Rulers are, and to whom they must give an account: And
therefore Monarchical Government among men does come nearest to this Pattern,
and consequently must be owned as the best Form.

5. Monarchical Government is every way qualified to answer the ends of
Government most advantagiously, and therefore it is the best. The ends of
Government, are, making and executing Laws, and protecting the People. Now what
way so expeditious for the making of Laws, as when the Royal Assent breaths
life into them; when they are drawn up by the Counsels of many wise men, and
receive their Stamp of Authority from One, One the Supreme Moderator and
Adjustor of all different Interests and Opinions? What Method so Uniform in the
Execution of the Laws, as when all Proceedings run in the Name of One and the
same sacred Person? What means so expedient to protect the People, as when the
Sword is in the hand of a Man that can have no Private Ends distinct from the
Public Interest? It would be here easy to show what obstructions and delays
the Power of the Many would give in each of these matters, but every man's
consideration will do that.

6. This Nation has had an happy Experience of the good Fruits of this
Government for many Ages, and why should we now quarrel with an Old Friend?
Ever since History, either of firm or suspected credit, will give us light,
this Nation has been ruled by Kings: And as we had sometimes several Kings, so
there was no Peace till it was united into one Kingdom. And since how has this
Nation flourished in Peace and Plenty, in Arts and Arms, in Trade abroad and
Manufactures at home? Especially since the happy Restoration of our gracious
King, we have sat like Israel and Judah in the reign of Solomon, every man
under his Vine and Fig Tree, and Silver and Gold has been multiplied greatly.
And are we weary of these Blessings? Have we taken a Surfeit on Peace and
Plenty? If any enquire how we like Democracy for our Government in the State?
Let us answer him as Themistocles did one that asked him the same question; Go
first and set up that Government in thy own Family, see how thou will like a
Coordinate Power in thy Children and Servants, and mark if thy business go well
on then.

7. This Nation has never yet had the trial of a Democracy, so that those who
talk of it, may as well discourse in commendation of Plato's Commonwealth, or
More's Utopia. We had them who assumed to themselves the Name of the
Commonwealth of England, but were never Christened. He that considers the
Constitution of the House of Commons in England must know that the Members
thereof do not represent All the People of this Land that are under Government.
For beside that the Peers have no Vote in the Election, the Knights are to be
chosen only by the Freeholders: And how many that are Free born Subjects, are
not Liberi tenentes? And he that considers how that House of Commons was
retrenched, some voluntarily forsaking the House, and others excluded by armed
Force, must needs say that those who so illegally, unreasonably, and
audaciously styled themselves the Parliament of the Commonwealth of England,
were as far from being a Parliament, or from representing all the People, as a
Rump is from being an Ox. So that here was no formed Commonwealth to stand for
Probation.

8. I affirm that Democracy is liable to many and great Corruptions, such as
cannot be argued to result any way from Monarchy. For,

1. The Ambition of those that recommend themselves as Candidates for Offices
in Government, must be supposed to beget great disturbances. An hand in the
Government of a Nation, is so splendid a thing, that most men of the least real
worth will be apt to be ambitious of it. And such will lay claim to every
Pretense that may entitle them to it. If seeming Saintship shall entitle them
of the number of those meek that shall inherit the Earth, and bind their Kings
in Chains, and their Nobles in Fetters of Iron; he must be too apparently a
wicked man that will not put on the Habit of Saintship. Or if Interest, and a
long Sword, and Strong Arm must make the way, every man that has these, will
put himself forward. And if the different Claims of two Families did heretofore
involve this Nation into much Blood, how much may be the Consequent of such
men's different pretenses to governing the Land!

2. Nor may less Mischiefs follow the Factions of those that are to choose their
Governors. One man has a Relation whom he has a mind to recommend to sit at
the Stern, on purpose to make a Consular Family: Another has one that he
reckons his Friend, and hopes that if he be advanced, he may prefer him:
Another has imbibed some heterodox Opinions, and has his eye upon one that
has espoused the same, and he hopes that if he have a share in Governing, he
will not fail to promote the Party. And what differences will follow upon the
pursuits of these People, and what disturbances to the Nation, every man will
easily judge.

3. The covetousness of men advanced to govern, will make them apt to heap up
wealth for themselves and their Kindred, to the great detriment of the
Community. The public Interest would in this Case be like the man in the
Fable, whose Ulcers were exposed to the Insects in the common Road; 'twas but a
civil compassion of the Traveller that attempted to disturb them; the poor man
begged him to reserve his charity for another occasion, telling him that the
Flies who had been his Familiars some time, did not much torment him: but these
being removed, others would take their place with empty bellies and hungry
appetites, who would much more anoy him. The Application is too obvious to want
an Exposition.

4. And even this Democracy, that pleases men in the Theory, to minister
matter of Discourse, will be farther from pleasing all men, when it has
exercised its Power for some time, than is the Monarchy that now cannot give
content. The Mobile that are ready to be fond of the fancy of that Form, and
might in its first Appearance dally with it as Children with a New Play-Game,
after a while will be apt to discover its imperfections, and be the first to
complain of it. That party of Men that called themselves the Parliament of the
Commonwealth of England, when having killed the right Owner, they seized his
Inheritance, and did by their printed Declaration in March 1648. avouch
themselves a Free State, complaining of the unsufferableness of the Monarchy,
when they had for a while fed themselves with it, and then were condemned to
Perpetual Minority, and to Wardship under a Protector: And when at last the
Army and the Mobile suing out their Liberty from Wardship, started the
Nicknamed Title of The Good Old Cause: They had not long lived upon that
pretense, but they were weary of it; for the Grandees of the Army at
Wallingford-house, dispersed them, and in October 1659. put forth a
Remonstrance, representing the Grievances of the Nation to be as great under
that Commonwealth, as it had been before under the King: So that it appears
that changing the Bed will not give ease to the sick person, nor will the
change of Government please those that are resolved not to be pleased.

5. In fine, Democracy is much more apt to degenerate either into Oligarchy, or
else into Ochlocracy and Anarchy, than Monarchy can be feared to degenerate
into Tyranny and Arbitrary Government. If we consult Foreign experience, the
Spartans, I think, the first that called themselves a Republic, did not long
keep their ground without degenerating into an Oligarchy, or a Government by
the Thirty Tyrants. Rome when they had driven out their Kings and set up a
Commonwealth, were one while inclining to an Ochlocracy, when they chose the
Tribunes of the People to give check to the Senate; another while to Monarchy
when they chose Dictators, which becoming by degrees perpetual, at last ended
in Monarchy again. The Venetians are rather to be esteemed to be an Aristocracy
than a Democracy. Our Neighbors of the United Provinces seem to have mixed
Aristocracy with their Democracy. And if we remember the proceedings of our own
Nation, the pretended Commonwealth did one while degenerate to Monarchy in the
time of the Usurper; another while to Anarchy, in the time when the Rota
invented so many new Forms of Government. No settlement could be till God was
pleased to restore us to the Old Foundation. The result of all which will be,
to weigh things in an even balance, and to judge which is most agreeable to
Gods Institution, and tending to the Good of the People, Monarchy or any other
Form of Government.

Second Question; Whether Kings have their Power immediately from God, or
whether it be conferred upon them by the People?

The reason of moving this Question is, because it is become the Subject of
common Discourse in our days. And an Author that wrote a bad Postscript to a
good Letter, has seemed to assert the Power of the King as entrusted to him by
the People. A person who if he had been as well acquainted with Divines as
Lawyers, might have known the substance of his Arguments to have been prevented
about 35 years before they were produced, in the excellent Lectures of a
Learned Professor, who determined that in the Chair, which few men but himself
durst to have done in those days. Or if he did consider the Consequences that
would be deducible from such a Supposition, Honesty and Loyalty should have
kept him from maintaining it.

In answer to the Question, I affirm the first part, that Kings have their
Authority derived immediately from God; And deny the later, that it is
conferred upon them as a Trust by the People.

And here 1. Let us consider what Titles the Scripture gives to Kings. They are
called (...), the Ministers of God, therefore not of Men, Romans 12.4, 6. the
Powers that be, are said to be (...) ordained of God, therefore not of Men. v.
1. for the Question concerning St. John's Baptism, was it from Heaven, or of
Men? Mat. 21.25. seems to put this upon an Issue. Besides, they are called
Elohim, Earthly Gods, Psalm. 82.6. And what People can make their own Gods
without palpable Idolatry?

2. When God first subjected his own People Israel to the Government of Kings,
the People had nothing to do in conferring the Power. Moses was made their
Ruler immediately by God. So Joshua and the Judges; for so long the Theocracy
did continue visible among them. When the People desired a King with Formality,
God is not angry with them simply for desiring a King; for he had foretold
their having a King, and given him directions for his Government, Deuteronomy. 17. but
for some irregularities in their manner of desiring him. But how was he chosen?
Not by the People, but by Lot, 1 Samuel 10.20, 21. the determination whereof is
from the Lord, Prove. 16.33. no hand of the People in choosing him. David was
made King by Gods immediate choice, 1 Samuel 16.1. Here the Theocracy seems to
end. Afterward the Government did descend by Succession. And those that pretend
directions from the Scripture in every thing, will be at a loss where to find
directions there for the People to confer Power upon their Prince.

3. We challenge any man, from profane Histories, to show us any Footsteps of
such beginnings of Monarchy, when the People did entrust this Power to their
Kings. If they acknowledge that their History fails them, let not also Reason
fail them; let not Loyalty fail them, let not Conscience fail them: let them
have something more than bold surmises, or else not attempt to build a
supposition of such dangerous consequence, upon the mere strength of
Imagination.

4. If therefore they persist and urge us to show how Monarchy first came to
subject men to Obedience, I think the History of the Bible will give us light
enough. That Patriarchal Government, or the Ruling of the Father or Eldest of
the Family over the rest, was the first Form of Government in the World, I
think is generally owned. Now when the Families increased, the Subjects
multiplied, and by insensible degrees the Patriarchal Government seems to have
settled into that Government of the Reguli, or Small Kings, which was upon the
matter the same. When Joshua conquered the Land of Canaan, which is less in
extent than the Kingdom of England alone, he found and subdued thirty one
Kings, Josh. 12.24. And it seems this was the least Jurisdiction of their
Reguli. For after him, Judge. 1.7. Adonibezek, when he was conquered, does own
that he kept Seventy Reguli in barbarous servitude under him. And some hundred
of years after, the King of Syria (no great Prince) had thirty two Kings at
once in his Army, 1 Reg. 20.1. So that it seems their Territories and Power
were then surely but an inconsiderable Alteration of Paternal Government, and
that which by degrees introduced greater Monarchies.

5. If we further proceed to take a view of all the ways whereby Princes ascend
to the Throne, it will appear they are but few; and that in none of these the
People confer the power on the King.

1. By Descent or Succession, as in England. Now who can say that the People
here confer the power? If they plead, that at the Kings Coronation the Consent
of the People is demanded; It is evident that the King is King to all intents
and purposes before his Coronation. Besides neither are all the People
summoned, nor any considerable part of them appear at a Coronation: And if then
there should be any surly Sheba that should reject his Prince, that would not
hinder the Coronation. So that this is but barely a thing of Course, and does
not derive the Kings power from the People at all.

2. Of those that attain a Crown by Conquest, no man can say they expect or
receive the explicit Consent of the People, though a tacit consequential
Consent may be argued in their yielding him obedience.

3. As for those that surprise a Throne by Fraud, though they may impose upon
the People so as to gain a Formal Consent, yet is there no real Consent in
those that are thus cajoled.

4. There are some that come to a Crown by Election: And here our Malcontents
think they are secure that they derive their power from the People. But we must
consider the great difference that is betwixt designing the Person, and
conferring the Power. The former is from them that choose him, the later by no
means. The Dean and Chapter of a Cathedral, by the Kings leave, choose a Bishop
sede vacant; this Choice designs the Person, but does not confer the power,
which is afterward given him in his Consecration. The Aldermen and Commons of a
City do yearly choose their Mayor; this choice does indeed design the Person,
but not confer the Power, which descends by virtue of the Kings Charter. So
when the Seven Electors choose an Emperor of Germany, or those that usually
choose a King in Poland, they only design the Person; his power is not from
them, but immediately from God.

The third Question, Whether, supposing that the People did confer the Power
upon the Prince, in the First Institution of Monarchy, it does now lie in the
Power of the People to revoke it?

This Question seems needful to be handled, not only because in the late days
of Rebellion it was maintained; but because it may be feared that those Seeds
are not yet quite rooted out; especially seeing the holding the Kings Power to
be a Trust committed to him by the People, does seem to design to prove it
revokable.

In Answer hereto, 1. I have already showed that the Supposition which is the
Foundation of this, that the People confer the Power upon the Prince, is false,
and consequently the Superstructure that is reared upon it must fall of course.

2. Supposing (but not granting) the Princes power to be conferred by the
People, yet the Revokableness of it will not follow. For,

1. Both Law and Reason say that what is Absolutely conferred in any Compact or
Donation, is not to be revoked: Against the reasonableness whereof I cannot see
what can be alleged.

2. Instances in other Cases of like Nature, do show the truth of this. When
the Dean and Chapter have chosen their Bishop for their Ordinary, or the
Aldermen and Commons of a City have chosen a Mayor to govern them, it does not
lie in either of them afterward to recall the Exercise of this power, or to
reassume the Trust into their own hands. When the Freeholders of a County have
chosen their Knights to represent them, it will not afterward lie in their
power to recall this trust. They might have forborne to commit the Trust; but
being committed, they cannot re-call it. The same is applicable to the Case in
hand, if the supposition were true, which yet is not to be granted.

The Fourth Question, Whether the Power of Kings be so immediately subordinate
to God and depending upon him, that no earthly Power whatsoever can call them
to account for the administration of their Government, and discharge of their
Trust?

The accountableness of Princes to the People in their Representatives, has
passed for current doctrine in the days of imprisoning our late Sovereign. That
Reason and Conscience may be satisfied of the falseness and dangerousness of
such affections, I shall offer what follows, to prove that God Almighty is the
only Ruler of Princes, and that to him only they owe their Accounts.

1. In Reason it is a contradiction, after we have owned the King to be Supreme
in all Causes, and over all Persons both Ecclesiastical and Civil, afterward
to affirm that there is any other Power that has Right to call him to an
account, and consequently is in that respect his Superior. That we have owned
the King as Supreme, I suppose all men will confess, and the Apostle St. Peter
calls him so, 1 Pet. 2.13. And that his accountableness to any other on Earth
would render those persons that may demand his account, eo nomine, Superior to
him, is grounded upon that known Maxim, Par in parem non habet potestatem. If
therefore the King be Supreme and yet has others on Earth that are Superior
to him, then is he Supreme and not Supreme, a palpable contradiction, both
branches whereof cannot be true. Now the Kings Supremacy both the Law has
settled, and every good Subject has owned, and therefore must disown the
Supremacy of the People, either Collectively, or in their Representatives, as a
spurious offspring descended from Salus populi, and Universis minor.

2. If we consult the Scriptures, when David had committed those two great sins
of Adultery and Murder, either of which singly was Capital by the Jewish Laws,
yet do we not find him called to account for them, but only by the great King
of Kings. If any man here will reply, in the Country Proverb of the Author of
Julian the Apostate, that the People would if they could, have called David to
an account, and punished him too, but that David had the Sword as well as
Scepter, and therefore was above their reach: I answer, there was then a
Sanhedrim among the Jews, whose Authority was as venerable as that of a
Parliament, and yet we neither find them challenging an account of David's
Actions; nor God, who then made familiar converse with men, either summoning
the King to submit himself to a Legal Trial, or stirring up the Sanhedrim, or
the Princes of the Tribes to call him to account by judicial Process. No, the
Only Ruler of Princes takes the matter into his own hands, sends his Prophet
to him, summons him before himself as his Judge, brings him to Repentance,
accepts his Confession, and remits his Trespass as to the Eternal Punishment.
And David appears very sensible of his being subordinate and accountable to God
only, when in his most penitent Confession, he looks up wholly unto him,
Against thee, thee only have I sinned, Psalm. 51.3. If therefore we own the
Scriptures for our Guide in all doubtful and important points, here is an
instance to guide us in a matter of this great and weighty moment.

3. To hold a Power in the People to call the Prince to account for the
administration of his Government, is most highly inconsistent with the Law of
Nature, and all the Reason and Conscience imaginable: For it makes the People
at once the Complainants, the Witnesses, the Jury, and the Judge. For when we
speak of the King and the People, they are but two Parties. If therefore the
King must be Impleaded, who must be the Complainants, and Prosecutors? the
People. Who Witnesses? the People. Who must be the Jury to enquire of Matter of
Fact? the People. Who must be the Judge to determine whether he has broken a
Law, and be obnoxious to punishment? the People. At last when Sentence is
passed upon him, who must execute it? still the People. A thing never heard of
in any Judicial Proceedings, even in the most barbarous Nations: and that which
must needs preclude the doing of Justice, when Passion or Interest in the
Mobile would carry all things according to their own Lusts and Humors.

4. The Judgments of God have dogged at the heels in all Ages those Subjects
that have risen up in Rebellion against their lawful Kings, and either secretly
or openly taken away their lives. Had Zimri peace who slew his Master? 2 Reg.
9.31. And how Gods Justice has become the Avenger of Blood, and pursued at the
heels those who had killed and taken possession, and after they had boasted of
their wickedness for several years together; and some of them desired it might
be written on their Tombs, Here lies one of the late Kings Judges, at last
brought them to condign punishment. This I hope will not be forgotten in this
generation, and those that shall succeed, I doubt not, will be made sensible of
it, that all men may hear and fear amd do no more so presumptuously.

If we at last proceed to reflect upon what has been spoken, we may make
improvement of it three ways.

First, If Kings have their power from God, and are not accountable to any
person or persons on Earth for the administration thereof, then it is a great
sin to arraign the Wisdom and the Justice of the Kings proceedings in the
little Conventions of men of unsanctified hearts, unhallowed lives, and
profane mouths. A Sin which, had I the voice of Stentor, I could not declaim
loudly enough against in this Age, when many make it either a sign of Grace, or
a token of Wisdom, or at least an argument of good Affections to the Public,
to slander the Footsteps of Gods Anointed; and as if they would investigate
their Pedigree from Corah and his Accomplices, do proceed by rising up against
Moses and Aaron, reproaching both Prince and Priest, as if they took too much
upon them. If God Almighty be the only Ruler of Princes, and neither the
People Collectively nor Representatively have power to censure the Actions of a
King, then certainly the Individuals or little Knots of the Populacy have much
less power to censure his proceedings. If that which without Christning, gave
it self the Unchristian name of an High Court of Justice, had no power to
censure and condemn a King, though they bore before them pretenses of Justice;
how much less is it lawful for them that do not in the least pretend to be a
Court of Judicature, to arraign and condemn both his Majesty's Actions and
Intentions! If sin be aggravated by Ingratitude in him that commits it, and in
the want of advantage to be proposed in doing amiss, then certainly this sin is
doubly aggravated, as being the highest ingratitude to a Prince that has been
so merciful and obliging, and committed without the least probability of any
advantage to follow such discourses. If he that stepped out of his Rank, without
allowance of his Officer, to fight an Enemy, though he killed him, was
condemned for deserting his place, what censure can be great enough for those
that desert their Ranks and Stations, not to fight an Enemy, but to encounter
their lawful Sovereign? If a scandal cast upon a private person, that damnifies
him in his Profession, be censurable in Law; what censures do they deserve that
cast scandals, without fear or shame, upon the greatest of men, and thereby
lessen the affections of his Subjects, and render his Throne uneasy to him!

Secondly, Let the Original of Kingly power teach us, out of Conscience toward
God, to stand in the defense of our King against all the Aspersions that are
cast upon him, to alienate the affections of his good Subjects from him. He
that is not against him, ought to be on his side. And to move us all hereto,

1. Let us consider the evil Root from whence these bitter Fruits do spring,
even a Malignant and Disloyal Spirit. Had Ham been so dutiful as his other
Brothers, he would have covered in stead of showing his Fathers nakedness; and
the curse that was bequeathed to him seems grounded upon his evil Intention. So
that as well may a man believe that person that rails at him behind his back,
and censures all his disputable Actions, to be his Friend; as believe these
persons to be good Subjects.

2. We should further consider the ill Consequences of such Discourses. Every
wise man ought to consider the tendency of his words and actions. And he that
foresees evil consequences, and does not endeavor to prevent them, cannot be
reckoned either Friend or honest man. And if these discourses do conclude that
their thinking that to be true, which they speak of the King and his
Government, will alienate their own Affections from him, then ought they not to
vent them in discourse to others, which must also tend to alienate their
affections and duty from him.

3. It would be fit to recollect what happiness we and the whole Nation have so
long enjoyed under his Majesty's happy Reign. Some men are like that sort of
Insects, which pass over the sweet Flowers in a Garden to fix upon Excrement in
a Dunghill. They overlook all that Peace and Plenty, that flourishing of the
Church which we have tasted since the Kings happy Restoration, and if they can
find any real or fancied oversight in those that are Ministers of State, they
set themselves to censure that, and expose it to others. If the Nation has
flourished in 23 years past, more than in any the like period of time, then it
may be suspected to be a Plethory, arising from Peace and Plenty, that makes
men so sick, and so apt to disgorge themselves in these unsavory Belches.

4. And withal let us reflect upon the judgments of God that have overtaken the
Enemies of our King and his Fathers Throne. The righteous God has both showed
that his Providence takes a special care of the safety of Princes, and that he
is immediately concerned to avenge their Blood. Unto those that had shed the
Royal Blood, God kept silence for a while, and they were ready to think him
altogether such an one as themselves, a Partner, if not the Principal, in that
Fact: But in his good time he did reprove them, and set before them the things
that they had done. O consider this, and forget not God, lest he tear you in
pieces, and there be none to deliver.

5. It would greatly help to govern men's Tongues, if they did with greater
wariness look to their Ears. For what is over-greedily drank in at the Ear, is
commonly vomitted out at the Mouth as hastily. If we consult the old Rule, it
will tell us, that Fame has for many Ages been branded with the infamous
Character of Common Liar and Incendiary. If we consult Experience, it will tell
us how often it has imposed upon us misreports and false representations of
things. And if we consult Reason it will tell us that Reports do, and must
savor of the Cask from whence they are drawn; and we cannot so well know how
to judge of what is spoken, as by taking due measures of him that speaks it.
Which if it were duly improved, it would put us upon weighing or slighting bare
Reports, and excuse our tongues from many transgressions.

6. Both Modesty and Prudence should teach us not to presume that we see into
the depth of the Proceedings of our Governors. It is better for us thankfully
to make use of the Light and Heat and Influences of the Sun, than to stand
gazing only upon the Course of its Motion. It is better to comfort our selves
in the practical Use of a piece of Clockwork, than to puzle our heads with
speculative inquiries how, and why, and what does move the Hand. And if these
things were duly considered, it would supersede a great deal of pains to our
Politic Would Bees, and prevent their Censures of Transactions, which they
neither can, nor is it their duty to understand.

7. When the mouths of men are so open in speaking evil of Dignities, that they
refuse to be stopped, and plead that they have Justice and Truth on their side,
it will concern us to consider that the best and greatest of men are still but
Men, and cannot plead exemption from the mistakes and frailties that are common
to Mankind. And if men that move in lower spheres, attended with less violent
temptations, do frequently err; how much more may those that are placed in
higher Orbs, surrounded with weightier Cares and greater Difficulties, commit
mistakes, and discover Humane Frailties? Which should move us rather to assist
them with our Prayers, that they may not err, than to suggest in sly and
slanderous whispers to the Rabble, that they are always erring.

8. Charity toward Men as Brethren, and Loyalty to our Prince as the Father of
our Country, should oblige us to pass the most favorable construction upon
doubtful actions. It Is this alone can justify an intermedling with private
Affairs, and therefore the Argument holds stronger, that only this can excuse,
if any thing can be said to excuse an inspection into public Transactions.
Every Action (says the Moralist) has two handles; and if one Ear of the Cup be
cold and the other hot, he is foolishly rash that chooses by a wrong
application of his hand, to burn his fingers without necessity.

Thirdly, Let what we have heard of the Original of Government, and of the
Power of Kings, prevail with us to a ready, cheerful, and conscientious
Obedience and subjection to them. The Jews could see that if they owned St.
John's Baptism to be from Heaven, it would necessarily follow, that they ought
to have entertained him, and believed his Doctrine, Matthew. 21.25. And seeing it
is manifest that the Power of Kings is from God, it follows that we ought to be
obedient to every Ordinance of Man for the Lords sake, whose Vicegerent he is,
1 Pet. 2.12. Seeing the Powers that be, are ordained of God, it follows, that
not only he that rebelleth, but even he that resists the Power, resists
the Ordinance of God; and they that resist, shall receive to themselves
danmation. And forasmuch as he is the Minister of God to thee for good,
therefore we must needs be subject, not only for wrath, to escape punishment,
but even for conscience sake, Romans 13.1, 2, 4, 5. For when men presume to think
that the King is (...), the Peoples Creature, deriving his Power as a Trust
from them; and when the fondness and novelty of the Notion by degrees has
flattered them into a fixed Opinion of it, they will quickly implead his
Authority as a Conditional and precarious thing, and upon the least distaste
will be tempted to meditate a Revocation of their Trust; so that what does not
jump with one man's Interest, though it may advance another, the King must
answer for; and what does not indulge the lusts of the Foolish, though it is
highly acceptable to the Wise, the King must account for; so apt are Resty men
to clamor against the settlements of their own security and happiness, and
promote the steps of their own ruin and confusion. But when they seriously
consider that the Sword is put into his hand by God himself, and that he bears
it not in vain, that he is a Revenger to execute wrath upon him that does evil,
Romans 13.1. this will oblige them to Obedience and Loyalty to their Earthly
Sovereign, out of a principle of Conscience toward the King of Heaven; this
will speak them at once both true Christians and good Subjects. For pretended
Saintship is consistent with Rebellion, but true Christianity will be always
attended with Loyalty. This will clear the Profession of Religion from the
Aspersion of Ungovernableness; and set us forward to that Kingdom, where he by
whom Kings reign, shall rule over all, and be all in all.

To which Heavenly Kingdom God in his Mercy bring us all, etc.

FINIS.

