The last MEMORIAL of the Agent from the K. of POLAND, to the SALAMANCA DR.
My Learned Chaplain,
FOreseeing many Hours are not allotted me to remain in my Earthly Tabernacle I
judged it requisite to impart my Sentiments to Thee before my Exit.

Ah Friend! If Thy Self, thy Father, and old Ezrael Tongue, etc. in 1678.
(instead of honest K. K.) had made a timely application to Me, after you
bugger'd out your ill favored and imperfect Embryo at Fox-hall and in Fulwoods
Rents, I could have lickt the uncouth Cub into a much more gainly and Gentile
Form, that would have made the People Moon-blind, and transformed them into
such confounded Asses, that they might have been Bridled, Saddled, and Rid as
your good pleasure should have deemed convenient; yea, and have striven with
all their Might and Main to have lost their Liberty, Property and Religion, and
like egregious Sots and Coxcombs wilfully to thrust their Necks into a certain
Noose of Eternal Slavery and Confusion,

If this notorious Tragi-comedy had been first revised and corrected by my
experienced Hand, I should have imbelished it with most curious Touches, and
England at this day had seen many fair Commissions Sealed ISH, and Signed
Johannes Paulus d'Oliva; But Ye, like a Triumvirate of silly Tubsters, had not
the Brains to consider, that One Commission would have been a Scene superior
to any in your Farse, and have far outdone those Letters, which (unknown to
You) gave you Reputation.

If my Hand had been earlier at the Oar, Dear Doctor, thy Forty Thousand
Pilgrims and their Black Bills had not now been invisible, nor thy numberless
Drury Lane Daggers been believed Non-Entities, nor thy Doctorhood at Salamanca
a very Ridicule, nor the Illustrious Don John of Austria a Tall Fair Man;
Neither had thy worthy Father at this day sold Pies at the Half Moon in
Bloomsbury, (where he died,) nor thy little Brother boiled Rumps of Mutton in
Red-cross-street, nor Sea Bully Sam entered the Appartments of the Scolds in
Long-ditch.

If Ye had attended Me when Ye ought, no Mortal durst now have averred, that
there never was such a Man as Father Strange the Jesuit, who so candedly and
frankly unbosom'd himself, and (as Gabriel to Mahomet) revealed to Thee the
mighty Mysteries of thy Alcoran, which T. Sm. of the Temple digested into
things called Depositions, or rather Stories of Cocks and Bulls, and Parson
Jones prefixed the Epistle, and called it by the name of Narrative: This was
the Sire to numerous hopeful Babes of the same Name and Nature, and Grand-sire
to the admired Narrantine of thy Renowned Brother the Ingenious Eustace Comins;
So, as thy prudent Predecessor Mahomet, the Impostor, had a juggling Jew and a
mischievous Monk; Thou had a discontented Law-man, and a discarded Naval
Chaplain thy Co-adjutors; yet the veryest Logger-head in the Three Nations will
never account Thee a Prophet; or a Savior worth a Farthing.

I was constrained to fly my Country in order to preserve my Neck, and to
take Sanctuary in that very Carthage, I formerly took Measures to have
destroyed. Oh! let my Speech to the Lords and Commons be blotted out of the
Records of Time! Oh! may my Delenda est Carthago, [Amsterdam must be Damned,]
never be remembered by Butter-boxes of this or the next Age! Oh! may my
Countrymen never revert upon Me Delenda est Septonia, S -- y must be sent to
the Devil!

My not being soon enough acquainted with thy Intrigue, is the certain source
of all our miseries and misfortunes; That broke and dislocated all Measures.
The World remembers well, after I became thy Patron and Pilot, how smoothly we
all shamed the Public; how quickly thou attainedst 12 l. a week, to feed a
numerous gang of Rebels and Sedition-mongers, with a Set of antiquated
Ruffians, and Beardless Buggeroons to attend thy Tail; Any Mortal that would
not believe thy Affidavit, and make thy Plot his Creed, was forthwith put into
it, or into as had a condition; No Man was secure in his Bed, no Man's Life was
his own; 'twas Peace, but a Peace as dangerous as War; for the malicious Oath
of any Flagitious Villain, was sufficient to send a Man to the Gallows, and to
Carve out his Carkase for Crows-meat. Then was the time of great Miracles, and
stupendous Faith; Men believed every thing; Not a Sooty Chimney took Flame
without a Popish Fire-ball; not an idle Fanatic could run from his Creditors,
slip into a corner with a Wench, etc. but 'twas reported he was snatched away by
some Papist, and sent into another world; The French with innumerable Ships and
Boats descended out of the Moon, and subdued the Isle of Purbeck; W. Bedloe
traversed Spain, France and Flanders in the Marshalsea, was wonderfully
conveyed from Bristol to make strange Discoveries, and from a very great Rogue
suddenly transformed into a Man of Virtue and Integrity. Prance by an admirable
Providence, confessed, denied, and declared great things. Brigades of Horse in
bright Armor by Moonlight Associated under a Hedge to Assassinate my
Lordship, but were prevented by a Miracle. Then were deep Secrets dragged out of
the Bowels of the Midwives Meal-Tub, and 300 Wolves, 300 Letters, and as many
Suits of Clothes found in the Enchanted Chamber of Col. Mansel; The Wolves were
slain by his own Hand; The Letters sent to Carolina by Tom Merry, and the
Clothes were reserved for the Col's own wearing; But those Commissions Waller
and He had in their custody, are not yet come to light. Then thon did wisely
re-collect thy self, that thou had seen 2 or 3 Blue Garters through 4
Key-holes.

By this time some of the Greatest persons in the three Kingdoms were entangled
one way or other in the Plot; the next thing was to make it glance upon the
King Himself: First we contrived to pluck the Kingdoms Sword out of His hands;
to get the Militia from Him; then to steal away His other Sword from His side,
to Indict His Guards upon an obsoleted Statute, as Ryoters and Routers, These
mean failing, we stirred up Legions of Factious Fellows to Petition Him for a
Parliament; that trick not doing the feat, we caused many poisonous Libels to
be made upon Him, and very carefully dispersed; next we Printed Treasonable
Pictures and Penned obscene Ballads stuffed full of Sedition and most malicious
Ribaldry; as the Raree-shew, and many others; These we diligently cast abroad,
and ordered our Pensioners Aaron Smith, Stephen College, S. harris, Bedlow,
Dangerfield Brother Sam. Coll. Mancel, etc. to sing and chant them out in every
place they came in. We very well understanding one way (a sure one too) to
destroy a Prince, is, to render Him ridiculous, and little in the Eyes of His
People.

All these projects, were backed with one more dangerous and dreadful, our late
Association; this was our True Protestant-Flail, the Masterpiece, of all our
hopes.

London and Middlesex were certain Sanctuaries for any True Protestant Traitor.
The Sheriffs were my Slaves, and their packt Juries my Vassals: Treason escaped
Scot-free, and was esteemed a Cardinal virtue by every True Protestant
Dissenter. All Loyal Men were called Papists, and all Ministers of State
Pritectors of Popery-Juries would not see light at noonday, and in spite of
Magna Charta, damned up the Sacred Streams of Justice. With what Face will
those base Recreants to common sense, and the Sacrament of an Oath, who fixed
an Ignoramus upon my Association, one day appear at a Bar, and hear the
dreadful Statute of Edward the First read to them? Or how can those wilful
Sots, those Antipodes to Reason and prudence, ever atone for their Folly and
Madness, who endeavored by Seditious Arts and Rebellious Tumults, instead of
two honest Englishmen, to set up two strange Calvinistical Walloons for
Sheriffs of London and Middlesex? Or can thou but expect Justice will catch
thee by the crown, and thy Buggeroons by the back, who by thy command in all
those Ryots dispense thy Bottles to the rude enraged Rabble to insence them up
to commit Murders on the King's Liege-people?

I leave thee to the Horror thou bear in thy own Breast; for a wicked person
is always in pain. He either practiceth the Evil he has projected, or projects
to avoid the Evil he has deserved. Adieu.

Amsterdam January 17th. Stilo novo. 1683.
LONDON, Printed for R. H. Anno Domjni, 1683


