Last Sundays Night Frollick:
Being a very True ACCOUNT of Three Eminent Citizens of London. Who, by a
strange Mistake, unfortunately Picked up their own WIVES, last Sunday Evening,
in St. James's Park; whom they Treated with a Supper very Splendidly, at an
Eminent Tavern, near Charing Cross: With the Manner of their Discovery; and of
the great Confusion of the whole Company thereupon.

Being indeed, not only a very Pleasant, but also a True Relation.
IT was upon a Sunday Night (to sanctify the Deed) when Three Strowling
Citizens, of Superior Note, released from the Purgatory of a Compter,
determined to gratify their Lungs with a litlte Fresh Air and, after the Duty
of the Day was over, which, no doubt they had performed with the usual City
Devotion, they very amicably took a Walk together into St. Jame's-Park.

The Matrons at home, being Ladies of Singular Intelligence, were timely enough
acquainted with their Husbands Determination. Mrs. A -- having the first Advice
brought to her, Posted away with mighty Exedition to Mrs. E -- 's House, to
acquaint her with the News, where she immediately dispatched a Confident to
Mrs. M -- who no sooner understood the matter, but instantly repairs to the
Congress at Mrs. E -- 's where the matter was not long a Debating, being Ladies
of admirable Invention; and they Resolve was, That they should put on Diguises,
and go Incognito in pursuit of their Husbands, that Care and Pleasures should
seperately occupy the Family. The Ladies thus Equipped, pursued their Stratagem
in Masquerade, and soon arrived at the Park; where they were often attacked by
the Beaux and Sparks, but they, being in quest of a nobler Game (though naturally
coming and complying enough) did very Tyrannically repulse all the Courtship
and Solicitations of these Gallants, and very bravely made good their way,
till at length they came in view of their appointed Quarry; and drawing toward
them with all the Tricks and Artifice's of Women of the Town, Mr. A -- made the
motion to meet them, and carry them to a Glass of Wine, being of an even number,
and promising well enough to deserve their Fare; the Motion was agreed to by
the other Two, and referred to Mr. A -- being a Man of the greatest Assurance
and Presence of Mind) to manage; and accordingly, Don Formaliteso, with a
Spanish Stiffness, makes up to the Ladies, and accosts them with Tropes and
Figures; and a dull Harangue of Costive Rhetoric, (his natural Style, wherein
he excuses the Modesty and Bashfulness of his two Friends, though Gitts and
Married too; yet for them and him self he gave them a hearty Invitation to a
Glass of Wine. The Ladies gave their Consent by their Silence; or by saying
very little at most, being sparing of their Speech, for fear of Discovering
themselves; so, in short, every one takes his Bird, and hasts to a certain
Tavern at Gharing-Gross; knowing the Nights being short, their Wives would look
for them home in good time; or else lead 'em a weary Life all the Week after,
with hard Service in Bed, and bad Bargains in the Shop; as soon as they came to
the Tavern, like generous Hearts, they spoke for a Supper of a Price, and
ordered it to be hastened with all Speed, and in the mean time called most
incontinently for Wine, and drank very freely whilst Supper was making ready:
But here was the most diverting Scene as Fortune would have it, who seldom
stumbles over, or interrupts such Intriegues, each Makes choice of his own
Wife, whither for Rallery, or the last Favors I know not, (an unhappy choice,
and a sign that they did not know them; And here they all strove for the most
soft and engaging Expessions of Love; and here they boasted and bounced of
strenuous Vigor, and youthful Performances, which these disguised Ladies had
too too often found experimentally false, in the disconsolate and legitimate
Bed; and yet, perhaps these Gentlemen might have been sincere too, For some can
never do the Trick to Perfection, but in a Bawdy House.

But, by this time, Supper was brought up, and the Conditions ended that they
must now Unmask, which, when the Waiters were commanded to retire, they
performed, and put an end to the Farce, by discovering themselves to be their
Wives, and the whole Company 3 whole Pair of Legitimate Upholders of the Race
Man' tho I think they had not been very successful neither.

But here you may imagine what a Surprise and Confusion arose in the whole
Company; and had (...) the Sparks been very Generous in their Entertainment,
they had been considerable Sufferers; but what with the Pleasure of the
Discovery, and the Diversion of good Wine and a Supper, which in the midst of
(...) their Passion, they were too wise to spoil, the Ladies were so far
mitigated as to keep the King's ^ and their Fingers off their Husbands Faces.
So, in short the Company soon broke up, and they (...) Wives to the Triumpth of
their Discovery, and the Husbands to the severest Discipline that ever (...)
exposed to. This Frolic was performed on Sunday last.

LONDON* Printed (...).


