CONFORMITY OF THE ECCLESIASTICAL DISCIPLINE OF THE Reformed Churches OF FRANCE
With that of the PRIMITIVE CHRISTIANS.

Written by M. LA ROCQUE, Minister of Quevilly near Rouen. With his Learned
Commentaries on each ARTICLE.

Rendered into English by JOS. WALKER.

LONDON: Printed for THO. COCKERILL, at the Three-Legs in the Poultrey,
over against the Stocks-Market. MDCXCI.

LICENSED,

August 10. 1691. J. FRASER.

To the Truly HONORED CHARLES STAYNINGS, Esquire Of Honycault in Somersetshire.
SIR,
WHen one enters your Neat Habitation, which for Conveniences bear parallel
with the proudest Palaces, there appears a Scene of sundry Varieties. A
Cambden, or Dugdale, would be requisite to display the Antiquities of the many
Honorable Families whereunto yours is related by Affinity and Marriage; out of
which Alliances, has issued several who have been Famous in their Generations
for their Heroic Actions in Peace and War; which laudable Qualities have
always been conspicuous in your self, Sir: Your Love of Learning, and happy
Familiarity and Intimacy with the Muses; your constant Courtesy and
Hospitality to Strangers, and all your Friends and Acquaintance, (which I have
several times personally Experimented) as also your uninterrupted Love and Zeal
for the Honor of God, and the good and safety of your Country, (for which you
have more than once Buckled on your Armor, and appeared in the Field of Mars)
makes you, like another Vespasian, to be the delight of all that are happy in
your acquaintance.

You have heretofore, Sir, been pleased favorably to accept and approve some
of my weak Essays, when I had the Honor of Living in your Neighborhood, near
the famous Orchard Wyndham; and knowing your deference for Pristine Learning
and Purity, I thought the Dedicating to you a Piece of that Nature and Stamp,
would not be excluded your Society, and a place amongst the Venerable Fathers
and Councils near your Chapel, in your Library. God has blessed us with
another King David to Fight our Battles, and a Venerable His Grace Dr.
Tillotson, Archbishop of Canterbury.
Jehojada to Rule our Church; so that I hope Peace and Truth will revive and
flourish in our Days, which is the hearty desire of,

Dear SIR, Your ever bounden Friend, and Most Humble Servant, JOS. WALKER.
Covent Garden, October. 25. 1691.
To the MINISTERS and ELDERS of the CONSISTORY which meet at Be'gle near
Bourdeaux.
Gentlemen, and much Honored Brothers,
ALthough I have undertaken this Work for the Edification of all our Churches;
nevertheless I offer it to you in particular, as a testimony of my due
resentments for the Honor you formerly did me in inviting me to you. I should
willingly have embraced your offer, if my Conscience could have dispensed with
it; for besides that the Employment had been honorable and profitable to me,
it would have drawn me also a little nearer to my own Country, for which I
still retain an Inclination. But the Providence of God; which orders our
Persons and Affairs as he pleases, having otherways disposed of my Ministry,
bestowing it on a Church where I found a second Native Country, by the marks
of kindness I daily received of the goodness of those whereof it is composed; I
lose by little and little the hopes of ever seeing my Native Country, and by
consequence, of assuring you by word of mouth, the true sentiments of my heart.
But Gentlemen, if I am at a distance from you in Body, I desire you to be
assured, that I am present with you in Spirit, seeing you are always in my
remembrance, and that I shall ever ardently beseech God, that he will generally
and in particular bestow on you his blessings. Moreover, the Work which I
present to you, will doubtless administer to you joy and comfort, in
manifesting the Antiquity of the Discipline under whose Maxims you live; for as
it scatters the false Aspersions of Novelty wherewith we are branded, and the
unjust reproaches wherewith you are daily accused; you will therein find such
lively Marks and Characters of the Discipline of the Ancient Christians, that
you will bless God for seeing that your Fathers have walked so Religiously in
that, as well as in the Doctrine which their Ancestors had professed, that is
to say, of those which had lived in the purest and happiest Ages of
Christianity. And indeed, if you please to give your selves the trouble to
compare together these two Disciplines, you will soon find they are Children of
one Father, productions of the same Spirit; and that drawing their Original
from Heaven, it is also their scope to direct men to Heaven, in building them
up in Sanctification and Holiness. After which, let men, if they please, blame
your Ecclesiastical Policy; hence-forwards you will have sufficient ground to
stop the mouth of Envy, and wherewithal to confound those which endeavor to
censure it. To justify it, 'twill be enough to show the Conformity there is
betwixt it and that of the Primitive Church; and this you may easily do,
because I think I have so fully evinced this resemblance, that it will be
visible to all those who will read this Treatise with an unbiased mind, and
that are not prepossessed with malice against us. As for us, Gentlemen, let us
faithfully keep the holy trust our Fathers have transmitted to us; let us
diligently exercise this Discipline, and carefully practice it; but especially
let us to our power conform to the Exercise of these Precepts by the Holiness
of our Lives, and the purity of our Actions; this will be the ready way of
baffling the many Volumes that attack your Morals; and show to all the World,
that these Instructions have no other scope but Justice and Piety. Actions are
of greater demonstration than Words; and the Arguments drawn from Practice, are
more convincing than those that are borrowed from Discourse. It was never
better proved, That there was motion in Nature, than it was done by the
Philosopher, that walked about to convince him that denied it. We cannot better
justify the purity of the Maxims of our Morals and Discipline, than in living
well; seeing it is very difficult, if not impossible, to live well under Masters
which only teach Debauchery, and that engage persons in Extravagance. Those who
please to look on your Society, will be convinced of what I say, when they
shall see in your wise conduct, to shine forth the marks and effects of the
innocence of your Discipline, and the equity of its Maxims and Laws. I hope you
will favorably accept this Book which I Dedicate to you, seeing its chiefest
aim is to show, That it is the same with the Discipline of the Primitive
Christians, for which all have so much respect and veneration. The Father of
Lights, from whom comes every good and perfect gift, be pleased to establish
you more and more in his Love, abundantly bless your persons, preserve the
Flock committed to your care, and cause therein all Christian Virtues to
abound, to the end that you may be a pattern to others, and that your Faith and
Piety may be renowned through all the Churches. These are the ardent Prayers
that are made for you all, by

Gentlemen and Honored Brethren, Your most humble Servant and Brother in
Christ Jesus, M. LA ROCQUE.
Rouen 24o. June 1678.
THE AUTHOR'S PREFACE.
WHat Laws are in a State, the same things are Canons in the Church: All
Societies of Men, as well Civil as Sacred, have always stood in need of some
Rules for the conduct of those whereof it is composed, and under their
direction to attain the designed end, which is pleasure of life, with the
repose of Conscience, and tranquillity of Mind. Man ought of his own free will
be inclined to the obedience of these, in the main prospect of the pleasure
there is in doing his Duty, and in the delight which is to be found in the
practice of Virtue; besides that in so doing, depends the happiness all men
seek after, but which few do find, because they seek amiss. Nevertheless,
according to the manner we are made, it is necessary we should be excited by
other motives, and be set a work by other principles; these Motives are, Fear
of punishment, and Hope of rewards; the two great springs that give motion, if
it may be so said, to the whole world, and which do powerfully engage men to
eschew evil, and do good. Legislators have also employed it in the world; the
Apostles, and their Successors, in the Church; and God himself made use of it
in regard of Adam, promising him Life and Immortality, if he continued faithful
and obedient to him; and on the contrary, threatening him with death, if he were
so foolish as to neglect the keeping his Commands, and violate the purity of
his Laws: In the day thou eatest the fruit of the tree of knowledge of good and
evil, thou shall die the death.

Man being a reasonable Creature, it was suitable to God's wisdom to give him
Laws to serve as a Rule and direction through the whole course of his life;
therefore he had no sooner created him, but he imprinted in his heart those
instructions which we call the Law of Nature, the Exercise whereof was to
constitute his joy and felicity; so that had he always persever'd in his
innocence, he would not have stood in need of Judges, nor of their Tribunals;
his conscience would have been sufficient for him; its counsels would ever have
been safe, its decisions just and right, and all its Ordinances would have
tended to the practice of this important maxim of the Son of God, which he drew
from the very spring of Nature it self, not to do to others, but what we would
they should do to us.

But sin having interrupted this Economy, and darkened the Lights which
attended it, all these directions of Nature have been ineffectual, and these
Instructions of no value. Nevertheless it is certain, God preserved in Man after
his fall, or at least he stirred up in him anew, by the efficacy of his
Providence, some little remains of that clear and pure light wherewith the
understanding had been illuminated when 'twas immediately made by his hand; and
thence it is that all men have the common and general Notions, That there is
one God; That he governs all things; That he punishes the wicked, and rewards
the good; That to honor him, is a Law that is allowed amongst all men; And that
he must not only be thought to be immortal and blessed, but also to be a Lover
of Mankind, of whose preservation he takes particular care, in daily doing them
good; it was thereby that the Inhabitants of the Isle of Maltha concluded St.
Paul was a Murderer; Act. 28.3.
they said, when they saw a Viper on his hand, Divine Vengeance followed him,
and would suffer him to live no longer. It is also from this principle
proceeded the knowledge the Apostle attributed to the Gentiles, when he says,
For when the Gentiles which have not the Law, Romans 2.14, 15.
do by nature the things contained in the law; these having not the law, are a
law unto themselves, which show the work of the law written in their hearts,
their conscience also bearing witness, and their thoughts in the mean while
accusing, or else excusing one another.

But at length Sin having almost extinguished the light of Nature, and made all
its instructions unprofitable, God was obliged to renew the knowledge of it, by
publishing his Law, which in substance contains the same precepts as those did
which God had writ at first in the heart of Men; and seeing the greater
corruption is, so much the more need there is to multiply Laws to restrain its
impetuosity and violence, and so hinder its spreading and excess; God, who knew
very well the inclination of the people of the Jews, which were a people of a
stiff neck, and uncircumcised heart, as the Scripture speaks; a people inclined
to disobedience and rebellion; God, I say, not content to divulge the Moral
Law, he thereunto joined the Ceremonial and Political Laws, to the end the
Israelites should the easier be retained in their duty, under the heavy yoke of
this severe Discipline.

Thence it followed by the Rule of contraries, That the more Sanctification is
advanced, the less need there is of Laws; which made St. Paul say, That the Law
is not made for the just, but for the Sinners and wicked. The first Christians
had but very few Decisions and Decrees in their Discipline, because being full
of Piety and Zeal, and that laboring with unspeakable diligence in the work of
their Sanctification, they disposed themselves voluntarily according to the
nature of the Gospel, and intention of Jesus Christ, and conscionably
practicing the Maxim of the Apostle, That all things should be done decently
and in order, in the Church of God; they with ease were guided by the Divine
motions of Grace, and the inspirations of that holy Spirit which God had so
plentifully, and in great measure poured forth on his Church in the first
Establishing of Christian Religion; for as to the Canons attributed to the
Apostles, and the Constitutions which also go in their name, they are things
forged in the following Ages; and after this new people had began to degenerate
from the first heat of their zeal, and that they had given some check to the
innocence of their life, and to the purity of their Manners; and as corruption
insensibly got ground; so also was seen to increase, the number of Canons and
Ordinances; for it commonly happens, that ill actions do multiply good Laws,
without which it would be impossible to make head against the many Scandals
that licentiousness does introduce where it predominates, and where sins are
not repressed and punished.

Something of this kind happened in our Reformation, which had a great
resemblance with the first Establishment of Christian Religion; for it may
truly be said, that by a particular blessing of Heaven, the first Reformers
were so holy in their life, so pure in their conversation, so wise in their
conduct, so modest in their words, and so humble in their actions, that all
their study and care tended only to Piety and Virtue, without being needful to
incline them to it by any great number of Rules; so also their Discipline at
first consisted in forty little Articles, which were composed by the first
National Synod held at Paris, in the year 1559; whereas that we have at this
time, contained in 14. Chapters, 222. Articles, much more large and ample than
the first.

The Reason of this difference, proceeds from the change which in time happened
to those that lived in our Communion, and that were Members of our Churches;
had they always followed the steps of their Ancestors, and that they had been
faithful Representatives of their Innocence, and of their purity, they would
have stood in need but of very few Rules; because the only love of Virtue,
would have seasoned all their actions, animated all their motions, mortified
their passions and desires, and lighted in their Souls a Divine flame, which
would have raised their thoughts from Earth to Heaven, and the which in
snatching them by a holy violence from the love of the Creatures, would
inseparably have fastened them to the love of the Creator.

But because there is always some remains of Man in Man, and that the flesh too
often prevails over the spirit; they by little and little degenerated from the
zeal of their Fathers, and their piety insensibly falling into extreme
coldness, they suffered themselves to fall into many defects, which dishonored
the Holiness of their Profession, and which obliged their Guides to increase
from time to time, the number of Laws, to restrain by the authority of those
Ordinances the course of their disorders, and to stop the spring of those
abuses; wherein they wisely followed the conduct of the Primitive Fathers, who
seeing a great negligence in the lives of Christians, added to their
Constitutions new Decrees, proportionable as the Sins of Men gave them matter
and occasion; knowing well, that 'twas the only means to preserve in its
purity, a Religion which had been cemented by the blood of Jesus Christ, and
consecrated by his Spirit.

In conclusion, How large soever our Discipline at this time may be, and how
much soever is increased the number of its Canons, I dare boldly say, That
never was a better Discipline; and that there was never seen an Ecclesiastical
Policy, more judiciously composed, than it is; if one take the pains to read it
without prejudice, one shall agree to this truth, and unless one be extremely
prepossest with prejudice against it, it must be granted, that the
Constitutions are just, that the Rules are holy, and that all the Decrees have
no other aim but the glory of God, and the holiness of those which submit
themselves to the keeping of his Laws; all the parts of this body answer one
the other; they march an equal pace, and agree all to the same end; the form of
Government which it prescribes, is indeed very simple, but it is Evangelical;
the order it will have one follow, is full of exactness; and if the Government
it establishes, is far from splendour and pomp, it is wholly bedewed in justice
and equity. In a word, All that is contained in it, was settled with a spirit of
love and sweetness.

After all this, what is there can be blamed in this Discipline? Is it the
Establishment of its Ministers? But there must be such to instruct the people.
Is it the manner of their Establishment? But it is conformable to that which
was observed in the Primitive Church. Is it the qualities which is desired to
be in them? But they are the very same which St. Paul requires in those which
consecrate themselves to the holy Ministry, Is it the Duties whereunto they are
obliged? But in this also is followed the precepts of the same Apostle, seeing
they are obliged to preach the Word of God, to administer the Sacraments which
he has instituted, to live unblameably, to be an Example to their Flock in word
and actions, to edify them by their Sermons, and by their Example, under pain
of great Censures to those which do not discharge themselves as they ought of
these just Duties, even to the suspending and deposing those which commit
Scandalous offenses, and such as deserve suspension and deposition.

Shall our Schools be condemned? But the use of them is too ancient, and too
necessary; for it is convenient to instruct youth, and teach them with care,
that they may one day be fit instruments in the hand of God for the propagating
his truth, and for establishing the Kingdom of his Son.

If any carp at our Consistories; it shall be made appear, that from the
beginning there was in every Church an Ecclesiastical Senate, which informed
themselves of all which concerned the good and edification of the Flock.

If any quarrel at our Lay Church Elders, we will make appear, that their
Institution is almost as ancient as the settling of Christianity; and that the
Primitive Church having used it successfully several Ages, we also make use of
it with much utility, according to its example.

As for Deacons, all the world knows they were instituted by the Apostles, and
amongst us they answer very well to the design of their Institution; for they
take care of the Poor, and distribute to them the gifts and charity of good
people, as their true Patrimony.

As to the Union of the Churches, St. Paul declares sufficiently of what
importance it is, when he exhorts us to keep the unity of the spirit in the
bond of peace, and to be one body and one spirit, as being called to the hope
of one and the same vocation. The ancient Doctors have recommended nothing with
more care than this holy union; nor censured any thing with more ardor and
zeal, than the Divisions and Schisms which divide the Church, and tear to
pieces the seamless Coat of our Lord Jesus.

Our Colloquies are nothing else in effect, but Assemblies of Ministers and
Elders of some certain Association, or part of a Country, deputed by their
Churches to deliberate all together of Affairs which offer, and do concern the
quiet and comfort of those which sent them; so that they cannot be condemned
without censuring at the same time, the Synods which are called Diocesan, to
which they have no little resemblance.

Who can find any fault with our Provincial and National Synods, seeing they
are grounded on the practice of the Primitive Church, and on the authority of
the Canons which so frequently recommend the holding and calling of them.

One must be very ill humoured to blame what we do in our Assemblies, all the
holy Exercises whereof consist in Invocating the Name of God, in Singing of
Psalms, in Preaching his Word, and in the administering the Sacraments.

These Sacraments being the Seals of his Covenant, and Symbols of our
Redemption, they cannot be Celebrated with too great respect, nor too much
reverence cannot be shown when they are administered; and it is this respect and
reverence which has been endeavored to be inspired in Believers amongst us, by
the directions which has been made about the administration of Baptism, and the
Celebration of the Lord's Supper.

There has no less care been had in preserving the Holiness of Matrimony, from
whence has been removed all manner of filthiness and impurity, and all
imaginable precaution used to render it legitimate.

To conclude, As for the Advertisements which regard particular persons, it has
been made known to all the world, that nothing else was intended but to dispose
Christians to Piety and Holiness, and generally to all Virtues, which are
worthy the name they bear, and of the Religion they profess.

Behold here the substance of our Discipline, which how innocent soever it be,
nevertheless has found adversaries, who being animated with a spirit contrary
to that of Christianity, have traduced it, and still daily rail against it,
declaiming against it in their Pulpits, endeavor to render it odious, by the
calumnies they accuse it of, and by the unjust reproaches they load it with; as
if those which composed it, and which have reduced it to the form wherein we
find it, had no other design but to open the door to Licentiousness, to foment
Vice, and to encourage Debauchery and Excess; but let them say what they list,
God which brings to light the secrets of all hearts, will be the Judge of our
Innocence, and will one day cover with confusion and shame, those which so
cruelly censure and injure us.

Nevertheless, I trust, with the blessing of his Grace, that the reading of
this Treatise will better inform them, and that finding therein an entire
Conformity betwixt our Discipline, and that of the Primitive Christians, they
shall be forced to change their notes, lest that condemning the one, they also
condemn the other; they resemble one another too much, not to approve, and like
of both. It Is true, that the better to discern this resemblance, Conscience
must be consulted, silence must be imposed on the Passions, and all prejudice,
which blinds our sight, and darkens our judgment, must be laid aside; by this
means the Conformity here proposed will be easily discerned; and having
discovered it, they will declare for us; for there would be no reason to make
that pass for blasphemy in our mouths which was esteemed Oracles in the mouth
of the ancient Fathers, neither to reject this rule of our conduct, seeing it
is the same that theirs was.

It is what I undertake to prove in this Book; and to make the thing the more
evident, I have examined from first to last, all the Articles one after
another, that none might think I had a design to cast a mist over the Eyes of
the Readers, in establishing a Conformity in too large and general a way; and
that to save the credit of our Discipline, I would not descend to a particular
search and examination. In effect, the first thing I do is to produce the Text
of each Article, then I cite the Decrees of Councils and Testimonies of
Fathers, as much as may be necessary to justify the resemblance which is in
dispute; from this Article I pass to another, and so go on unto the last; and I
can say with a safe Conscience, that in this work I have not used fraud nor
artifice, that there will be seen throughout the whole Book a great deal or
plainness, and if in some parts more of art and skill be required, I am
persuaded that there never will be cause to desire more of fidelity; because I
had so particular a view of resembling these two Disciplines, and to represent
so plainly the features and lineaments, that the one might easily be taken for
the other, as it often happens to two Twins, and to find in ours a true Copy of
the Prototype, and of the true Original.

Moreover, I warn the Reader, that having done as I have now mentioned,
nevertheless I have dispensed my self in reciting at large all that I alledg of
Antiquity, fearing to deform the Edition; because the whole Work is but a
continued tissue of Canons and Testimonies; therefore I have only done it when
I thought it necessary, and in those places which absolutely required it.
Secondly, The Reader may take notice, I do not always write the whole Decrees,
but just what relates to the matter I examine, reserving the rest for clearing
some other Article, if it be proper for it. And to conclude, In the things
which are evident, and approved of all, I have not obliged my self exactly, in
all places, to cite the proper terms of Authors, but just the sense and
substance; which nevertheless, I have done in such a way, that none will have
cause to blame my Conduct, if they will please to compare with the Originals,
what I have transcribed.

Although what I have hitherto writ be more than sufficient to stop the mouth
of Calumny, and to justify our Ecclesiastical Government; nevertheless there
are some such untoward and cross spirits, and withal so full of prejudice
against us, that they make pass for Criminal, the things which are most
innocent; and easily condemn what is well worthy the Esteem and Love of the
best of Men: For instance, If we forbid Dancing, Comedies, the Play of Hazard,
Mummeries, the liberties of Shrovetide Carnivals, and other Follies of this
kind, They say we are Leaders of the blind; and they injuriously compare us to
those Hypocrites in the Gospel, to whom our Savior says, They strain at a
Gnat, and swallow a Camel; never considering that in acting after this manner,
they lessen the Glory of the Fathers, which have so highly reproved the same
things, and pronounced severe Censures against all those which allowed
themselves in these worldly pleasures; were they not blinded with prejudice,
they would speak after another manner, and they would infer from the severity
of these Laws, That those which made them, were guided by the Spirit of God,
which inspired them with so great a Love to Virtue, and so great a Hatred to
Vice, That they forbid those which lived under their Authority and Conduct, the
use of those things which were capable to infect the purity of their Lives, and
to stop the course of their Piety and Sanctification.

But the Censurers of our Discipline stop not there; they pretend, it favors
Libertinisme, because it permits those which separate for the cause of
Adultery, to Marry some other person; and it may be said, That this sole
Article opens to the Preachers of the Roman Church, a wide Field to declaim
against us; and that they take occasion, or rather a pretext, to accuse us, as
if we were favorers of Vice, and enemies of Virtue: There are also amongst
them persons considerable for the Rank they bear, which treat us with no less
injustice, for that having but little or no knowledge of the Ancient Discipline
of Christians, they imagine it was no way different from that which they at
this time follow; and on this wrong ground, they look on them as Libertines,
which teach that the band of Marriage may be broke by reason of Adultery;
nevertheless it is the Doctrine of Jesus Christ, who formally declares in the
Gospel, That it is only for Adultery that Marriage may be dissolved, as well to
the Bed, as the Obligation. I know, St. Austin, and some others, have found
difficulty in the explication of the Words of our Savior, and that they could
not fully resolve to explain them in the manner I just now mentioned; at least
St. Austin confesses in several places of his Writings, That the Question
concerning the Dissolving of Marriages for cause of Adultery, is very obscure
and difficult, and is, what made him write on this matter things, which would
seem contradictory, if one did not distinguish the times wherein he applied
himself to write on this question.

For it is most certain, in what he wrote before the 2d Council of Mileva,
which was held in the year of our Lord 416. he appeared unresolved and
undetermined, finding great difficulties, obstructions almost impassible, and
depths not easily to be fathomed; those that will please to take the pains to
see what he writes in the 3d Chapter of his Book against Adimentius, in the 7th
of the Book touching the Comfort of Marriage, in the 8th and 25th Chapters of
the 1st Book of Adulterous Marriages, that is to say, of Marriages dishonored
by Adultery, and join to these Testimonies which are in the 6th Tome, those
others which are in the 4th, to wit, The 19th Chapter of the Book of Faith and
Works, the last Question of the Book of 83 Questions, and the 16th Chapter of
the first Book of the Sermon of our Lord on the Mount; those I say, which will
take the pains to read all these places which I have instanced, will agree to
the irresolution and trouble St. Austin was in, on the subject now spoke of,
and especially if they consider the sincere Confession which he makes in one of
the places I have cited; Having, says he, Lib. 1. de Adult. Conjug. cap 25.
Tom. 6.
thus Treated and Examined these things according to my capacity, I am not
ignorant that the Question touching Marriages, is very obscure and difficult,
and I do not dare to say that I have yet explained in this Work, nor that I am
able, if you press me, to resolve hereafter, in any other, all the difficulties
which accompany it. He confesses the same thing, Lib. 2. Retract. cap. 57. Tom.
1.
although in terms a little different, in recalling the Books wherein is found
the Testimony which justifies what I have alleged of his doubtfulness, and
declares with his usual humility, That he don't think to have given to this
Matter, all the clearness it requires.

After this Council of Mileva, this Holy Doctor wrote several Treatises,
wherein he explains himself more fully than he had done in the others; for
instance, In the 19th Chapter of the first Book of Retractaions, he says, That
it is out of doubt, that one may leave his Wife for the Fornication which is
committed in Adultery.

In his 89th Letter to Hilarious, Quest. 4. He confesses, That by the Laws of
Jesus Christ, Tom. 2.
it is not permitted to leave one's Wife but for the cause of Adultery, and
that Jesus Christ forbid to put her away for any other Cause but for Adultery;
And in the 9th Treatise upon St. John, It is permitted to put away the Wife for
the cause of Adultery, Tom. 9.
because she has first refused to be a Wife, in not keeping her vow of Wedlock
to her Husband. To judge of the mind of St. Austin by these latter Testimonies,
which are more formal and positive than the former; it may be concluded, That
he believed having well examined the matter, that the band of Marriage was
broke by Adultery: Nevertheless, because that in the other writings he could
not satisfy himself, nor clear all their difficulties wherewith this question
seemed to be always encumbered, I would not make use of His Authority, for
Establishing the Conformity of our Discipline with that of the Primitive
Christians.

This Council of Mileva abovementioned, forbids in the 17th of its Canons,
which is the 102. in the African Code, it forbids him that is repudiated by his
Wife, and to the Woman put off by the Husband, to re-marry themselves to any
one else, and enjoins them to live single, or to be reconciled again,
threatening to put them into the number of Penitents if they disobey this
Decree, which the Fathers of the Synod pretend to be conformable to the
Evangelical and Apostolical Discipline; But in the first place, they do not
declare whether they speak of a separation occasioned by Adultery, or by some
other cause, for the which Jesus Christ don't permit of Separation. Secondly,
The Conduct of St. Austin who assisted at this Council, makes me suppose, that
either the Fathers of Mileva spoke of Divorces besides for the Cause of
Adultery, or at least if they regarded Divorces grounded upon Adultery, St.
Austin did not forbear Writing after the Convocation of this Assembly, That
it is permitted to put away the Wife for the matter of Adultery. Thirdly, When
the Council it self with some other Doctors should more fully explain
themselves, and that they should have formally condemned the second Marriage of
those which had been put away for Adultery, it would not from thence follow,
that I have not made appear that our Discipline does not suffer in this
occasion, only what the Ancient Christian Discipline of the Church suffered,
seeing I have proved it by the Canons of diverse Councils, by the Decrees of
some Popes in their Synods, and by the practice of all the Greek Church, a
practice which the Council of Trent dared not to condemn, after the
Remonstrances made by the Ambassador of Venice.

And yet farther, It is what a famous Doctor of the Communion of Rome has fully
justified, without thinking of us, nor the innocence of our Conduct on the
point in Controversy, in a Book which he published two or three years ago,
touching the power of Kings and Sovereigns over Marriages; for in the 3d Part,
Art. 1. Chap. 5. he has at large represented to the Reader, the Tradition of
the Church on the matter of Marriages occasioned by Adultery, whereas I have
contented my self to relate in my Work, what is most definitive in the
Tradition, and least of all subject to Controversy and Contestation. Whatever's
the matter, after so many explanations, there is hope to believe, That Men will
not for the future cry so much against this Article of our Discipline, which
has given occasion to our Enemies to accuse us of favoring Vice and
Libertinisme.

I could, if it were needful, mention other Cavils of some lesser Disputers
against the Holiness of our Ecclesiastical Laws, which they have spoke very
injuriously of, as if they were directly contrary to the Rules of the first
Christians, and as if those which made them, had taken pleasure quite to
forsake its use and practice; but it is much better to refer to the reader the
liberty of judging of our innocence when he shall have Read the whole Treatise;
for besides that I cannot refute these injuries and slanders, without
discovering persons who have lately been forward this way, unless I would write
a Volume, and not a Preface, would I undertake to answer particularly to all
the false accusations which they have alleged to render our Religion odious,
in censuring our Discipline.

Laying therefore apart these unjust Accusers, it is needful, before ending this
Preface, that I speak a little of some others whose Learning and Reputation is
better known and grounded, and yet nevertheless, going by a false Zeal, or by
some other motive unknown to me, treading in the steps of the others, do no
less cruelly devour us; I speak of those Gentlemen which accuse us of
overthrowing the Morals of Jesus Christ by certain Doctrines which we teach; an
unjust accusation, if ever there was one; for if we destroyed the Sanctity of
the Gospel, it must needs follow of necessity, that that which we follow, must
be pernicious; And how can it be that our Morals should be corrupt, seeing it
produces a Holy Discipline, whose Rules and Directions are so many marks of
the Maxims of true Morality; I will not be the Judge, I desire they would only
read what I have writ to prove the resemblance of our Discipline with that of
the Ancient Churches, and I am persuaded that reading it without prejudice,
they will freely confess that my parallels are just, and that I have drawn the
Picture so like the Original, that 'twill be hard to know the one from the
other, there is so much resemblance betwixt them; after which, I may be
permitted to infer from the Holiness of our Discipline, the sanctity of our
Morals; and from the holiness of our Morals, and of our Discipline, the truth
of our Doctrine, and by consequence, the purity of our Religion.

I know it is not absolutely impossible but that there might be a corrupt Moral,
with a good Doctrine; for although ordinarily these things march together, and
that the sanctity of the one is followed with the purity of the other;
nevertheless it may so happen that some may undertake to join a pure Doctrine
with a corrupt Moral, or a holy Moral with dangerous Doctrines. Nevertheless,
because the Moral naturally follows the Doctrine, that for the most part an
Orthodox Doctrine produces a virtuous Moral, and that when the Doctrines are
true, the Laws of the Moral are just; I allow that those which belch out false
accusations against us, as Enemies of the Morals of Jesus Christ, I desire they
would judge of our Doctrines by our Morals, because then they would judge of
our Morals by our Discipline; for there is nothing more just, than to judge of
the one by the other. If our Discipline then be pure, 'twill follow that our
Moral is holy, and by consequence our Doctrine is true by their own confession.
If they say that our Discipline is not pure, they accuse of impurity that of
the Primitive Church, seeing ours is a faithful Copy and Representation of it;
if they confess it is good, then they must confess that all our Religion is
pure, seeing its Doctrine is true, the Moral holy, and the Discipline blameless.

They may forbear then writing such great Volumes to vent untruths, nor take
such wide circuits to build on ill Principles, and to draw false and unjust
consequences; for there is nothing falser than what they write, that we destroy
the Moral of Jesus Christ by our Doctrine of Justification; I say illegitimate,
for if the very consequences they impute to us might be drawn from our
Doctrine, which cannot be, yet they could not in equity be imputed to us,
because that, far from owning them to be ours, we abhor them with our Souls.
What have we done to those Gentlemen, that we should be the object of their
malice and spite? Where is the gentleness and moderation which the Spirit of
Jesus Christ inspires? Where is that Christian Charity that thinks no harm?
Would they recover at our charge what they have lost? Would they be received
into favor by our prejudice? and make us a Sacrifice to appease a Party that
would suppress them, and against which they are no longer able to resist? Must
they needs quarrel with us because they could not succeed in their designs?
Heaven does not prosper men's endeavors, when the flesh has as great a share in
it as the Spirit, when we mingle our Interest with those of God; when we make
Religion serve the World, and when we go about to make I know not what mixtures
of the Onions and Garlic of Egypt, with the Milk of Canaan. The time will come
when we shall all appear before the dreadful Tribunal, upon which shall sit an
Incorruptible Judge, who reading in our hearts, and searching into the bottom
of our Souls, will make us give an account of our most secret thoughts, of our
words and our actions; and happy will those be whose Conduct, was sincere and
whose actions had Faith and Charity for their Principle, and the glory of God
for their End.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THE Stationer has in his hands the Attestation of Monsieur Cartaut and
Monsieur Le Page, Ministers at Diep, and another of Monsieur Le Gendre,
Minister at Rouen, declaring they have examined this Work, and that they have
found nothing in it contrary to their Religion.

In honorem ejus qui ex Anglorum, genere natus, hoc opus, ex Gallorum idiomate,
in Anglicum transtulit.
ANte oculos posuit nostros Celeberrimus Author
Lumina, quae priscos dant prope quosque patres:
Hique Patre sacrum Domini dant tempore Coetum,
Quique eadem nostri tempora Coetus habet.
Os avidum Romae potuit sic claudere clave.
Ille decus per me perferat egregium.
Est alius quisquam divino Numine fretus,
Primam cui generis praebuit ipsa Diem
Magna Britannia, qui pugnaces quos-ve Britannos
Edocet hoc verum, voce sua Patriae.
Inter eos igitur sit gloria utrique vicissim,
Eximioque Patri, Praesidioque gravi.
Desaguliers, M.

Dom. Domino Walkero, in Versionem Disciplinae Ecclesiarum Reformatarum, apud
Gallos.
QUae tibi plus debet Walkere? Britannia forte.
Gallia forte. Tuus seruit utrique labor.
Nostrorum scripta exornas Sermon diserto,
Externis anges divitiis patriam --
L. Rival.

Sur le meme, pour Explication, en Francois.
Sonnet.
L'Autheur de cet Ouvrage, ij paroit des la France,
Excellent tout a fait, and met devant nos yeux,
Avec beaucoup de soin, and beaucoup de prudence,
Les Peers de se siecle, and ceux du siecle vieux.
Son travail clairement, montre que notre Enfance
Est celle des Vicillars, qui possedent les Cieux.
Rome, tu dois bannir ta Lache medisance;
Pour la dissiper toute, on ne peut fair mieux.
L'Autheur merit bien de l'honneur, de la gloire;
Mais il ne doit pas, seul, jouir de la Victoire:
Ce sage and just Anglois, tout plein de Charity,
Fait passer, chez les siens, ce Traitte veritable:
Il doit donc avoir part au Laurier honorable,
Le Pere en ce partage exalte l'Equite.
Desaguliers, M.

A Monsieur Walker sur sa version, en Anglois, de la Discipline des Eglises
Reformees de France.
QV I te doit plus des deux! l'Angleterre ou la France?
O genereux Walker. Ton Travail Excellent
Honor l'une and l'autre, and done l' Esperence
D'un Amor, qui du Ciel, tient son vray fondement.
J. D. M.

CONFORMITY OF THE ECCLESIASTICAL DISCIPLINE OF THE Protestants of France, With
that of the PRIMITIVE CHRISTIANS.
CHAP. I. Of MINISTERS.
ARTICLE I.
TO proceed to the Election of those which are to be Employed in Preaching the
Word of GOD, the Rule of the Apostle must be observed; that Examination and
Inquiry must be made of their Doctrine, Life and Conversation, and that as
diligently as may be.

CONFORMITY.
Jesus Christ having established the Preaching of the Gospel, to conduct his
Children to the enjoyment of the Salvation which he purchased for them by the
Merits of his Death, it is with great Reason that the Authors of our Discipline
have begun this Excellent Work, with the Articles which Treat of the Election
and Establishing of Ministers, which are the Instruments which God employs for
assembling the Saints, and for building up the Body of Christ, as St. Paul
speaks. The more weighty this Office is, the more care ought to be taken, that
those which are called to it should be enriched with Gifts necessary to
discharge themselves as they ought; that is to say, That they should be apt to
teach; which the National Synod of Gergeau, added in the Year 1601. to the
Article which we examine, after these Words, of their Doctrine: It Is true, that
the purity of Doctrine should be accompanied with Holiness of Life, to the end,
that if they are the Light of the World by their Preaching, so also they should
be the Salt of the Earth by their good Living. The Apostle, who perfectly knew
the importance of this Divine Employment, took particular care in Chap. 3. of
the 1st Epistle to Timothy, and in Chap. 1. to Titus, to prescribe all the
Qualities he desires in a good and faithful Minister of the New Testament: St.
Peter also Treats of them, but in a more general manner, in Chap. 5. of his
1st. Epistle.

Thence it is that St. Clement observes in his Epistle to the Church of
Corinth, Page 54. Edit. Oxford 1633.
That the Apostles Preached the Word in the Cities, and in the Country, and
that they Established for Bishops of those which were to believe, the first
Fruits of those which they had Converted; that is to say, The first Fruits of
those, which, being awakened at their Preaching, had embraced the Profession of
the Gospel; but he observes also, that he made them not Conductors of the
Faithful, until after he had proved them by the Holy Ghost. Tertullian, in all
likelihood, thought of this practice, when describing in Chap. 39. of his
Apology, the Assemblies of Christians of his time, he says, That the Elders
which had been tried, presided over them; this proof undoubtedly comprehending
that of their Life and Doctrine: It is also in the same design, that the fourth
Council of Carthage Assembled in the Year 398, and Composed of above 200
Bishops, ordered in the first Canon, before all things, To examine him that was
to be Consecrated a Bishop, Tom. 1. Council page 727.
to see if he have a good Natural Wit; if he be apt to Teach; moderate in his
Conversation; sober in his Life; diligent in his Affairs; humble, affable, full
of Compassion; If he be Learned; if he be Instructed in the Law of the Lord; if
he Interprets the Word of God soberly and prudently; if he be versed in the
Dogma 's of the Church, and if he can explain in a clear and plain manner, the
Doctrines of Faith. The first Council of Nice also made mention of this Trial
in the Ninth and Tenth Canons; and it shall be shown on the fourth Article, the
exactness that was used, to have good Testimonies of those which were to be
Established in the Ministry of the Church.

II.
Those which are newly introduced into the Church, especially Priests and
Friars, are not to be admitted into the Ministry, without long and diligent
inspection and examination, not only of their Life, but also of their Doctrine,
and must be approved of at the least for two years, from the time of their
Conversion, and confirmed by good Witnesses of the places wherein they have
lived; and they shall not receive Imposition of Hands no more than if they were
mere Strangers, without the advice of Provincial and National Synods.

CONFORMITY.
This Article is grounded upon the Authority of St. Paul, and upon reason; I
say, on the Authority of St. Paul, who declares positively, That the Minister
of the Gospel should not be a Novice, lest being lifted up with Pride, 1 Timothy
3.6.
he fall into Condemnation of the Devil. I say, in the second place on Reason;
for if we diligently examine the Doctrine and Manners of those that aspire to
the Office of the Holy Ministry, although they are Sons of the Church by Birth, or
at least that they have joined themselves to her Communion for several years
past, of much greater reason should the same Care and Precaution bind rather
more in regard of those which are turned to us but very lately: A Tree newly
planted cannot so well resist Winds and Storms, the extremity of Cold, nor
great Heat, as if it had taken deep root in the earth; a new Convert has not so
much Light or Experience for the guiding of a Flock; besides, it is requisite
time should be allowed to judge of the sincerity of his Conversion, because Men
cannot penetrate into the heart; and that moreover, the Actions of a Hypocrite
have in outward show, much resemblance with those of a good Christian.

But if this Article, now in question, be grounded on the Authority of
Scripture, De Presc. c. 41. edit. Paris. 1664.
and on the Light of Reason, it is no less on Tradition; Tertullian reproaches
Heretics, That they established in the Ministry of the Church, Neophites, and
such as were newly converted. The great Council of Nice, in the year of our
Lord 325. made a Canon on purpose, wherein the Fathers complain, Can. 2.
that several things had been done, either through necessity, or otherwise, to
the Prejudice of the Ecclesiastical Rule, as for having too soon granted
Baptism to those which passed from Paganism to Christianity, without having
been long enough Catechized; and in having advanced them to the highest Offices
in the Church presently after Baptism; upon which they prohibit. That the like
shall not be done for the future; because say they, There must be time for a
Catecumene, and a longer Proof and Trial after he has been Baptized; which they
confirm by the Words of the Apostle above cited: About forty years after, the
Council of Laodice, the Canons whereof have been annexed to the Code of the
Canons of the Universal Church, made this Decree, which is to be seen in the
Third Canon, It is not permitted to admit into Sacred Orders, those who have
but lately received Baptism; it is also, whereunto have regard the 12th and
13th Canons of the same Council. This same Defense has been since often
reiterated; for, not to speak of the 8th Canon of those attributed to the
Apostles, wherein it is to be seen at this present time, it is to be found in
sundry other places of the Writings of the Ancient Fathers; those who will take
the pains to read in the first Tome of the Councils of France, the Eleventh
Canon of the Fourth Council of Arles, Anno Dom. 524. the Letter of Pope Foelix
the Fourth, to Caesarius Bishop of Arles, of the year 528. The Sixth Canon of
the Third Council of Orleance, of the year 538. and the Ninth to the Fifth of
the same place, with the Twelfth of a Roman Synod to the Bishops of France, the
time whereof is uncertain; those I say, which will please to read these places,
will will easily perceive the Matter now in question; as also in the Third
Canon of the first Council of Barcelona, Tom 4. Council. p. 531. and 587.
which was held the year 599. and in the Eighteenth or Nineteenth of the Fourth
of Tolledo, in the year of our Lord 633.

III.
If it happens that any Bishop or Curate aspire to the Ministry of the Gospel,
he cannot be Ordained until he be first a true Member of the Church, renouncing
to all his Benefices, and other dependancies on the Roman-Church, and
acknowledging all the faults he has committed for the time past, as he shall be
directed by the Consistory; and after long experience and proof of his
Repentance and good Living.

CONFORMITY.
Those whereof there is question in this Rule, being near hand the same with
the others whereof I have discoursed in the precedent Article; the same Method
must be observed in reference to them, as toward the others; seeing they can
be looked upon in the Communion wherein they are lately come, but as new
Converts.

IV.
A Minister of the Gospel, (except it be in troublesome times, in case of great
necessity, in which he may be Ordained by Three Ministers, with the Consistory
of the place) shall not be admitted to this Holy Office, but by the Provincial
Synod, or by the Colloqui; provided it be composed of Seven Pastors at the
least, which Number not being to be found in some Colloquies, it shall call in
others of the Neighborhood to accomplish the Number; and him who is to be
Ordained, shall be presented together with good and sufficient testimonies, not
only of Academies, or particular Churches, but also of the Colloqui of the
Church in the which he has been most conversant.

CONFORMITY.
There are two chief Heads in this Article, one whereof regards the Number of
the Ministers which are to assist at the reception of him who is intended to be
admitted into the Holy Ministry; and the other concerns the Testimonies of him
who presents himself to be Examined. As for the former of these two Heads,
touching the number of Ministers, whose presence is necessary for the
Establishing of another, there is nothing wiser or more judicious, than what
our Discipline does appoint. Whilst the Church does enjoy Peace, and is at full
Liberty, it is very reasonable that the Minister of the Gospel be admitted to
this Sacred Office by all the Ministers of the Province, assembled in a Synod,
or at least by those which compose the Colloqui or Class where he is to serve,
provided they are not under the number of Seven; but in perilous and difficult
times, and upon urgent necessity, three are sufficient: It is the Establishment
of the first Council of Nice, which explains it self in these Terms, in the 4th
of its Canons, It is requisite the Bishop should be established by all the
Bishops of the Province; but if that be difficult to be done by reason of some
urgent necessity, or by reason of the length of the way, let there be Three
Assembled to make the Ordination, those which are absent, consenting and
approving the same by their Letters. I grant the Cannon speaks properly of the
Ordination made by the imposition of hands, as we shall see in what follows;
but that don't hinder but that it may be applied to the whole vocation; the
19th. Canon of the Council of Antioch of the year 341, says in effect the same
thing.

But in regard of these difficult times whereof mention has been made, during
the which three Pastors sufficed for establishing a Minister, the
Ecclesiastical History praising the Piety and Zeal of Eusebius Bishop of
Samosate, observes of him amongst other things, one action very considerable,
which is, that in the time the Arrians persecuted the Catholics under the
Emperor Valens, this holy man knowing there was several Churches destitute of
Pastors, He Equipped himself in a Soldiers habit, and putting a Miter on his
head, Theodoret. Lab. 4. c. 13.
he went through Syria, Phoenicia, and Palestine, settling Priests and Deacons,
and also Bishops, in the Churches that had need of them.

I say, he established even Bishops, whether it be understood of Bishops, which
had before been advanced to this Dignity, and which he established in the
Churches which had need of them, as may be gathered from Theodoret, or other
Orthodox persons which he Consecrated, and to whom he gave Ordination at the
very time that he assigned them Churches; and that he settled them in them, as
is observed by Mr. de Valois in his Notes upon this place, and on the 4th.
Chap. of the 5th. Book of Theodoret's History; to justify what I have now said
of Eusebius of Samosate, that he established Bishops in the Churches that
wanted them, and at the same time to see sundry instances of Ordinations by the
Imposition of hands, of one person only; however it be, the conduct of this
Prelate, which was never blamed by any, shows plainly, that in difficult times,
and when the preservation and safety of the Church requires it, something of
the rigor of the Laws and Canons of the Church may be dispensed withal, as is
observed by Synesius Bishop of Ptolomais, in his 67 Epistle, P. 20. Edit. Par.
1631.
where he makes mention of the Ordination of a Bishop by another single Bishop,
in difficult and troublesome times; and I will make appear on the 8th. Article,
several examples of these kinds of Ordinations even in times that were not
troublesome, and such as our Discipline designs; in the mean while I observe
that Venerable Bede in his Ecclesiastical History of England, writes, that
Ithamar Bishop of Rochester, Lib. 3. Cap. 20.
alone of himself, Consecrated two Archbishops of Canterbury, one after
another successively.

I now proceed to the second Head of this Article, which concerns the
Testimonies those are to produce, who are to be Consecrated to the Holy
Ministry. Pastors being to be an example to their flock in word and
conversation, it is very fitting there should be good testimonies of their Life
and Doctrine, before they are established in this Divine Office; insomuch as
St. Paul desires, that they may have a good report of those which are without,
fearing lest they should fall into shame, and the snare of the Devil; therefore
the Church has ever used after this manner, admitting unto this trust only
those which had good and sufficient testimonies, as well for their capacity, as
for their good Conduct; it is whereunto amounted the proof St. Clement,
Disciple of the Apostles, and Tertullian, have already made mention; thence it
is, St. Cyprian will, Ep. 67. ult. Edit.
That the Pastor be established in the presence of all the people, who
perfectly know the life of each person, and that have narrowly observed his
conversation, to the end that having discovered his virtues, or vices, the
Ordination made by the consent and approbation of all, may be just and
legitimate. Id. Ep. 33.
And elsewhere, he says to the people, That he is wont to advise with them,
when he is about to Ordain any Clerk, to the end they may examine and try
altogether, the life and good qualities of each one.

Saint Basil complaining of the relaxation of Discipline, T. 3. Ep. 181. Paris
1638.
and the slighting of the Canons, which in time might occasion great confusions
in the Church, he says, That the ancient custom of Christians was carefully to
search and to make very strict inquiry into the life and conversation of those
who were admitted into the Ministry, to find out if they were Slanderers,
Drunkards, Fighters, if they carried themselves soberly, and if they could walk
steadfastly in the ways of Sanctification, without which no one shall see God.
Moreover this custom appeared so good and holy to him, that he will absolutely
have the use of it revived throughout all his Diocese; that he will have the
Church purged of all those that were entered into it by any other manner, as
being unworthy to serve in it, and that for the future none should be admitted
but those which were first duly examined, and accounted worthy the Employments
intended for them.

I will not here repeat what I alleged of the fourth Council of Carthage upon
the first Article; I will only say, that in the third Tome of the Library of
the Fathers, and in the Pandect of the Cannons Printed at Oxford of late years,
there is a Canonical Epistle of Theophilus Bishop of Alexandria, the sixth
Canon of which treats of Ordinations, wherein he desires, the Election and
consent of the Clergy, the examination of the Bishop, and the testimony of the
people.

In the Book of Sacraments of Gregory the first, P. 236. Paris 1642.
the Bishop is to signify to the People the Names of those which are to be
chosen, to the end that if any there present know any thing that might hinder
the Ordination, they might declare it freely, and with a safe conscience;
thence it is that Leo the first, desires in these Occasions, the testimony of
the People, as he explains himself in his 89 Epistle. And Pope Eugenius II. in
a Synod assembled at Rome about the year of our Lord 826, and which is to be
seen in the second part of the Roman Collection of Holstenius Printed at Rome
1642, I say, with the Synod, prescribes in the very terms of the Apostle, Cap.
1.
the manner of Ordination; that is to say, that he requires that he which
desires to receive it, may be adorned with the Qualities recommended by St.
Paul, and that he may be acceptable to all the world by his good Works.

The Emperor Alexander Severus, so highly approved this use and practice, as
also the publishing which was made of those which were to be admitted into the
Ministry of the Church, whereof I shall speak on the tenth Article, Aelius
Lampri. in Alex. Sev.
that he would have it be put in practice in establishing Governors of
Provinces of the Empire, and other Magistrates.

The Fathers of the first Council of Nice, in the Letter they wrote to the
Church of Alexandria, and which has been transmitted to us by Socrates and
Theodoret, these Fathers term this, L. 1. c. 9.
Offering to the People the Names of those which were to be advanced to any
Dignity in the Church. St. Chrysostom in the 18th. Homily upon the 2 Epist. to
the Corinthians, Establishes and confirms this custom by the Example of the
Apostles, which used the same when Mathias was to be chosen, and also by that
of the Seven Deacons. Something of the same kind is to be seen in 61 and 76
Epistles of Synesius, according to which Nicetas in the Life of St. Ignatius
Patriarch of Constantinople, in the IX Century, which is contained in the
Preliminaries of the eighth Council of Constantinople, which the Latins hold
for Ecumenical, but is rejected by the Greeks: Tom. 6. Council. pa. 872.
Nicetas observes, that several were named to sill the vacant Chair, and that
St. Ignatius was preferred before the rest.

V.
The Examination of him that shall be presented, shall in the first place be
made by Propositions out of the Word of God upon the Texts of Scripture which
shall be given to him, the one in French; of necessity, the other in Latin, if
it be thought expedient by the Colloque; for each of which he shall be allowed
24 hours time to prepare himself; if therein he satisfies the Company, it shall
be farther known by a Chapter in the New Testament which shall be assigned him,
whether he is skilful in the Greek, so as to interpret it; and as for Hebrew,
it will be requisite to know if he understands it so far as to make choice of
good Books for the better understanding the Scriptures; whereunto shall be
added an Essay of his Industry and skill on the most necessary Parts of
Philosophy, all in Charity, without affectation of difficult and unnecessary
Questions. To conclude, there must be required of him a short confession of
Faith in Latin, upon which he shall be examined by way of Dispute; and if after
this trial, he shall be found capable, the Company representing to him the
obligation of the Office whereunto he is called, shall declare to him the power
which is given to him in the Name of Jesus Christ, of Administering as well the
Word, as the Sacraments, after his entire Ordination into the Church whereunto
he is appointed, the which shall have notice of his Election by Acts and
Letters of the Synod or Colloque, carried and read by one of the Elders.

CONFORMITY.
After what I have hitherto said, it cannot reasonably be doubted, but that in
all times, those have been Examined in the Church, which were to Labor for her
Instruction and Edification, and which were to serve in Preaching the Word, and
Administering the Sacraments; I grant this Examination may differ according to
the diversity of Places and Persons, which were to do the Office of Examiners;
some doing it with more Exactness and Severity, and others with more Mildness
and Charity; and I cannot tell if ever there has been seen on this Subject, a
more strict and exact establishment than that which our Discipline does
prescribe: Whatever it is, it is most certain, that is, That the Examination of
Life and Doctrine, however 'twas performed, always preceded Ordination. The
19th. Canon of the 1st Council of Nice, the 12th of that of Laodicea, and the
1st and 4th of Carthage, ordaining it should be so; although the latter makes
it more ample than the two others, and declares distinctly, the Questions which
were to be made, and the Articles upon which those were to be Interrogated
which were to be called to be Bishops; and I make no question, but 'twas with
regard to this Examination, That Gregory the first condemned in his Pastoral,
Part. 1. c. 1. T. 1. Paris. 1586.
The temerity of those which being ignorant and destitute of knowledge, would
presume to take on them the Office of Pastors, never considering that the
Conduct of Souls, is the Art of Arts: That is to say, the Noblest and most
Excellent of all the Sciences, and withal, the most Difficult, the most
Intricate, and most Laborious, and by consequence, requires more Study and Care
than any other whatsoever. What a shame would it be for a Pastor, to speak yet
with the same St. Gregory, Part. 2. cap. 11.
in the same Treatise, If he should go about to learn, in the time that he
should resolve the difficulties should be proposed to him? Whereas he ought
always to be ready, to give to Believers the satisfaction which they desire,
upon things which concern Conscience and Salvation.

This laudable Custom continued a long while after the Death of Gregory; but
since the Ninth Century, the Examination of Pastors was insensibly brought to
so mean a State, that there needed not much Learning to Answer the Questions
that were proposed: And to conclude, The greatest part of the Vocation and
Consecration of those to whom the Care and Conduct of Souls was committed,
consisted only in Show and Ceremony, or at least so little heed was taken of
their Judgment and Capacity, that there was seen to grow in a little time, from
a practice so different from that of the Primitive Christians, that gross
Ignorance, which was the Spring and Cause of most part of the Evils and
Disorders which have befaln the Western Church: Not but that several Rules have
been made to redress this great Mischief, but it had got too deep root:
Besides, Favor and Authority had a greater share in these promotions than the
Glory of God, and the Instruction of the People; especially the Power of the
Bishops of Rome, who by degrees had gained to themselves the greatest part of
Ecclesiastical Power, bethought themselves about the XI. Century, to cause to
be demanded, or demanded themselves of the Bishops which were Examined, and in
the very moment of their Examination, if they did not promise subjection and
fealty in all things to St. Peter, Tom. 10. Probl. Pat. p. 107.
and to his Church, to his Viear, and to his Successors, as appears by the
Roman Order, which in all likelihood was writ about that time, and where is to
be seen at this day amongst the Questions made to the Bishop which was
Examined, those which regard the Obedience and Fidellity which I but now
mentioned; and there is to be seen in the Roman Pontifical, Printed at Venice
in the Year 1582. Page 25.
the Form of the Oath they were made to take, and whereunto they engaged
themselves in doing it, which are things quite different from the Discipline of
the Primitive Christians.

I know very well, that about the year 722. Boniface, Archbishop of Mayence,
made an Oath to Pope Gregory the II. at the time of his Ordination and
Promotion to the Prelacy; but this Oath did properly contain no more but a
Profession of Faith, and the Essential Duty of an Apostollical Legate, and of a
Vicar of the Holy See, as they express it; which is to make Bishops observe the
Canons, and to give the Pope Information of the great difficulties which is
therein. I know also this Prelat Assembled a Council, as he recites it in his
105. Letter to the Bishop Cuthbert, wherein he made alike profession to the
Bishops which there assisted; but besides that, all this was done but only by
Order of the Princes and Bishops of the Kingdom, as may be gathered from the
very Letter of Boniface, and from the 1st Canon of the Synod of Leptines, where
Prince Carloman protests, That by advice of the Bishops and Nobles of the
Kingdom, he settled Bishops in all Cities, and gave them for Chief and
Superior, the Archbishop Boniface, Legate of the Holy See. Besides this, I say,
these Examples now alleged, went no farther, if my memory fail me not, before
the time I mention.

VI.
Him whose Ordination shall be signified to the Church, shall Preach the Word
Three several Sundays in public; (but not Administer the Sacraments, nor
Celebrate Marriage) in presence of all the People, that they may observe his
manner of Teaching: The said People being expressly warned, That if there be any
one that know any just cause, wherefore the Election of him so signified, may
not be fully ratified, or that he be not liked of, they may come and make it
known to the Consistory, who will patiently hear any one's Reasons, to judge of
the whole. The silence of the People shall be looked upon as a full consent:
But if there be murmuring, and that the Party named, is liked of the
Consistory, and not of the People, or the major part of them, his admission
shall be deferred, and the whole shall be reported to the Colloqui, or the
Provincial Synod, to discern, as well the Justification of the Person named, as
of his Reception; and although the Person named was there justified, yet he shall
not be imposed as a Pastor on the People, contrary to their desire, nor so much
as to the dislike of the greatest part of them; nor the Pastor in like manner
against his will, to the People; and the difference shall be cleared by order,
as abovesaid, at the Charge and Expense of the Church which shall demand it.

CONFORMITY.
Although a Minister might be judged capable by the Synod, or the Colloqui,
which have Examined him, That is not sufficient to Establish him. It is
moreover requisite that the Flock that is appointed for him, be satisfied with
his Preaching; therefore he is obliged to Preach Three several times, before he
receives the Imposition of Hands, to the end, that if his way of Preaching
please the People, he may be confirmed in his Ministry; but on the other hand,
if all the People, or the major part of them declare, That they are not
satisfied with his Preaching, and that his Teaching is not to their liking, Our
Discipline does very prudently Order, that all shall surcease. In effect, as a
Minister cannot be forced to yield his Service to a Church, for the which he
has no inclination; so in like manner, a Church cannot be obliged to make use
of the Ministry of a Man, whose Conduct and Preaching is not acceptable. It is
a kind of Wedlock, which requires the reciprocal liking of both Parties; Tom.
1. Orat. 8. p. 148. Paris 1630.
There is nothing more firm and profitable, ( said to this purpose, Gregory
Nazianzen) than to receive freely the oversight of those you receive as your
Teacher or Guide; and see here the Reason he alleges for it: Our Law (says
he, speaking of the Canons of the Church) requires not that People should be
led by force, it desires that all should be done of free will, and without
constraint.

And because it often happens, that Ministers give no cause on their part, for
the refusal made of their Ministry by the Churches, although 'twas appointed
for them, and that this refusal has no other ground, but the humor of an
inconstant People; the Ancient Canons have provided, in declaring that these
Pastors shall partake of the Honor of the Office and Function of a Minister;
and that the Provincial Synods shall provide them some settlement elsewhere.
The 18th Canon of the Council of Antioch, in the Year of our Lord, 341. is
clear in the Case; If a Bishop go not to the Church for which he was
Consecrated, and that it don't happen through his fault, but by the opposition
of the People, or for some other subject for which he is not the Cause; Let him
partake of the Honor, and of the Ministry, provided he causes not any trouble
to the Church whither he retires; and let him take what the Synod of the
Province shall judge convenient. All the difference there is to be seen betwixt
this Canon and the Article of our Discipline, is, That then the Pastors which
were sent to the Churches, had already received Ordination; whereas amongst us,
it is to be received in the Church it self whither one is sent: Nearer to which
there cannot a greater Conformity be desired. The 36th Canon of those fathered
on the Apostles, prescribes in effect, the same as that of Antioch.

After all, by this Order of the Canons, Pastors could not be imposed on the
Churches against their liking; so it is that Pope Celestin writes in the 5th
Century, to the Bishops of the Provinces of Vienna, and of Narbona, Let no
Bishop be given to those which oppose his Establishment; Tom. 1. Conc. Gall. p.
57.
and let the consent of the Clergy and People be first had, to know if they
desire to have him for their Pastor. Leo the 1st, Successor to Celestin, after
Sixtus the 3d, writes near hand the same to Anastatius, Bishop of Thessalonica,
p. 84. c. 5. Lion. 1652.
and pretends, That the Bishop be desired by the Clergy and the People, and
that without it, he ought not to be sent; fearing lest the People having
received against their will, a Bishop that they had no liking to, might slight
or hate him, and not being able to have him they desired to have, they out of
measure decay in Piety and Religion. The 5th Council of Orleans, in the Year
549. renews in the xi. Canon, the Ancient Decrees, and pronounces Sentence of
Deposition, without hope of Restoration, against those which intrude into the
Ministry any other way; and that do by violence usurp the Conduct of a Church,
against the Will of the Clergy and People whereof it is composed, and without
having been called unto it by any lawful Ordinance. And the 3d of Paris,
Assembled Anno Dom. 557. Emplies also to this same effect, Ibid.
The 8th Canon contained in terms no less strong than that of Orleans.

There would never be an end, should one undertake to cite all the Testimonies
of the Ancients, touching the part Believers had in Election of their
Conducters; for besides what I have hitherto writ, there are a great many
proofs of this Truth: For instance, L. 6. c. 43. p. 245.
That which is said by Cornelius Bishop of Rome, in Eusebius, of the Ordination
of Novatian unto the Office of Priest; for it is easily collected out of this
Relation, That the People were wont to give their Voices and Consent in these
occasions. The Fathers of the 1st Council of Nice, speak fully of the Choice of
the People, Apud Theodor. l. 1. c. 9. Ibid. 1.20. p. 50.
in the Letter which they wrote to the Church of Alexandria. The Emperor
Constantine writing to those of Nicomedia, he says, That it is in their power to
make choice of what Pastor they please; and that it depends freely of their
Judgment. The Council of Calcedon in the xi. Action, speaking of the Church of
Ephesus, says, Tom. 3. Council. p. 410. and 462.
That a Bishop shall be given them, as shall be Elected, by the consent of all
those which he is to feed. And in the 16th Action, there is also mention made
of the suffrage of the People: Those that will take the pains to read the 20th
Chapter of the 4th Book of Theodoret's Ecclesiastical History; the 15th of the
5th Book of that of Socrates, the 19th of the 8th of Zozomen, the 12th of the
2d of that of Evagrius, with the 67th and 76th of Synesius, will find several
Examples of the Practice which I Examine.

The IX. Century affords us a Treatise expressly about Elections of Bishops,
written by Florus, Deacon of the Church of Lions, the which is contained at
large in the 2d Volume of the Works of Agobard Bishop of the same place, of the
last Edition, for which we are beholding to the care of Mr. Baluze; Pa. 254,
etc.
This excellent Writer Establishes throughout the whole Treatise, the Right of
the People; and proves, That they ever had their part in the Vocation of their
Pastors; and that this was also practiced in his time, and also in the Roman
Church. To conclude, The Vocation of a Minister was not thought Legitimate, if
the Voice of the Clergy and People had not intervened, which practice continued
also in the XIIth Century, at least in the West, as appears by a Treatise of
Arnulph Archdeacon of Siez, and afterward Bishop of Lisieuz, against Gerrard
Bishop of Angouleme; Tom. 2. p. 343, and 363.
for he says in the 2d Chapter, That there is no likelihood, that the Clergy
nor the People had any part in his Election. And in the 7th, wherein he
reproaches him to have usurped the Archbishopric of Bourdeaux, he speaks after
this manner; The desire of the People did not precede, no more than the
Election of the Clergy. I proceed on farther, and I say, the same practice was
observed in the beginning of the 13th Century; therefore a Council of Avignon
Assembled the Year 1219. by the Legates of Pope Innocent the 3d, was obliged to
prohibit it in the 5th Chapter, Ubi supra, p. 613.
We forbid the Laity to intermedle by themselves or any else, in the Election
of a Bishop, or of any other Church Guide. And in all likelihood, the Council
made this Decree in regard of the Albigenses, who doubtless followed the
Ancient practice, and with whom the Legates of this same Pope had a Conference
in the City of Mountreall near Carcassone, three years before, whereof there is
mention made in the 18th Chapter of the 2d part of the History of the
Eucharist. In the main, I believe, that since this Council of Avignon, the
People have, by little and little, been deprived of their just Rights; from
thence it is, as I suppose, that Pope Gregory the Tenth which ordered several
things about Elections in the Council of Lions, in the year 1274, Tom. 7.
Council. p. 885. ad 887.
says nothing at all of the suffrage of the People, although he speaks several
times in general terms of those which do elect.

VII.
He who has consented to be Ordained to the Holy Ministry, shall receive the
Office which shall be given him, and at his refusal shall be solicited by all
convenient Exhortations, but he is not to be constrained.

CONFORMITY.
From the time that one has consented to make choice of him to settle him in
the Office of the Holy Ministry, he is engaged by a kind of promise that he is
bound in Conscience to accomplish; so that it is just to represent his Duty to
him, and to exhort him to bear without reluctance the yoke which he had a
design to take on him. Nevertheless, because these kind of actions should be
free, and that the work of the Lord ought to be without constraint, it cannot
reasonably be used toward those which refuse to accept this Office, whatever
inclination they had to it before; according to which the third Council of
Orleance assembled Anno Dom. 538. discharges the Pastors which were chosen into
Orders by force, or against their will; it discharges them from their
Employment, without debarring them from the Communion; Can. 7. t. 1. Conc. Gal.
p. 250.
but as for Bishops that have the confidence to make such Ordinations, the
Synod imposes on them a years Penance, and suspends them from the functions of
their Ministry. The 36th. Canon of those which go in the Apostles Names,
differs a little from this practice, and is something more severe. In the main,
the ancient Discipline never approved force nor constraint in these Occasions,
although some instances are found in the Ecclesiastical History.

VIII.
The Election of Ministers shall be confirmed by Prayers, and the Imposition of
hands; nevertheless in avoiding all superstition, according to the form which
follows.

The manner of the Imposition of hands, commonly observed in the Churches of
France, in the Ordination of Ministers.

All abovesaid having been observed, two Pastors which for this purpose have
been deputed by the Synod, or Colloque, to lay hands on him that is elected,
being come to the appointed place; him of them that is to Pray, shall briefly
treat of the Institution and Excellency of the Ministry, alleging the passages
of Scripture most fitting to the occasion, as Ephesians. 4.11. Luk 10.16. Joh. 20.21.
1 Cor. 4.1, 2. 2 Cor. 5.18, 19, 20. 1 Timothy 1.2, etc. and others the like,
exhorting each one to beware, to the end that as well the Minister as the
People, discharge their Duty: The Minister discharging himself so much the more
carefully of his Employment, as he knows it is precious and excellent in the
sight of God; and the people receiving with all reverence the Word of God,
which shall be delivered by him, which is sent unto them. Then shall be read in
the presence of all what is written, 1 Timothy 3. Tit. 1. and 1 Pet. 5. where the
Apostle teaches what a Minister should be. And to the end God would be pleased
to bestow his Grace on him which is Ordained, well and faithfully to acquit
himself, a short Prayer should be made to this effect, wherein the said
Minister shall include these words, or others to the same effect: That thou
would be pleased, Oh God, to endow with the Gifts and Graces of thy Spirit,
this thy Servant lawfully Elected, according to the Order established in thy
Church, supplying him abundantly with all Gifts necessary for well discharging
his trust, to the Glory of thy Holy Name, the Edification of thy Church, and
the Salvation of him who is now dedicated and consecrated by our Ministry. Then
they shall lay their hands on his head: Him that Prays standing at the Chair,
and him for whom he prays, on his knees; Prayer being ended, and the new Pastor
standing up, the two Deputies of the Synod or Colloque, shall in presence of
all the people give him the hand of fellowship; and let this Form, with the
direction abovesaid, be generally observed in all the Churches.

CONFORMITY.
There are several Considerations to be made on this Article, and on the form
which is above recited. In the first place, the Minister to whom it belongs to
Preach, ought in his Sermon, to treat of the Institution and excellency of the
Ministry, and of the duties of this weighty Office; whereupon we find a great
many excellent passages in the Writings of the Ancient Fathers of the Church,
and several holy reflections capable to infuse into Pastors an ardent zeal, and
a sincere affection, in performing the several Duties of their Office. Not to
speak of Gregory the First, having composed an entire Treatise to explain the
Functions of this Excellent Office; and it is very probable that in the time of
Ordination it was signified to those which were to receive it, whereunto the
conduct of souls which God committed to their charge, obliged them: The first
Canon of the fourth Council of Carthage, insinuates it thus, having touched all
the several things about which he will have him examined which is to be
established in the Ministry, Tom. 1. Council. p. 727.
he adds, When he has received the Episcopacy in the Name of Jesus Christ, let
him not follow his pleasures, nor the inclinations of his mind, but let him
submit and acquiesce to these Decrees of the Fathers. And I make no doubt but
what was practiced in Africa in the time of this Council in the Ordination of
Bishops, did tacitly warn them of their Duty; for we find in the second Canon,
that two Bishops laid on his head the Book of the New Testament, and held it
there during the whole action; we read almost the same thing in the
Constitutions under the Apostles Names, and in the Roman Pontificial, and in
the XI. Chap. of the second Book of Durandus his Rational, St. Chrysostom, or
rather some one else in his name, teaches in the Homily, that there is but one
Legislator of the Old and New Testament; he teaches, I say, that the reason
wherefore this Ceremony was practiced in the Ordination of Bishops, was to mind
them, that to be Rulers over others, they were subject nevertheless themselves
to these Divine Laws, and obliged to observe its Commands. Moreover, it appears
by all I have said, that the Author of the Book of Divine Offices, which is
falsely attributed to Alcuin Tutor to Charlemaign, and to Amalarius Fortunatus,
who lived in the time of Lewis le Debonair, it appears they were deceived, when
they said the former in the 37th. Chap. and the other in Chap. 14. of the Book
of Fcclesiastical Offices, that this Ceremony which I have touched, was not
countenanced by the authority of the Ancients.

The second Consideration regards the Imposition of hands which the Apostles
used in Establishing of Deacons, Acts 6.6. and in that of Pastors and Ministers
under the name of Elders, Acts 14.23. for the Greek word, which may be referred
to the suffrages of the people, does commonly signify the Imposition of Hands,
whereof express mention is made, 1 Timothy 4.14. and 5.22. a Ceremony which the
ancient Christians always practiced in these Occasions: I should be
over-tedious should I cite all the passages which confirm this truth; wherefore
I shall only instance some places of Antiquity where mention is made of this
imposition of hands. St. Cyprian makes mention of it in his 68 Epist. the last
Edition; Cornelius Bishop of Rome in the same. St. Cyprian, Ep. 46. Eusein the
8, 23, and 43. of the sixth Book of his Ecclesiastical History, and in the 32.
and 7. Book. St. Basil in the first Canon of his first Canonical Epistle to
Amphilokius, and in the 192. to the Priests of Nicopolis. The Great Council of
Nice in the ninth Canon; that of Antioch in the 10. and 17. and the fourth of
Carthage in the second. I pass in silence a great number of other passages,
which favor the use of this Holy Ceremony, to observe, That in the very time
when they added a great many other things to this Imposition of hands, yet it
was nevertheless considered, as the chief of all the rest. Insomuch that in the
Theses that were maintained at Paris in the year 1633, June 7. it was taught,
That in Orders where Imposition of hands was used, it sufficed, Antir. 2. Part
2. c. 8. p. 72. Paris 1634.
Ad valorem firmitatunque Sacramenti, which also is the judgment of many
Learned Divines, says the Jesuit Sirniond; We are indeed of another opinion,
for we do not believe that Orders is a Sacrament; but I have alleged this
Example to show, that those it self which have accompanied the Ordination of
Pastors with several Ceremonies, which are not of the first nor purest
Antiquity, do nevertheless give the chiefest place to the Imposition of hands.

The third thing observable is, That Prayer was joined to the laying on of
Hands; as appears by the passages in the Holy Scriptures cited in the foregoing
Section, which was Religiously practiced by those which succeeded those first
Ministers of Jesus Christ; the second Canon of the fourth Council of Carthage,
represents to us one of its Bishops imploring the Blessing of God upon him on
whom they laid their hands; St. Basil in his Morals says, To. 2. Reg. 70. C.
1. p. 476. To. 4. page 383. T. 5. p. 326. Paris 1632.
That that ought to be done, with Prayer and Supplications. St. Ambrose says
the same in his Book of the Dignity of Priesthood, and in the 60 Epist. Thence
it is that the Deacon Hilary in the third Tome of the Works of the same St.
Ambrose, expounding the 14 verse of the 4th. Chap. of the 1st to Tim. he looks
on the Imposition of hands, as so many mystical words, whereby him that is
Ordained, is confirmed for the work of the Ministry. Tom. 4. p. 192. Paris 1623.
St. Jerome says positively on the 58th. Chap. of Isaiah, That Ordination is
completed not only by Prayer, but also by the laying on of hands. Theodoret in
the 19th. Chap. of his Religious History, in the third Volume of his Works,
Printed at Paris Anno 1642, Theodoret joins these two actions together, to wit,
Imposition of Hands, and Prayer; as things which should not be separated in the
Ordination of Pastors. Twenty five years ago the Letters of Photius Patriarch
of Constantinople- in the Eleventh Century, were Printed at London, and at the
end of these Letters, five more of this same Patriarch were subjoined, which
were taken out of an ancient Eastern Manuscript, in the fourth of which
Letters, he declares that Hands were not imposed on a Bishop, But to implore
the Grace of the Holy Spirit which is needful for a Minister. Tom. 4. Conc. 525
Ibid. page 531 To 1. Conc. Gal.
It is doubtless upon this account that the Council of Sarragosa in the year
592, Can. 9 calls this the Benediction; as also the fourth of Carthage, and the
first of Barcelona, in the year 599. Can. 3. The Blessing of Consecration. The
first of Orleans, Anno 511. Can. 10. speaks of the Benediction of the laying on
of hands.

This third Consideration opens the way to us for a fourth, which regards the
posture of him which is Consecrated, and of him which Consecrates. It may
easily be observed from what has been said, that him which Consecrates is
standing, and him which is Consecrated kneeling, otherwise it had been hard and
almost impossible to lay his hands on him, and to pray to God, holding them on
his head, to the end he would be pleased liberally to bestow on him the Gifts
and Graces necessary, duly to discharge the Office wherewith he is honored.
But were it so that the truth of this practice, which is very just, could not
be gathered from this Discourse, Theodoret gives us no cause to doubt of it;
for he observes in the 15th. Chap. of the fourth Book of his Ecclesiastical
History, that when there was need of appointing a Successor to Eusebius Bishop
of Samosatia, the Synod of the Province cast their Eye on Antiochus his Nephew,
and that after his Election he was led toward the Communion Table, and there
he was made to kneel down to receive the Imposition of Hands.

It remains now to say something of the Number of the Pastors which are to be
present at this Holy Ceremony: The 4th Canon of the 1st Council of Nice,
appoints this should be done by all the Bishops of the Province; or if that
cannot be, that there should be three at the least; the others, by their
Letters, approving of the Ordination. The 19th of that of Antioch prescribes
partly the same thing, that is to say, it declares, That 'twere to be wished
that all the Bishops of the Province could be present; but when there is any
hindrance, it does not specify, as that of Nice, the number of those which
ought to be present; it only says, That it is requisite there should several be
assisting, or that should consent by their Letters. The 1st of the Canons
attributed to the Apostles, requires, That a Bishop should be established by
two or three Bishops. Thence it is, that though according to the direction of
most part of the Canons, Three Bishops were usually employed for the Ordaining
a Pastor; nevertheless Examples are found different from this Custom.

Dioscorus Bishop of Alexandria was Ordained by two Bishops; Tom. 3. Council. p.
539.
nevertheless the Fathers of the Council of Calcedon acknowledged him for a
Legitimate Bishop before his being deposed, and frequently termed him, the Most
Reverend Bishop. Hist. Eccles. l. 5. c. 23.
Theodoret Writes, that Evagrius was Consecrated Bishop of Antioch by Paulin
only, and by this means chose him his Successor before his death; yet this did
not hinder, but Siricius, and Innocent, L. 7. c. 32. p. 288.
the 1st Bishops of Rome, and almost all those of the West, esteemed him as a
Lawful Minister. Anatolius, as Eusebius writes in his Ecclesiastical History,
received the Imposition of Hands by Theoteckna Bishop of Caesaria, in
Pal^stine, and in making him Bishop, made him also his Coadjutor, by reason of
his great Age, it not appearing that any other Bishop was present at this
Ceremony, although it had been easy to have called others to it; it is true
this happened before the 1st Council of Nice; but besides that the other Examples
we have alleged are after this Council, it needs only to read the 4th Chapter
of the 5th Book of Theodoret's Ecclesiastical History, where will be seen
sundry. Instances, of Bishops being Ordained by laying on of Hands of one
Minister, to which may be added the 19th Chapter of his Religious History, and
the 19th of the 8th Book of Zozomen's History, which makes mention of two
several Ordinations made, or ready to be done, without any great necessity, by
one sole Bishop, a great while after this Council of Nice. It is not then to be
thought strange, if our Discipline mentions but two, seeing also these two do
represent the Synod or Colloque which deputed them, and that they do nothing
but by virtue of the Power and Authority wherewith those Bodies has invested
them; and that moreover one alone may suffice for a due Ordination, as we have
just now proved. But before ending this matter, one difficulty which offers
must be resolved, to wit, if Hands may be laid on two Ministers at once; for it
sometimes happens in our Churches, that two are called together, and some are
in doubt, and desire to know if one Minister can give them both Ordination at
the same moment. To which I answer, That if one consider the Original of this
Ceremony, and the Nature of the thing it self, one may safely agree to lay
hands on two Ministers at once. As for the Original, and the Ceremony, every
body knows it comes from Jesus Christ, or rather from the Patriarchs, which
practiced it before their Children were Masters of Judea; and it is not to be
doubted, but Jesus Christ and the Apostles derived this Custom thence when they
used it. If it appears then that any of the Patriarchs blessed two persons at
once, in putting one hand on the head of the one, and the other hand on the
head of the other, it seems to me one is sufficiently Authorized to give
Imposition of Hands to two Ministers at the same time. Now to know if the
Patriarchs did so, you need only read Genesis 48. where Jacob blessed the two
Sons of Joseph purposely, setting his right hand on the head of Ephraim which
was the younger, and his lest on the head of Manasseh, which was the elder
Brother.

But to remove all doubt and scruple, it needs only cast an eye, on the nature
of the thing it self, that is to say, on the Prayer, which is indeed what is the
essential part of these kind of Actions, the imposing of the hand or hands
being only a bare exterior gesture, to design those for whom the Blessing of
God is implored, that it may rest upon them, as one may so speak, much after
the same way as the hands do stay on their heads; now no body does question,
but that one may pray for two as well as for one; thence it is, that in
Eusebius his History there is mention made, L. 1. c. 13. p. 34.
to receive Prayers by the hand, to signify, to receive the Blessing of God by
Prayer, and the laying on of Hands; so that in effect, it is as if he had said,
To receive the Blessing of God by Prayer, and the imposition of Hands, as he
speaks in Chap. 1. Book 2. To conclude, The Ancients called this Ceremony,
which they practiced on sundry occasions, Tom. 7. l. 2. c. 26. de pecc. mor.
and rem.
I say, they called it, Prayers by the hand, or Prayers of the hand, or hands.
Or as St. Austin explains himself in some of his Writings, The Prayer of
Imposition of Hands.

IX.
Those which are Elected shall subscribe the Confession of Faith settled
amongst us, and the Ecclesiastical Discipline, as well in the Churches where
they are Ordained, as in those whither they may be sent.

CONFORMITY.
The former part of this Article which regards the Confession of Faith, which
those are to sign which are established in the Ministry of the Church, relates
in the first place to what was practiced in the Primitive Church, where when
one received the Office of Bishop or Minister, one was absolutely obliged to
subscribe to the Confession of Faith of the Council of Nice, and by consequence
to what was determined in the three following Ecumenical Councils, touching
the Divinity of the Holy Ghost, and touching the Person and two Natures of
Jesus Christ. Secondly, It refers also to the mutual Letters which the New
Bishops wrote to the others, to assure them they were of the same Communion,
and that they had one and the same belief. See here a famous instance, and of
the first* Antiquity, that is, of the 3d Century, whereof Eusebius has
preserved us the memory in his Ecclesiastical History, L. 7. c. 30. p. 282.
in his preserving the Letter which the Fathers of the Council of Antioch
(where Paul of Samosatia was condemned) wrote to all the Churches. In this
Letter, amongst other things, they give advice of the Ordination of Domnus into
the Church of Antioch, instead of a Heretic which they had deposed; and they
give this intimation, That one may write to Domnus which was the lawful Bishop,
and that Communicatory Letters might be received from him. St. Cyprian, at the
end of his 67th Letter to Pope Stephen, Let us know, says he, who has been
settled at Arles instead of Marcion, to the end we may know to whom to recommend
our Brethren, and to whom to write. Theophilus, Bishop of Alexandria,
advertises at the end of his 1st and 3d Paschal Letters, all the Bishops of
Egypt, of the settling of new Bishops instead of those which were dead, Tom. 3.
Bibl. Pat. p. 94, and 112.
and says to them, Write to these, and receive from them, according to the
custom of Pacisick and Ecclesiastical Letters.

As for Ecclesiastical Discipline, there are a great many Rules which oblige
those of the Clergy to observe the Canons, whereof the Discipline of the
Ancient Christians was made; so that neither Bishop, nor Priest, nor Deacon,
was admitted, who had not first submitted to these Laws, and who did not
acknowledge in submitting to them, that 'twas by them he was to conduct the
Souls which were committed to his care. I should be too prolix to mention all
the passages of Antiquity where Ecclesiastics are enjoined to the practice of
the Discipline, and observing of the Canons; it shall suffice to mention some,
to justfy a Truth acknowledged by all those which have applied themselves to
the Reading the Works of Ancient Doctors, and especially of the Councils; Cod.
Afric. Justell. Canon 18.
That of Carthage, An. Dom. 419. Appoints those who are to impose hands on a
Bishop, or to any other Clergy Man, to let them know first of all the Decrees
of the Synods, that so they might have no cause to repent of having done any
thing contrary to the Statutes of the Council. Pope Celestin, about the same
time, thus begins his Letter to the Bishops of Poulia, and Calabria, which is
the third in Course; Tom. 1. Council. page 902.
That if it be not permitted to any Priest nor Prelate to be ignorant of the
Canons, nor to do any thing contrary to the Constitutions of the Fathers; for
what is it may be worthy of our care, if giving too great a latitude to the
People, at the desire of some persons, the Rule of the Canons is infringed.

The first Canon of the Council of Calcedon, requires that one observe all the
Canons had been made till then in the Synods; Tom. 1. Council. Gall.
the 33d of the 3d Council of Orleans, in the year 538, and the 6th of the 4th,
of the year 541. with several others which I pass over in silence, do enjoin
the same thing. The Fathers stop not there; for not content to have recommended
to the Clergy the observation of the Canons, which also they have formally
required of them at the very moment of their Consecration, it is in this manner
the Fathers of the 4th Council of Toledo have explained themselves in Canon 27.
Anno Dom. 633. for they oblige the Priests and Deacons established in Parishes,
Tom. 4. Council. pa. 589. Ibid. p. 824.
to promise the Bishop to live Chaste, and Holily, and Religiously to observe
the Laws and Discipline of the Church; the 10th Canon of the 11th Council of
the same place, assembled in the year of Christ, obliges all those which take
on them. Holy Orders, to keep the Catholic Faith, and wholly to be subject to
Canonical Rules; and that it should not be thought 'twas only Priests and
Deacons which were obliged to the strict observing the Canons and
Ecclesiastical Laws; the Council of Merida in Portugal, Ibid. p. 802.
extended this obligation to Bishops also, and to Metropolitans in the 4th
Canon, Anno Dom. 666.

X.
Ministers shall not be ordained without assigning them a particular Flock, and
shall be fit for the Flocks which shall be assigned them; and one Church cannot
pretend a right to a Minister by virtue of a particular promise made by him,
without Approbation of the Colloque or Provincial Synod.

CONFORMITY.
The Council of Calcedon made a considerable Decree on this Subject, which is
to be seen in the 6th of its Canons, where the Synod forbids to receive Priest
nor Deacon, nor any Ecclesiastical Person whatever, without assigning them a
Flock; that is to say, without a Title, to speak after the manner of the
Writers of these times; it makes void all Ordinations which is not made in the
manner it prescribes, and suspends the Ministry of those which have been
established in any other manner; by this means to correct the boldness of the
Ordainers. But rightly to understand the sense of the Canon, it must be
observed that the Council calls absolute Ordination, an Ordination which
obliges not to any certain place; it is what the Greek terms import, used by
him, which amounts just to what we say, to Elect without assigning a certain
Flock. See here the terms of the Canon; You must not lay hands on any body,
neither Priest nor Deacon, nor on any in Ecclesiastical Orders, unless him that
is to receive Ordination has been before published and named in some Church in
the City or Country, or in some Martyrs Chapel, or in some Monastry; and as
for those who are absolutely established, the Synod appoints, that the
imposition of hands be null, and that those which received it, cannot serve in
the Church; which shall reflect on those which had done it.

France caused the Execution of this Decree to be demanded of the Council of
Trent, P. 639. c. 3. Paris. 1654.
as we find by the Memoirs of Mr. Du Puy; and we have seen in the 4th Article,
what the Emperor Alexander Severus said of this practice of Christians, which
he mightily approved.

The Council of Valentia in Spain, prescribes almost the same thing with that
of Calcedon, in the Year 524. in the 4th Canon. Tom. 3. Council. p. 820.
Collect. Romans part 2. c. 14. p. 162.
That none of the holy Bishops do ordain any body, until he first promises to
six in one place, to the end, that by this means men should not have liberty to
shun the Rules of Ecclesiastical Discipline. Pope John the VIII. in a Synod of
130 Bishops, made this Decree; Him that thinks fit to establish a Priest, let
him assign him a Church, where he may still reside, serving the Lord. Atto,
Bishop of Verceill, who lived in the Xth Century, cites the Canon of the
Council of Calcedon in his Capitulary, chap. 30. and in his 31st he says, Tom.
8. Spirit. Dach. p. 13. Paris. 1668.
Churches ought to be built in Convenient places, consecrate them by Prayers,
and settle Pastors in each of them.

However, These Decrees hindered not, but there were some Persons Ordained and
Established in the Ministry of the Church, without being engaged to any
particular Flock; as Paulinus, who afterward was Bishop of Nole in Italy; St.
Jerome, and the Friar Macedonius, they were made Priests without assigning them
Flocks; but this does not prejudice what has been said; for the two former
accepted only the Employ, wherein 'twas desired to engage them, only on this
Condition, as appears by the 6th Epist of Paulinus to Severus, by the 45th to
Alipius, and by the 61st of St. Jerome, chap. 10. As for Macedonius, something
of constraint was used in regard of him, if we credit Theodoret in the 13th
Chapter of his Religious History. To these Examples may be added that of the
Friars Barses and Eulogius, who by report of Zozomen, were made Bishops for
Honor sake only, without assigning them any Church; however, Barses in time
was made Bishop of Edessa, and Enlogius succeeded him.

XI.
Those who are Ordained into the Ministry, are to understand they are entered
into it for their whole life, if they are not lawfully dismissed for good
Considerations, and that by the Provincial Synod.

CONFORMITY.
The 7th Canon of the Council of Calcedon, forbids those that have been once
admitted into the Clergy, to bear Arms, or to exercise any worldly Dignity:
that is, The Synod requires that they should always abide in the Profession
they have taken upon them, and that they should not forsake the Ministry of the
Church. Rusticus, Bishop of Narbona, having writ to Pope Leo the Is It, That he
was so moved with the Scandals which daily happened, that he could wish to be
freed from the Episcopal Office, to lead a more tranquile and quiet life; the
Pope answering the Bishops Letter, Tom. 1. Conc. Gall. p. 111.
intimated to him, That he could not with a safe Conscience forsake the Office
he had undertaken, nor flinch from the Employment committed to his trust. It is
in this same Sense that Pope Felix the IV. Ann. Dom. 528. wrote to Caesarius,
Bishop of Arles, That the Establishment of Church-Guides ought to be firm, and
immutable. Tom. 1. Conc. Gall. p. 254. Tom. 7. Conc. p. 153.
In the Year 895. there was a Council held at Tribury, near Mayence, composed
of 22 Bishops, which in the 17th Canon renewed that of Calcedon, which we above
cited, and which anathematized those of the Clergy which did not repent of
having left their Cures, and which did not return to them. Pope Calixtus the
II. assembled a Council at Tholouza, the Canons whereof are inserted in the
18th Chapter of Monsieur De Marca's 8th Book, De Concordia Imperii and
Sacerdotii. The 10th of these Canons Excommunicates the Clergy we speak of,
until they have repented of their prevarication. A great while before, Tom. 5.
Part. 2. p. 211. Paris. 1638.
to wit, in the Vth Century, and before the assembling of the Council of
Calcedon, St. Cyril of Alexandria complains of this Abuse in his Canonical
Epistle; There is, says he, another thing which does not agree with the
Decrees of the Church, which is, That there are Priests which present
Renunciations by writing; for if they are worthy to exercise the holy Ministry,
they must reside on it; and if they are not worthy, they do not leave it for
their Resignation, but because their own Deeds condemn them. Thence it is, that
Loup, Abbot of Ferriers in Gattinois, said in the IXth Century, That as nothing
but Adultery could dissolve carnal Wedlock, so also it is not permitted to lay
aside the Pastoral Charge once received, Ep. 2 Paris 1664.
whilst one may contribute to the good of the Flock.

Nevertheless, there are sundry Examples of those which in diverse times, and in
diverse places, have for quietness sake renounced the Ministry; that is, they
have forborne exercising the Functions, and exercising the Office of a Bishop:
thus was was it done by Eustathius, Tom. 3. Conc. p. 428, 429.
Metropolitan of Pamphilia, to whom the Ecumenical Council of- Ephesus, in the
year 431. preserved the Name, Honor, and Communion of a Bishop. Martirius,
Bishop of Antioch, withdrew himself by reason of the Extravagance of his
Clergy, the Disobedience of his People, and the Corruptions of his Church; but
in preserving to himself the Honor and Dignity of the Ministry, as Theodorus
Lector writes in his Ecclesiastical History. L. 1. p. 555.
In the next Age there happened almost the same thing to Paul, Bishop of the same
City of Antioch, in the VIth Century: and in the very Infancy of Religion, St.
Clement, Tom. 3. Conc. p. 800.
Disciple of the Apostles, advised Pastors, whose Churches were not well
satisfied with them, he counseled them to go elsewhere, and to acquiesce to
the desire of the People, assuring them to obtain a great degree of glory in
Christ Jesus; adding, Ep. ad Cor. p. 69.
That those who have lived according to the Rule God has prescribed, has
always, and will ever do after this manner, because they ought to desire
nothing more than the Peace and Edification of the Churches. Pope Innocent the
IIId, in the 1st Book of Decretals, tit. 9. cap. 10. Nisi cum pridem, proposes
sundry Reasons wherefore it may be permitted to renounce the Conduct of a
Flock; for instance, The reproach our Consciences makes us of some Crime,
infirmity of Body, want of Knowledge, the wickedness of the People, some
grievous Scandal, or some personal Irregularity; these are the Reasons for
which this Pope thought one might desire to be discharged from the Ministry of
the Church.

XII.
The Office of Ministers is principally to Preach, and declare the Word of God
to their People; and they shall be desired to abstain from teaching in any
strange way, not tending to Edification, and conforming to the Simplicity, and
ordinary Style of God's Spirit, taking heed there may be nothing in their
Sermons which might bring any prejudice to the Honor and Authority of the Holy
Scriptures. They shall not Preach without choosing for the Subject Matter of
their Discourse, some Text of the Bible, which they shall keep close to; and
their Text they shall take, and explain the best they can, avoiding all
unnecessary Amplifications, tedious and needless Digressions, of many Passages
of Scripture, not pertinent to the matter in hand; and of reciting various
Expositions. They shall be moderate in alleging the Writings of Ancient
Doctors, and much less Profane Authors, and Histories. They shall not deliver
their Doctrine in Scholastic manner, nor intermix with strange Languages. To
conclude, Let them avoid every thing that may tend to Ostentation, or any way
give Occasion to suspect it; to which the Consistories, Colloques and Synods,
shall take special heed.

CONFORMITY.
The Preaching of the Word being the principal duty of the Holy Ministry, the
Compilers of our Discipline have taken particular care exactly to prescribe to
Ministers the Subject and Manner of doing it; these are the two things
contained in this great Article; As to what regards the Subject of their
Sermons, it must always be taken in the Holy Scripture; The Council of Laodicea
calls it, The Dispensation of the Word of Faith, Can. 12.
and of the right and true Word; and it is with regard hereunto, Tom. 1.
Council. p. 728. Tom. 4. Council. p. 820.
that of Carthage, Ann. 398. appoints in the 20th Canon, That the Bishop should
apply himself only to Reading, Prayer, and Preaching of the Word of God. The
Council of Tolledo, assembled in the Year of our Lord 675. employs the 2d of
its Canons to prescribe to Pastors their Duty, saying, They should always have
in their mouth the Sword of Truth, be powerful in exhorting by holy Doctrine,
and to convince Gainsayers; and not to turn aside from reading the Holy
Scriptures, seeing they have received the Office of Preachers: And having
observed that the dumb Minister is not fit to instruct his Flock, The Assembly
declares, That the true Pastor ought to find out those who are under his care,
either to instruct them without arrogance, if they are ignorant; Tom. 1. Conc.
Gall. Ibid. c. 3, and 10.
or to rejoice with them for the progress they have made in the knowledge of
the Mysteries of their Salvation. The Council of Reims, in the Year of our Lord
813. enjoins Bishops and Pastors in the 14th Canon, To preach the Word of God
to all the World. The VIth of Arles, in the same year, requires that all the
business of Bishops should be Instruction, and Preaching, because Ignorance is
the Mother of all Errors; and that the Word of God should be taught, not only
in Cities, but also in the Parishes. In the Year 858. Herrald, Bishop of Tours,
made a Capitulary, taken out of Ancient Canons, in the 9th of which he
appoints, That Priests should preach to all the Faithful, Tom 3. Conc Gall. p.
111.
the Doctrines of Faith, the Incarnation of Jesus Christ, his Death,
Resurrection, his Ascension, the Gift of the Holy Ghost, and the Remission of
Sins. To all which may be added the 58th Canon of the Apostles.

If after the Decrees of Councils, we consult the Ancient Doctors, they will
also testify, that Ministers are particularly called to Preach the Gospel, and
to declare to their Hearers the word of Truth; My Sheep, said to this purpose
Gregory Nazianzen, Orat. 25. p 440.
My Sheep hear my voice; that is to say, that which I have received from the
Divine Oracles, which I have preached ever after one manner throughout the
whole course of my life, without complying with the Times, and which I will
never forbear to preach; Tom. 4. p. 266.
and St. Jerome in his 3d Book of Commentaries upon the 16th Chapter of
Jeremiah, says, It is the Duty of Pastors to teach; it is what the putting the
Bible on their head at their Ordination should put them in mind of.

This will appear yet more plainly, if after having considered the Subject and
Argument of Ministers Preaching the Gospel, we also examine the Matter, which
according to our Discipline, should be plain, conformable to the Scripture, fit
to Edify, free from intricate Schoolquestions, and from all Ostentation. Let us
now inquire if the Ancient Christians did otherwise. The Council of Carthage,
Tom. 1. p 110. Paris. 1574. Ibid. p. 185.
in the Year 398. which we have often cited, desires in the 1st Canon, That the
Doctrines of Faith should be taught with simplicity. Origin in his 16th Homily
upon Leviticus, desires the Word may be preached to purpose, and that one
should accommodate himself to the Capacity of each person in giving Milk to
some, and strong Meat to others; and in the 7th Hom. upon Joshua, Ibid. l. 2.
p. 393.
he advises to shun the beauty, pomp, and ornament of Rhetorical Philosophers,
Poets, and Writers of the Age, of whom Valentine, Basilides, and Marcian,
learned their Heresies: In the 9th Book of his Commentaries on the 12th Chap.
of the Epistle to the Romans, he says, So much care must not be taken to
please the Hearers, as to work on their Affections, and to inspire into them
the love of Virtue; observing on this occasion, that it often happens, that the
most Eloquent and sublime Preachers, only tickle the Ears with pleasing words
of humane Learning, but do not work on the heart; whereas many times those
which study plainess, and preach without affectation, convert many to the
Faith, humble the Proud, and bring Sinners to repentance.

St. Busil in his Morals, says several things which agree very well with the
Article, whose conformity we seek to find with the ancient Discipline of the
Primitive Christians: For Example, Tom. 2. Reg. 70. C. 5, 6, 7, 23, 26.
That one must not teach otherwise than we have learned in the Gospel; that we
must preach all things our Savior has prescribed to us in the Gospel, and by
the Ministry of his Apostles, and all things conformable to them; That those to
whom the preaching of the Gospel is committed, should not conceal any thing
which is pleasing to God, fearing lest they should render them elves guilty of
the death of those which perish; That the Word of God must not be preached for
Ostentation, nor flatter those which hear it, the more to serve our own
Pleasure or Conveniences; but act as if we spoke for the glory of God in his
presence; and that to preach the Gospel one must not make use of any
Prerogatives or Advantages that should advance us above others, fearing lest
the grace of God should be frustrated thereby. There can nothing in the World
be seen more conformable to our Discipline.

In the main, all I have said on this Article is grounded on the Precepts and
Example of St. Paul; I say on his Precepts, 2 Timothy 1.13. and 2.14. and 3.2.
Hold fast, says he to Timothy, the form of sound words which thou have heard
of me, in faith and love, which is in Christ Jesus. Of these things put them in
remembrance; charging them before the Lord, that they strive not about words to
no profit, but to the subverting of the hearers. Preach the word, 2 Timothy 3.3.
be instant in season, out of season; reprove, rebuke, exhort, with all
long-suffering and doctrine, reproving those who having itching ears, make
teachers after their own minds. 1 Cor. 1.17. and 2.14.
I say in the next place, according to his Example; for he declares, That Jesus
Christ sent him not to Baptize, but to Preach; not with wisdom of Words, nor
with excellence of Speech; and that his Preaching was not in flattering words
of humane Wisdom.

XIII.
The Churches are warned more frequently to use Catechizing, and Ministers to
treat and Expound it by succinct Questions and Answers, simple and familiar,
accommodating themselves to the Peoples capacity, without entering into long
Commonplace Discourses: It is also the duty of Ministers to Catechize each one
of their Flock, once or twice a year, and to exhort every one to come
diligently to be Catechized.

CONFORMITY.
The Instruction of the People being the End which Jesus Christ proposed in
establishing the Ministry of the Word, it is worthy the prudence of those which
are called to teach others, to begin by those things which are the chiefest
Essentials of Religion, and which are the easiest to be understood, as are the
fundamental Points of Religion; the Summary whereof we have contained in the
Apostles Creed: therefore it was that in the Primitive Church, Catechisms were
instituted, wherein was familiarly explained to the Catechumeny, the Doctrines
of Heaven, the knowledge whereof is necessary to Salvation, and without which
they could not receive the benefit of Baptism. Of this kind, for instance, are
the Catechisms of St. Cyril of Jerusalem, wherein he explains the Articles of
the Creed proportionable to the Capacity of those whom he instructed, to put
them into a state fit to receive Baptism, and to be plunged in the Mystical
Waters of this Sacrament of our Regeneration. But to ascend higher than St.
Cyril; Eusebius. Hist. l. 5. c. 10. and l. 6. c. 6. Can. 3. etc. 26. Can. 15, and
29.
from the very first beginning of Christian Religion, there were public
Schools at Alexandria, and places appointed for this Exercise, and where the
rudiments of Faith was taught; or, as the Apostle speaks, The rudiments of the
first beginning of the word of God. In the 2d Century, Pantenus, an Eminent
Philopher, kept this School, and then exercised the Office of Catechist:
Clement of Alexandria succeeded him, and he had Origin for his Successor, aged
but 18. years. Origin left the Conduct of this School to Heraclas, and Heraclas
to Dennis; and these two last were successively Bishops of Alexandria. The
Authors of our Discipline had therefore good reason to exhort the Churches to
have frequent Catechizing, which is of great benefit, and singular edification.

XIV.
Ministers, with their Families, shall actually reside in their Churches, or
Parishes, under pain of being deposed from their Office.

CONFORMITY.
In the first Ages, Pastors were so full of zeal for the Glory of God, and so
industrious for the Edification of their Flock, that 'twas superfluous to
exhort them to Residence, seeing they had no other thoughts but to do it in the
places assigned to their care, and where the Families lived which were
committed to their conduct; neither do we find in those times any Canons which
enjoin them to this Residence, because they themselves of their own free will
were inclined to do it; and that 'twas not heard of that a Pastor did not dwell
in the midst of the Flock to whom he owed his care and presence. De Lapsis.
St. Cyprian complained of certain Bishops which incumbring themselves with
secular affairs, abandoned their Churches, and the care of that holy
administration whereof they were to render an account to our Savior: And in
his 56 Epistle to those of Thibari, he shows, that in the present
conjuncture, he could not safely leave his Church, and the People God had
committed to his Charge.

St. Ambrose sufficiently testifies that he was really persuaded of the
necessity of Residence, when he wrote to the Emperor Theodosius, that if the
dread he had of the Tyrant Eugenius had obliged him to quit Millan for a little
time, yet he returned thither as soon as the storm was past over; Lib. 7. Ep.
58. To. 5. p. 322. P^r. 1632.
I hastened, says he, to return as soon as ever I heard that him whose presence
I thought I was bound to shun, was gone: for I forsook not the Church of
Millan, which the Providence of God committed to my care; but I desired not to
see him that made himself guilty of Sacriledg. He speaks of Eugenius, who
usurped the Empire after having cruelly put to death the Emperor Valentinian
the younger. This holy Doctor elsewhere represents the damages occasioned to
the Church by the absence of its Pastor, especially when he observes the People
omit frequenting the Holy Exercises, and not only the People, but also the
Clergy themselves become more remiss in things of Piety and Religion. St.
Austin declares plainly in the 138 and 227 Epistles, that he never forsook his
Church but upon indispensible necessity.

In a request presented by some Friars to the Emperors Theodosius the Younger,
and Valentinian the Third, against Nestorius, they accuse him amongst other
things, That for the executing his outrages, he employed foreign Clerks which
he made come from other parts, that is to say, other Clergy besides his own:
Tom. 2. Conc. page 222.
Although according to the Ecclesiastical Canons, say they, they are not permitted
to live in another Diocese, or in another Church, but only in those places and
Cities where they received Ordination by the Imposition of hands, there to
reside peaceably.

It is not easy to affirm with certainty, if the Canons whereof they speak
were reduced into writing, or rather if they were not customs and uses settled
in the Churches by long practice; for this term of Canon or Rule, has sometimes
this signification in the writings of the Ancients; and what induces me to
think so, is, That till the Fifth Century, when this request was presented, it
was not very needful to make Canons to oblige Pastors to reside in their
Churches, if it be not that one may apply to this Residence the Canons which
prohibit the Translation of Bishops from one place to another, whereof we shall
treat hereafter.

I know very well, that the Council of Sardis had in the year 347, made some
Decrees which in some fort regarded Residence; but besides that these Canons
were not much known in the East, they were not properly made for establishing
of Residence, nor precisely to oblige Bishops thereunto, but only to inform
them in presupposing it as an indispensible Obligation, in what occasions, and
for what time they were permitted lawfully to be absent from their Churches; in
effect, in the eighth Canon, the Fathers of Sardis allow Bishops may go to
Court if the Emperor send for them, or if the protection and defense of the
Poor, of Widows, and Orphans oblige them to it: It is true, that in the ninth
and tenth Canons they restrain the permission granted in the former, and do not
permit Bishops to go themselves to Court, but when they are called by the
Prince; nevertheless they agree they may send one of their Deacons to obtain
some favor in behalf of distressed persons; but they consent to it upon
prudent and judicious reasons, and which are to be looked upon as necessary
precautions against the ambition of Bishops, to whom the same Council
positively forbid, Can. 14, 15.
To be absent from their Churches above three Weeks, unless some pressing
necessity constrain them to it.

When under the second Branch of our Kings, the Prince cast his eye on any
Bishop to make him his Arch-Chaplain, he was forced to demand leave of the
Synod and Pope, Con. Fran. cap. 55. Tom. 2. Conc. Gall. p. 217.
the Bishops of Rome having already got great power in France; I say he was
forced in some sort to desire their leave to get him away from his Church, to
have him near his person, because every body was then persuaded that Pastors
were bound in Conscience to make their Residence in the midst of their Flocks.

I believe Plurality of Livings, as is spoken at this time, has given a mortal
blow to the case of Residency, and has by this means introduced ignorance into
the Church, and together with Ignorance, Superstition, which is the Daughter of
Ignorance; this wicked custom was a long while unknown amongst Christians,
seeing the first Canon which formally condemns it, is, if my memory fail not,
the fifth of the sixteen Council of Toledo, assembled the year of our Lord 693.
I confess that the tenth of the Council of Galcedon forbids Clerks to inrole
themselves in two Churches at once; but that of Toledo is formal on the matter
I examine, That there be not granted to one Priest several Churches, because he
cannot do service in all, nor help the People in the Priestly Functions. Since
that time, this sort of prohibitions have been frequent in the West, as may be
easily made appear, were this the place to do it; it shall suffice to alledg at
present, the demand which Charles the Ninth caused to be made by his
Ambassadors at the Council of Trent, That but one Benefice be conferred on one
person, in taking away as to what regards Plurality, the difference of
Benefices, Compatibles, or Incompatibles, because this distinction which is
new, and unknown to ancient Decrees, has also occasioned great Evils to the
Catholic Church, and that Regular Benefices be given to Regulars, and Secular
ones to Seculars, and that for those which at present enjoy two or more, either
that they hold only that which they shall make choice of in a little time, or
that they suffer the punishments inflicted by the ancient Canons.

However it be, zeal being grown cold, and Pastors abating in the care they
formerly took in the Edification and Salvation of those committed to their
charge, there was an absolute necessity of making Laws to enjoin Residence;
whereas formerly, they did it of their own free will and inclination, to
discharge their Consciences of the Duties of their calling. Pope Eugenius the
Second, seeing in the Ninth Century they dispensed themselves from dwelling
with their flock, Coll. Romans p. 2. c. 6, 7: p. 23, 24.
made a Decree in a Synod held at Rome, having this Title, That Bishops do not
live out of their Diocesses; the Canon is conceived in these terms, Bishops
should keep always at their Churches, to labor with Piety for their
edification, because the absence of the Bishop many times becomes the
misfortune of the People: And in the following Canon he will have Cloisters
built near the Churches for the Dwellings of inferior Clerks, to the end they
may give attendance to the study of Ecclesiastical Discipline. The Council of
Meaux Anno 845, Tom. 3. Conc. Gal. c. 36 p. 42.
made another Ordinance much like it, That Priests be not suffered to lodge
abroad where they list, but that they keep always at their Churches, by reason
of Divine Mysteries, and to yield to Litanies the services they owe to them;
and that they have not liberty to dwell elsewhere.

After abuses had in this regard crept into the Church, it cannot be doubted
but many Settlements were made to restore things to the ancient Model, and to
show the necessity and importance of it, because in truth the Obligation of
Residency is greater than most people are aware of, seeing that Pastors are
obliged wholly to their Flocks, and all the parts of their Ministry is destined
for them: Nevertheless whatever Decrees have been made to establish the ancient
Discipline, it could not be prevented, but in these latter ages an extreme
negligence has succeeded in the practice of so holy and sacred a custom;
therefore in the days of our forefathers, the question of Non-residence was
debated with much heat in the Council of Trent, Hist. du Conc. lib. 6. p. 592.
ad 600. and p. 621. ad 616. avec le livre 2. p. 309, 310, 311. ^ Troys 1627.
insomuch that the Spanish Prelates were so stiff, that they declared it was
Jure Divino, of Divine Institution; which alarmed the Legates, and gave a
furious shock also to the Court of Rome; for 'twas foreseen if this Article
should pass, a part of the Pope's Authority should be retrenched, the Plurality
of Benefices, which has occasioned so great mischief in the Church, should be
abolished, and the Cardinals should be deprived of that which supported the
splendour of their Purple Robes, in depriving them of Benefices for
Non-residence; but means were found to allay these heats, and to compose
matters to the satisfaction of the Bishop of Rome, and his Court: However this
same Council in the 24th. Session, and in the Decree of Reformation, seems to
have prescribed some remedy to the evil which arises by Non-residence, but it
did it in such a manner, as it left the door open to the abuse, which far from
diminishing, has increased more and more.

But that there may not be any contest on occasion of our Discipline, enjoining
Ministers and their Families, to make actual residence in their Churches, that
is, with their Wives and Children, as if the Ancient Bishops were never
Married, and as though they never lived in their Churches with their Families;
it is necessary to justify our Practice by some Examples: The first shall be
that of the venerable old Cheremon, Bishop of Nile in Egypt; for Eusebius
mentions in the 42d Chapter of the 6th Book of his Ecclesiastical History, That
when the Persecution of Decius raged, he retired into a Mountain with his Wife,
who never forsook him: And in the 9th Chapter of the 8th Book, he makes mention
of Phileas Bishop of Thmuis in Thebaide, who suffered Martyrdom under
Dioclesian, although the Judge which condemned him, did what he could possible
to make him renounce Jesus Christ, in exhorting him especially to have pity of
his Wife and Children. Spyridion, Bishop of Trimythunte in the Isle of Cyprus,
in the days of the Emperor Constantine, lived in his Church with his Wife and
Children, as is witnessed by Zozomen; L. 5. c. 11.
It Is only needful to Read the 22d Chapter of the 5th Book of Socrates his
Ecclesiastical History, to see sundry Examples of Bishops that were Married and
lived with their Wives. It cannot be doubted but Synesius did so, seeing he
accepted not the Bishopric of Ptolemais but on those terms, as he himself
tells us in his Hundred and fifth Letter: And it is very likely the greatest
number of the Eastern Bishops lived in their Churches with their Wives and
Children until the end of the 7th Century; That the 6th Council appointed that
they should put away their Wives, and that they should no longer cohabit with
them, Can. 12. which they were ever permitted to do before this Decree,
according to the remark of the Friar Blastares in Syntagm. Alphab. Litt. G.
Cap. 16, and 17. Besides that, in this same Canon the Fathers acknowledged,
that there were several Bishops in Lybia, in Africa, and elsewhere, that lived
with their Wives; which agreed very well with the 5th Canon, called the
Apostles, which forbids Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, under pain of
Suspension, and even of Deposing, to separate from their Wives, under pretext
of Religion.

XV.
Those to whom God has given the talent of writing, are admonished to do it in
a modest way, and befitting the Majesty of Heaven, and consequently not to
write in a ridiculous and injurious manner; the which gravity and modesty they
shall also observe in their usual Sermons. Those who have received the gift of
Writing shall be chosen by the Provinces; and if it happens any Book be
Published against the Orthodox Religion, it shall be sent to them that they may
answer it, a Colloque being deputed in each Province to inspect what shall be
Writ and Published, to dispose of the Copies as shall be thought fit.

CONFORMITY.
There was never greater Liberty of Writing than in the first Ages of the
Church, at which time every body writ in the manner which he thought best and
most convenient, without being obliged to communicate his Works to any to be
Examined for their Approbation; nevertheless, seeing there has been at all
times amongst Christians, some Bishops and Pastors fitter for this purpose than
others, such were for the most part employed for the defense of the Truth
against Schismatics and Heretics. It was for this Cause that the Book of
Phaebadius or Phaegadius, Bishop of Again in Guien, written against the Arrians
of the East and West, holds the Degree of the Epistle of a Council of Vaison,
of the Year 358. P. 3. Paris 1666.
and bears the Name in the Supplement of the Councils of France. St. Austin
even to his Death, was the Pen of Africa against the Enemies of the Church,
particularly against the Donatists and Pelagians; and St. Fulgentius, in the
following Age, succeeded him in a manner, in the same Office, especially during
the time that above Sixty African Bishops, of which Number he was one, was
Exiled into the Isle of Sardegnia; for although he was the youngest of them
all, the Author of his Life does observe, that he was the Mouth and Spirit: And
it may yet be said of these two famous Writers, That they exactly observed the
Modesty, Sobriety, and Decorum prescribed by our Discipline, to all those who
put Pen to Paper for the Defense and Vindication of Truth; Examples which
should be carefully imitated; and in the mean time, condemn the rashness of
Agobard Bishop of Lions, who Writing in the 9th Century against Amalarius
Fortunatus, cruelly rails against him; and much more that of Lucifer, Bishop of
Caillari, against the Emperor Constantius, in the Library of the Fathers, Tom.
9. of the Edition of Paris, 1644.

XVI.
Ministers should not pretend Precedence one over the other.

CONFORMITY.
S. Jerome informs us in in his Commentaries upon the Epistle to Titus, and in
his Letter to Evagrius, That at the beginning of Christianity, the Churches
were Governed by the joint advice of the Priests, or Elders, and this form of
Government lasted, until that by the instinct of the Devil, there arose Parties
in Religion, says the same St. Jerome; for then recourse must be had to
Election; so that to avoid Schisms and Divisions, one of the Company was chose,
to whom Election gave the precedence to all the rest; whereas before, it was
the time of promotion, as is testified by the Deacon Hillary, in his
Commentaries upon the 4th Chapter of the Epistle to the Ephesians, amongst the
Works of St. Ambrose; for he says, That at first, the Priests were called
Bishops, and that the one being Dead, the other Succeeded; that is to say, That
it was granted to the Ancientest Priest in promotion, to bear the first rank or
place; this primacy, being a primacy of Order, and not of Power and Authority
over others, the only primacy forbidden by our Discipline; in effect, the first
admitted, held the first place in the Pesbytery, just as the Dean amongst
Counselors of Parliament, or as the Dean of Prebends in a Chapter.

From hence it is also, that after the Establishing of the Hierarchy in the
Church, Equality was still observed amongst the Clergy, except 'twas in the
Power of Metropolitans over the Bishops of their Provinces; and also it was a
very limited Power, seeing it consisted only in the right of calling the
Synods of their Provinces to preside, and to take notice of all Ecclesiastical
matters which passed in the compass of their District only; but could not
decide, nor determine, without the consent of their Suffragans, after the manner
of speaking at this time. As for all the rest, they had no kind of prerogative,
but the Order, according to the time of their Reception, the which is
punctually observed amongst us; and accordingly, St. Austin finds it strange,
that in the Letter which the Primate of Numidia writ to his Brother Bishops to
Assemble them in a Synod, I say, he thinks it strange, to see himself named the
third in it, knowing that there were several others before him, which, says
he, is injurious to others, and exposes me to envy. Ep. 207, To. 2.
And in the Life of St. Fulgentius, Bishop of Rusp in Africa, which the Jesuit
Chifflet caused to be Printed at Dijon, An. Dom. 1649. with the Works of the
Deacon Forran, it is observed Chap. 20. That in the Assemblies of Exiled
Bishops in Sardignia, he was seated lowest of all, although he was the most
considerable in Worth and Value, because he had been last of all Ordained to be
Bishop. Tom. 4. Conc. p. 422.
The 86th Canon of the African Code so appoints it; the 24th of the first
Council of Prague, in the Year 563. Ordains the same thing; as also the 3d of
the 4th Council of Toledo, in the Year 633. and the 112th Letter of Gregory I.
his 7th Book; to which we may add the 6th Letter of Hincmar, Chap. 16. in the
16th Tome, of the Library of the Fathers, Ibid. p. 581.
Page 408. It is the Reason that in Africa, one was enjoined to observe the
precise day of Promotion, and the Consulat. African Code, Can. 89. which is the
14th of Mileva. Theodore Archbishop of Canterbury held a Synod Anno 679. the
8th Canon whereof is conceived in these terms, Apud Bedan. Hist. l. 4. c. 5.
Let no Bishop prefer himself before another through ambition; but let every
one know the Time and Order of their Ordination.

XVII.
Ministers shall preside in Order in their Consistories, to the end that none
might pretend superiority over each other; and none of them shall give
testimony of any matter of importance, until they have first communicated it to
the Ministers, his Brethren and Companions.

CONFORMITY.
This Article is only a continuance of the former; for if there is to be an
Equality amongst Ministers, so that they cannot pretend superiority one above
the other; it is just that when there are several in one Church, that they
should preside every one in his Turn and Rank in the Consistory, and that none
of them should do any thing of his own head, without taking along the advice of
his Brethren, and even of all those who have share in the conduct of the Flock,
especially when there is question of any thing of importance.

XVIII.
Heed shall be taken to avoid the Custom practiced in some places, of deputing
certain Ministers, by the Provincial Synods, to visit Churches; the Order
hitherto used being sufficient to have cognizance of abuses: And this new sort
of Offices and Degrees are condemned, and looked upon to be of dangerous
consequence; as also are to be rejected all Titles of Superiority, as Ancients
of Synods, Superintendents, and others of like nature. The Advertisements for
Assembling Colloquies and Synods, or any thing relating thereunto, shall be
addressed to a Church, and not to a private Minister, or other particular
Member of it; if they should happen to be directed to one of the Ministers or
Elders, for some considerations, those which shall receive them, shall carry
them to the Consistory, to advise and deliberate of them.

CONFORMITY.
There is nothing in this Discipline which is not entirely agreeable to the
Primitive, according to which every Bishop was only obliged to visit his
Diocese once a Year; but he was not permitted to visit any other but his own: I
say, in the first place, he was obliged to visit his Diocese, as may easily be
proved by a great many Canons, the 8th of the Council of Tarragona, in the Year
517. is formal in it; Tom. 3. Council. Paris, p. 803. 1636.
We appoint by this Constitution, That the Ancient Use be observed; and that
each Bishop visit the Churches of his Diocese. The 35th of the 4th of Toledo,
in the Year 633. renewed this Decree, with this Clause, That if the Bishop were
sick, or employed elsewhere, he should cause the Visitation to be made by some
of his Priests or Deacons: This restriction opened the door to the negligence
of Pastors, which did that by others, which they should have done themselves;
whereas had the Canon of Tarragona been lest in its force, and without bringing
any qualification to it, the Bishops would not have failed punctually to have
observed it. Nevertheless, the Council of Trent, in the 24th Session, Chap. 3.
of Reformation, made no difficulty to follow the mitigation of the Council of
Tolledo, although it does but too much favor the stupidness of Overseers,
which our Kings having mutually considered, in the 9th Century, they made
sundry Ordinances, whereby they enjoined Bishops themselves only, to visit
yearly their Diocesses, Lib. 7. Capit. Cap. 94, and 109. of the Edition of
Paris 1588. There are besides several other Capitularies which prescribe the
same thing, but are not necessary here to be recited.

Therefore I proceed to the other Consideration, To show that a Bishop had no
right of inspection, but on his own Diocese; beyond which he was not permitted
to meddle. Thence it was that the Council of Antioch, in the Year 341. declares
in the 9th Canon, That each Bishop has power in his own Diocese, prudently to
Govern it, and to take care of the whole Circuit which depends of the City
where he dwells; and in the 22d Canon this Rule is made, That a Bishop do not
go to another City which is not under his Conduct, nor into any part of the
Country which don't belong to him, there to Ordain any one, nor to settle
Priests, or Deacons, subject to another Bishop, if it be not done by consent of
the Bishop of the place; and if there be any Bishop so bold to do such things,
That the Ordination he has made, be void; and as for him, let him be censured
by the Synod. And as this Council prohibits Bishops to enterprise any thing
without their Diocese; that of Constantinople, of the year 381. forbids it to
Metropolitans out of their Provinces, Canon 2d.

And as for the Titles of Superiority which is disallowed by our Discipline,
besides that they are contrary to the simplicity of the Gospel, and to the
Equality which was at first amongst Pastors, the Church of Africa had in a
manner banished them quite from amidst of it, to incline the Bishops to
humility, and to remove from their minds, all thoughts of Pride and Ambition;
for it made this Canon, which is the 39th in Mr. Justell's African Code; Let
none call Prince of Bishops, or High Priest, or any thing of like nature, the
Bishop of the highest See; but let him only be called Bishop of the first See.

St. Cyprian had said a great while before, of himself, De Haeret. Baptiz. p.
282. Vol. Edit. Paris 1666.
and the Bishops in Africa, Let none of us assume to be called Bishop of
Bishops; or as is read in some Copies, None of us have resolved with our
selves, to be called, or termed, Bishop of Bishops.

XIX.
A Minister cannot, together with the holy Ministry, Practice Physic, or the
Law; nevertheless he may for Charity, give Counsel and Assistance to them which
are sick of his Flock, in the neighboring parts, provided it don't hinder him
from doing the duty of his Charge, and that he makes no gain of it, except it
be in times of trouble and persecution, when he cannot exercise his calling in
his Church, and is not maintained by it; to avoid the study of Law, or other
distraction, to addict themselves wholly to their Office, and to the study of
the holy Scriptures and Divinity: And against those which refuse to yield
obedience, the Colloquies and Synods are warned to proceed according to Order
of the Discipline; as also against those which so employ themselves in teaching
youth, that it may in some measure hinder them from attending to their
principal Employment; to which the Provincial Synods, Colloquies, and
Consistories, shall have regard, even to the suspending of Ministers.

CONFORMITY.
It is said that Philosophy requires the whole Man; it may more truly be
averred of the Ministry of the Gospel, to the Functions whereof one should
apply all their time, and all their study; so far unfit it is to think one
shall be able to exercise any other Calling with that of the Ministry, for
example, that of Physic; therefore amongst us, it is not permitted for a
Minister to undertake any other Profession with the Ministry; a Pastor may have
some insight in the Law and in Physic, and also may use it charitably for the
good of his Neighbors, in giving Counsel to some, and affording Ease to
others, as Theodotus, Bishop of Laodicea, did, of whom Eusebius speaks so
advantagiously; Hist. Eccles. l. 7. c. 32. p. 288.
but with all, that it is requisite one should apply himself entirely to the
good of his Flock, and that one cannot with safe Conscience rob it of a great
part of the time which belongs to it, to employ it in the Exercise of any other
Profession, to the prejudice of that whereunto it is principally dedicated.
Thence it is, that the 10th Canon of the Council of Mayence in the year 813,
Tom. 2. Council. Gall.
and the 100 of that of Aix la Chapel, in the year 816. prohibit
Ecclesiastics of taking any thing for helping any sick persons by the Rules of
Physic, which was not unknown to them. Doubtless for warning them, that having
been Consecrated to the Service of the Church, they ought not to spend time in
the common practice of Physic, by the knowledge of which, they have liberty in
certain occasions, charitably to help their Neighbors, without any expectation
of Profit, provided that don't in any wise hinder them from their principal
Employment, and Calling; in such a case it was absolutely forbidden, Pandect.
Can. To. 2. p. 129. Oxford. 1672.
as the Patriarch Lucas of Constantinople did to his Deacons. Theodoret indeed
makes mention of one certain person he calls Peter, which he represents as a
very good Man, and he observes in the Letters 114 and 115, that he had been
honored with Priestly dignity, and that nevertheless he practiced Physic; but
it plainly appears by what he says, Theodor. Tom. 3. P. 988. Paris. 1642.
That this Man was not bound to the Service of any Church, although in was
contrary too to the Rule of the Canons, and so nothing hindered but that he
might commonly practice Physic: Moreover, nothing hinders but to this Article
may be applied, Canon 6.81. and 83. of the Apostles. The Example of Gerantius
Bishop of Nicomedia mentioned by Z^zomen, might here find place, had his
Ordination been legitimate; L. 8. c. 6.
for being a very good Physician, he was very helpful to the Inhabitants of
Nicomedia, who bewailed him much after his being deposed.

XX.
Ministers shall exhort their Flock to observe modesty in their Apparel; they
themselves in this, and all other things, giving good Example; abstaining from
all bravery in Clothes, themselves, their Wives, and Children.

CONFORMITY.
The Ancient Doctors of the Church have been very careful in recommending to
Christians the Modesty prescribed in our Discipline; especially to Women, which
more commonly transgress its Laws, than Men do.

Clement of Alexandria neglects no pains to induce them to the practice of this
Virtue; Lib. 2. Padag. c. 12. p. 211, 212. Paris. 1641.
for having alleged these words of St. Paul, In like manner also, that women
adorn themselves in modest apparel, with shamefacedness and sobriety; not with
broided hair, or gold, or pearls, or costly array; but (which becomes women
professing godliness) with good works, 1 Timothy 2.9, 10. After this, I say, this
Ancient Doctor shows, That seeing Apparel was only given us but for a
Covering, there ought not to be any superfluity in it; that the holy ornament
of the hands is not Bracelets, but a readiness we should have to distribute our
Goods to those which are in distress, and the care one should take in
conducting ones Family; that that of the feet is a promptness to do good, and a
walking in the ways of Justice; that modesty and pudor are the Chains and
Collars which God himself has made, and that there is no other real Ornament,
but that of Wisdom; that Women ought not to suffer their Ears to be bored to
hang Jewels in them, but to have them ever open to hear the Instructions shall
be given them, and turn their eyes to the Contemplation of heavenly things; and
in the same Treatise, he speaks so much against needless and superfluous
dressing and apparel, that I on purpose forbear reciting all he says,
satisfying my self to observe in general, that he fears not to affirm, That
under the delicacy of these worldly Dresses, there is found not the Image of
God, but that of the Devil. Tertullian speaks in the same terms, exhorting
Christian Women to show by the modesty of their Apparel, the difference there
is betwixt the Servants of God, and those of the Devil; he will have them to be
an Example to those who do not profess the Gospel; and that God might be
glorified in their bodies, by going clothed suitable to modesty and
shamefacedness; and that when they go out of their Houses, they should be
adorned with Raiment of Prophets and Apostles, with probity, chastity, and
innocence; by this means obtain for themselves the blessing of God. St. Cyprian
follows the steps of Tertullian, whom he styles his Master; and he condemns
with no less severity than the other, all the superfluous Ornaments of the Age,
and all those worldly Dresses, which, says he, De habit. Virg. p. 165. Paris.
1666.
serve to no other end, but to hide what God has formed in Man, and to discover
what the Devil has invented. I should be over-tedious to transcribe what has
been said on this Subject by Saint Chrysostom, that golden Tongue of the
Ancient Church; Read only his 8th Homily on the 2d Chapter of the 1st to
Timothy, and one shall see the manner he treats of it, and with what Eloquence
he declaims against the pride and sumptuousness of Apparel, the niceness of
Dresses; against painting, curling the Hair, Pendants in the Ears, Pearls, and
all sorts of Jewels; to all which things he opposes shamefacedness, modesty,
and decency; the use and practice whereof he earnestly recommends. Isidorus of
Pellusia has very judiciously observed, L. 5. Ep. 200. Paris. 1638.
That these outward Ornaments are prejudicial to a beautiful Woman, and to one
that is not so; to the one, because it reproaches her with her ugliness; and
the other, because people are taken up in talking of her Ornaments, and say
nothing of her self.

XXI.
It is convenient to desire Princes, and other Lords which follow the Court,
that have, or would have Churches ordered in their Houses, to take their
Ministers from Churches duly reformed, and where there are more than one, with
sufficient assurance of their lawful vocation, and by leave of the Collogues or
Synods; the which shall first sign the Confession of Faith of the Churches of
this Kingdom, and the Ecclesiastical Discipline. And to the end the Preaching
of the Gospel might have the greater Success, they shall also be desired each
of them to erect in their Families a Consistory, composed of the Minister, and
of the godliest and best approved persons of the Family, which shall be elected
Elders and Deacons, to a competent number; by which Consistory, the Scandals
and Vices of the said Family shall be suppressed, and the Order of the common
Discipline of the Churches maintained. Moreover, the said Ministers shall
attend the Provincial Synods as often as they can possible; to this end, notice
shall be given to the Church which shall assemble the Synod, to call them unto
it; But especially the said Ministers, or part of them, as they shall be
deputed by the rest, shall not fail appearing at National Synods, and shall
come also accompanied with the Elders, who may inform the said Synod of their
Life and Conversation: And when they shall meet several of them together, none
of them must pretend pre-eminence or lordship over the others, according to the
Article of Discipline. And when the said Lords and Princes shall reside in
their Houses, or other Places, where there is a Church established, the better
to prevent Divisions, they shall be humbly desired that the Church of their
Family may join with that of the Place, to make but one Church, as shall be
agreed upon by a friendly Conference of the Ministers of both parts, to do what
shall be most expedient.

CONFORMITY.
In the Year of our Lord 506. Tom. 1. Conc. Gall. Can. 21. p. 165.
the Council of Agde in Languedoc, made a Decree, which in some sort refers to
this Settlement; for it suffers those, who for the convenience of their Family,
desires to have an Oratory, or as they speak nowadays, a Chapel in the
Country, besides the common Places of assembling; it permits them there to
serve God, except it be on principal Feast-days, for on this occasion it
enjoins them to come to their Parishes, excommunicating the Churchmen that
shall serve in those Oratories, if they attempt any thing against this Decree,
Collect. Romans part 2. c. 41. p. 132.
unless it be by the order or permission of the Bishop, in whose Diocese the
Chapel is. Thence is it that Pope Leo the IVth forbids Laymen to establish a
Priest in any Church whatever, without consent of the Bishops. The Council of
Meaux, in the Year 845. Exhorts Princes and Lords to order it so, that the
Priests which serve in their Chapels, should be ready to hinder and banish
from their Houses all manner of Vice, and be careful to instruct the
Domestics, because Parish Priests, and Bishops, and Ministers, are to do so
unto the poorest and meanest of the People. Agabard, Bishop of Lions, in the
same Century, complains in a Book he writ of the Law of Priesthood; he
complains, I say, Tom. 1, p. 134, 135, Paris. 1666.
of the abuse which reigns amongst great Lords in regard of their Priests and
Chaplains, and of the little esteem they made of them, requiring of them
services altogether unworthy the Degree they were to hold; And because these
Priests dwelt in the Houses of Persons of Quality, they were called their
Priests, Page 121.
and 'twas said the Priest of such a Lord; the which Pope Nicholas the Is It
could not suffer, as appears by the Chronicle of Hugh of Flavigny, contained in
the 1st Volume of the Library of Father Labbe, imprinted at Paris, Ann. 1657.
there is in the 6th Tome of the Councils, diverse Canons of a Synod, which as
some think, was assembled at Pavia, in the Year 850. in the 18th of which, the
Priests, whereof we speak, are called Acephales; Page 444.
and those which have them in their Families, are warned not to entertain any
but such as have been examined by the Bishops. Pope Urban the IId, in the 9th
Canon of the Council which he held at Melphes, Tom. 7. Conc. p. 504.
in the Year 1090. says near hand the same thing, and makes such another Decree.

XXII.
It shall not be lawful for a Minister to leave his Flock without leave of the
Colloque, or Provincial Synod of the Church to the which he was given.

CONFORMITY.
This Rule is very judicious, to hinder Ministers from leaving their Flocks
slightly, and without permission of those which have power to dispose of their
Ministry; this is agreeable to the 3d Canon of the Council of Antioch, in the
Year 341. which forbids Priests, and Deacons, and all those of the Clergy, to
abandon their Churches to go unto others, suspending from the Ministry those
that do so; especially, if after being warned by their Bishops, they do not
speedily return to the Churches which they left; and deposing, without any hope
of restoration, those which shall persevere in their Disobedience; with menaces
to the Bishops which shall receive them, to be censured by the Synod according
to their Merit; or as the Council of Calcedon will have it, be excommunicated
with the Desertors, Can. 10, and 20.
until such time as they return to their Churches. Add also to this, the 23d of
the same Council, with the 18th and 13th of Ancyra.

XXIII.
The Deserters of the Ministry shall be Excommunicated by the Provincial Synod,
if they do not repent, and reassume the Office God has committed to them.

CONFORMITY.
The Council of Sevill, in the Year 619. Can. 3. for some time Exiles the
Deserter into a Monastry, after having degraded him of the Honor and Degree of
a Minister; but without taking away from him all hope of being restored after a
punishment proportioned to his Fault; to the end, by this means to restrain the
Libertinism of Deserters. Gratian cites this Canon in his Decret. cap. 21. q.
2. Placuit ut si.

XXIV.
Ministers shall not be Vagabonds, and shall not have liberty of their own free
Authority, to intrude themselves where they please.

CONFORMITY.
The Council of Ancyra, in the Year 314. made a Decree which was very
conformable to this of our Discipline; If those which have been orduin'd
Bishops, says he, Can. 18.
are not received into the Churches for which they have been named, and that
nevertheless they endeavor to get into others, and to offer violence to those
that are duly established, and to stir up troubles against them, let such be
deposed; but if they will continue in the Presbytery, wherein they were
formerly Priests, let them not lose the honor of Episcopacy; whereas, if they
stir up Seditions against those which are settled Bishops, it is sit they should
be deprived of the honor of the Preshytery, Tom. 1. Conc Gal. p. 126. C^n. 11.
and intirel^d posed. The Is It Council of T^^rs, assembled Ann 46. requires that
he be excommunicated from the Clergy which forsakes his Church without the
Bishops permission, to settle himself in any other place. Ibid. p. 138. c. 5.
That of Reimes, orders almost the very same thing again Church-Vagabonds, in
the year 465. In the Council of Valentia in Spain, assembled Ann. 524. the like
Edict was made against inconstant and wandering Clerks, Can. 5. Tom. 3. Conc.
page 820. See Synesius on the 22d Article in his 67th Epistle, how he declaims
against these wandering Clergymen, whether they be Bishops, or others and
judges it is not fit they should have any public mark of Honor amongst the
Clergy, nor admission into any other Churches, to oblige them to return to
their own.

XXV.
The Minister of one Church cannot preach in another, without first obtaining
leave of the Minister of it, unless in case of his absence, in which case it
must be the Consistory must give him leave; and if the Flock be dispersed by
reason of persecution, or other trouble, the Foreign Minister shall endeavor
to assemble the Deacons and Elders, which if he cannot do, he shall
nevertheless be permitted to preach, to reunite the Flock.

CONFORMITY.
We formerly observed on the 18th Article, that a Bishop had no power to
undertake any thing without his Diocese; within the compass whereof he was
obliged to limit all the Functions of his Ministry; and we proved it by sundry
Canons, needless here to be repeated; it shall suffice to add unto them the
20th Canon of the VIth Ecumenical Council, which is yet more formal than any
of the rest, to the matter now in question; see here in what sort the Fathers
have laid it down; That it be not permitted for a Bishop to preach publicly in
any City which is not within his Jurisdiction; Tom. 5. Council. p. 328.
and if there shall be any one found so doing, he shall be no longer Bishop,
and let him only perform the Functions of Priest.

XXVI.
The Minister which shall intrude himself, although he were approved by the
People, is not to be approved by the Neighbour-Ministers, or others; but notice
must be given of it to the Colloque, or Provincial Synod.

CONFORMITY.
The Council of Antioch, which I have several times cited, absolutely
authorizes this Rule in the 16th Canon, which is contained in these words; If a
Bishop out of employment, intrudes himself into a vacant Church, and usurps the
place without the Authority of a full Synod, let him be turned out, although he
may be approved of all the People which he shall have gained to him. The 35th
Canon of the African Code, contains a solemn Decree against these Pastors,
which having by their slights insinuated into the minds of the People, intrude
themselves into Churches without any lawful Vocation; so far, that the 3d
Council of Carthage, which made this Decree, in the year 307. appoints, that
they shall be driven away by public Authority. Pope Gelasius the Is It enjoins
almost the same, in his 9th Epistle to the Bishops of Lucania, Tom. 3. Council.
page 936.

XXVII.
Ministers shall not be sent to other Churches without Authentic Letters, or
other sufficient Testimonies from the places from whence they shall be sent,
the which shall be delivered into the hands of the Consistory, whither they are
sent, to be carefully laid up.

CONFORMITY.
Besides the Canons I have mentioned upon the precedent Article, and which do
alike favor this, there are also others which no less confirm it; for Example,
Those which forbid to receive to the Communion in another Church, an
Ecclesiastical Person, which cannot show a Certificate from his Bishop; and
those also which enjoin Bishops to contain themselves within their Diocesses,
without intruding into another's, as we have made appear; and as may be farther
proved by the 10th Canon of the Council of Carthage, which is commonly called
the 1st, and which was assembled under Gratus, in the Year of Christ 348, or
49. Tom. I. Conc. p. 566. To all which may be added the 33d Can. of the
Apostles, which expressly forbids to receive any Churchman without Letters of
Recommendation, and without due Examination; and the 41st of Laodicea. In the
Ancient Discipline, the Letters now spoken of, were called Letters of Conge,
whereof we will speak more on the 4th Article of the 4th Chapter.

XXVIII.
No Minister, for saying he is forsaken of his Church, or persecuted, shall
thereupon be received by another Church, until that by good Certificates he
shall make appear to the Synod, or Colloque, how he shall have behaved and
governed himself; and the whole shall be referred to the prudence and
discretion of a Colloque, or Provincial Synod.

CONFORMITY.
This Article also tends to nothing else but to restrain the Enterprises of
such Ministers as shall insinuate themselves into Churches without being
called, or not having good Testimonies of their behavior, and of the cause
wherefore they pretend to be forsaken of their Churches; therefore it is that
our Discipline refers the Decision of these matters to the discretion of
Synods, according to the Canon of Antioch, in the year 34. Can. 16.

XXIX.
When a Minister finds himself destitute of a Church, having duly obtained
leave, and his discharge from that which he formerly served, it belongs to the
Colloque, or Provincial Synod, to provide for him in a months time; and if in
that time he be not provided for by the Synod of the Province, or Colloque, he
shall be at his own liberty to provide for himself of a Church any where else,
without the Province, where God shall enable him, according to the Rule of the
Discipline.

CONFORMITY.
This Rule intimates something more than the former; for it speaks of Ministers
destitute of a Church, after having obtained License from those they served,
and of having for good and sufficient Causes been removed; and who nevertheless
are not suffered to settle in any other, but by Authority of the Colloques, and
Synods, according to the Ancient Discipline.

XXX.
Power is given to Provincial Synods to change Ministers for certain
Considerations, their Churches being heard, and their Reasons well and duly
examined; but in case of Discord, all shall be determined at a National Synod,
until which time nothing shall be innovated.

CONFORMITY.
The translating of Pastors from one Church to another has been strictly
prohibited in the Ancient Church, by reason of Abuses which have been therein
committed; and because these Translations were commonly the effect of Ambition,
and Covetousness, for seldom any was translated from a greater to a less
Church; but frequently, and almost always, from a less to a greater; the 15th
Canon of the 1st Council of Nice; the 21st of that at Antioch, in the Year 341.
the 1st of the Synod of Sardis, in the year 347, and several others, prohibit
these sorts of changes which have no other motive, as the Fathers of Sardis
say, but covetousness, ambition, and a desire to domineer. Nevertheless all
these Prohibitions has not hindered but several Bishops have been transferred
from one Church to another. Lib 7. c 35 36, 37.
Socrates in his Ecclesiastical History recites a great many Examples of these
Translations made before and after the Council of Nice. Pope Boniface at the
beginning of the Fifth Century established Perigenes Bishop of Corinth,
Collect. Rom Part 1. p. 52.
whereas before he was of Patras, as appears by the Letter writ by this Pope to
Rufus Bishop of Thessalonica. Socrates also cites this Example.

But that it may not be imagined that all these Translations were nothing but
the ill effects of the relaxation of the Discipline of the ancient Christians,
and that they were not countenanced by the Authority of some Canon, it is to be
observed there were some occasions wherein these changes were allowed; as for
example, for the greater edifying of the Church, in such a case it was
permitted to translate a Pastor from one Church to another, provided it was
done by consent of the Synod, as our Discipline does prescribe: The 14th. of
the Canons attributed to the Apostles, explains it self after this manner: It
is not permitt^^ for a Bishop to leave his Church to go to another, although he
should be desired and invited thither by a great many, unless there be some
great reason that obliges him to it, as that his Preaching might there tend to
greater Edification, and there cause a greater growth of Piety, neither yet
ought he to do it of his own accord, but by the Exhortation and Judgment of
several Bishops.

The fourth Council of Carthage assembled in the year 398, made a like
Ordinance to that in the 27 Can. for having prohibited to go by ambition from
one Church to another, it adds, That if the benefit of the Church be advanced
thereby, it may be done by approbation of the Synod, which shall put another in
the place of him they send away. Thence it is that Pope Gellasius the first,
does not always simply condemn these Translations, but only then when they are
made without cause. Hinemar, Archbishop of Rhemes, in the Ninth Century,
authorizes these Changes when there is good cause for them, or necessity, and
that it is done by Order of the Synod; and he also produces sundry instances of
this practice. I do not mention the first Epistle of Pelagius the second, who
establishes, or rather approves, for the like motives, these kind of
Translations, because I am persuaded it is false and spurious.

XXXI.
When a Minister is persecuted, or for some other cause cannot exercise his
Office in the Church, whereunto he was appointed, he may be sent elsewhere by
the said Church, or an exchange shall be made of him for some other for a time,
by the consent and good liking of both the Churches: But if the Minister will
not submit to the judgment of both Churches, he shall impart the reasons of his
refusal to the Consistory, and there it shall be judged if they are sufficient;
and if they are not found to be so, and that yet the Minister persists to
refuse the said Office, the difference shall be transferred to the next
Provincial Synod, or to the Colloque, if the Churches are of one and the same
Colloque.

CONFORMITY.
The ancient Christians which had foreseen the inconvenience which regards our
Discipline in this Article, have made diverse Rules to remedy it. In the year of
our Lord 347, the Council of Sardis in these terms, set down the words of their
last Canon: If violence be done to a Bishop, and that he be cast out unjustly
through malice, for the Discipline he has exercised, or for the Catholic Faith
which he confessed, or for the truth which he defended, and that being
innocent, and flying from danger, he comes to another Church, let him not be
hindered to abide there, until such time as he can return, and that an end be
put to the trouble which he suffers; for it would be cruel not to receive with
all humanity and good will, him which suffers persecution: (...). 20.
The Council of Chalcedon which forbids to quit the Church one has served in
from the first time of ones promotion, Excepts those which having been
constrained to forsake their Country, have passed into another Church;
according to which Gregory the First established a certain Bishop called John,
which had been driven away from his Church by the Enemy which had taken
possession of the place; I say he settled him in another, on condition to return
back to his former Church as soon as it recovered its ancient liberty. It was
also in the same manner he served Agnellus Bishop of Fundi, which upon a like
occasion he preferred to the Church of Terracina; the same was practiced in
France in the IX. Century, in regard of Actard Bishop of Nants, the City having
been sacked and plundered by the Brittans and Normans, he was made Archbishop
of Tours, as Hinomar affirms, who lived in that time, and at large relates the
History in his 45 Epistle, which we cited on the foregoing Article; and all
that he blames in Actard is, That he would have held both Churches of Tours and
Nants, contrary to the prohibition of the Council of Chalcedon; excepting this,
he approves, that when a Pastor is persecuted and driven from his Church, he
should be provided of another. The Friar Blastares is of the same judgment, and
he supports it by the 13 and 22. Canons of the Council of Antioch, in Syntagm.
Let. A. Cap. 9. page 22.

XXXII.
Ministers may, with their liking, be lent by the Consistory, as the
Edification of the Church shall require; but the Loan shall not be made without
the advice of two or three Ministers, or of the Colloque, if it be for more
than six Months.

CONFORMITY.
St. Paul says, Charity is the bond of perfectness; and all those of one
Communion, being to be united by this Sacred Bond, they are bound in
conscience, upon all occasions, to show reciprocal marks of sincere and true
love; and because there are none more sensible than those which have for their
scope and aim, our instruction and consolation, they cannot be mutually refused
without violating the Laws of Christian Charity: It was by such a principle,
that when there was among the Primitive Christians any Church destitute of a
Pastor, That next unto it, was obliged to take care, and visit it from time to
time, to impart unto it Instructions and Consolations. There are several
Prescriptions to this purpose in the Monuments of Ecclesiastical Antiquity,
particularly in St. Gregory's Epistles; and all these Rules, in effect, amount
to what is here prescribed in our Discipline.

XXXIII.
Ministers lent, when the time for which they were lent is expired, they shall
return to the service of the Churches from whence they went.

CONFORMITY.
When a Church for some time borrows the Ministry of a Pastor which is settled
in another Church, which consented to this Loan, there is no need to doubt but
that when the time of Loan is expired, he may re-enter into the Church which
lent him, and which in lending him, did not disclaim their Right in him. In the
Primitive Church, at the very instant a Flock was provided of a Pastor, he that
visited it in the time of its Widowhood, that is to say, whilst 'twas without a
Conductor, returned no more to it, and exercised the Functions of his Ministry
no where but in his own Church.

XXXIV.
If in one year after the time of Loan is expired, the Church don't re-demand
its Pastor, he shall belong to the Church which borrowed him; always provided,
the Minister willingly consents thereunto; but if he be not willing, he shall
submit to the direction of the Colloque, or Synod of the Church to which he had
been lent. And this rule also shall be in force for the Ministers which by
reason of Persecution shall fly to other Churches; and the persecution
ceasing, not being demanded by their former Churches in a years time, the which
shall commence after the warning which shall have been given to the said first
Churches by the said Ministers.

CONFORMITY.
Because it may so sall out, that a Church which shall have lent one of her
Ministers, does not recall him after the Expiration of time for which he was
lent, no difficulty is made of translating him wholly to the Church which had
borrowed him, the silence of the other being then looked upon as a kind of
Consent. Which also is to be applied to those which joining themselves to other
Churches by reason of Persecution, are not redemanded by theirs when the
Persecution is over; for on these occasions, it is as much as if they had
granted unto them those Letters of Conge which the Ancients called
Dimissoria's, with the which a Churchman could serve in another Church, in the
same Province, or in any other.

XXXV.
Him who is destitute of a Church for not being employed in the Province, and
shall be lent elsewhere out of the Province, by the Colloque, until the Meeting
of the Synod of the said Province; if he be not employed by the said Synod in
the Province, he shall remain proper to the Church to which he was lent, if he
consents thereto, and the said Church also.

CONFORMITY.
This Article depends of the foregoing ones, and is no more but the continuance
of the Rules we have examined; amined; therefore it is needless to add to what
has been said to this purpose.

XXXVI.
To the end that Congregations should acquit themselves of their Duty to their
Pastors, as the Word of God enjoins them, and that cause should not be given to
Ministers to be dissatisfied, and even to leave them; the said Flocks shall be
advertised to allow them what shall be necessary.

CONFORMITY.
When Jesus Christ first sent forth his Disciples to Preach the Gospel, he
forbid them to provide Gold, or Silver; alleging for this prohibition, that
the labourer was worthy of his hire. St. Paul, who wrought with his own hands,
that he might be burdensome to none, nevertheless appoints in his Epistles, the
obligation Flocks have to their Pastors, saying, None goes a warfare at his own
expense; That him that plants a Vine, cats of the fruit; and him that feeds a
slock, drinks of the milk of it; that what the Law says, Thou shall not mussle
the ox which treads out the Corn, is to be applied to the Ministers of the
Gospel, who ought to receive temporal things of those to whom they sow
Spiritual things; That those which were employed about holy things, did eat of
that which was Holy; and those which served at the Altar, did participate of
the Altar; that in like manner the Lord ordained, 1 Cor. 9.14.
That those which preach the Gospel, should live of the Gospel.

The Charity of Christians, who lived presently after the Holy Apostles, was so
servent, that they suffered not those which were ordained to instruct in the
knowledge of the Mysteries of Heaven, to lack any thing; and although in those
first Ages, they lived on the voluntary Oblations of Believers, nevertheless
they had suslicient for their maintenance and support, and for the relief of
the poor: And because these offerings were divided amongst the Clergy, each had
his portion, or at least, they spent altogether that which fell to their share,
and also imparted to the relief of Indigent Clerks, and other Brethren, Ep. 66.
p. 109.
which were in want; and which St. Crprian designs by Sportulantes fratres; an
expressien sound in the Testament of Perpetu Bishop of Tours, in the Fifth
Century, inserted by Dom Luke D'Achery in the fifth Tome of his Collection. The
25 Can. of the Council of Antioch appoints, That the Bishop should receive of
the Church-stores what shall be convenient for the necessary support of life,
both for himself and for the Brethren which lodge in his House; and the 36 Syned
of Agde, in the year 506 requires, That all the Clerks which serve in the
Church faithfully, Tom. 1. Conc (...) p. 168.
and with care, receive of their Bishops the wages due for their labor,
prop^rtionable to the service they yield, or according as the Canons do
appoint. After all, when Riches came flowing into the Church, in several
Provinces, they divided them into four equal portions; the Bishop had one, the
Clergy another; the third was for the poor, and the fourth for repairing the
Church: But in the Countries where they divided them into three Portions, as in
Spain; one third was for the Bishop, one third for the Clergy, and the other
third for the Poor, and repairation of Temples.

XXXVII.
And to avoid the ingratitude of those which have been found unworthily to
treat their Pastors, this order shall be observed, To pay them aforehand, one
Quarters Sallery, of the Pension which has been promised them yearly.

CONFORMITY.
Were the Charity of the Christians of this Age as great as was that of the
Primitive Christians, those who labored in composing our Discipline, had not
been obliged to have made so many Rules to provide for the Maintenance of
Ministers; they would have found a sufficient propensity in the minds of their
People to have contributed to their Necessities: But this Charity being abated,
and the People being but too much inclined to pay those with ingratitude which
labor for their Instruction, it was expedient to multiply Laws to procure for
them a moderate maintenance, without the which a Minister cannot subsist.

XXXVIII.
And for the time to come, doubting of miscarriage herein, lest there should
happen damage to the Churches; Those elected to manage the Action of the
Colloques, shall inquire of the Elders of each Church, what Allowance they make
their Ministers, and the care they take in administering what has been
appointed, to the end that by the Authority of the Colloques it might be
remedied.

CONFORMITY.
The Ministers of the French Protestants, living commonly on the equal
contribution of their Congregations, it became the wisdom of the Authors of
their Discipline to remove all dissiculties which might retard or hinder these
voluntary Contributions whereon depends their Subsistence, having no stock for
their Maintenance.

XXXIX.
When necessary support is refused to a Minister; and that he has made his
complaints and applications, and that three Months are elapsed; it shall be
lawful for the said Pastor to range himself to another Church, by advice of the
Colloque, or Provincial Synod; and in case of urgent necessity, the Colloques,
or Synods, may shorten the term of three Months; and if necessity so require,
and that three Months are elapsed, and that he continue unprovided, although the
Minister has made his complaint to be set at liberty, it shall suffice, that he
call into his Consistery, the two adjacent Mimslers, and shall not be bound to
stay for the consent of any Colloque nor Synod, unless one of those Assemblies
were summoned in the same Month, to the which he may have recourse.

CONFORMITY.
Seeing that according to the Doctrine of Jesus Christ, Those which Preach the
Gospel shall live by the Gospel, it cannot reasonably be refuted. Minister to
whom the Flock does not apply necessary Subsistence; I say one cannot refuse
him the liberty of joining himself to another, which are more tender and
grateful, especially when he has nothing else to subsist upon. It Is true, this
should not be done without the advice of his Superiors, that is to say, without
consent of the Colloque, or Provincial Synod, which may dispose of his Ministry.

XL.
Upon the knowledge and judgment which shall be made of the ingratitude of the
People upon the Minister's complaint, all circumstances must be prudently
weighed, and as well principal regard shall be had to the poverty of the
Churches, as to the faculty and ways of him which makes the complaint, the
better to follow what may most tend to the glory of God, the Edification of the
Church, and the honor of the Ministry.

CONFORMITY.
In the main, heed must be taken to do nothing in these occasions which may in
the least prejudice the glory of God, the Edification of the Church, and the
honor of the Ministry, or that may offend the Laws of Christian Charity.

XLI.
The Church which shall be found ungrateful, shall not be furnished with a
Pastor, until first of all she has fully satisfied what she owes to him, from
whose service she is discharged.

CONFORMITY.
This Article is a consequence of the preceding ones, and is founded upon
Justice and Equity; provided exact Judgment be made betwixt unableness and
ingratitude; the former deserving pity and compassion, and the latter
punishment and blame.

XLII.
Ministers that have some Rents and Goods, may nevertheless take Wages of their
Flocks; it is even expedient they should do so, for the consequence, and to
avoid the prejudice they may do to other Pastors and Churches: But they shall
be Exhorted to do as the necessity of the Churches and Charity shall require.

CONFORMITY.
The Ancient Canons do sufficiently authorize this settlement, in
distinguishing the goods of Bishops from those of the Churches, the latter not
being to be alienated; whereas the Bishop at his Death might dispose of those
which were his; and if he disposed not of them by Will, they of right
appertained to his Heirs, the Church not being permitted to trouble them on
this occasion. The 24th Canon of the Council of Antioch is formal in the case,
and so regulated the matter, that afterward there was no difficulty in the
Case; and I make no question, but the Impostor that forged the Canons, which go
in the Apostles Names, did borrow from that of Antioch, the 4th of his, which
he a little altered, to hide the fraud of his Imposture; for he says, the
Bishop has sometimes Wise and Children, which are his Legitimate Heirs. Neither
do I make any doubt, but the Fathers of the Council of Chalcedon had in their
view the same Canon, a little more than 100 years after the Synod of Antioch,
when they forbid the Clergy in the 22d Canon, to dissipate the Goods of the
Bishop after his Death; and that they allege the Ancient Canons which prohibit
the same; it is hereunto may be applied the 32d Canon of the African Code,
attributed to the Council of Carthage, in the Year 419. However it may be, it
clearly appears by what has been said, That Ministers which had any Goods of
their own, might nevertheless take the portion of those of the Church, which by
the Decrees of Councils were destinated for the support of the Bishop.

XLIII.
It shall not be permitted for a Minister to possess any Inheritance under the
Title of a Pastor; but if his Pension, or any part of it, were assigned upon
any Possession, Rent, or Revenue, all shall be administered by the Deacons, or
other person appointed and deputed to this purpose, by whose hands the Minister
shall receive his Salary, to take away all suspicion of Avarice, and to the
end, that by such sollicitudes, he may not be hindered from doing his Office
and Duty.

CONFORMITY.
St. Cyrill of Alexandria ordains something to this purpose in his Canonical
Epistle, when he says, That the holy Vessels, and the immovables, must be left
to the Churches; and leave to the Bishops which do the Functions of the
Episcopacy, the dispensation of the Expense, which is necessary to be done,
whether it proceeds from the Revenues of Ecclesiastical Goods, or from some
liberality that comes from elsewhere. The Council of Antioch had already
ordained something of the same kind in the 25th Canon; and since St. Cyril,
that of Chalcedon in the 26th.

XLIV.
The Church, in whose Service a Minister dies, shall take care of his Widow and
Children; and if the Church be not able, the Province shall provide for them.

CONFORMITY.
This Rule is in good measure grounded on Christian Charity, and also on the
acknowledgment a Church owes to the memory of a Minister dead in her Service,
to whom she is obliged to show some marks of respect and kindness in the
persons of his Wife and Children.

XLV.
Ministers shall be subject to Censures.

CONFORMITY.
All Pastors were subject to the Canons, and by consequence to the Censures
enjoined by the Canons; it is a known Truth, and which is not contested by
those who have any knowledge of the practice of the Ancient Church. Tom. 1.
Conc. Gall. p. 27.
The Council of Turin, in the Year 397. in its Synodal Epistle, says, They
were Assembled to preserve the Blessing of Peace, and the Decrees of the
Canons, and to apply a profitable remedy to Men's minds; and in the 5th Canon,
speaking of a certain Priest called Exuperantius, it says, He was deprived of
the Communion of the Lord, because he had done something against the
Ecclesiastical Discipline. Therefore it was, Can. 1.
that the Council of Chalcedon requires, Tom. 1. Conc Gall. p. 490.
that the Canons be observed which had, till then, been made by the holy
Fathers; and the Synod of Chalons upon Soan, in the Year 650. enjoins all Men,
in the 2d Canon, inviolably to observe the Decrees of the Councils: Thence it
is, that the 4th Council of Orleans, in the year 541. in the same Volume of
French Councils, speaks in the 37th Canon, of the Censures which were made in
the Synods; to which also may be referred, the 3d and 22d Canons of the Synod
of Antioch; and the 25th of that of Chalcedon; and in the 4th of the 7th
Council of Tolledo, Anno Dom. 646. it is said expressly, That if any Bishop be
so inconsiderate, as to violate the Decree of the Council, the Censure and
Punishment which the Fathers have enjoined, Tom. 4. Council. p. 640.
shall be inflicted on those which transgress the Canons.

XLVI.
The Office of Ministers is to Govern themselves and their Flocks, great and
small, by the Word of God, and Ecclesiastical Discipline; but it is also the
Duty of the Magistrate to have inspection over all sorts of Men, even over
Ministers, and to take care they behave themselves as becomes in their
Vocation; and if they fail therein, the Magistrate shall warn them of their
Duty, by the Church Discipline, in the Colloquies and Consistories, else the
faults may be punishable by the Laws, the Administration whereof is in the
Magistrate.

CONFORMITY.
Origin treats at large of these Duties of Pastors in several parts of his
Works, where he teaches how they ought to act in regard of themselves, and in
regard of those committed to their care, toward whom they should not show too
much indulgence, nor too much severity; but open unto them the Gates of Heaven
by their Doctrine and Example, and not shut it against themselves by a
disorderly and wicked Conduct: But especially must be added, what he says in
the 7th Homily upon Joshua; which is in the 1st Volume of his Works; and in the
25th upon St. Matthew, in the 2d Edition at Paris, An. 1514. St. Basil lays
down several Rules in his Morals, for the Conduct of Pastors, whom, as he
says, should be an Example unto others, and do in the first place, what they
desire others should do, Preach the Gospel with a holy freedom, and bear
witness to it, although there might be some which forbid so doing, and
persecute to Death those which do it. He will have them render God thanks for
those which are converted, and that they should pray to God for them, to the
end they may grow in grace daily; That they should have care not only of those
which are present, but also of the absent; and that they should omit nothing
which may tend to their Edification and Salvation; desiring they would therein
Exercise themselves constantly, as well in public as private: He says
moreover, That the Minister should be tender and full of compassion, especially
toward those whose Souls are mortally sick; That he should charitably
contribute to their bodily necessities, without abusing his power to the
prejudice of those under his Conduct, and without exalting himself over them;
but rather take occasion to exercise humility toward them. He adds in
conclusion, That he which is established in the Church to be a Guide to others,
should neither say nor do any thing, but with a great deal of prudence and
circumspection, to render himself acceptable in the sight of God, as if he were
to be approved by their judgment and testimony.

I could allege several other Doctors of the Church to confirm the same thing;
but because what I have said, is sufficient for establishing this Truth, I
proceed to the consideration of what follows in the Article which we Examine,
That it belongs to the Magistrate to have an Eye over Ministers, and to take
care they walk orderly in their Vocation, etc. The good Kings of Israel did so
under the old Discipline, obliging the Ministers of the Sanctuary to do their
Offices, and Religiously to perform all things which pertain'd to the Service
of God; under the Economy of Grace, the Examples of Constantius, of
Theodosius, of Marcien's, of Leo's, and sundry others, which have assembled
several Councils for the benefit of Christian Religion, and to preserve the
Church from the Poison of Heresies and Schisms; I say, all these Examples do
not in the least suffer us to doubt, but that Princes and Sovereigns have right
to supervise over Bishops and Pastors, and are bound in Conscience to endeavor
the advancement of the Glory of God, and the preservation of his Worship in all
purity: And not to go farther than our France, Who is there at this time but
does know the diligence of our Kings on a great many occasions; the many
Councils they have Assembled, and to many of them have prescribed the subject
and matter of their deliberations, which is an authentic proof; and the
Capitularies which we have still in our hands, of Charlemaine, of Lewis le
Debonnaire, and of Charles the Bald, are also so many Authentic Evidences. It
was hereupon, that Constantine says in Eusebius, ^^b 4. de Vit. Constable. ^. 24.
and l. 1. c. 44.
That God had Established him Bishop; that he should take care of things which
passed out of the Church; and in the same Treatise, he is called, The Common
Bishop, established by God. In the 6th Action of the Council of Chalcedon,
there is given to Marcien, the Title of Sacerdos. St. Remy calls Clovis, the
Bishop of the Country, Tom. 1. Conc. Gall. p. 204. The Fathers of the Council
of Mayence, in the Year 819. calls Charlemaine, The Director of the True
Religion, and the Defender of the Holy Church. Which the 6th Synod of Paris, in
the Year 829. says also of Lewis le Debonnaire, and of Lothaire his Son.

It is also in all likelihood, by the same motive, that in the 98th Letter of
Loup Abbot of Ferriers, where there is mention of the promotion of Aeneas to
the Bishopric of Paris, in the 9th Century, The gift of the Prince is joined
to that of God: As if one had been fully persuaded in France, that the King was
in God's stead, in Establishing of Bishops. Thence it is also, that whereas
Loup, in the 29th Letter, writes that Aldrich was made Bishop of Sens, by the
Command of Caesar; the Friar Clarius, in his Chronicle of St. Peter vif. of
Sens, says, That it happened by the Will of God. To intimate, that the Power
whereof Princes were in possession, was given them from Heaven, it is the
reason wherefore in the 2d Council of Thionville, in the Year 844. it is said,
That Bishops are given of God, regularly designed by Princes, (they mean the
Children of Lewis le Debonnaire) and Consecrated by the Grace of the Holy
Spirit. In the Life of Nicetas, who was Bishop of Lions in the 6th Century, it
is observed, That the good will of the Prince, gave him by the Will of God to
be Bishop to this Church.

XLVII.
Ministers that teach bad Doctrine, shall be deposed, if they persist after
having been several times warned; also those which do not obey holy Admonitions
given them by the Consistory, taken out of the Word of God; those also which
shall lead Scandalous Lives; those which shall be convinced of Heresies,
Schisms, Rebellion against Ecclesiastical Order, and manifest Blasphemies,
worthy of Secular punishment; Simony, and all corruption by Presents;
endeavors to have another's place; forsaking their Flock without due leave and
just occasion; Falsehood, Perjury, Adultery, Theft, Drunkenness, Fighting,
worthy of being punished by the Laws; Usury, Sports forbid by Laws, and
scandalous; Dancing, and other like dissolutions; any crime having the mark of
Infamy; any Crime which should in another deserve separation from the Church;
and those which are insufficient to discharge their Office.

CONFORMITY.
The Truth of the Holy Trust committed to the Apostles, and after them to their
Successors, has ever been so dear and precious to those amongst them, which
have been Followers of the Zeal and Piety of those first Ministers of the Son
of God, that they could not suffer it should be altered, without severely
punishing those which sowed Tares amongst this good Corn, and especially
Pastors, whom they deposed from their Office, at the very instant that they
taught Doctrines contrary to this Heavenly Truth. When Paul of Samosatia,
Bishop of Antioch, stirred up by the Evil Spirit, had the impudence in the 3d
Century to teach, That Jesus Christ was but mere Man; the Ministers of the
Gospel came flocking from all parts, as against the Enemy and Destroyer of the
Flock, and Fold of the Lord; but this Heretic having avoided the Sentence of
his Condemnation, in the first Synod held at Antioch against him, in the 12th
year of the Emperor Gallien, and about the Year of our Lord 266. because he
promised to change his Opinion; he was at length deposed, in the Year 170. in
another Assembly in the same City of Antioch. In the Year 346 Euphrates Bishop
of Cologne, was also deposed by a Council Assembled in the same City, for an
impiety much like that of Paul of Samosatia; for he denied that Jesus Christ
was God. It was on the same ground that in the Ancient Church, Pelagius,
Celestius, Julian, and their followers, Nestorius, Eutyches, and many others
were Anathematized; not to speak of what was done against Arrius, in the first
Council of Nice. I do not here make mention of scandalous vices for which
Ministers deserve to be deposed, because I shall speak of them in the following
Articles; I will only add, that the 45th Canon of the Apostles, deprives of the
Communion, the Bishop, Priest, and Deacon, which do so much as pray with
Heretics, that is to say, according to Balsamons interpretation, If they have
any Communication with them; but he deposes them, if they permit them to do any
Ecclesiastical Function; and the 46th. if they allow of their Baptism, and
Oblation.

XLVIII.
Those shall not be deposed, who through Sickness, Age, or other the like
accident, shall be incapable of doing their Office; in which case, they shall
still enjoy the Honor, and shall be recommended to their Churches for a
maintenance, being provided of another which shall perform their Office.

CONFORMITY.
Old Age and Sickness being no lawful cause of deposition, it is with good
reason they here except them out of the Number of those things for which
Bishops and Deacons are wont to be degraded, and to turn them into the Rank of
Laymen, from the which they were before distinguished; as for Old Age, it is
certain, that in the Primitive Church, when a Pastor was well stricken in
years, and that by reason thereof he could not perform all things relating to
his Office, some other was chosen to assist him; but in continuing to him the
Honor of his Office, and a competent Maintenance. Eusebius. Hist. Eccles. l. 6.
c. ^.
It was so practiced at the beginning of the 3d Century, in regard of Narcissus
Bishop of Jerusalem, Aged 116 years; for there was by consent of the
Neighboring Bishops, given to assist him in that weighty employment,
Alexander, who had been Bishop in Capadocia. It was for the same reason, that
Theotecnus, Id. ib. l. 7. c. ^2. p. 288.
Bishop of Caesarea of Palestine, Consecrated one Anatolius Bishop, with whom
he divided the care of his Disocess, which they governed both together for some
time: These are the two Ancientest Examples of Coadjutors of Bishops, as is
spoke at this time; they were at first introduced for the ease of Ministers,
who for their extreme Age could not discharge the Duties of their Pastoral
Office; but since that time, Favor and Ambition has had a much greater share
in establishing these kind of Coadjutors, than Necessity; although the Council
of Antioch in the year 341, expressly defends it in the 23. Canon, which
practice St. Austin was a stranger to, when Valerius made him his Coadjutor,
and designed him his Successor, as Possidonius observes in the eighth Chapter
of his Life; where he takes, if I be not deceived, the Council of Antioch for
that of Nice, the fourth Canon of which prescribes only the manner of Promotion
of Bishops; whereas the 23. of Antioch absolutely prohibits a Bishop to
establish himself a Successor, and by the same means a Coadjutor.

I come now to Sicknesses, and other like accidents, for the which we do not
think fit a Minister should be deposed; we do not indeed in the first Ages of
the Church find any Rule on this subject, because in all likelihood, as yet
none were found that would dispute to a Pastor, (who by reason of Sickness
could not discharge the Duties of his Calling) the name and quality of Pastor,
no more than things necessary for his subsistence. In the time of Gregory the
First, things having in all likelihood changed face in this regard, this
Prelate made a Constitution which is yet to be seen in the 11th. Book of his
Letters, Indict. 6. Ep. 7, and 8. by which he appoints that a Coadjutor shall
be provided for the Bishop, who by reason of Sickness cannot take care of his
Congregation, which nevertheless shall be bound to maintain him as before; it
is much after this sort he deals by the Bishop of Rimini, who by his own
confession, a great pain in the head rendered incapable of discharging his
Episcopal Office, for which cause he desired to be absolutely discharged, that
another might be put in his place; which could not have been done without his
consent, but only to have given him a Coadjutor. The Bishops of France did
otherwise in regard of Heriman, or Herman, Bishop of Nevers, who was troubled
with a mighty headache, but he stoutly resisted them; as also Vvemlen Bishop of
Sens, his Metropolitan, for they would have put another in his place against
his will; but having writ to Pope Nicholas the First, in the year 862, he
disapproved what they did in the case, Tom. ^. Cone Gal. Ann. 862. p. 87, 88
politickly avoiding the question they put to him touching the forged Decretal
of Melchiades.

In the Appendix at the end of the Letters of Loup Abbot of Ferriers, of the
last Edition, there is a Letter of Innocent the Third to the Archbishop of
Tours, writ in the year 1209, whereby he will have the Bishop of Perigueux to
resign his Bishopric to another, because he was incapable and unfit to
discharge the Office; and that moreover he wasted the Treasure of the Churches;
although he judges the former reason sufficient cause for the resignation: But
Innocent the Sixth in the sixth year of his Popedom, that is, about the year of
Christ 1360, writes to Girlac Archbishop of Mayence, to appoint a Coadjutor to
Salvian Bishop of Worms, by reason of his great age and sickness, without
leaving the Coadjutor any hopes of succeeding him after his death; the Letter
is to be seen in the same Appendix.

Mark, Patriarch of Alexandria, Apud Beaureg. Annot. in Can. Apost. To. 2.
Pandect. p. 37.
having demanded of Balsaman the famous Greek Canonist that lived in the
Twelfth Century, If a man that had but one hand, or but one eye, were worthy
the honor of Priesthood; and whether 'twere permitted to him that after
Ordidination chanced to be dismembered in any part of his body, to celebrate
Divine Service, or not? Balsaman after having alleged the 77, and 78 Canons of
those which go in the Apostles names, to resolve the difficulty proposed to
him, adds, That those ought not to be established in Ecclesiastical Offices,
which by reason of their sickness and infirmities, are incapable of doing their
Duties; but as for those which since their Ordination are fallen into any
mischance, he declares, That if their inconvenience don't hinder them from
discharging their calling, they are permitted to continue in it, and to
celebrate Divine Service; but if the inconvenience be such as that it hinders
them, he will that they desist from doing the service, but that the honor and
dignity be continued them, with the enjoyment of things necessary for their
subsistence. Matthew Paris observes in his History of England, in the year 1095,
that Lanfranc Archbishop of Canterbury, in a Synod he held at Westminster, Anno
1075, judged, that the not understanding the French Tongue in a Bishop, with
the incapacity of not assisting at the King's Councils, was a just cause of
deposition; and it was thereon he grounded that of Wolstan Bishop of Worcester.
Hereby let the Genius of this Prelate be judged; and let no body any further
wonder, that the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, which he promoted with so much
earnestness, made such progress in a time of such ignorance, to the prejudice
of the ancient belief of the Church.

Moreover, the Reader may observe, if he please, that the ancient Councils did
not put the inconveniences of Lunatism, and of those tormented by the evil
spirit, in the rank of those for which it was not suffered to depose Pastors;
on the contrary, they banished from Ecclesiastical Orders, all those as were
any ways touched with these things, and if they were already promoted, they
were removed, as appears by the 29th. Can. of the Council of Eliberi in Spain,
Tom. 1. Conc. page 235.
assembled in the year 305. By the 16th. of the first Council of Orange in the
year 401, in the first Tome of the Councils of France, by the 13th. of the
11th. of Toledo, in the year 675. Tom. 4. Conc. p. 825. it is answerable to
what Pope Gelasius the First writ to the Bishops of Lucania, at the end of the
Fifth Century, Cap. 21. Tom. 3. Council. p. 636. There might be added to all
these Testimonies, Great. 33. Distinct. Cap. 3, and 4.

XLIX.
Scandalous Vices punishable by the Magistrate, as Murder, Treason, and others,
which shall reflect to the great dishonor and scandal of the Church, deserve
that the Minister shall be deposed, although they had been committed not only
before his Election, but also in the days of his ignorance; and that in case of
continuance in the Ministry, he brings greater scandal than edification to the
Church, whereof the Synods shall take account.

CONFORMITY.
St. Paul, who lays down to his Disciple Timothy, the qualities requisite to be
in a good Pastor, desires amongst other things, he should be irreprehensible;
the Primitive Christians following the steps of this great Apostle, have always
with great care debarred from all Ecclesiastical Offices, those who were not of
a very clear reputation, especially such as were vicious and scandalous, whom
they never would admit of; and they were so strict herein, that when they came
to know after the Ordination of any one, that he had committed any heinous sin
before his promotion (for example the sins of Fornication, or Adultery) they
inflicted on him a punishment in some measure proportionable to the greatness
of his crime; but far less than if he had done it after his Ordination. The
Council of Neocaesaria, assembled as is thought in the year 314, the Decrees
whereof make part of the Code of the Canons of the Universal Church; this
Council sufficiently instructs us of the two things I now have mentioned; for
in the ninth Canon it forbids the Celebration of Divine Mysteries to him that
shall have confessed, or be convinced to have sinned in his body, before his
promotion; permitting him nevertheless, for living soberly since his receiving
into Priestly Orders, to exercise the other Functions; but in the former, the
Fathers entirely depose the Priest which shall have committed Adultery, or
Fornication, that is, since his admission into Holy Orders. The Council of
Valentia in Dauphine, in the year 374, in its fourth Canon, excludes from all
Church Dignities, the Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, which declare at the time
of their Ordination, that they are guilty of any Crime which deserves death.
Tom. 1. Conc Gal. page 19.
And that of Orleans in the year 511, And the first of those hold at that
place, deposes and Excommunicates, in the ninth Canon, the Priest or Deacon
which shall have committed any Capital sin; an Ordinance which the Synod of
Epaume renewed, Ib. p. 180.
22. Canon of the year 517, in the same Tome of the Councils of France; the
rigor of the ancient Discipline extended so far, as to suspend the Priest who
was accused of any evil action, by the People committed to his Charge, although
the Bishop could not prove the things by sufficient witness, Tom. 3. Council.
pa. 817. c 10.
and the suspension was to hold till he had fully acquitted himself, that is to
say, till his innocence had appeared to those that thought him guilty. We at
least find so by a fragment of a Council of Lerida in Spain, assembled
according to the common opinion, in the year of our Lord 524. Those who are
convicted of any evil action, are excluded from Holy Orders, by the 61 Canon of
the Apostles.

But because in examining the 47th. Article, we deferred to treat of the
scandalous vices therein mentioned, when we consider this, and the following
ones, it is requisite we should say somewhat of each. The Council of Lerida
abovementioned, appoints in the same place, to depose those which shall be
convicted of Cheating, Perjury, Robbing, Fornication, and other the like
crimes, under which may be comprehended, Drunkenness and Quarrelling, both
worthy to be punished by the Law; two Sins which are also mentioned in the
47th. Article of our Discipline, without touching at the 55th. Canon of the
Synod of Laodicea, which forbids Churchmen to make Feasts, where each person
contributes his share and portion; nor at the 24th. which forbids them entering
into a Tavern. The Council of Epaume, Can. 13. Can. 22.
cited a little before, puts false witness in the number of Capital Sins, for
which it will have Ministers to be deposed. The third of Orleans, in the year
538. speaks of Adultery, Thieving, Cheating, of Perjury, or false witness, in
the seventh and eighth Canons, Tom. Conc. Gall. and the 42th. of the Apostles,
formally depose against Play and Drunkenness; and the 25th. for the same Sins,
as the third of Orleans; And the 54th. excludes from the Communion any one of
the Clergy found entering into a Tavern, unless it be in Traveling, that he by
necessity is constrained to lodge in a Tavern, or Inn; and the twelfth Canon of
the fourth Council of Tolledo in the year 633, excludes from the Ministry of
the Church, those which are spotted with any crime, or which do bear any mark
of infamy.

As for what regards Simony, which according to our Discipline deserves
deposition, St. Basil was of the same judgment, as he shows in the Letter which
he writ to the Bishops of his Diocese, and which in the new Edition Printed in
England, of the Canonical Epistles of the Holy Fathers, four years ago, makes
the 91 Canon of this Holy Doctor. The second Canon of the Council of Chalcedon,
without redemption, condemns all Simoniacal Ordinations, and deposes as well
him which gives, as he which takes Ordination for Money; and serves no better,
those which intermeddle in this filthy and shameful Traffic. The 29th. of the
Canons attributed to the Apostles, is set down in these terms, That the Bishop,
Priest, or Deacon, that has obtained this Dignity by money, be deposed, with
him that gave him Imposition of Hands; and debarred from the Communion. There Is
an infinite number of other Canons no less severe to those which expose to sale
the gift which cannot be sold, nor valued, as the Fathers of Chalcedon express
it.

The Combinations which our Reformers condemn, and under which they comprehend
the support and favor of great men, whose credit and recommendation may
contribute to the promotion of some one; these contrivances, I say, are forbid
by the ancient Discipline. St. Chrysostom condemns them highly in his third
Homily on Chap. 1. of the Acts of the Apostles. St. Jerome does the like in his
Commentary on the first Epist. to Titus. Tom. 3. Council. page 757.
Pope Hormisda in his 25th. Letter to the Bishops of Spain, follows the steps
of these two Illustrious Writers. Gregory the first in several places of his
Writings, forbids to confer Orders, or prefer to Church-Offices, by motives of
favor, or consideration for persons of Quality; so it is they express
themselves in the 22d and 24th. of the second Book, in the 56th. of the fourth,
in the fifth of the seventh, and in the fiftieth of the ninth. Unto all these
testimonies may be added, what he writes in the fourth Homily upon the
Evangelists, Lib 9 c. 17 and lib. 1^. c. 25.
and in his Moral Exposition of Job; the 30th. Canon of those which go in the
Apostles Names is formal in the case; If a Bishop employ the great men of the
times to obtain a Bishopric, let him be deposed, and deprived of the
Communion, with all those that are concerned with him. Tom. 1. Conc. Gall. p.
280.
The Eleventh Canon of the Fifth Council of Orleans, in the year 549,
prescribes something of the same nature.

Quarelling and Violence, which sometimes is of ill consequence, are punished
with deposition in the 65th. Canon of the Apostles. If any one of the Clergy,
having a difference with any other, gives him a blow whereof he dies, let him
be deposed, by reason of his rashness, and too much passion. And the 27th.
involves in the same punishment in general, all those which fight and strike
each other.

The ancient Discipline, as well as ours, deposed Ecclesiastical Usurers, as
appears by the 17th. Canon of the first Council of Nice, which plainly
threatens with this punishment, all those of the Clergy which shall be guilty
of this Sin. After the definition and prohibition of this great Synod, to this
Canon may be added the fourth of the Council of Laodicea, though it is not so
positive and express; the 44th. of the Apostles is formal in the case.

The crime of Treason and Rebellion, has not been omitted in our Discipline,
being it furnishes a just and more than sufficient cause of deposition. If any
one, says the 84th. Canon of the Apostles, offers to injure the King, or the
Prince, let him be punished; if he be of the Clergy, let him be deposed; and if
a lay-person, let him be Excommunicated.

As for deserting their flocks, by Pastors forsaking them without license, it
is punished by the same punishment, by the third Canon of the Council of
Antioch, in the year 341; and by the tenth and twentieth of that of Chalcedon.
There remains something to be said of Schism, which commonly is attended with
Rebellion against the Ecclesiastical order, and with a disregard of Caveats and
Remonstrances, made to the Authors of these Partialities and Divisions, by
those who have right and power to do it. The sixth Canon of the Council of
Ganges in Paphlagonia, assembled Ann. Dom. 325. or as I think, much later, has
this Decree, If any shall hold private Assemblies out of the Church; and if out
of contempt to the Church, they undertake to do that which should be done in
the Church only, without so much as having a Priest by consent of the Bishop,
let him be Anathema. The 31st. of the Canons which go in the Apostles Names,
pronounces sentence of deposition against a Priest who despising his Bishop,
although he has done nothing contrary to Justice and Piety, if he makes Assemblies
apart, and raises Altar against Altar, doing after this manner, he manifests
his Tyranny and Ambition; it is true he advises he should be warned three times
before he is degraded. The fifth Canon of the Council of Antioch is too
remarkable to pass it under silence: If a Priest or Deacon (says it) slighting
his Bishop, and separating himself from the Church, makes a Congregation apart,
and raises an Altar, and refuses to hearken to his Bishop, when he recalls him,
and don't prepare to please and obey him at the first nor second time that he
calls him, let him absolutely be deposed, without any remedy for his evil, nor
recovery of his place and dignity; and if he continue to stir up troubles and
seditions in the Church, let him be punished by the Secular power, as a
seditious person. The first Ecumenical Council of Canstantinople, in the year
381, employs its sixth Canon against those which endeavor to confound and
overthrow the Ecclesiastical Order. And the first Council of Ephesus, assembled
in the year 431, deprives of all power over the Bishops of the Province, and
from all Ecclesiastical Communion, the Metropolitan, who separating himself
from the holy Ecumenical Synod, has, or shall adhere to the Council and
Assembly of Apostasy, and Rebellion; and moreover declares him incapable of
exercising any Office, subjects him to all the Bishops of the Province, and to
all the Neighboring Metropolitans, which make profession of the Orthodox
Faith; and to inhance his punishment, it degrades him from the Episcopacy. One
may add to this Decree, the 3, 4, and 5th. Canons of the same Council.

Howsoever it be, Rebellion, and the contempt of Remonstrances, which for the
most part accompany Schism and Divisions, did not find in the Discipline of the
Ancients more kind entertainment than in ours, seeing that after two or three
Advertisements and Summons, they proceeded, as has already been seen, to the
degrading of obstinate and rebellious Clergymen. So it was done to Nestorius,
who was cited three times before he was condemned, as is evident by the Acts of
the first Council of Ephesus. It was also the manner of proceeding used against
Macarius Bishop of Antioch, a Monotholite, toward the end of the seventh
Century: In the Sixth Ecumenical Council held at Constantinople by the Emperor
Constantine Pogonat, or the Great Beard.
Hairy; and it may be said, 'twas the usual practice of the Church. The 74th.
Canon of the Apostles explains it self at large, for it orders, when a Bishop
shall be accused, the Bishops shall summon him; and if he appears, and that he
confesses, or is convicted of the crime he is accused of, they shall declare
what punishment he has deserved; but if being summoned, he don't appear, it
requires to send two Bishops to cite him a second time; and if he fails again,
that two others be sent to cite him a third time; and if through contempt and
rebellion, he refuses to appear after those three Citations, it requires the
Synod to pronounce against him what they shall think fit, fearing lest flying
from judgment, he may think to have gained his Cause.

I almost forgot to have spoke a word of Dancing, and other Disorders which are
prohibited to our Ministers, in the 47th. Article, which is very conformable to
the 45th. Canon of the Council of Laodicea, especially if also one considers
the 35th. of the same Council.

L.
If a Minister be convicted of enormous and notorious Sins, he shall speedily
be deposed by the Consistory, calling unto it the Colloque; or in default of
it, two or three unsuspected Ministers. And in case the guilty Pastor complains
of wrong and injury, the whole matter shall be reported to a Provincial Synod.
If he has Preached Heretical Doctrine, he shall presently be suspended by the
Colloque, the Consistory, or two or three Ministers thereunto called, as above,
until such time as the Provincial Synod has determined the case, and all
sentences of suspension for whatsoever it be, shall nevertheless admit of
appeal, until final judgment be given.

CONFORMITY.
Although this Article has been already explained in what has been delivered in
the preceding ones, yet I will add something for the fuller clearing of it; I
say then, it was so done in regard of Paul of Samosatia, Bishop of Antioch, who
being convicted of Heresy, was presently Deposed, as Eusebius informs us. The
25th Canon of the Apostles, ordains to inflict the same punishment on Bishops,
on Priests, and Deacons, which shall be convicted of Fornication, of Perjury,
and of Robbery; and a Council of Lerida, of which we have already made mention,
shows no more favor against Churchmen convicted of enormous and crying sins,
alleging for a reason, That their vicious examples are a scandal to the People
of God. The second Council of Sevill, in the Year 619. decrees in the 6th
Canon, That it should be done by authority of the Synod to which it refers, as
our Discipline does the definitive Judgment of these Depositions, Tom. 4. Conc.
Page 559.

LI.
The Reasons of the Dposition shall not be divulged to the People, if necessity
don't require it; whereof those which shall have judged of the Depositions,
shall do as they shall think convenient.

CONFORMITY.
This Establishment in regard of deposed Ministers, is like that of Pope Leo I.
in regard of those who were to do public Penance; for being informed that in
several parts of Italy, the Bishops caused publicly to be rehers'd the Sins of
those which were to do Penance, Ep. 80.
he condemns this practice, and expressly forbids to do so for the future; Ep.
Can. 2. Cap. 34.
and a long time before Leo, St. Basil declares, That the Fathers had
prohibited to divulge to the People, the Women which were guilty of Adultery,
either by their own Confession, or after having been convicted of it.

LII.
The National Synods shall be advertised by the Provincial ones, of those which
shall be Deposed, to the end they should not receive them.

CONFORMITY.
In the Primitive Church, when any Pastor was Deposed, advice was given to all
the Churches, to the end that none should receive him; Ersel. Hist. l. 7. c. 30.
according to which, after the Synod of Antioch had Deposed Paul of Samosatia,
in the 3d Century, for Heresy, it wrote a long, fair Letter, to all the
Bishops, and to all the Churches in general, to inform them at large, of all
that had passed in the Condemnation of this great Heretic. Alexander Bishop of
Alexandria, having Condemned Arrius, and his adherents, he also writ to all the
Catholic Bishops, To the end, Secrat. Hist. Eccles. lib. 1. c. 6. p. 13. ult.
Edit. Page 27. Paris. 1598.
says he, that you should not receive him, if by chance he should have the
confidence to go to you, and that you should not give credit to what Eusebius,
or any one else may write to you in his behalf: St. Hillary, Bishop of
Poictiers, informs us in his Fragments, That the Western Bishops, Assembled at
Sirmium, in the year 350. having Anathematized the Heretic Photin, they sent
into the East the Decree of his Condemnation, to inform them after the usual
manner, of what they had done against him. Lib. 4. c. 9.
Theodoret has preserved to us in his Ecclesiastical History, the Letter of a
Council of Bishops in Illyria, writ about the Year 370. by which, amongst other
things, they inform the Churches of God, and the Bishops of the Diocesses of
Asia, of the Deposing of certain Clergymen, Tom. 3. Council. p. 468.
infected with the Impiety of Arrius, whose Names they express. Accordingly the
Fathers of Chalcedon, say, in their Relation to the Emperors, that the Sardick
Synod, gave notice into the East, of what they had done against the remains of
Arrius, as the Eastern Bishops did those of the West, of their Decree against
Apollinarius: They went yet further; for they published these Sentences of
Deposition in the Churches which had been advertised of it. In short, St.
Austin in his 3d Book against Petilien, Chap. 39. makes mention of a Deacon
called Splendonius, which had been Deposed in part of Germany, and the Decree
of his degradation was read in the Churches of Africa, when they had received
notice of it by the Prelates which had condemned him.

LIII.
Ministers which have been Deposed for Crimes which deserve signal punishment,
or that bear marks of Infamy, cannot be restored to their Office, what
acknowledgment soever they make. As for other less faults, after due
acknowledgment made, they may be restored by the National Synod, however to
serve in another Church, and not otherwise.

CONFORMITY.
The 28th Canon of those ascribed to the Apostles, appoints to separate wholly
from the Communion of the Church, the Bishop, the Priest, or Deacon, which
having been Deposed for notorious Crimes, has nevertheless the confidence to
reassume the Ministry which had been committed to him; the 4th of the Council
of Antioch leaves him no hope at all of being reestablished; no not so much as
liberty to defend himself, or plead his Cause in another Synod. The 5th Canon
treats not more favorably, Rebels and Schismatics; the 14th and 15th confirms
the judgment of the Provincial Synod, unless in case the Opinions were divided;
in which Case, they prescribe to call other Judges of some adjacent Province.
The 29th of the Council of Chalcedon, speaking of Bishops, which from the
Episcopal Degree are descended to that of Presbytery, it declares, That if they
are condemned for just Cause, they are not worthy of the Honor of Priesthood
it self. To this Settlement may be referred the Canons which descend to receive
to the Communion in a Church, or Province, those which have been Excommunicated
in another; as the 5th of the 1st Council of Nice, the 6th of that of Antioch,
the 32 of the Apostles, and diverse others.

After all, the Constitution of our Discipline which we examine, gives Power to
Synods to restore after due acknowledgment, those which have been deposed for
lesser faults, but to serve in another Church; which in substance, Tom. 3.
Council. p. 817. c. 10.
is one of the Decrees of the Council of Lerida, which we have cited several
times; there is something much like this in the 11th Canon of the Council in
Trullo, at the end of the 7th Century, Tom. 5. Conc. Page 329.

LIVE.
Vagabonds, that is to say, those which have no vocation, and that intrude into
the Ministry, shall be suppressed; and whatsoever the Provincial Synods do, as
to prohibiting the Ministry, it shall have the same virtue and effect, as if
the National Synod had enjoined it.

CONFORMITY.
The 6th Canon of the first Ecumenical Council of Constantinople, may well be
applied to this Article, seeing it was made against those which endeavor to
confound and overthrow the Ecclesiastical Order; In the year 752. was held a
Council at Verberie in Valois, Tom. 2. Conc. Gall. p. 4.
(it was a Royal House in the Diocese of Soissons near Champaigne). The 14th
Canon of which, is against wandering and straying Bishops. The 22d of that of
Mayence in the year 813, in the same Volume, page 281. is also against
wanderers; as also the 101st. of the Synod of Aix la Chappelle, in the year
816. the same, page 376. And to conclude, the 5th of the 2d Council of Toul,
Assembled at Tousi, in the same Diocese, Anno Dom. 860. by Order of Charles the
Bald, and of Lothaire; to all these Canons may be added, the 13th of the Synod
of Vernon, under Pepin, in the Year 755. Tom. 1. Conc. Gall. page 3.

LV.
Those which are declared Vagabonds, Apostates, Heretics, Schismatics, shall
be proclaimed in all Churches, that they might beware of them, and a List of
their Names shall be delivered to the Provincial and National Synods.

CONFORMITY.
What we have said on the 52d Article, is very proper for this, therefore it is
needless to repeat it.

LVI.
Those who have been put in the number of Wanderers, by advice of the National
Synod, cannot be struck out but by another National Synod.

CONFORMITY.
There Is nothing in this Establishment, but what is conformable to the method
of Ancient Canons, which frequently remitted differences to be determined at
Synods, to the end, that being decided this way, every body should acquiesce to
their determinations, especially when it was transacted by the Synods of the
whole Diocese, which comprehended several Provinces, and to which do answer our
National Synods; this appears by several Canons of the Councils of Nice, of
Antioch, of the 1st of Constantinople, and others; the 22d of the Council of
Mayence, alleged by us on the 54th Article, does expressly refer the question
of wandering Churchmen, to the Censure of the Synod.

LVII.
Those which shall insinuate themselves into the Ministry, in the Provinces and
Places where the pure Ministry is already Established, shall be duly
advertised to desist, and in case they persevere, they shall be declared
Schismatics, as also those which adhere to them, if after the like warning
they do not leave them.

CONFORMITY.
No one, says the Apostle, ought to assume to himself the Honor of the
Ministry, unless he be lawfully called to it; therefore it is with great reason,
that the Authors of our Discipline appoint, That the temerity of those should
be reproved, which intrude into the Ministry without Vocation, both in the
Country, and other places, where the Ministry is already Established. It is on
this account that the Author of the pretended Canons of the Apostles, L. 3. c.
10. Paris. 1608.
prohibits Lay-persons to perform any Function of the Sacred Ministry of the
Church, as to Christen, to Administer the Lord's Supper, and the laying on of
hands; and declares, That those which shall undertake it without being called,
shall be punished with the punishment of Vzza. It is for the same reason, That
the Ancient Canons forbid Bishops (on pain of Deposing) to meddle out of their
Diocesses, or there to make Ordinations, to the prejudice of their Brethren. It
is just the same as is enjoined in the 35th of the Apostles; to the which may
also be added the 12th and the 16th of the 1st Council of Nice, which say
something near the same matter. The 8th of the 1st Council of Ephesus, in the
Year 431, is more formal; for upon occasion of the Encroachments which the
Bishop of Antioch made on the Isle of Cyprus, the Fathers appoint, That each
Province shall enjoy its Privileges, and forbids Bishops to incroach, or make
themselves Masters of places which have not been always under their Conduct,
with Express Command to restore those they had usurped, that the Authority of
Ancient Canons may not be trampled under foot: To all which may be added, part
of what I have observed on the 18th and 24th Articles; and besides, what
Socrates has writ of one Ischyras, which was of St. Athanasius his Diocese, and
who never having been preferred to the Honor of Priesthood, had nevertheless
the impudence to assume the Name, and do the Functions of a Priest; which the
Historian judged worthy of several deaths. It Is true, this inconsiderate Person
in all likelihood acted after this manner, thinking he should be favored by
the Arrians, which were Enemies to Athanasius, which succeeded accordingly; for
they advanced him to be Bishop, as appears by the 20th Chapter of the 2d Book
of the same Socrates. Zozomen calls him Ischyrion, in the 12th Chap. of the 3d
Book of his History.

CHAP. II. Of SCHOOLS.
ARTICLE I.
THE Churches shall use their best endeavor to Erect Schools, and shall give
Directions, that Youth be instructed.

CONFORMITY.
The instruction of Youth being of the greatest importance for establishing of
the Truth, for advancing the Glory of God, and for the Edification of his
People, it was great reason to procure amongst us the means of doing it,
wherein our Fathers have exactly followed the Example of the Primitive
Christians, who neglected nothing for the Educating of their Children; for not
to insist on Grammar, or Rhetoric, to which Schools they sent them, until the
Emperor Julian the Apostate (who gained this Name by his falling off from the
Truth) forbid the Masters of those two Arts, to teach them to Christians; which
Amianus Marcelinus, though a Heathen, condemns as an Action directly contrary
to the Laws of Clemency and Equity; not to insist, I say, on these things, no
more than on other humane Sciences, the knowledge of which they were no
strangers to; Who don't know, that their principal study was to understand the
Truths of the Holy Scriptures, the Mysteries of Piety, and of Religion; It was
for this Reason, that from the very first beginning of Christianity, they had
public Schools, wherein the principal Matters, and Fundamental Points of the
Religion of the Son of God, was taught; as has been proved on the 13th Article
of the 1st Book.

Now to descend lower, I observe, that Charlemain, who may be looked on as the
first restorer of Sciences, in a great part of the West, I say, he took care to
settle Schools in Monastries, and Episcopal Houses, for the Instruction of
Youth; it is what he particularly enjoins in his Capitulary, Tom. 2. Conc.
Gall. p. 152. c. 72. Ib p. 215. c. 19, 20.
in the year 789. Theodulph Bishop of Orleans, declares in his, made Eight
years after the other, That there were several Schools in his Diocese, which he
names; and moreover appoints to have others in the Country, and in Villages.
The 2d Council of Chalous on Soan, made a Decree in the year 813. Ib. p. 308.
Can. 3.
which deserves here to have its place. It is requisite, that according to the
command of the Emperor Charles, a Prince endowed with singular Sweetness,
Force, Prudence, Justice, and Temperance; Bishops should Establish Schools,
where the Doctrine and Knowledge of the Holy Scriptures may be Learned, and
where persons may be instructed, of whom our Savior may justly say, Ye are the
Salt of the Earth, and may be the savor of the People, and whose Doctrine may
not only resist sundry Heresies, but also the temptations of Antichrist, and
the Antichrist himself; and that so it may justly be said of them, in praise of
the Church, A Thousand Bucklers, and the Arms of Men of might, are there. The
Synod of Paris, Ib. lib. 3. p. 549. Can. 12.
termed the VI. in the Year 829. make request to Lewis the Debonnair, in
following his Predecessors steps, That he will be pleased, by his Authority, to
procure the Establishment of some public Schools, at least in three of the
most convenient places of his Empire; to the end, that his Father's, and his
pains, might not be in vain: Besides, that this Establishment would be very
useful, and glorious to the Church of God; and that by this Action, he would
make his name Immortal. The Council of Meaux, Tom. 3. Conc. Gall. p. 41, 42.
Can. 35.
in the Year 845. requires, that each Bishop has a Learned Man, of a good and
unblameable Life, to teach and instruct Priests, which have the care and
conduct of People, in the truth of Faith, and in the observation of God's
Commandments; and to enable them to Preach, that the Light of the Word of God
may shine always in the House of God, which is the Temple of the Living God. It
is also the substance of the 18th Canon of the 3d Council of Valentia in
Dauphine, Ib. p. 104.
assembled Ten years after that of Meaux; of the 34th of a Roman Synod held in
the 9th Century, Collect. Romans Part 2. p. 43, 89.
under Pope Eugenius the 2d. and which is repeated, and enlarged in another
under Leo the IVth. in the same Century.

II.
The Regents and Schoolmasters, shall sign the Confession of Faith, and the
Ecclesiastical Discipline; and the Cities and Churches shall not receive any
without the consent of the Consistory of the place.

CONFORMITY.
The Regents and Masters of Schools, which serve in our Academies, especially
Professors of Divinity, being called to teach their Scholars the same Truths,
as those Ministers are obliged to Preach to their Congregations, and to have
them live under the Law of the same Discipline; it is just, they should, as
well as the Ministers, sign our Confession of Faith, and our Discipline, to the
end their Lessons may be always conformable to the former, and their Actions to
the latter; as well in regard of themselves, as of those which depend on their
Conduct. I will not here repeat what I have said on the 9th Article of the 1st
Chapter, and which may conveniently be applied to that we now Examine; it shall
suffice to add, that what we expect of our Regents, is in substance the same
thing as the Protestations made by Doctors in Universities, amongst the Latins,
Not to say nor write any thing contrary to the Holy Scriptures, and the Decrees
of Councils.

III.
The Doctors and Professors in Divinity shall be Elected by the Synod of the
Province where the Academies are, and shall be Examined, as well by the Lessons
they shall make on the Old and New Testament, according to the Authentic Texts
of Hebrew and Greek, which shall be delivered to them, as by Disputation, of
one or more days, as shall be thought fit; and being found capable, if they are
not Pastors, the hand of fellowship shall be given them, having first of all
promised faithfully and diligently to discharge their Duty, and to Teach the
Scripture with all purity, according to the Analogy of Faith, and according to
the Confession of our Churches, which they shall subscribe.

CONFORMITY.
The Council of Chalons, which was cited upon the first Article, refers to
Bishops, and by consequence to their Synods, the Choice and Establishment of
those which are to Teach Divinity, and the Mystery of Salvation; and that of
Meaux, which we also cited on the same Article, prescribes the Gifts and
Qualities, as well for the Doctrine, as the Life and Conversation; so that we
may say, it amounts near to the Establishment of our Discipline, if you except
only the form and manner of installation, whereof these two Councils make no
mention at all Pope Alexander the 3d, Tom. 7. Council. part 2. p. 660.
in his Lateran Council An. 1189. uses the 18th Canon, to provide for the
establishing and preserving of Schools, in appointing Pensions to Masters and
Regents; it is the subject of the 11th Canon of another Lateran Council, 36
years after that, under Innocent the 3d, which also declares, There ought to be
in each Metropolitan Church a Doctor in Divinity, to expound to Priests and
others, the Holy Scriptures, and to instruct them in things necessary for the
guide of Souls.

IV.
To the end there might be always good store of Pastors, and that Churches may
be always well provided with persons capable to conduct them, and to Preach the
Word of God; the Churches are advertised to Elect hopeful Scholars, such as are
already well advanced in Learning, to keep them at Universities, that there
they may be fitted and prepared to be employed in the Holy Ministry,
encouraging the Children of poor Ministers, which are apt for Learning, whereof
the Colloques shall take notice. Kings, Princes, and great Lords shall be
desired and Exhorted to assist herein, and to contribute part of their Revenue,
as also opulent Churches. The Colloques, and Provincial Synods shall give
advertisements where and when they shall see occasion, and shall use all
convenient means, that things so necessary might be brought to good effect; and
if single Churches cannot do it, neighboring Churches shall join together, that
at least there might be a maintenance for each Colloque; and that rather than
fail, the 5th Penny of the Alms-money be set apart for this use, if it may be
conveniently done.

CONFORMITY.
It appears by the 14th Canon of the Synod of Epaum, Assembled in the Year 517,
That it was practiced at that time just as our Discipline prescribes; for it
appoints to him of the Clergy that shall have received any Gratification and
Present from the liberality of the Church wherein he lived, that he should
return it back again, if he be advanced to be Bishop of another Church; it
appears to me, this cannot be understood, but of the assistance was given him
during the time of his studies, seeing that from the very moment any one entered
into the Service of a Church, he was to have his support and maintenance from
it. It was in this regard Theodolphus, Bishop of Orleans, permitted the Priests
of his Diocese, in the Year 797. to send their Nephews, or some of their
Relations, unto the School he names, which they shall like best, there to be
Taught and Educated. There Is something like this in the Seminaries, which the
2d Council of Toledo, as 'twere, founded in the Year 530. and the 4th of the
same place, An. 633. Can. 23, or 24. Tom. 4. Conc. Page 588. Not so much as the
Council of Trent, but made a Decree in the 29th Session, Anno 1563. for the
Establishing these Seminaries, Tom. 9. Conc. Page 409. cap. 18.

V.
In each Church there shall be appointed Propositions of the Word of God
amongst the Scholars, according as the convenience of the place and persons
shall permit, where the Pastors shall be present, as well to preside, as to
direct and help the said Students.

CONFORMITY.
The Exercises here prescribed, have no other scope, but to fit and prepare
Students in Divinity for Preaching, and to put them in a condition to Preach
the Gospel to Edification, with profit; which agrees very well with the
Establishments of the Synods of Chalons, and Meaux, which we cited on the first
Article.

CHAP. III. Of ELDERS and DEACONS.
ARTICLE I.
IN those places where the Order of Discipline is not yet Established, the
Election as well of Elders as of Deacons, shall be made as well by the common
voice of the People as of the Ministers; but where the Discipline is already
established, it shall pertain to the Consistory with the Pastors, to make
choice of the fittest Persons, by ardent Prayers, to that effect; And the
Parties shall be expressly nominated publicly in the Consistory; and to those
which shall be chosen, the Office shall be read, to the end they may know the
business they are to be employed in. If they consent to it, they shall
afterward be nominated to the People two or three Sundays, that so the consent
of the People may also intervene; and if there be no opposition the third
Sunday, they shall be publicly admitted by solemn Prayers, they standing
before the Pulpit, and so shall be settled in their Office, subscribing the
Confession of Faith, and the Ecclesiastical Discipline; but if there be
opposition, the Matter shall be decided in Consistory; and if it cannot be
there determined, the whole shall be transmitted to a Colloque, or Provincial
Synod.

CONFORMITY.
Having treated of Ministers, and the Schools where they ought to study to
attain to the Office of the Holy Ministry, it follows in order, to speak of
those which partake with them of the care in Governing the Flock; That is, of
Deacons, and Elders, which amongst us are Secular persons, serving in the
Church, and distinguished from Ministers; or to speak with the Fathers, from
the Clergy; it is then of these two sorts of Persons, and of their Election,
that I am to treat, in examining this Article, according to the design and
intention of the Compilers of our Discipline.

I Will begin with the Deacons, which as every body knows, are of Apostolical
institution; In effect, we find in the 6th Chapter of the Acts, That the
Apostles giving themselves up wholly to the Preaching of the Gospel, they
desired the Church of Jerusalem to choose out certain persons of good repute for
Wisdom and Piety, that they might commit unto them the care of the Poor, which
they express, by serving of Tables, that by this means they might the more
conveniently attend to Prayer, and Preaching of the Word. St. Chrysostom
observes on this place, that this was the first establishing of Deacons, the
very name not being till then known, that is, in the Christian Church; as for
the Jewish Church, they had their Deacons, as Epiphanius writes in the Heresy
of the Ebeonites, which is the 30th, they were called Azanites; and thence
probably 'twas that the Apostles took the Original of Christian Deacons; and
they called them so, because they served at Tables, and at the distributing of
Money to the Poor; It was to that time, those which followed St. Chrysostom,
and wrote of the first institution of Deacons, writing on the Acts of the
Apostles, as Beda and Orcumenius, have referred it.

As for Lay Elders, such as ours be, I do not find their institution in
Scripture, as that of the Deacons is found; as for the Elders of the Christian
Churches, whereof there is mention made in several places in the New Testament,
I am fully persuaded that by them is to be understood Pastors themselves, which
were called indifferently Elders, or Priests, and Bishops; I do not except that
famous passage, chap. 5. verse. 17. of the 1st Ep. to Timothy.

It is certain that these Elders were all of the same Order, that is to say.
They were all Pastors; but because there were several in the same Church, and
that some were sitter for Preaching the Word than others, they gave them
different employments, according to the diversity of Gifts; in my judgment
there needs no other proof of this Truth, than the right of Precedence which
St. Paul attributes indifferently to all, which he would not have done, had
they not been all of one Order; the Greek word also, which he uses, ordinarily
imports a precedence which is due only to Pastors, which the Ancients
frequently design by this name, particularly Justin Martyr.

But notwithstanding this, I make no question, but the Original of our Elders
is very Ancient, and that it approaches very near to the Apostles days, if they
be not rather themselves the Founders of them; and what confirms me in this
Opinion is, that they established in the Church a Government like that of the
Synagogue, a Christian Presbytery, instead of a Jewish one; and as there were
Elders amongst the Jews, which had share in Governing the Synagogue, it is very
probable that there were also Elders amongst the Christians, People which had
part in that of the Church, if not at the very first birth of Christianity, at
least there was as soon as the number of them was increased in so great a
manner; for then it was there was need of establishing this sort of Government
I have spoke of, and of which the Holy Penmen have not mentioned the time of
its settlement; because it may be they had no particular occasion of doing it,
as St. Luke had of writing the History of the Institution of Deacons, which
probably might also have been unknown to us, if the murmuring of the Greeks
against the Jews, because their Widows were neglected at the ordinary Service,
had not obliged him to transmit it in writing.

However it be, That it may not be imagined I only insist on mere conjectures,
and conjectures utterly destitute of the Authority of Tradition, I Will produce
the formal Testimony of Hillary, Deacon of Rome, a Writer of the 4th Century,
who speaks in this manner. In 1 Timothy 5. 1, 2. apud. Ambrose Tom. 3. p. 582.
The Synogogue, and the Church afterward, had Elders, without whose advice
nothing was done in the Church; and I cannot tell by what negligence the same
has been abolished, if it be not probably by the slothfulness of Doctors, or
rather through their Pride, to make it be believed they are some-bodies: It
appears plainly by these words of the Deacon Hillary, That the Church had her
Elders, as well as the Synogogue, and that very early she began to make use of
them, when he began to write his Commentaries on St. Paul's Epistles; for he
complains of the abolishing this holy Custom, which in all likelihood held a
considerable time after its first institution, and in the very place it self
where it was extinct by the negligence and malice of vain and ambitious Men;
which does justify, as I take it, what I have said of its Antiquity, that is to
say, That the first establishing of it was by the Apostles, or at least by
their immediate Successors, if it were so that we could not find the Footsteps
in the Monuments of Ecclesiastical Writers, that immediately followed the Age
of the Apostles.

Nevertheless, who knows but Claudius, Ephebius, Valerius, Biton, and
Fortunatus, which St. Clement, Disciple of the Apostles, sent to the Church of
Corinth, with the Excellent Letter which he wrote to appease the troubles
wherewith it was agitated; who, I say, can tell but they were of those Elders
whose original Institution we seek for? for he says nothing at all which may
induce us to think they were either Pastors, or Deacons. Moreover, in the third
Century, Firmillian Bishop of Caesaria in Cappadocia, and one of the most
celebrated Prelates of his time, makes mention of Elders, which he joins with
Pastors, for the treating of affairs which concerned the good and edification
of the Churches, Seniores and Praepositi. Apud Cypri. page 144. Optat. l. 1. p.
41. Par. 1631.
We meet together, says he, every year, Elders and Ministers, to settle and
order matters committed to our care, and with common consent to treat of the
weightiest and most important affairs. About fifty years after, Mensurius
Bishop of Carthage, having received orders to follow the Emperor's Court, he
committed to the trust of certain Elders, says Optatus of Milvetan, several
Ornaments of Gold and Silver, which appertained to the Church: But afterward
he made a Note of them, which he gave to an old Woman, with orders to give it
to his Successor, if it happened that he died in his Journey, as it fell out he
did; so that Cecilian having been Established in the place of Mensurius, the
Woman failed not to give him the Note she had, by virtue of which he called for
those Elders to whom Mensurius had committed this trust, in the belief he had
that they were good honest men; but these perfidious persons, willing to
satisfy their own covetous desires, converted the Gold and Silver to their own
private uses, Cecillian was frustrated of his expectation; and as he was going
about to compel them, they rent from the Communion of the Church a good part of
the People, and began the Schism of the Donatists, which proved so destructive
to the Churches of Africa. And what invincibly proves they were Lay Elders like
ours, is, that Optatus expressly distinguishes them from Botrus, and Celesius,
which were of the Clergy of the Church of Carthage, and who not attaining to
the Degree of Bishops, to which their ambition made them aspire, they herded
with these corrupt Elders, together with Lucilla, a factious and powerful
Woman, who of a long time endeavored the ruin of Cecilian.

See here already sufficient Arguments of the truth of the matter we examine;
nevertheless because many do imagine that our practice in regard of Elders, is
new and unknown to the ancient Church, it will not be amiss to insist a little
longer on this subject, and to alledg farther proofs, the better to establish
the Antiquity of the practice which we defend. I Will begin with the Acts of
Justification of Cecilian, and of Foelix of Aptonge, his Ordainer, which are at
the end of Monsieur de Laubespine Bishop, of Orleans, his Notes on Optatus
Bishop of Mileva in Numidia. In these Acts, which are ancienter than the
Council of Nice, there are several things which directly regard our Subject, as
what is said on occasion of Money given by Lucilla a Woman of Quality, to have
made Majorinus Bishop, Page 268.
That all the Bishops, the Priests, the Deacons, and the Elders, had knowledge
of it. And some lines after, a Bishop called Purpurius, writes to Silvanus
Bishop of Cirthe, who was accused of several things, To employ those of his
Clergy, and the Elders of the People, which are Ecclesiastical persons, to the
end they might give an account of the nature of these dissentions; and in the
following page there is mention made of a Letter writ to the Clergy, and to the
Elders; and six pages after, one Maximus says, Page 276. Inst.
I speak in the name of the Elders, and Christian People of the Catholic Law.

St. Tom. 7. Page 191. c. 56. Tom. 2. p. 250.
Austin in his third Book against Cresconius, speaks of a stranger Priest, and
the Elders of the Church of the Country of M^slitan* The Title of his 137th.
Letter is conceived in these terms: To my beloved Brethren, the Clergy, the
Elders, and all the People of the Church of Bonne, Tom 8. in Psalm. 36. Conc. 2.
p. 119. Extr.
or Hippone, whom I serve in the Love of Jesus Christ. There is in this same
Father's Sermons on the Psalms, a Synodal Letter of the Cabarsussitan Council,
which speaking of Primian the Donatist, says, He was given to be Bishop to the
People of Carthage, according to the request made of the Elders of the Church
by Letters. And in the next Page, there is again mention made of Letters, and
Deputies of the Elders of the Church. In the Nineteenth Sermon on the words of
our Lord, which is the third in the Appendix of the 10th. Tome, he makes appear
wherein consisted one part of the Duty of their Employments. The 100th. Canon
of the African Code, attributed to the Council of Carthage in the year 407,
speaks three several times of the Elders at Nova Germania; and because there
had been some difference betwixt this Church and Maurentius its Bishop, and
that nevertheless the Elders deputed in this affair to the Synod, appeared not,
the Council assigned to Maurentius, the Judges he desired, and left to the
choice of the Elders, tho absent, the nomination of those that should be
needful to complete the number; and what is very remarkable in this conjuncture
is, that these Elders defended the right of the People, which were the Bishops
opposite party, who complained of their outrage and calumnies.

What I have hitherto writ, does clearly show, that when the Deacon Hillary
complained that the use of Elders was abolished, he had a regad to Italy, where
it had indeed happened in sundry places, though the same practice continued
elsewhere, as I have justified by many Examples after the time in which this
Roman Deacon wrote. I now proceed on farther, and do say, this custom was not
extinct in France and Sicily at the end of the Sixth Century; I say first of
all in Sicily; for Pope Gregory the First writ to John Bishop of Palermo, Tom.
2. lib. ^1. Ind. 6 Ep. 49. p. 1083
and recommends two things to him, one was, To establish a Receiver by consent
of the Elders and Clergy, to give an account yearly, to take away all suspicion
of fraud: The other was, not to give easy credit to reports that might be made
to him of his Clergy, but carefully to examine the truth in presence of the
Elders of his Church. I say in the second place, this same practice was
observed in France. In effect, Gregory of Tours has transmitted to us the
Letter of an Assembly of Bishops held at Poictiers by the King's Command, to
take course about the disorders of the Monastry of St. Radegonda; Hib. l. 1^.
c. 16.
and in this Letter the Abbess confesses amongst other things, that she
received Earnest for the Marriage of her Niece which was an Orphan; that she
received it in presence of the Bishop, the Clergy, and the Elders. And in the
year 585. King Goutran makes express mention of the Elders of the Church, which
he distinguishes from the Clergy, in the Edict which he addresses to the
Bishops and Judges of his Kingdom. Tom. 1. Conc. Gall. p. 391. I cannot say but
Agobard Bishop of Lions in the ninth Century might design these same Elders,
Lib. de Jure Sacerd. page 135. Tom. 2.
when complaining of Persons of Quality that abused Priests they had in their
Houses: He says, That by reason of these Domestic Chaplains, They forsook the
Churches, the Elders, and the public service.

Now it follows, I must treat of the form and manner of Electing our Deacons
and Elders. The Establishment I examine, distinguishes the places where the
Discipline is not yet settled, from those where it is already received; in the
former it requires Election should be made by the Votes of the People and
Pastors: In the other, it appoints, that nomination shall be made in the
Consistory, and that it shall be signified to the People, to have either their
consent, or their refusal; because their Establishment depends on the liking
and approbation of the People; the nomination made in the Consistory, no way
depriving the People of their Right, seeing the most part of those which do it,
that is to say, the Elders and Deacons, do represent the People, and are
invested with its power and rights. It is therefore of the People, either
mediately, or immediately, that depends the Establishing of Elders and Deacons
amongst us. And herein our Discipline has Religiously followed the practice of
the holy Apostles, who referred to the liberty of the People, the Election of
the Seven Deacons; the History whereof is mentioned by St. Luke in the 6th.
Chap. of the Acts. And it is not only in regard of Deacons the Apostles
proceeded in this manner, they would also that the whole Church of Jerusalem
should have share in Establishing Matthias, Acts 1.
who by common consent was added to the Number of the Eleven Apostles; and when
they Ordained ordinary Pastors, doubtless they did it by the advice of the
Assemblies of the People, to the conduct of whom they intended to commit them.
Which example the succeeding Christians imitated very exactly, as we have made
appear on Artic. 4. of the first Chap. Our Discipline does not therefore
prescribe any thing as to what regards the Election of our Elders and Deacons,
but what is very conformable to the practice of the Apostles, and to that of
the Primitive Christians; in short, if in the first Ages of Christianity the
People had a good share in the Vocation of Ministers, of greater reason had
they in Establishing of Elders, which were, if it may be so said, the Executors
of their Will, and the dispencers of their Rights. And if our Ministers by the
ninth Article of the first Chapter, are obliged to sign our Confession of
Faith, and Ecclesiastical Discipline, agreeable to what was practiced in the
Primitive Church, it cannot be thought strange, that we should also oblige our
Elders and Deacons to sign them, because they make up one body with the
Ministers of each Church, and do partake with them of the conduct of the same
Flocks.

II.
Hence forward, as much as possible may be avoided, there shall not be elected
for Elders and Deacons of the Church, those which have Wives contrary to the
true Religion, according to the saying of the Apostle: Nevertheless, that the
Church may not be deprived of the labor of several good persons, who by reason
of the ignorance of past-time, have Wives of a contrary Religion, they shall be
dispensed withal for the present necessity, provided they show their readiness
in instructing their said Wives, and in desiring them to join themselves to the
Church.

CONFORMITY.
Having established, as we have done, the first Article, this has no difficulty
in it; for St. Paul requires, 1 Timothy 3.
That Deacons should hold the mystery of the Faith in a pure Conscience. He
also requires, That their Wives be faithful in all things; and by consequence,
in those of Religion and Piety, which should be the only Religion of Jesus
Christ both in Husband and Wife, to avoid the great inconveniences which happen
by diversity of Religions, which Tertullian represents very well to his Wife in
the Second Book he wrote to her.

III.
The Office of Elders is to have care of the Flock, with the Pastors; to take
care the People come to the Assemblies, and that every one frequent the holy
Congregations; to give notice of misdemeanors and scandals; to take cognizance,
and judge of them with the Pastors; and in general, to have care with them, of
all such like things which concern the Order, Support and Government of the
Church; so that in each Church there shall be a form of their office in
writing, according to the circumstance of time and place.

CONFORMITY.
In the Christian Church there has ever been persons appointed to take care of
the conduct of those which were Members of it, and to watch over their Flocks,
to the end no scandalous actions should be committed therein, nothing that
should be unbecoming the profession of the Gospel. Origin at least tells us,
that in his time, which was the third Century, it was so practiced; for he
declares in his answer to Celsus, that there was in the Churches, Lib. 3. page
142. of Cambridge Edit. 1658
Persons established to take notice of the life and conversation of those which
embraced the Christian Religion; that when they committed any evil actions, to
expel them out of the Congregations; and on the contrary to receive with great
affection all those which lived orderly and well, to the end to improve and
make them better from day to day. Tertullian, before Origin, Apolog. c. 39.
had sufficiently intimated this same practice, speaking in his Apologetick of
Censures inflicted on sinners in Christian Assemblies, which banished from
their Communion those which were convicted of heinous offenses; for example, of
Idolatry, Murder, and of Fornication; which proceeding shows there was in each
Church persons entrusted to keep watch over the life and manners of the People;
and these persons were the same which we call Elders, which also is the name
St. Austin gives them in the nineteenth Sermon on the words of our Lord, and
which at this time is the third in the Appendix of the tenth Tome. In this
Sermon, which others attribute to Maximus Bishop of Turin, and which is the
66th. amongst those of St. Ambrose, there is to be seen the Name and the Office
of Elders, the same in effect as they are amongst us; for the Author, whoever
he be, having observed that Soldiers, and those in any Office, could not bear
to be reproved, and to be told of their Duty, he speaks after this manner: When
the Elders reprove them for any misdemeanor, and that any of them are asked why
they are drunk? wherefore they took away other folks goods? wherefore they
committed murder. They presently answered, What would you have me do? being one
of the World, and a Soldier? Do I profess to be a Friar, or a Clergyman?

IV.
The office of Deacons is to collect and distribute by direction of the
Consistory, the Money belonging to the Poor, to Prisoners, and to sick folks,
to visit and have care of them.

CONFORMITY.
It appears by Chap. 6. of the Acts of the Apostles, that the Office of Deacons
is what our Discipline does represent, because they were first of all appointed
to serve at Tables; that is to say, to take care of the Poor. Oecumenius in his
Commentaries on this Chapter of the Acts, I now mentioned, observes expressly,
that they were appointed to distribute to Widows and Orphans, with care, the
things necessary for their subsistence: According to which, the Enemies of
Cecilian Bishop of Carthage, laid it to his charge as a great crime, That being
Deacon, he hindered people from giving meat to the Martyrs, whereas he ought to
have carried them some himself. Fascicul. rer. Expet. and fug fol. 32. verse.
Coloniae 1535.
Cardinal Julian, who presided at the Council of Basle, remonstrates to Pope
Eugenius the Fourth, That there are several things he ought to do himself, and
others which he may refer to the care of those which are under him, after the
example of the Apostles; who to attend the more freely to the Preaching of the
Word, instituted seven Deacons, which served Tables, and the administration of
things of less weight.

It is nevertheless true, Apolog. 2. page 99.
that in the time of Justin Martyr, it was the Pastor that distributed the
Money to the Poor, which was appointed for their Maintenance, which was given
by Peoples Charity. But this Distribution in all likelihood was made by the
Ministry of Deacons. Cap. 39.
Tertullian indeed in his Apologetick declares, one had care of the Poor, of
Orphans, of Old Folks, of those which had lost their Goods by Shipwreck, of
those which labored in Mines, who were banished into Islands, or detained in
Prisons for the Gospel sake; but he don't mention by whom it was done. The
Church of Rome in the time of Cornelius its Bishop, that is, about the middle
of the third Century, Apud Eusebius. Hist. lib 6. c. 43. p. 244.
maintained above 1500 poor, as well Widows, as others, who were reduced to
poverty, or afflicted with sickness or infirmities. The charity of that of
Antioch was no less conspicuous than that of the Church of Rome, as we find by
some of St. Chrysostom's Homilies on St. Matthew, particularly the 67, and
86th. It is true, we are not certain that the Deacons were charged with the
care of these two Churches in the days of Cornelius, and of St. Chrysostom; but
we know very well, the Deacons amongst us attend on the things for which they
were established by the Apostles; that is, that they should take care of the
Poor and Necessitous, according to their Primitive institution. It was on this
account that Fabian Bishop of Rome divided amongst seven Deacons in the third
Century the fourteen Quarters of the City of Rome; that is to say, to the end
they should take care of the Poor which were in each of these Quarters, as is
to be seen in the Roman Breviary on the 20th. day of January; and as Binnius
observes in the Life of Fabian, Tom. Conc. page 114. But what the Deacons did
at first, was in time performed by the Ministry of Oeconoms and others, of
which the ancient Canons make so frequent mention, in such a way: nevertheless,
that the Bishop had the chief power in the distribution, which however was not
done without the knowledge of these Deputies, when they had taken the place and
office of those first Deacons; and that it is so, I explain what Zozomen says
of St. Epiphanius Lib. 7. Chap. 27. Read what shall be said on the second Art.
of the 4th. Chap.

V.
The office of Deacons is not to Preach the Word of God, and administer the
Sacraments: Nevertheless if necessity require, the Consistory may choose certain
Elders and Deacons to Cacechise in Families; as also it is permitted to Elders
in absence of the Pastor to read Public Prayers on workingdays, being chose by
the Consistory for that purpose; and that they follow the usual form, in
Reading the Canonical Books of the Old and New Testament. As for the Deacons
who are wont to Catechize publicly in some Provinces, the inconveniences which
have already, or may hereafter ensue, being heard and considered, the Churches
where this custom is not yet introduced, are desired to forbear, and the others
where it is, to continue; and to order that the said Deacons, if they are found
capable, would enter into the Ministry of the Gospel, as soon as they can
possible.

CONFORMITY.
What I have said of the Office of Deacons, does highly justify the
Prohibition here made them of Preaching the Word of God, and administering the
Sacraments, because they were not thereunto appointed; as Oecumenius has
observed on Chap. 6. of the Acts of the Apostles; the words whereof we have
alleged, in examining the precedent Article. I know very well, that Philip,
one of the Seven Deacons established by the Apostles, Preached the Gospel; but
I say it was not in quality of a mere Deacon that he Preached, but by virtue of
a particular vocation, whereby God made him a Herald of his Grace, and a
dispencer of his Mysteries; therefore he is qualified with the Title of
Evangelist, in the 21. Chap. ver. 8. of the Acts; Act. 21.8.
I do not here mention his Preaching Christ at Samaria after the great
Persecution raised against the Church of Jerusalem upon the death of St.
Stephen, because he did nothing therein but what the others which were
scattered abroad did elsewhere, by virtue of a general vocation which each
Believer has right to exercise at certain times, and in certain places. As for
Baptizing and instructing the Queen of Aethiopia's Eunuch, Ibid.
the Sacred History informs us, that Philip had an express command by the
Ministry of an Angel to do it. In the Primitive Church a Deacon was not
permitted to Preach the Word whilst they were Deacons, they must at the least
pass from the Order of Deacon, to that of Priesthood, to be qualified to
Preach; I said at the least; for if in the East, Priests were suffered to
Preach, it was otherwise in the West, where Bishops only performed that
function for several Ages. The first Priest that Preached publicly in Africa,
was St. Austin, by the power granted to him by Valerius his Bishop, who was by
Birth a Grecian, which was found to be irregular, because 'twas contrary to the
use and practice of the Churches of Africa, as is observed by Possidonius in
the Life of St. Austin. If amongst us there is found a Deacon that was capable,
and had a desire to exercise the Ministry, he was made to pass from one degree
to another, and then might Preach the Word, and administer the Sacraments;
whereas Deacons were not instituted at first to do the one nor the other.

In effect, if their first Institution permitted them not to Preach, neither
did it suffer them to administer the Sacraments, for these two commonly go
together; so that if prohibiting them Preaching, they were afterward in
process of time suffered to administer the Sacraments; besides that things
which were joined together were separated, they passed beyond the bounds of
their Vocation. Thence it is that Oecumenius, a Writer of the tenth or eleventh
Century, which I already have cited several times, Ubi supra.
confesses that the Deacons of his time were quite different from those
established by the Apostles, and an Order quite another thing than the first.
In the days of Justin Martyr, Apolog. 2.
that is to say, in the second Century, the Deacons distributed the Bread and
Wine of the Sacrament after being Consecrated by the Pastor; which in all
likelihood proceeded from a false Interpretation given of these Tables, for the
service of which, Deacons were appointed; for they were not Eucharistical
Tables, but common Tables, where distribution was made of things necessary for
the Maintenance of Widows, and Orphans, and other poor People, and where
perhaps Christians made their Feasts of Charity, which for a time was practiced
in the Church. Tertullian, something later than Justin Martyr, De Coron. c 3 p.
102.
testifies, the Eucharist was received only from the hand of those which
presided, that is, of Bishops and Pastors; in all likelihood 'twas at that time
the practice of the Churches of Africa, and a custom which was not observed in
all places. The third Canon of the Council of Ancyra, in the year 314, suffers
Deacons which have done nothing unworthy their degree, to distribute both the
Symbols. But in the same year, the Council of Arles prohibits them in the 15th.
Tom. 1. Conc. Gall. Ibid.
Canon by that term to offer, which he emplies, is taken to administer,
according to the Explication which is given it by the 15th. Canon of the second
Council of Nice on the same place. The year 462, the great Council of Nice
forbids them simply to give the Eucharist to Priests. Can. 18.
The 25th. Canon of that of Laodicea seems to forbid them absolutely to
distribute the Bread and the Cup; It ought not to be, that Ministers, says the
Council, should distribute the Bread, nor that they should bless the Cup. At
that time the term of Ministers implied commonly the name of Deacons; but in
the Canons of this Council it denotes a more inferior Order, viz. Subdeacons.
In conclusion, it must be granted, that we have innovated nothing in the
Deaconship; and that our Deacons have always kept within the just bounds of
their first Institution, which was to serve at Tables, and to take care of
Widows, as St. Jerome observes in his 85 Epistle.

VI.
The Elders and Deacons may be present at the Lectures and Propositions of the
Word of God made by Ministers, besides the ordinary Preaching: Or by those made
by young Students, and even at the censures made there, and give their advice
thereon; but the decision of the Doctrine is principally reserved to Ministers
and Doctors in Divinity, duly called to their Offices.

CONFORMITY.
Besides the usual Sermons Ministers Preach in the Churches, they were wont to
Preach by turns in the Colloques they held several times a year, and those
Exercises were called Propositions, much like to those our young Studens in
Divinity are wont to make to fit them for Preaching; therefore these kinds of
Exercises are subject to the Censures of those before whom they are made; for
they were instituted to judge of the Progress which Ministers, as well as
Students, did make in their Studies; and because there are Deacons as well as
Elders that sometimes are present, either in the Colloques, in the quality of
Deputies, or in the Consistory, whereof they are Members, they are permitted to
speak their opinion, which ought not to be thought strange after all which has
hitherto been said by the Ancients, seeing also the decision of Doctrines is
reserved to the Ministers.

VII.
The Office of Elders and Deacons, as it is at present used amongst us, is not
perpetual; nevertheless inasmuch as it is prejudicial to change, they shall be
exhorted to continue in their office as long as may be; and if they will be
discharged, it cannot be without consent of their Churches.

CONFORMITY.
The settling of Elders and Deacons, depending of the will of the Church, in
which originally lies all the Right and Power of Government, and the Church not
having thought convenient to make these Employments perpetual, fearing it might
not find persons that would accept them for life, she has yielded to those
which accept of them, the liberty to be discharged, provided they do it in due
form, and with the leave of the Churches which called them to this Employment.

VIII.
Neither Deacons nor Elders can expect Superiority or Dominion one over
another, whether it be in being nominated to the People, or in taking place, or
giving their judgment, or any thing else relating to their office.

CONFORMITY.
If Ministers cannot pretend precedence one of another, as we have fully showed
on Art. 16. of Chap. 1. It would not be reasonable that Elders and Deacons
should pretend any Sovereignty over their Companions and Equals.

IX.
The Elders and Deacons shall be deposed for the same causes as the Ministers
of the Word of God, in their degree. It being condemned by the Consistory, if
they appeal, they shall remain suspended from their Offices, until things are
determined by a Provincial Colloque, or Synod.

CONFORMITY.
The Deacons and Elders making up with the Ministers one Body, that is to say,
one Consistory, and sharing with them the care of conducting the Flocks, it is
just they should be punished with the same pains as the Ministers, when they
commit the same Offenses, whereof we have treated at large on Articles the 47.
and 49. of Chap. 1. to which I refer the Reader.

X.
The restitution of Deacons and Elders which have been deposed, shall not be
done but in the same manner as the restoring of deposed Ministers is done.

CONFORMITY.
This Article is a necessary consequence of the former; for if the Elders and
Deacons are deposed for the same reasons as Ministers, it is evident that the
restitution ought to be made in the same manner. Read what has been said on the
35. Art. of Chap. 1.

CHAP. IV.
Of the Deaconry, that is to say, of Administering the Poor's Money, by the
Deacons.

ARTICLE I.
THE Money for the Poor shall not be given out by any but by the Deacons, by
the Advice and Order of the Consistory.

CONFORMITY.
What I have said on the 4th Article of the 3d Chapter, suffices for the
explaining of this, and to establish the Conformity of our Discipline with that
of the Ancient Churches; to which may be added the Order given by Pope Gregory
I. to Anthemius his Subdeacon, That he should take care of the Poor of those
places whither he sent him.

II.
In the common Distributions, it is requisite one or two Ministers should be
present, if it may be conveniently, but especially at passing the Accounts.

CONFORMITY.
Although I might refer the Reader for the Explication of this Article, where I
did for the former; nevertheless I will add to what I have said, some Rules
which are not incoherent to the Subject we Examine; for Example, the 7th and
8th Canons of the Council of Gangres, assembled in the Year of our Lord 325. as
is commonly said, but 'twas later; where it is forbid to dispose of the
Church-Revenue without the consent of the Bishop, or of him he has appointed to
distribute these Alms. The 24th and 25th Canons of the Synod of Antioch, Anno
Dom. 341. Tom. 2. Conc. Gall. c. 47. p. 146.
Orders the Bishop to make this distribution by advice of the Priests and
Deacons. Charlemain's Capitulary, in the year 789. renews the prohibition of
the Council of Gangres.

III.
The People shall have notice of Passing the Accounts, that so every one that
please, may be there present, as well to discharge those who disburse the
Money, as to make known to every body the Necessities of the Church, and the
Poor, thereby the more to encourage people to contribute toward their relief.

CONFORMITY.
St. Austin practiced something of this kind, as our Discipline does here
prescribe; for when the Church-stock failed, he gave notice to the Christian
People, that he had not wherewithal to supply the wants of the Poor; which in
all likelihood he would not have done, if on the other hand he had not given
them an account how he had disposed of their Charity, and of the Money
committed to his trust, Aug. Tom. 1. p. 13.
and which he consigned over to the management of Persons, as he deemed fit for
the purpose, as is related at large by Possidonius, in the 24th Chapter of his
Life.

IV.
To prevent the Inconveniences which daily happen by Attestations given to the
Poor, every Church shall use their utmost endeavor to maintain their own Poor;
and in case any one for his necessary Affairs was forced to Travel, Ministers
shall in their Consistories Examine if the Cause be just, and in that case
shall give them recommendatory Letters to the next Church in the direct way
from the place whither they go; expressing the Name, Age, Stature, Complexion,
the Place whither they go, the cause of their Journey, and the Assistance which
has been given them; and the date of the Day and Year shall not be omitted:
Which Letters the Churches shall keep to whom they were directed, and shall
give them others to the next Church. And all Attestations before granted, shall
be Void and Null.

CONFORMITY.
It cannot be denied, but great abuses are committed, and that at all times
there has been abuses committed in the Church, upon account of Attestations and
Testimonies granted to those of the same Communion which desire to go from one
place to another, to the end they might be known to be Members of the same
Church, and to be assisted in case of necessity. The Primitive Christians
endeavored to remedy these inconveniences two ways; The first, By ordering
that each Church should maintain their own Poor. The second, In using a great
deal of caution in granting these Attestations, which is exactly the two things
prescribed by our Discipline.

As to the former of these two Means, Can. 85, and 101. Tom. 1. Council. p. 730.
the 4th Council of Carthage, in the Year 398. declares, That the Poor and
Ancient people of the Church ought to be more assisted than any others; and
that young Widows, who are weak of Body, should be maintained at the charge of
the Church to which they belong. In the 2d Council of Tours, assembled An. Dom.
567. the 5th Canon's Title is, That each City shall maintain its Poor, and runs
in these terms, That each City does furnish according to its ability Provisions
sufficient to all those of its Inhabitants which are poor and incommoded; and
that as well the Curates of Villages, Tom. 1. Conc. Gall. p. 332.
as all the Farmers which dwell there, do each nourish their own Poor, to the
end they may not stray and wander about to other Towns. In the 3d Council of
the same place, assembled in the Year 813. there are several directions in this
matter; for the Fathers command in the 11.16. 36. Canons, Tom. 2. Conc. Gal.
page 297, 298, 302.
That Bishops shall be permitted to take out of the Church stores, according to
the Canonical Rules, in presence of the Priests and Deacons, what shall be
necessary to maintain the Family and Poor of the Church; That the Tithes which
shall be given to particular Churches, shall be distributed with great care by
the Priests, according to the Bishops Order, for the use of the Church and the
Poor. That it be made known to all the World, that every body should endeavor
at all times to maintain their Family and the Poor; because it is a wicked and
impious thing in the sight of God, that those which enjoy great Riches, and
that abound with all manner of Wealth, should not help and assist those which
are in want and misery. It is to what also amounts the 14th Canon of the 6th
Council of Arles in the same year, That each have care of their Poor in time of
Famine, Ib. p. 271.
or any other necessity, because it is written, Blessed are the merciful, for
they shall obtain mercy. The Emperor Charlemain commanded the same thing, in
the first Book of his Capitularies, Page 324. c. 11.
Chap. 121, 128, 132. and in another Capitulary he made after certain Synods he
assembled in the year 813. and which is in Sirmond's 2d Tome of French
Councils. And I make no doubt, but this holy Discipline was Religiously
practiced in the first Ages of Christianity, when people were full of Charity,
when there was no need of compelling them to the exercise of it, by Authority
of Canons and Humane Laws.

I proceed to the 2d Means which I proposed, and which regards the Attestations
and Certificates which should not be granted but with much caution and
circumspection, to the end those to whom they are given, should not abuse them
in the places whither they go, or by the which they pass; these kinds of
Certificates were very frequent in the Primitive Church, where they were called
Letters, to which was given several denominations, according to the several
Causes under which they were considered; in regard of those which wrote them,
they were called Ecclesiastics; in regard of the relation which was betwixt
those which wrote them, and which received them, they had the name of
Communicatory, or Pacisick; moreover, they were called Canonical, by reason of
the Order which rendered them necessary and peculiar Letters, because they were
writ in certain Terms, and with distinct Marks as they bore, if it may be so
said, as had the very tokens of Christian Charity.

But besides all these respects, there was that of the persons in whose favor
these Letters were written, and then they were termed in general, Letters of
Recommendation, of which St. Paul makes mention in the 3d Chap. of the 2d
Epistle to the Corinthians: Nevertheless, this general Term has not hindered
that in this last regard three sorts has not sometimes been made; in the first
place, there were Litterae Dimissoriae, Letters of License, by virtue of which,
Ecclesiastics of one Church, were admitted to do the Functions of their
Calling in another, and could even be received into their Clergy, Tom. 5.
Council. p. 327.
and be Members of it, provided they were absolutely Dimissoriae, as appears by
the 17th Canon of the 6th Ecumenical Council. Secondly, Litterae Commendatiae,
Letters of Recommendation, which were given to strange and unknown Clerks, or
to Laymen which were separated from the Communion, to the end, to recommend
them as Believers, and as being out of the Censures of the Church. The 13th
Canon of the Council of Chalcedon speaks of the former, Where it forbids to
suffer strange and unknown Clerks to say Service in another Church, without
having Letters of Recommendation from their Bishops. And Zonaras, a famous
Greek Canonist, makes mention of the latter, on the 11th Canon of the same
Council, and on the 12th and 13th Canons of those attributed to the Apostles.
Cap. 9. Litt. A. p. 94.
The Friar Blastares makes almost the same remark in his Alphabetical
Collection of Canons. To conclude, The Council of Chalcedon requires, that
Letters Pacifick only, should be given to the Poor. See here the manner it
explains it self in the 11th Canon; We appoint that all the Poor, and those
which have need of assistance, have in their Journeys, along with them,
Ecclesiastical Letters only Pacifick, and not Letters of Recommendation;
because Letters of Recommendation should not be given but to those which are
some way suspected: Yet I observe this distinction han't always been kept, and
that the Council of Antioch, in the 7th Canon, forbids to receive a Stranger
without having the Pacifick Letters, which that of Chalcedon accords to the
Poor and Indigent. Gregory of Nazianzen expresses himself thereupon in a manner
which sufficiently shows they were Letters of Recommendation, as the
Interpreter has translated it. In short, in his 3d Oration, which is the 1st
against Julian the Apostate, he says, That amongst many things which that
Cowardly Fugitive from the Truth endeavored to introduce the use and practice
of amongst the Gentiles, in imitation of Christians, Tom. 1. p. 102.
he desired above all things, To establish the use of those Letters of
Recommendation, by the which, says this Ancient Doctor, we send from one
Country to another, those which are poor and in necessity: Zozomen in his
Ecclesiastical History, writes the same thing of this Emperor, and says, That
by virtue of these Letters by which Christians recommended the Strangers of
their Communion, they were lodged, and care was taken of them where ever they
went, and in what Country soever they came, as much as if they had been
Friends, and a long while known and acquainted; and that all this was done on
account of the Character the Letters gave of them, and which were as 'twere the
Mark and Symbol of their Profession; and as I conceive, it is what Tertullian
calls the Contesseration of Hospitality; that is to say, the mark and sign, at
the sight whereof, the right of hospitality was used toward those which showed
it; and it is probable Lucian had a regard to this Custom, when speaking of a
Stranger, Dial. de Pereg.
he says, that in Traveling, he found plentiful assistance amongst the
Christians, whereby he was abundantly supplied with all things.

There is yet something farther to be considered in this matter, to wit, That
Christians were so circumspect in granting these Letters of Recommendation,
that they examined those which had them, and obliged them to give an account of
their Faith, to avoid all fraud and surprise. Ubi supra.
The 58th Canon of the Council of Eliberi, or Eluira in Spain, in the year 305.
orders it so; the 33d of the Apostles is no less express, without insisting on
the Interpretations of Balsamon, Zonoras, and Aristenus, Greek Canonists, which
have understood it in this sense. I cannot tell but Lucian does again allude to
this practice of Christians, when he said, That they receive certain Dogma's
which he mentions, without exactly searching the Truth; but I know very well,
that we, on this occasion, do the same as the Primitive Christians did, not
only through Custom, but also by Order of our National Synods. That of
Charanton, the Establishment whereof is cited in the Article we Examine, That
of Charanton, I say, in the year 1623. enjoins; Exactly to Examine, as well the
Attestations, as those which have them, to have from their own mouth, testimony
of their Religion, and Instruction.

As for the Order our Discipline prescribes, to give and renew from Church to
Church the Recommendatory Letters, it is the same in substance of that
established by the Synod of Sardis, An. Dom. 347. in the 8, 9, 10, and 11.
Canons, and particularly in the last, where it appoints Bishops, which are on
the way, to Examine these Letters of Recommendation, and to ask of those which
have them, the Cause and Reason of their Traveling; or to subscribe their
Letters if they are just, and to refuse them Communion, if they have
fraudulently got them.

CHAP. V. Of CONSISTORIES.
ARTICLE I.
IN each Church there shall be a Consistory, composed of persons which shall
have the conduct of it, to wit, of Pastors and Elders; and the Ministers in
this company are to preside, as also in all other Ecclesiastical Assemblies.

CONFORMITY.
From the very first Establishing of Christian Churches, there was in each of
them a certain number of Persons to whom the Government of it was committed,
and who were distinguished from the rest of the People by the Offices which
they Exercised, and by the choice which had been made of them for supervising
the whole Flock, and it is what we call Consistory; Origin calls it the
Ecclesiastical Senate, and makes it parallel with the Politic Senate of each
City, to show that the Ecclesiastical Senate very much surpasses the other,
being composed of Persons of more virtue and knowledge, than those which are
Members of Politic Senates in Cities. The Ecclesiastical Senate, or
Consistory, is composed amongst us of Ministers and Elders, and it ought not to
be thought strange that we join Elders with the Ministers, after all we have
said on the 3d Chapter, particularly on the 1st Article, where we have at large
proved, that the Elders have had share for several Centuries in the Government
of the Churches, and that they in all likelihood would have still continued, if
the ambition of Bishops and their Clergy had not insensibly abolished this
laudable practice. The Deacon Hillary, as has been shown, complained of it in
his time. But although the Elders partake with the Ministers in Governing the
Flocks, yet the right of precedence appertains to the Ministers; therefore in
these testimonies we have alleged to prove that the Church has had great
advantage, in the first Ages, of Lay Elders, like ours, they are for the most
part named after the Clergy.

II.
As for Deacons, seeing the Churches, for the necessity of the times, has to
this day happily employed them in Governing the Church, as Exercising also the
Office of Elders; those which hereafter shall choose such, or continue them,
they shall with the Pastors and Elders, bear a part in the Governing the
Church; and therefore shall frequently be with them in the Consistory, yea,
even at the Colloques, and Synods, if they are thither sent by the
Consistories.

CONFORMITY.
The care of the Poor, making one of the most considerable parts of the
Church Government, it is with great reason we therein admit the Deacons,
because they were properly instituted to attend on this thing, as has been
above proved at large.

III.
In places where the Exercise of Religion is not settled, Christians shall be
exhorted by the Colloques, to have Elders and Deacons, and to follow the
Ecclesiastical Discipline; and at the said Colloques, they shall be informed to
what Church to join themselves for their convenience and exercise of their
Ministry; from whence also they may not depart without communicating it also to
the said Colloques.

CONFORMITY.
In the places where there is no public exercise of our Religion, although
there are a considerable number of Families which profess it, care must be
taken they do not live without Discipline; and to this purpose there must be
Established amongst them Deacons and Elders, to take care of the Poor, and to
watch over the Life and Conversation of private persons, whereof they shall
give account at the Church-Consistory to the which they shall be joined for the
public Exercises of Piety, and the Service of God; and there is no question to
be made, but something of this Nature was done in the Primitive Church; Apolog.
p. 98.
for instance, in the days of St. Justin Martyr, that they Assembled from the
Country and Cities unto one place; which shows plainly these Assemblies were
not made every where, although according to all appearance, there was in all
places one and the same Order for the conduct of Christians, to the end they
should do nothing unworthy the holiness of their Profession.

IV.
There shall be but one Consistory in each Church, and it shall not be
permitted to Establish other Council for any Church-business whatever. If in
any Church there shall any other Council be established different from the
Consistory, it shall forthwith be suppressed. Nevertheless the Consistory can
sometimes call to its aid, such of the Church as shall be thought convenient,
when occasion requires, and that Ecclesiastical matters be treated of only in
the place where the Consistory does Assemble.

CONFORMITY.
There was not anciently in each Christian Church any more than one
Ecclesiastical Senate, as we have heard by Origin, and this Senate was not
properly any thing else, but what we call Consistory; which is a company of
Persons which the Church does invest with her Rights and Power to Govern the
Flock.

V.
It is in the Power of the Consistory to admit of Father and Son, or of two
Brothers in the same Consistory, unless there was some other reason to the
contrary, of which the Colloque, or Provincial Synod shall take cognizance.

CONFORMITY.
The Church being the Spouse of Jesus Christ, and by consequence, the Mistress
of all the Power, and of all the Ecclesiastical Authority which resides in Her
as in its Fountain; and in the Consistories, as in Societies, which she
establishes for the use and exercise of this Power; She may then have
authorized the Ecclesiastical Senate and the Consistory, to admit into its Body
the Father and Son, or two Brothers, provided they are agreeable to the Church,
which has in general given this Power to the Consistory.

VI.
It is also referred to the discretion of Consistories, to call unto them young
Students, although they have no Office in the Church, but not without weighty
causes and considerations; and when their Wisdom is known, the said Students
shall be there present, not to have any voice in what Affairs shall be debated,
but that by their presence there, they may the sooner become fit and proper to
Govern the Church when it shall please God lawfully to call them thereunto.
Nevertheless it shall be at the Pastor's free choice to demand their Judgment,
to make trial of their abilities, which shall be done with great prudence and
caution, and promise not to make it known abroad.

CONFORMITY.
Those whom we call Students, are young Men which study Divinity, and which
resolve one day to exercise the Ministry of the Gospel; and because this Office
don't consist alone in Preaching the Word, but generally in all things which
one ought to do wisely to Govern the Flocks; It is with great reason, that
under certain Conditions we suffer them to enter into the Consistories, to the
end they may there learn after what way they are to act, when it shall please
Almighty God to commit the care of some Church unto them.

VII.
A Magistrate may be called to the Office of an Elder in the Consistory,
provided that the Exercise of the one Office does not interfere with the other,
and may not be prejudicial to the Church.

CONFORMITY.
What I have said to the 5th Article, may very well be applied to this.

VIII.
The Government of the Church shall be regulated according to the Discipline,
as it has been ordered by the National Synods; and no Church nor Province
shall make any Law but what in substance shall be conformable to the general
Articles of the Discipline. To this purpose the Articles of the said Discipline
shall be read in the Consistories, at least at the time of celebrating the
Lord's Supper; and the Elders and Deacons shall be exhorted to have a Copy
thereof each of them, to read and study it at home at leisure.

CONFORMITY.
In the Ancient Church, It was not permitted to a Province, much less to a
particular Church, to make any Constitution which was not conformable to the
Canons which were the Discipline of those times; contrary to which, nothing was
to be Established, especially after the Canons, which composed this Discipline,
had been Authorized by any Ecumenical Council, as the Code of the Canons of
the Universal Church was by that of Chalcedon: This also shall be farther
cleared by the remarks I will make on the 2d Article of the following Chapter.

IX.
The cognizance of Scandals, and the censure of them, appertains to the Company
of Pastors and Elders; and whole Consistories cannot be impeached, nor above
half. However Accusations shall be of force against particular persons of the
said Consistories, as well Pastors as Elders, admitted by the said Consistory;
and they being adjudg'd, shall proceed on, notwithstanding Appeal, on admission
or rejection of the said accusations.

CONFORMITY.
What I have writ on the 3d Article of the 3d Chap. serves as a Commentary on
this, without being necessary to say any more.

X.
The Custom which is found to be used in some places, of making inquest, and a
general censure of misdemeanors in the public Assembly of the People, and in
presence both of Men and Women, being condemned by the Word of God; the
Churches are advertised to abstain from it, and to be satisfied with the Order
contained in the Discipline, as to what regards Censures.

CONFORMITY.
See what has been observed on the 51. Article of the 1st Chapter.

XI.
The Elders may be advertised not to report misdemeanors to the Consistory,
without great reasons for it; neither shall any one be called to the
Consistory, without good cause or reason.

CONFORMITY.
The Elders having been Established to watch over the Life and Coversation of
those which are Members of the Church, as I have made appear; there is no
question to be made, but they should do it with Prudence and Charity.

XII.
In the Exercise of Ecclesiastical Discipline, one shall forbear as much as
possible may be, as well from all formalities, as from the terms commonly used
in Courts of Justice.

CONFORMITY.
The Tribunal of the Church being of a very different Nature from
Common-Law-Courts, it is convenient the proceeding should be quite different;
and that in the Exercise of Ecclesiastical Discipline, one should avoid, as
much as may be, the formalities of the Bar; Read the Discipline of the
Primitive Christians; for Example, the Code of Canons of the Universal Church,
of which I spoke just now; and I am well assured they shall there find
proceedings very different from the conduct and style of what is done in the
Common-Law-Courts. I know that the Tribunal of Bishops at this time, have too
great correspondence with that of Secular Courts; but I know also, 'twas not so
in the beginning, and that the Ancient Christians Governed themselves quite
otherwise.

XIII.
Believers shall be Exhorted by the Consistories, yea, required in the Name of
God, to speak truth, for as much as that don't at all derogate from the
Magistrates Authority; as also the usual formalities in making Oath, practiced
before Magistrates, shall not be used.

CONFORMITY.
This Establishment has nothing in it but what is very agreeable to the use and
practice of the Primitive Christians, as I may prove by sundry testimonies; I
shall only instance in two, which the Ecumenical Councils of Ephesus and
Chalcedon give us, seeing that in one and the other, Conc. Ephesians. p. 2. Act. 1.
Tom. 2. Con. p. 264, 265 Catch. Acts. Tom. 3. p. 131.
They Exhort, and Conjure the Bishops by the Holy Gospels, to speak the truth.
If these two Councils have made no difficulty to do so toward Bishops;
Wherefore should not the Ecclesiastical Synod, as Origin speaks, have power to
do so to particular persons, as occasion shall require?

XIV.
In differences which shall happen, the Parties shall be Exhorted by the
Consistories to be reconciled by all friendly means; but the Consistories shall
not appoint Arbitrators, nor shall do the Office of Arbitrators. If any of the
said body are called to be Arbitrators, it shall be only as a particular
person, and in their own name only.

CONFORMITY.
This Article is taken from the Doctrine of St. Paul, 1 Cor. 6.
which Exhorts Believers to compose their differences and Lawsuits in an
amicable manner, and to choose out some amongst their Brethren, to whose
Judgments they might refer the Decision of all those things which causes
debates and strife amongst them. St. Chrysostom and Theodoret explaining the
words of the Apostle, do fully confirm what is ordained by our Discipline.

XV.
Besides the Admonitions which are made by the Consistories to those as have
done amiss; if it so happens that greater Censure and Punishment must be used,
it shall be either Suspension, or Deprivation for a time from the Holy
Sacrament, or Excommunication and Retrenchment from the Church. And the
Consistories shall be advertised to proceed warily, and to distinguish betwixt
the one and the other, as also prudently to weigh and examine the faults and
scandals which they shall be informed of, together with all circumstances, the
better to judge what Censure it shall require.

CONFORMITY.
There is nothing more frequent nor better Established in the ancient
Discipline, than what ours does here prescribe; so that it is not necessary long
to insist on a matter, the truth whereof it were easy to prove by a great
number of testimonies, were it not to spare the Reader a trouble. The Primitive
Christians did just as we do, they informed Sinners of their Duty, they
charitably represented to them their faults, they applied to them fit censures,
they deprived them of participating of the Divine Mysteries, they caused them
to pass by certain degrees of Penance proportioned to the greatness of their
faults; and when the crimes were heinous, and the obstinacy stout and resolute,
they Excommunicated them, in separating them from the Society of the faithful,
as persons who had made themselves unworthy of living within the pale of the
Church. Tertullian has in few words comprised all this proceeding which I have
now touched, when describing the Assemblies of his times, Apolog. cap. 39.
he observes, That therein was made Exhortations, Reprehensions, and Censures;
that therein were inflicted punishments; that after having maturely weighed all
things, Judgment was given, being persuaded God see them; and it is, says he,
a great resemblance of the last Judgment, if any one for his sins is deprived
of the Communion of Prayer, from the Assembly, and from all holy intercourse.

Which will also appear yet more clearly, if one considers that Peter Bishop of
Alexandria, and Martyr of Jesus Christ under Dioclesian, has expressed the
virtue and efficacy of the Communion, Epist. Canon. cap. 8.
by communicating in all things; in Prayers, in participating of the body and
blood of the Lord, and in the Preaching of the Word. Origin has already spoke
of the Ecclesiastical Synod, and of those which had the care to watch over the
conduct of Christians, to encourage the one to do well, and to exclude from the
holy Assemblies those which lived ill; Chap. 3. Art. 3.
upon which it may be noted, there was two sorts of Excommunications amongst
the Primitive Christians; the former which was most frequent, consisted in the
being debarred from the Sacraments, to which sinners could not approach until
after having done Penance for their sins, as it happened to the Emperor
Theodosius, as is related by Zozomen Lib. 3. Cap. 25. for so it was, that all
public sins were punished; the other was a total exclusion from the Society of
Believers, which Tertullian expresses by Omni Ecclesia tecto Submovere.

XVI.
Suspension from the Holy Sacrament shall be used, the more effectually to
humble sinners, and make them the more truly sensible of their offenses. This
suspension, nor the cause of it, shall not be declared to the people, neither
also the restitution of the sinner, unless it were in case they were Heretics,
despisers of God, Rebels to the Consistory, Traitors to the Church; as also
such as shall be guilty of crimes worthy of corporal punishment, and that bring
great scandal on the whole Church: as also those who against remonstrances to
them made, do marry to Papists. Fathers and Mothers which do so marry their
children, Tutors, Curators, and others which supply the place of father and
mother, and do so marry their Pupils; together with those which thither carry
them to be Baptized, or do present others to be Baptized; it being necessary
that all such persons, although there may be perceived in them some beginning of
Repentance, should speedily be deprived for some time from the benefit of the
Sacrament; and that the Suspension should be declared to all the People, as
well that they may be the more humbled and induced to repentance, as to
discharge the Church from all blame and reproach; and also to give terror to
others, and make them tremble by this example, to avoid the like Sins.

CONFORMITY.
There has ever in the Church a distinction been made betwixt secret sins, and
those sins which have been public and scandalous; in regard of the former, the
Church never exercised any authority; for to the end she might act against
sinners, it is necessary that they confess their sins, or that they may be
convinced of them: But because it may so happen that the sins of a private
person may be known to some of the Governors of the Church, and that he may
not have scandalized the public, Orig. Hom. 7. in Jos. pa. 185. l. 1. Aug.
Ser. 16. de Verb. Do. c. 7 Tom. 10.
in this case he may be censured in the Ecclesiastical Senate, and if his crime
deserves it, may declare to him he is not in a state fit for some time to
approach to the holy Communion; which is just what is practiced by us. But when
the sins are public and scandalous, we publicly suspend from the Holy
Sacrament those which commit them, and leave them in this state, until such
time that having given sufficient marks of sincere Repentance, we receive them
into the bosom of the Church, by a public acknowledgment of their offense,
which they are obliged to do in presence of all the People.

And herein we follow the Example of the Primitive Church, Hom. 7. in Jos. and
21. and 2. in Jud. Tom. 1. and in Mat Trac. 35. To. 2.
which only subjected these sort of Sins to the Canons of public Penance; it
is the constant Doctrine of Origin, as appears in diverse parts of his Writings;
where he formally declares, that there is only great Sins, scandalous Sins,
which should be publicly punished; and also he will have it done with a spirit
of Charity, and according to the Gospel precept, for so it is he explains
himself in his third Homily on Leviticus.

Gregory of Nysse in his Canonical Letter to Letoius, Can. 5, and 6.
speaks no otherwise; and tho he expresses himself in different terms from
Origin, yet he acknowledges that it is only public Sins which should pass by
the degrees of public Penance, according to the Constitution of the Fathers.

St. Austin is no less clear herein than the two others; Hom. 50.
he teaches in the Book of fifty Homilies, which is in the tenth Tome; That
when the sin is great, and gives scandal to others, the Sinner ought to do
Penance in presence of all the Congregation, especially if the Edification of
the Church require it. And in another of these same Homilies, that is in the
27th. he will have to pass by this rude and laborious Penance, Murderers, Tom.
10. Cap. 7.
Adulterers, and Sacrilegious persons. And in the sixteenth Sermon on the words
of our Lord, he says, That the sins which are committed publicly must be
reproved publicly, and privately those which are committed more secretly. I
might add to these Testimonies, what he writes in the Epistles Fifty four, and
hundred eight, which are in the second Tome of his Works, and in the 65th Chap.
of his Manual to Laurence, the Author of the Questions on the Old and New
Testament, Tom. 3.
which is in the Appendix of the fourth Tome, which shows he is in this of the
same opinion as the true St. Austin is, in explaining the 102. Question.

Caesarius Bishop of Arles, Tom. 2. Bibl. Patr.
a Writer of the Sixth Century, in the first and eighth of his Homilies, Pope
Gregory the First in the 31. Letter of the 12th. Book. Isidore Bishop of Sevil,
about the same time, in his second Book of Sentences, Chap. 20. and in the
third, Chapter 46. these three have followed the steps of others. It is with regard
hereunto that the third Council of Carthage enjoins Bishops in the fourth
Century, Can. 31. Tom. 1. Conc page 711.
to prescribe to Penitents according to the nature of sins, the time of
penance. The Jesuit Petau in the 2, 3, and 10th. Chap. of his 6th. Book of
Public Penance, acknowledges against Mr. Arnauld, That it was the practice of
the ancient Church, where only heinous and scandalous Crimes were publicly
reproved; he acknowledges the same thing in his Observations on St. Epiphamus,
where he has a dissertation on the ancient manner of Penance, Tom 2. page 238.
on occasion of the Heresy of the Novatians, which is the 59th. in order.
Father Sirmond of the same Society, speaks in the same manner in his Treatise
of Public Penance, Chap. 2. and 4. In the main, all I have said, regards the
usual Excommunication of the Primitive Church, of which I have treated in the
precedent Article, and by the Laws whereof scandalous Sinners were not admitted
to the Holy Table, until they had passed through all the Degrees of Penance
which was then in use.

XVII.
If by such suspensions the Sinners were not reclaimed, but continued obstinate
and impenitent after long expectation, and that they have been several times
admonished and entreated, proceeding shall be made against them, by giving
public admonitions to the People three several Sundays, being named, if need
be, by the Minister, to make them more ashamed; every body advertised to pray
to God for them; and endeavor by all means to bring them home by repentance of
their sins, to prevent Retrenchment and Excommunication, to which one cannot
proceed without sorrow. But if for all this, they will not repent, but
persevere in their obstinacy and impenitence, on the fourth Sunday it shall be
publicly said by the Pastor, That it is declared to the said scandalous and
obstinate persons, in naming them by their Names, That they are not any longer
acknowledged as Members of the Church, cutting them off from it in the Name and
Authority of our Lord Jesus Christ, and of his Church. And the form of the
Excommunication shall be as follows.

The Form of the Excommunication.
Brethren, see here the fourth time that we declare unto you, that N. for
having committed several Crimes, and for having scandalized the Church of God,
and for showing himself impenitent and a contemner of all admonitions which
have been made unto him by the Word of God, has been suspended from the Holy
Supper of the Lord; the which suspension, and causes of it, has been signified
to you, to the end you may join your Prayers with ours, that it might please
God to soften the hardness of his heart, and give him true Repentance, drawing
him from the way of perdition. But having so long time waited for him, prayed
and exhorted, and conjured him to be converted to God, and endeavored all
means to bring him to repentance, nevertheless perseveres in his impenitence,
and with an incor rigible obstinacy, rebels against God, and tramples under
foot his Holy Word, and the Order he has established in his Church; and
glorying in his sins, is cause that the Church for so long time, is disturbed,
and the Name of God blasphemed. We Ministers of the Gospel of our Lord Jesus
Christ, whom God has armed with Spiritual weapons, powerful through God to the
pulling down of strong holds which hold out in opposition against him, to whom
the Eternal Son of God has given power to bind and loose on Earth, declaring
that whatsoever we bind on Earth shall be bound in Heaven, to the end to
purify the House of God, and free his Church from Scandals, and in pronouncing
Anathema against the wicked, should glorify the Name of God. In the Name and
Authority of the Lord Jesus, by the advice and authority of the Pastors and
Elders assembled in Colloque, and of the Consistory of this Church, we have
Retrenched and do Retrench the said N. from the Communion of the Church: we
Excommunicate and remove him from the Society of the Faithful, that he might be
to you as a heathen and unbeliever, and amongst true Christians he may be
Anathema, and Execrated, let his Company be esteemed contagious, and let his
Example fill your souls with fear, and make you tremble under the mighty hand
of God, seeing it is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God.
Which Sentence of Excommunication the Son of God will ratify, and make it
efficacious, until that the sinner ashamed and humbled in the sight of God,
gives him glory by his eonversion, and being freed from these chains of Satan,
where with he is bound, he bewails his sins with tears of Repentance. Beloved
Brethren, pray unto God that he will have pity on this poor sinner, and that
this fearful Judgment, the which with great sorrow and sadness of heart we
pronounce against him in the Name and Authority of the Son of God, may serve to
humble and turn into the way of truth, a soul which is strayed from it. Amen.

Cursed is every one that does the work of the Lord negligently. If there be
any one that loves not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be Anathema, Maranatha.
Amen.

CONFORMITY.
Christians were not the first which inflicted the pain of Excommunication on
Rebellious and Scandalous Sinners; Pagans and Jews have practiced the same
thing; I say Pagans; Casar informs us in his Commentaries, that the Druids in
Gaul Excommunicated those which despised their Decrees and their Constitutions;
Lib. 6. page 134, 135.
forbidding them to approach near the Sacrifices, after which they were looked
upon as impious and obstinate, every one flying from their company and
conversation, fearing to receive some harm by infection; and this punishment,
which was the greatest of all those they did inflict, put into such a condition
those which were subjected to it, that they were refused the benefit of the
Law, although they earnestly desired it; and it also deprived them from all degree
of honor.

As for the Jews, every body knows Excommunication was in use amongst them;
who, as it is said, had three sorts; the first and slightest, which they called
Niddui, this separated the guilty from those which were not so, but for a
little space, and for thirty days only; the second which they called Herem, was
attended with Anathema's and Maledictions, and it was not permitted to eat nor
drink with him that was so Excommunicated; and it is probable St. Paul had
regard to this kind of Excommunication, when he says, 1 Cor. 5.2. I write unto
you, that you should not eat with such a one. The third kind of Excommunication
was Shammatta, by which was separated for ever from the Communion and Society
of the Church, him that was guilty.

Seeing then that Jews and Pagans have exercised this power, methinks it would
be injustice to refuse it to the Christian Church, seeing also Jesus Christ her
Head and Spouse has commanded us in his Gospel to look on him that refuses to
hear the Church, as a Pagan and Heathen; that is to say, Matt. 18.17.
he will, that he be cast out of the Church; or that he be Excommunicated,
which amounts all to one thing. St. Paul has expressed this action by
delivering over to Satan, 1 Cor. 5.5. 1 Timothy 1.20. unless one will say that
there was something more in St. Paul's Excommunication than in that designed by
Jesus Christ in the Gospel.

However it be, the Governors of Churches strengthened by the command of the
Lord Jesus, and by the Example of his Apostles, have always Exercised this
Ecclesiastical power against enormous and scandalous sins. Tertullian and
Origin have shown on the fifteenth Article, That it was the practice of their
times; which is also verified by the places I have cited out of the same Origin
on the precedent Article; and by another of Tertullian's, who writes in his
Book of Pudicity, Chap 4. that these sinners should be driven away from the
Enclosure of the Church, and the place of the Assembly; and this was the great
and true Excommunication whereas the other was only a privation from the
Sacraments. To these two Witnesses we may join St. Cyprian, Contemporary with
Origin, who very often in his Epistles makes mention of this Censure, Ep.
28.38, 55, 62 of the last Edit.
when he speaks, of removing from the Communion, of not Communicating with some
one, to banish, and to cast out of the Church, to condemn by the mouth of the
Pastor, to kill with the Spiritual Sword. And other Expressions he uses to
declare the same thing. The tenth of the Canons attributed to the Apostles,
does not suffer us to be ignorant of this ancient Discipline. Seeing he
Excommunicates him that prays with an Excommunicated person, in the House only:
I Will enlarge no farther, seeing one must make a Volume, if one would collect
all the Canons and Testimonies of the Fathers which treat of Excommunication;
and more also, should one treat of the History of Interdiction, which Popes, to
render their Power more formidable, have sent abroad in these last Ages,
contrary to the use and practice of the Primitive Church, to which they were
utterly unknown.

As for the Order which is to be followed, according to our Discipline, before
debarring a sinner from the Communion of the Church, besides that it is
grounded on the Laws and Precepts of Charity, it is also conformaable to the
practice of the Primitive Christians, Hom. in Jos. Tom. 1. p. 185.
who by Origen's report, reproved and warned the guilty three several times
before they came to this last Extremity. Thence it is also, the same method was
observed when there was any mention of deposing an Ecclesiastical Person,
because in sundry occasions the same faults which deserved Deposition of a
Churchman, was punished with Excommunication in a Secular, as appears by
diverse Canons, particularly by the sixth and seventh of the first Ecumenical
Council of Ephesus, where we find these words, If they are Bishops, See the
Can. 8, and 17. of the Counc. of Calced.
or others of the Clergy which are deposed, the Bishops from Episcopacy, the
others from the degree they-held in the Clergy, from whence they are quite
excluded; but if they are Lay persons, let them be Excommunicated. And we have
made appear on the 49th. Artic. of Chap. 1. that a Bishop was cited three
times, or any other Ecclesiastical person, before proceeding to his deposing.

I don't insist on the form of Excommunication repeated after the Article on
which I have made the necessary remarks, because it is in the liberty of the
Church in such like occasions to make use of what terms it shall judge most
fitting, provided that in the main it don't depart from the bounds which the
Gospel does prescribe, nor from the Example of the Holy Apostles. Neither do we
see that in the Primitive Church they were confined to the use of a sorm of
words when any one was Excommunicated; those which condemned Sinners to that
punishment, having been always Masters of the form and manner of
Excommunication, which is always the same in substance, what variety soever
there may be in the form wherein it is conceived.

XVII.
For the future, all Sentences of Excommunication confirmed by the Provincial
Synod, shall continue firm, as also all Sentences of Suspension from the Lords
Supper, given by the Consistory, the which not being published to the People,
shall hold good, although the party suspended appealed to the Colloque, or
Provincial Synod.

CONFORMITY.
There Is nothing in this Article but what is very conformable to the ancient
Discipline, according to which each Church had power to inflict throughout the
whole extent of its Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, the necessary punishments and
Censures against all sorts of offenses; so that when a Bishop had
Excommunicated any one, none but the Synod of the Province could take off the
Excommunication; as there was none but the Synod of the whole Diocese which
comprehended several Provinces which could reverse the Sentence of a Provincial
Synod. Therefore it is, that the Sixth Canon of the first Ecumenical Council of
Constantinople, the 9. and 17. of that of Chalcedon, suffers to appeal from the
Bishop to the Provincial Synod, and from the Provincial to that of the whole
Diocese, of which we have a resemblance in our National Synods.

XIX.
Those which have deserted the profession of the True Religion to embrace
Idolatry, if they persist in this Apostasy after means used to return them to
the flock, they shall publicly be declared Apostates, to wit, those who lately
shall turn to be such, unless the Consistory shall think such a publication to
cause some notable damage and prejudice to the Church, in which case nothing
shall be done but by advice of the Provincial Synod. As for those which of a
long time shall be revolted, the execution of this publication is referred to
the discretion of Consistories.

CONFORMITY.
In the Primitive Church Idolatry and Apostasy were in several places excluded
from pardon and absolution, Tom. 1. Conc. p. 232, 236. Tom. 1. Conc. Gall. p. 8.
during the two first Centuries of Christianity, as is made appear by the first
and 46. Canons of the Council of Eliberi assembled Anno Dom. 305. and by the
last of the first Council of Arles in the year 314, but it also appears by
these same Canons, that bare Apostasy was not without hope of being pardoned by
the Church, but only when it was accompanied with Idolatry, which the ancient
Christians looked upon as the blackest of all crimes, Paran. ad Poen. Tom. 3.
Bib. Pat. page 71.
and the most heinous of all sins: But the great Council of Nice removed this
difference in the 11th. Canon, and made them all hope to find absolution in a
certain time, as well Idolaters, as mere Apostates and Deserters; but this
Decree was not so soon observed in all places, as may be gathered from the
Writings of St. Pacian Bishop of Barcelona, who writ after the sitting of this
Council; and it may also be said, that before the middle of the third Century,
bare desert^rs were not received into the bosom of the Church, but they were
still left under the labor of Penance, without any hope of Absolution, no not
so much as at the hour of Death; it was at least the practice of most of the
Western Churches. Tertullian in his Treatise of Pudicity, Cypr. Ep. 52. cum 14,
and 31.
and St. Cyprian in some of his Epistles, suffers us not to call in question
the use of this hard and severe Discipline, no more than the mitigation which
was begun to be used in it at that time at Rome, and in Africa.

XX.
In public offenses, that is to say, committed in effect, and known to a great
many of the People, the restoring of the sinner shall be made by the public
acknowledging his fault, tho he had been punished by order of the Magistrate.

CONFORMITY.
In the Primitive Church the restoring of a Scandalous Sinner was not done but
in presence of all the People, by the Imposition of Hands, which was
accompanied with Prayer; and the better to understand the nature of this
Discipline, it is to be observed, that three sorts of Imposition of Hands was
used to Sinners, whose Sins were punished according to the Laws of public
Penance; by the former they were admitted to do Penance after having demanded
it: Let the Penitents (says the Council of Agde in the year 506. Tom. Conc.
Gall. p. 164.
Can. 15.) receive the Imposition of Hands, at the time that they desire to do
Penance. The second was not practiced one time only, as the first, but often,
during the whole time of Penance; for as often as the Church assembled to
attend the Exercises of Piety and Religion, they were made go out, as well as
the Cathechumeny, before the celebrating of Divine Mysteries; but after, the
Bishop imposed his Hands, and Prayed on the one and the others separately; so
it is we find it by the 19th Canon of the Synod of Laodicea: See 4 Conc. of
Carth. Can. 80. Tom. 1. Conc. Toletan. 3. c. 11. Tom. 4. p. 504. An. 589.
It is requisite, says he, after the Homilies, or Sermons, the Bishops make
Prayers separately; first on the Catechumeny; and these being gone forth,
Prayer must be made on those which are under Penance; and after the Penitents
have been under the hands of the Bishop, and that they are withdrawn, the three
Prayers of Believers must be made: The last was destined for the public
reconciliation of Sinners, after they had accomplished all the time of their
Penance, and that they had passed through all its diverse degrees: Therefore the
3d Canon of the 1st Council of Orange, in the year 441. calls this Imposition
of Hands, Tom. 1. Conc. Gall. p. 71.
The imposing of reconciliatory hands, because God was beseeched that he would
pardon these Penitent Sinners, and that he would reconcile them to God and his
Church. The 78th Canon of the 4th Council of Carthage, calls it simply, The
Imposition of Hands, Tom. 1. Council. p. 730.
without which it will not so much as have sick Penitents to be Absolved, in
case they recover, although they had received the Sacrament during their
Sickness. Pope Leo I. calls it the Door of Reconciliation, in his 41st Epistle
to Theodorus.

XXI.
Seeing Adultery brings a mark of Infamy, especially on Women; the Publishing
such Offenses is referred to the discretion of Consistories.

CONFORMITY.
St. Basil, in his Canonical Epistles, has prescribed something of this kind;
Ep. 2. Can. 34. Tom. 3. p. 32.
Our Fathers, says he, have forbid to publish (that is to say, to make known
to the People) the Women guilty of Adultery, whether they confessed it by a
movement of Piety, or that they were in some sort convinced of it, for fear
that being Convicted, we should expose them to danger of Death: But they have
appointed that they should be deprived of the Communion, until such time as
they should accomplish the time of Penance.

XXII
Public acknowledgments are not to be made but in person, and the Sinner shall
give testimony of his Repentance.

CONFORMITY.
What we have alleged on the 20th Article, ought to serve as a Commentary on
this, seeing it was the Sinner in person which was publicly reconciled to the
Church, after having fully satisfied the Laws of Penance.

XXIII.
The Sinner which has been Suspended from the Lord's Supper by the Consistory,
and that the Suspension has not been declared to the People, shall desire of
the Consistory to be restored; and showing signs of Repentance, shall there be
restored, without making public acknowledgment.

CONFORMITY.
This Article is also very conformable to the practice of the Primitive Church,
which opened not the door of reconciliation in presence of the People, but only
to Sinners which were in public Penance, and publicly deprived of the
participation of the Sacraments, as evidently appears by what I have hitherto
said: As for other Sinners whose faults were not public, they were treated in
a gentler sort, and proportionable to the sins they had committed.

XXIV.
But him whose Suspension had been declared, after his Repentance had been
known to the Consistory by good Living, and sufficient Testimonies, he shall
publicly be reconciled to the Church, in acknowledging his offense.

CONFORMITY.
This Article being in substance the same with the 20. the Reader may see what
we have observed on that, it being needless to speak to this.

XXV.
Those who by their obstinacy and hardness in their faults, have been cut off
from the Church, shall not slightly be reconciled to the Church; but after a
good and long proof of their Repentance, they shall be heard in the Consistory,
and if they desire to be received into the bosom of the Church, acknowledging
their faults, proclamation shall be made to the People to stir them up to pray
and bless God; and sometime after they shall be presented to the whole Church,
to confess and detest their faults and past rebellions, demanding Pardon of God
and his Church, and so shall be reconciled with Joy and Public Prayers.

CONFORMITY.
The Ancient Christians were wont to keep Sinners under Penance more or less,
according to the nature of the Crimes whereof they were guilty; all the Canons
which treat of this matter, confirm it; and one may only read them to find this
difference; the time of Penance of some being incomparably longer than of
others, because their Sins were more enormous and heinous; and as to be hardened
in Sin makes it more criminal; so also they failed not to augment the
punishment in prolonging the time of Penance, sometimes even to the hour of
Death, even after the time that some mitigation had been made to the first
Discipline in regard of some Sins which in several places were excluded from
all hope of Pardon in the bosom of the Church, as is made appear by the 16th
Canon of the Synod of Ancyra, in the year 314.

XXVI.
Those which in a Church shall fall into Idolatry, thereupon shall come to live
in another Church where the fault is not known, shall confess their fault only
in Consistory, on condition that returning to the said Church which they had
offended, they also acknowledge their fault publicly in it; however referring
to the discretion of the Consistory to do otherwise, if they shall so think
expedient for the Edification of the Churches: The same Judgment shall be made
of all other Faults which shall require public Confession.

CONFORMITY.
Amongst the Primitive Christians, when a Sinner had been Excommunicated in a
Church, when he had been cut off from its body, or only debarred from the Holy
Table, another Church was not permitted to receive him, without the consent of
that which had inflicted the punishment; It was by this Principle, that the
Clergy of the Church of Rome, the Sea being vacant after the death of its
Bishop Hygin, about the year of our Lord 150. would not receive Marcion to the
Communion, because he had been Excommunicated by his own Father, who was
Bishop, for having debauched a young Woman: We cannot, say they, Apud Epiphan.
Petau. Haer. 42. p. 303.
do this without the Order of your venerable Father. In Theodoret, Alexander
Bishop of Alexandria, complains to Alexander, Bishop of Constantinople, that
some Bishops had received to the Communion, some persons which he had
Excommunicated. The 5th Canon of the great Council of Nice expressly forbids it;
as also several others, which it is needless to allege.

But when there was no Sentence given against a Sinner, that he had not
appeared before the Guides to acknowledge his Sin, or to be convicted of it, and
that by consequence he had not been Excommunicated; it is very probable that if
he retired into another Church where the Fault was not committed, he there
would be treated according to the Rules of Christian Charity, without paying
the satisfaction which he owed to that, which he had scandalized in case he
returned to it: It is just what is prescribed by our Discipline; whereas there
is not, that I know of, any positive Decree in the Ancient Canons, on a matter
of the Nature of that which we Examine, although it may be reasonably thought
there is, by what was practiced in other occasions.

XXVII.
All offenses confessed, and reparation made for them, shall be struck out of
the Consistory Books, except those which being joined with Rebellion, have been
censured with Suspension from the Lord's Supper, or Excommunication.

CONFORMITY.
As there were only public Faults, and scandalous Sins, which were to be
satisfied for in the presence of the People; there is great likelihood, that in
the first Ages, the Ecclesiastical Senate kept not a Register of others of a
less quality, and which deserved not to suffer the pain of public Penance; or
at least if they were wont to be written, they were carefully expunged, after
the Sinners had done what was required of them in presence of the Conductors,
and that the necessary Censures had been applied to them; otherwise what the
Church has ever carefully distinguished, had been confounded and embroiled.

XXVIII.
Consistories shall not give Certificates to Magistrates by Act nor otherwise;
nor particular Members of Consistories shall discover unto any, the Confessions
of Penitents, which voluntarily, or by admonitions given them, shall have
confessed their faults unto them, unless it be in Case of Treason.

CONFORMITY.
There is nothing more judicious than this Rule, which enjoins to keep the
secret of Confession made by Sinners of their faults, either to the Bodies of
Consistories, or to any particular person whereof they are composed, except the
crime of Treason; because in effect, the Seal of Confession should not be
regarded, when there is question of the Sacred Persons of Kings, and of the
safety of their Estates; there being no subject of what degree or quality
soever he be, that in this occasion is not bound in Conscience to disclose the
secret which has been revealed to him; otherwise he renders himself guilty in
the sight of God, and deserves to be exemplarily punished by the Laws of Men.

XXIX.
Proceeding shall be made by Ecclesiastical Censures even to Excommunication,
against those, which saying they are of the Religion, shall cite Pastor, and
Elders, or all the Consistory before the Magistrate, to make them give
Testimony against Delinquents which shall have confessed their faults before
them.

CONFORMITY.
The 11th. Canon of the Council of Antioch, Anno Dom. 341. expressly prohibits
Bishops and Priests, to address themselves to the Emperor for any business,
without the consent and Letters of the Bishops of the Province, especially of
the Metropolitan; and the 12th deprives them of the liberty of defending
themselves, and leaves them no hope of re-establishment, if after having been
Deposed by their Synod, they have recourse to the Emperor, instead of
addressing themselves to a greater Synod; for example, to that of the whole
Diocese composed of the Bishops of several Provinces. The Ecumenical Council
of Constantinople, Assembled in the year of our Lord 381. appoints in the 6th
Canon, not to receive the testimony of those, which, despising the Authority of
Provincial Synods, and of those of the whole Diocese, have the confidence to
implore Justice of the Emperor, or of the Civil Magistrate; because, say the
Fathers, they do injury to the Canons, and they overthrow all Ecclesiastical
Discipline.

XXX.
As for Crimes which shall be disclosed to Ministers, by those which demand
counsel and consolation, Ministers are enjoined not to reveal them to
Magistrates, fearing lest blame should be drawn on the Ministry, and Sinners
should be discouraged for the future to come to Repentance, and make Confession
of their faults; which shall stand good in all crimes confessed, except it be
Treason.

CONFORMITY.
What I have writ on the 28th Article, suffices for explanation of this; which
in substance contains the same thing.

XXXI.
If one or more of the People stir up dissension, to disturb the unity of the
Church upon any point of Doctrine, or of Discipline, or of the form of
Catechism, the Administration of Sacraments, or of Public Prayers, and the
Order of Marriage, and that hereto particular admonitions are not a sufficient
Remedy; the Consistory of the place shall endeavor with speed to dissolve and
appease the whole matter without noise, and with all mildness of the Word of
God: And if the opposers will not acquiesce, the Consistory of the place shall
desire the Colloque to assemble in time and place more convenient, having first
of all made the said Opposers expressly promise, which shall be registered, That
they shall not spread abroad their Opinions in any sort or manner whatever,
until the Convocating of the Colloque, under pain of being censured as
Schismatics; yet they may have liberty to confer with the Ministers and
Elders, if they have not been sufficiently instructed. And in case the
gainsaying Brethren refuse to make the said promises, they shall be censured as
Rebels, according to the Discipline; and the Colloque being assembled, shall
proceed as above. And if the said Opposers have been patiently heard, and
refuted by consent, the whole shall be Registered; if not, the Provincial Synod
shall be desired to meet, extraordinarily if need require, at the time and
place that the said Colloque shall judge most convenient, after the Promise as
abovementioned, reiterated by the said Opposers. The Synod assembled, shall
first of all consider with good deliberation and consideration, of the Matter,
the Places, the Time, and Persons, whether it shall be expedient that the
Conference with the said Opposers be made in presence of the People, the Doors
shut, or open, and that Audience be given to any of the Parties present that
would speak, or not; and that in all Cases, the decision should belong to
others, than to those called in the Province; and the whole, according to the
Order contained in the Discipline: And that then, if the said gainsayers will
not obey, they shall make the same Promise as above, and shall be transmitted
over to the National Synod, ordinarily, or if necessity require,
extraordinarily assembled; the which shall hear them with all Holy Liberty; and
there the entire and final resolution shall be made by the Word of God; to
which if they refuse to acquiesce from Point to Point, and with express dislike
of their Errors Registered, they shall be cut off from the Church.

CONFORMITY.
This Article shall be Explained in what I shall observe on that which follows.

XXXII.
A Pastor or Elder, breaking the Unity of the Church, or stirring up contention
about some Point of Doctrine, or of Discipline, which he has subscribed; or of
the form of Catechism, or Administering the Sacraments, or public Prayers, or
Marriages, refusing to obey what the Colloque has determined, shall then be
suspended from his Office, to be farther proceeded against at the Provincial or
National Synod.

CONFORMITY.
A Council of Africa, Ep. 71. p. 121. ult. Edit.
in the time of St. Cyprian, Deposed those of the Clergy which, by their
Rebellions, disturbed the Concord and Unity of the Church. St. Basil, in his
1st Canon of his 1st Canonical Epistle to Amphilochius, prescribes after what
manner one should act, not only against true Schismatics, but likewise against
all those which stir up Divisions in the Church, and which also make
Conventicles and Assemblies apart; He speaks in the same place of Heretics;
and as these are three sorts of Persons, very different one from another; this
Doctor does also adjudge diversity of Punishments.

But besides what I have now remarked, we have also several Canons of Ancient
Councils which do favor the Order of our Discipline; the 6th of the 1st
Universal Council of Constantinople, is against those which endeavor to
confound and overthrow the Ecclesiastical Order. The VII. first, of the 1st of
Ephesus, which is the 3d Ecumenical, were composed against all such of the
Clergy as well as People, which should depart from the Decrees of the Council,
and that should adhere to Revolt or Apostatize. The 18th of Chalcedon forbids
all sorts of Fraternities and Combinations against the Church; observing, That
seeing this Crime is forbid by the Civil Laws, that it ought much more to be
defended in the Church: It is for this Cause ought to be cited the 21st Canon
of the 3d Council of Orleans, in the year 538. Tom. 1. Conc Gal. p. 254. Ib. p.
480.
and the second Decree made by the Synod of Rheims, in the year of our Lord 630.

XXXIII.
In each Church there shall Memorials be made of all remarkable things in
Matters of Religion; and a Minister shall be deputed to each Colloque, to
receive and carry them to the Provincial, and from thence to the National
Synod.

CONFORMITY.
Pope Fabian, who finished his Days by a Glorious Martyrdom for the Cause of
Jesus Christ, during the Persecution of Decius, about the year of Christ 250.
Pope Fabian, Tom. 1. Co^il. p. 113^.
I say, Established persons to Collect the Acts of Martyrs, as is to be seen in
the Pontifical Book commonly attributed to Damasus; and it may truly be said,
this was the principal subject our Discipline aimed at in the Article which we
Examine, as appears by this Establishment of the National Synod of Privas, in
the year 1612. The Provinces shall be exhorted carefully to recollect the
Histories of Pastors, and other Believers, which in these last times have
suffered for the Truth of the Son of God; and such Memoirs shall be sent to
Geneva to be made public.

In the same Pontifical of Damasus, Ubi supra. p. 30.
which I but now spoke of, it is observed, That St. Clement, Disciple of the
Apostles, had a long time before Fabian, divided the seven quarters of the City
of Rome, to seven faithful persons of the Church, that each might exactly
enquire in his District, the Acts of Martyrs, in the number of which he was put
himself, Ib. p. 110.
about the year our Lord 100. Pope Anterus, Predecessor to Fabian, did
near-hand the same as was done by Clement: But if that was done in the Church
of Rome, it was also practiced in diverse others. St. Cyprian testifies, it was
practiced by that of Africa, in his 37th Epistle, where he ordains, That the
Day of the Death of Martyrs should be taken account of, to the end to celebrate
their Memory. It is in this regard Tertullian speaks, De Coron. c. 13.
des Fastes, of the Feasts of the Church; and the Letter of the Church of
Smyrna, touching the Martyrdom of St. Pollycarp, gives us also a proof of the
thing now in question, and which ought to be looked upon as the Original of
what we call Martyrologies, which comprehend not the Martyrs of one Church
only, but generally of all, as can be discovered, in which it is thought
Eusebius first labored.

CHAP. VI. Of the Union of Churches.
ARTICLE I.
NO Church can pretend Precedencie nor Domination over another, nor one
Province over another.

CONFORMITY.
Let the Reader see what I have said already on the Sixteen and Eighteen
Articles of the first Chap. where he will find this Article Established, and
its conformity to the ancient Cannons.

II.
No Church can transact any matter of great consequence, wherein the Interest
or Damage of other Churches may be concerned, without the advice of the
Provincial Synod, if it be possible to assemble it, and if the matter be
pressing, it shall communicate and have the advice of the other Churches of the
Provinces, at least by Letters.

CONFORMITY.
This Second Article is also very conformable to the Ancient Discipline,
according to which, the Affairs of each Province were administered by the
Provincial Synods, it is partly the Subject of the Second Cannon of the First
Ecumenical Council of Constantinople, That the Synod of the Province
administer all things which concern the Province, as it has been agreed on at
Nice. That is to say, in the VI. Canon of the Great Council which was held in
that City under the Emperor Constantine, and which ordained to preserve to each
Province their Privileges: According to which, if there happened dispute about
any point of Doctrine or Discipline which regarded Christians in general, it
would not be decided, but by a general Universal Council, that is to say, by a
Council composed of Bishops of the Five Patriarchs, within the compass whereof
were enclosed the Christians of the Roman Empire. In Append. T^. 8.


Thence it is that the Friar Maximus in Barronius, acknowledged no Legitimate
Council, unless it has a Circular Letter made by consent of the Patriarchs.
John Damacen writes, To. 2. Auct. Court f. p. 696.
That ought to be esteemed an Ecumenical Council which the five Patriarchs
have once appointed, and made Declaration of: But if there wants any one
Patriarch, or that he refuses to submit thereunto, it shall not be a Council,
but a perverse Congregation, an Assembly of Pride, and Vanity: In Collect. Romans
Part 1. p. 227.
It is also for the same reason Pope Pelagius the I. wrote in the VI. Century,
That if there arises doubt in any ones mind by occasion of a Universal Synod,
those which are desirous of their Salvation, must consult the Apostolical See,
to know the reason of what they do not understand. In the Preliminaries of the
Second Council of Nice, it is observed there were read some Writings of Synods
which prohibited the assembling of Universal Councils, or at least of holding
them without the consent of all the Patriarchs. To. V. Con. p. 518.

III.
The Churches and particular Persons shall be advertised not to separate from
the Sacred Union of the Body of the Church for any Persecution as may happen,
to procure to themselves any Peace or Liberty apart; those which do otherwise,
shall be sensur'd as the Colloques, and Synods shall think expedient.

CONFORMITY.
Partialities and Divisions having been ever destructive to the Church, Union
and Concord can never be too much recommended to those which are Members of it,
and which in this Quality are obliged inviolably to maintain Peace and
Uniformity in Religion, as well in regard of Doctrine, as of Worship and
Discipline: It is the Reason for which the Ancient Fathers have always
abhorred Schism, and have vigorously acted against Schismatics, particularly
against the Novatians, and Donatists, which cruelly rent and tore the Unity of
the Church.

IV.
The Disputes of Religion with Adversaries shall be ordered in such sort, that
ours shall not be Agressors; and if they are engaged in a verbal Dispute, they
shall do it but by the Rule of the Holy Scriptures, not giving too much way to
Writings of Ancient Doctors for Judging and Deciding of Doctrines; and shall
not enter into Regular Disputes but by Writings mutually given and signed. And
as for public Disputes, shall not engage therein but by advice of their
Consistory, and a certain number of Pastors, which to this purpose shall be
chosen by the Colloques or Provincial Synods. Shall not engage in any general
Dispute or Conference without the Advice of all the Churches assembled in a
National Synod, on pain of the Ministers which shall therein enter, to be
declared Apostates, and Deserters of the Unity of the Church.

CONFORMITY.
There is found in the Writings of the Holy Fathers sundry Disputes which the
Catholic and Orthodox Doctors have had against the Enemies of the Truth; We
have in the Second Century the famous Dispute of St. Justin Martyr against
Tryphon the Jew, who was the Agressor. Eusebius makes mention of another
Dispute which happened at Ancyra a City in Gallatia toward the end of the same
Century, betwixt a Catholic Doctor, and some of the Sect of Montanus. In the
Third Century Malchus a Priest of the Church of Antioch, Disputed earnestly a
ainst Paul of Samosatia, Bishop of the Place, and confounded him in a Regular
Dispute, the particulars of which was to be seen in the time of Eusebius, they
having been collected by Persons nominated to write what should be alleged on
both parts. In the same Century was seen another famous Dispute betwixt
Archelaus Bishop of Mesopotamia, and the Heretic Manes, in the House of a
Person of Quality called Marcellus, in the City of Caschara, in presence of the
chief Inhabitants of the place, four of which although Pagans, were chosen
Arbitors, and judged the Victory to Archelaus: This Dispute has been printed in
Latin some years past at the end of the Late Mounsieur Valois his Notes on the
Ecclesiastical History of Socrates and Zozomen, and St. Epiphanius treats amply
of it in the Heresy of the Manicheans, which is the Sixty Sixth. I may
instance in several Disputes, principally those of St. Austins against sundry
Adversaries, but what I have said sufficiently justifies, that the Order of our
Discipline don't differ from the Practice of the Ancient Church, although it
appoints something more of caution in the manner of Disputing, by reason of the
way of our former and present circumstances of living amongst our Enemies in
this Kingdom.

V.
The Churches should understand that the Ecclesiastical Assemblies of
Colloques, and Synods, as well Provincial as National are the Bands and
Supports of Union and Concord, against the Schisms, Heresies, and all other
inconvenients, to the end they should use all endeavor, and apply themselves
by all means, that the said Ecclesiastical Assemblies may be continued and
maintained, and in case some Churches and particular Persons, would not
contribute to the Charges needful to be present at the Ecclesiastical
Assemblies, such shall be surely sensur'd, as Deserters of the Holy Communion
which should be amongst us. The Minister also which shall not promote what is
above contained, shall be grievously sensur'd by the Provincial Synod.

CONFORMITY.
There is nothing in all the Ancient Discipline which is more strictly enjoined
than the holding of Synods, where the Conductors of Churches were obliged to
be, as shall be shown on the Eighth chap. and where by consequence, they were
to go at the charge of the Churches which they served; this is collected from
the Eighteen Cannon of the Third Council of Toledo assembled in the Year of Our
Lord, 589; for it ordains, that instead of assembling in Synods twice a year
according to the Order of the Cannons, Tom. 4. Conc. p. 405.
they shall assemble but once, by reason of the poverty of the Churches of
Spain.

CHAP. VII. Of COLLOQUES.
ARTICLE I.
IN each Province there shall be a Division of Churches, according to the
Number of them, and the conveniencie of Places, into Classes, or Colloques, the
most contiguous. And this Partition shall be made by Authority of the
Provincial Synod. And the Neighbor Churches shall so assemble in Colloques,
twice a year, or four times a year, if it may be done, according to the Ancient
Custom, this being referred to the discretion of Provinces, and there the
Ministers shall meet with one Elder of each Church.

CONFORMITY.
Our Colloques do in a manner agree with the Diocesan Synods of each Bishop,
Tom. 1. Conc. Gall.
like that of Anacharius Bishop of Auxer, in the year 578; or to the Assemblies
of some Neighboring Bishops, to decide the Differences which happened in the
adjacent Parts, it is to what do amount the Cannons 11, 20, 28, 125. Of the
African Code of Mr. Justel; However it be, it appears by the 100 Cannon of the
same Code, that the Ecclesiastical Elders, and of the Order of Layicks,
assisted at these sort of Judgments; Ap^d Cypr. contral p. Steph. page 144.
I know not but Firmillian Bishop of Cesaria in Cappadocia, had this Custom in
his mind when he wrote to St. Cyprian, We do meet every Year, Pastors and
Elders, to regulate the things committed to our care.

II.
Such Assemblies and Colloques shall be held to consider and compose
Differences which shall happen in the said Churches, as is appointed by the
Discipline; and generally to provide for what shall be known to be Expedient
and Necessary for the good and support of the Churches.

CONFORMITY.
To this Second Article may be applied the Cannons of the African Code which I
cited on the first, and also join thereto the Fifth Cannon of the Council of
Nice, by which we find that one of the Motives of the Convocation of
Ecclesiastical Assemblies, was to appease Differences, and to preserve Unity
and Concord; The Twentieth of the Synod of Antioch tends to the same end.

III.
There also Ministers shall Preach the Word of God, every one by his turn, to
the end it may be known what care every one takes in exercising himself in the
Study of the Holy Scriptures, and in the Method and Form of treating of it.

CONFORMITY.
Ministers being Established for instructing of their Flocks, it is the Duty of
their Superiors to take cognizance of their Conduct, and of the progress they
make in the Study of Divinity, and because it may be judged by their Preaching,
our Discipline has very well appointed, That Ministers shall Expound the Word
of God every one by turns, in the Colloques.

IV.
The Authority of Colloques is inferior to that of Provincial Synods, as those
of Consistories are to Colloques.

CONFORMITY.
It appears by the 21 and 125 Cannons of the African Code, that Appeals might
be made from the Judgment of Neighboring Bishops, whose Assemblies were much
the same of Colloques: It appears I say, that Appeals might be made to the
Councils of Africa, or to the Primates of their Provinces; And it was by the
Establishment of the same Discipline, That Appeal was made from a Provincial
Synod, to a greater Synod, such as was the Council of all the Provinces of a
Diocese. It is just what is prescribed by the Ancient Cannons, as the XII. of
Antioch, the VI. of the first General of Constantinople, the IX. and XVII. of
that of Calcedon.

V.
The Colloques and Synods shall deliberate of limiting the Extent of Places
wherein each Minister shall Exercise his Ministry.

CONFORMITY.
This Establishment is also very conformable to the Ancient Discipline of
Christians, according to which the Synod took cognizance of the Jurisdiction of
Bishops and of its Extent, as also of the places where they were to Exercise
their Ministry; from thence proceeds all the Prohibitions made them of
undertaking nothing without the bounds prescribed them, as has been shown on
the first Chapter.

VI.
At the end of the Colloques amicable and brotherly Sensures shall be made, as
well by the Pastors as the Elders, which shall be there present, of all things
which shall be thought fit to represent to them.

CONFORMITY.
The Fourth Council of Orleans in the Year 541. made a Rule like this in the 37
Cannon, which requires that Metropolitans should once a year assemble their
Synods, to the end that whilst the Brethren are assembled, the needful Sensures
should be made with Charity, which is also verified by the principal Motive of
convocating this Assembly, which was as I just now said, to determine all
Differences, and to appease all Quarrels and Contests.

CHAP. VIII. Of PROVINCIAL SYNODS.
ARTICLE I.
IN each Province, the Pastors of each Church shall assemble once a Year, or
twice, as they may, which is referred to the Prudence and Discretion of the
Synod.

CONFORMITY.
Christians have ever esteemed Synods so necessary, that they have been very
careful to assemble them when the good of the Church required it; for as
Eusebius says in the 51 chap. of the Book of the Life of Constantine, Great
Controversies cannot be determined but by Synods: At the beginning, and even
during the heat of Persecution, when there arrived any trouble in a particular
Church, all the others concerned themselves in it, and the Ministers by a mere
movement of Charity, and without any form of Convocation, assembled of
themselves, to make Peace, and to compose Differences: And in these Assemblies
Humane Passions being banished, and Jesus Christ there presiding by his Holy
Spirit, they consulted together, and resolved without Ceremonies and
Formalities, what was expedient. It is much after this Method they proceeded
against Paul of Samosatia Bishop of Antioch, when he had published his Impiety,
Eusebius. Hist. lib. 7. c. 27, 28, 29.
the Pastors of Churches as Eusebius says, being run thither from all parts,
as against an Enemy, which destroyed the Flock of Christ. And I cannot tell if
the Synod of Iconia in Phrygia mentioned by Fermillian Bishop of Caesaria in
Cappadocia, was not of the same kind of those held against Paul of Samosatia in
the same Century; Apud Cypr. contr. Ep. Steph. p. 146.
for he says, they were assembled in that place, from Gallacia, Cilicia, and
other adjacent Provinces, to confirm what had already been concluded touching
the reiteration of the Baptism of Heretics.

But what Bishops did at first by a principle of Charity, they were in time
obliged to do also by Duty, the Cannons requiring it of them: In effect the V.
Cannon of the First Council of Nice, appoints to hold Synods twice a year in
each Province. The Twentieth of the Council of Antioch renews the same Decree,
and thence it is undoubtedly that him which forged the Cannons of the Apostles,
borrowed the 37, which contains the same Establishment. The Nineteenth of
Chalcedon having complained that in the Provinces was not celebrated the Synods
prescribed by the Cannons, it appoints they be held twice a year, conformable
to the Decrees of the Holy Fathers. There Is a number of other Cannons which
prescribe the same thing, and which I forbear to allege, to observe two things
which concern the matter which we examine; the first, that Auitus Bishop of
Vienna in Dauphine, which flourished about the end of the V. Century, and at
the beginning of the VI, endeavored to restore the Ancient Custom which
insensibly was left off, as he does testify in his 80 Letter. It may be
thought that the Synod of Ries in Province had given some slight endeavor to
the first practice, Tom conc. Gal. p. 69. Ibid. p. 74.
in the year 439, when it confirms it in the Eighth Cannon, but under
condition, that times were quiet: That of Orange explains it self fuller in the
year 441, Cannon 29, saying, it was difficult to assemble twice a year, by
reason of sad and difficult times. The Second thing I mean to observe is, Ibid.
p. 173. Ib. p. 268, 284.
That the Synod of Agde in Languedock made a Decree in the 71 Cannon, by which
it reduces these Synodal Assemblies to hold once a year, and it declares in the
same Cannon, which is of the year 506, that it does so according to the
constitution of the Fathers; having respect it may (...) to the Cannons of
Orange and Ries, but just now cite* The 37 of the 4 of Orleans of the year 541,
the 23 an^ (...) of the year 549 on the same with that of Agde. (...) ^he 18 of
the 3 of Tolledo, alleges for a reason in the (...) 589, the length of the way,
and poverty of the Churches. To. 4, Conc. pa. 505, 506.

II.
Ministers shall bring along with them one or two Elders at the most, chosen by
the Consistory, and the said Ministers and Elders shall show their Deputations.
If a Minister comes alone, no heed shall be taken of the Certificates he brings
along with him, no more than there shall be of those an Elder shall produce if
he comes alone without a Pastor; which Rule shall be of force in all
Ecclesiastical Assemblies: If they cannot come, they shall make their excuse by
Letters, of the which the Brethren there present shall be Judges, and shall
send their Memoirs signed by a Pastor, and an Elder. Those who shall fail of
being present at Colloques, and at Provincial Synods without lawful Excuse,
shall be sensur'd, and the said Colloques and Provincial Synods, may finally
judge their Cause, and dispose of their Persons.

CONFORMITY.
There are in this Establishment several things to be considered, in the first
place, the deputing of our Elders with the Pastors to Synods, which is very
agreeable to the practice of the Ancient Church, which admitted the Layity into
their Synods after the Example of the Apostles, who in the Synod of Jerusalem
make mention of the Church, in distinguishing it not only from themselves, but
also from ordinary Persons, which they design by the term of Elders, Acts
15.22. to show, that by the Church they meant the faithful People which
assisted at that Holy Assembly, according to which, the Fathers in the Council
of Antioch, distinguishes also the Churches of God, And. Eusebius. l. ^. c. 30.
from Bishops, Priests and Deacons, in the Letter wrote to Dennis Bishop of
Rome, to Maximus Bishop of Alexandria, and to all the Churches to inform them
of the deposing of this Arch Heretic; not that it is necessary to think that
the entire Churches assisted at this Council which was assembled from sundry
Provinces, but they assisted by some of their Body which represented them, that
is, by some of the Body of the People. But to say something more to the
purpose, I have shown on the First Article of the Third chap. by Authority of
Fermillian, and of the African Code, that the Elders, such as ours, were
deputed to Synods with the Pastors, against whom they sometimes pleaded the
right of the People which deputed them.

The Second thing I observe on this Article is, that the Deputies to Synods are
obliged to be present there, or to excuse themselves by Letter; And if their
Excuse be not sufficient, they are sensur'd as shall be thought fit in the
Colloques, and in the Provincial Synods, which have power to judge definitively
of their Excuses, and to dispose of their Persons, which also is according to
the practice of the Primitive Christians, the Fortieth Cannon of the Council of
Laodicea is conceived in these terms, The Bishops which are called to a Synod
must not neglect to go thither, and if any one does neglect, he will condemn
himself, unless some Sickness does hinder him: The 19th of Calcedon requires
that one should reprove in a brotherly way those which fail of coming, although
they are in good health, and that they are hindered by any extraordinary
business which might not be deferred. In France no other Excuse will be
admitted, but that of Sickness, as appears by a great many Cannons, and amongst
others by that of the First of Epaume, by the 1 of the 2 of Orleans, by the 80
Letter of Auitus Bishop of Vienna, and by several other Decrees which I forbear
to cite. The Council of Agde in the 35 Cannon joins to Sickness, some command
of the King, next to which, it deprives from the Communion of the Church till
the next Synod, those which have failed to be present at the former, and as it
deprives them for that time from the Communion of the Church, it also deprives
them from the Charity of their Brethren, that is, from the other Bishops, to
which the Council of Tarragona in the year 517, reduces in the VI. Cannon all
the punishment of those Bishops which neglect to be present at the Synods where
they have been called by the Metropolitans, and excuses none but them which are
hindered by Sickness. The 15 of the 11 of Toledo assembled Anno 575,
Excommunicates them for one year, if they are not hindered by some Sickness, or
by some inevitable necessity, the 76 of the African Code wills, That they
should be content with the Communion of their Church, the V. Cannon of the
Council of Merrida, of which I will speak on the 10 Article of the IX. chap.
excuses those who are hindered by Sickness, or by Order of the Prince.

As to what our Discipline says, That if the Pastor comes alone, no heed shall
be taken of the Memorials he shall bring, nor of those the Elder brings if he
comes without the Minister, it agrees not ill with what we read in the 100
Cannon of the African Code, where a Bishop complains of his Church, but because
the Elders the Church had deputed, to defend its cause against the Bishop, did
not appear, the Council referred the Judgment of this Affair to a certain
Number of Bishops, whereof some were nominated by the Bishop which was
dissatisfied with his Flock, and the rest were left to be named by the Elders,
although absent. As for the Memorials whereof mention is made in this Article,
more may be seen of it in what I shall say on the Third Article of the Ninth
Chapter.

III.
Those Churches which have several Ministers. shall depute them by turns to
Colloques, and Synods.

CONFORMITY.
This Article is grounded on that, That Ministers may not pretend any Authority
one over the other, as I have made appear on the Sixteenth Article of the First
Chapter, and having no Power one over another, it is absolutely necessary that
to maintain this equality, that when there are several in one and the same
Church, they should alternatively be deputed to Synods and Colloques.

IV.
Ministers and Elders Deputed to Colloques, and Provincial Synods, shall come
thither at the common charges of their Churches.

CONFORMITY.
I do not find that in the First Centuries, conductors of Christian Churches
did observe much formality when they assembled for the deciding of any
difference, all things were done with so much simplicity, Humane Passions being
excluded, that every one spoke as he was inspired of God: Read what Eusebius
relates of the Two Synods which were held in the Third Century against Paul of
Samosatia; Hist. l. 7. cap. 27, 28, 29.
and I am certain the marks of the simplicity I have now mentioned, will be
found in them; but in process of time Humane Passions being mingled with
Charity, 'twas necessary to Establish some Methods in these Assemblies, and
choose some one amongst the Bishops, to propose the matter which was to be
deliberated, to gather the Voices, and moderate the whole Action, an Honor
which was commonly conferred either to promotion, that is to say, to him that
was the Eldest Minister, or to Personal Merit, by reason of ones great
Learning, and sometimes also for the greatness and eminency of the City whereof
one was Bishop. Palmas as the Eldest of the Bishops of Pontus, Ep ad Ep^^.
Privine. Viennees Tom. 1. Conc. Gall. p. 85.
presided in a Synod which was there held, upon occasion of celebrating Easter,
as Eusebius relates in the 23 chap. of the Fifth Book of his History. To this
Example may be added what was done by Leo I. in the V. Century, in favor of
Leoncius Bishop of Frejus in the upper Narbonnes, had not the Passion which he
expressed against Hillary, Bishop of Arles, made him violate the Laws of
Justice and Equity, in depriving him the right whereof he was justly in
possession, of assembling Synods, and which according to the Discipline of
those times belonged to his See, to invest Leoncius with it, because he was the
Eldest Bishop of the Province; and about the year 397, the First Council of
Turin bestowed on Proclus Bishop of Marsellis, the precedence over the Bishops
of the Second Narbonnes, P^^d. p. 27, 28.
not so much in consideration of the City whereof he was Bishop, as in
consideration of his Age and Merit. In fine, the Ecclesiastical Government
being wholly framed after the Model of the Civil, and Politic, this right of
precedence was joined in the out Provinces, to Metropolitan Bishops, except the
Churches of Africa, where this privilege was conferred on Primates, and in
that Country was called Primat, which had been first promoted to be Bishop;
for 'twas not to Age alone this I rerogative was attributed, but to the time of
promotion. Our Discipline which refers this to Election, does nothing differ
from what was practiced in the Ancient Church before the Establishing of
Hierarchy, especially when precedence was conferred on Persons for their Merit,
which could not be done but by plurality of Voices, because for the most part,
one Judges differently of the Merit of Men; and so it is St. Athanasius
expresses it in his First Apology, that Hosius was commonly the chief and
President of Synods, an Honor conferred on him for his great Merit, and
perhaps to for his Age, as it was in the latter regard bestowed on.

For the understanding of this Article it is necessary to read what I have said
on the Fifth of the Sixth chap. to which may be added, that Synods having been
instituted for the good and Edification of the Churches, it is more than
reasonable they should be charged with the Expenses needful to assist at those
Assemblies, especially seeing the maintenance they allow to their Ministers is
so small, that it is not sufficient for their subsistence, as it often happens
amongst us.

V.
The Churches which shall refuse to allow their Ministers conveniences for
repairing to Colloques and Synods, shall be advertised to do what is fit, and
in default thereof, so that Ministers are constrained to go at their own
charges, after two or three Admonitions, they shall be deprived of the
Ministry, and the Expenses made by the said Ministers, shall be repaid by the
Churches to whom they were sent, Liberty being given to have recourse to the
Ungrateful Church according to the Judgment which shall be given by the
Provincial Synod.

CONFORMITY.
This Establishment being a continuance of the former, what I have observed on
that, may serve for a Commentary on this.

VI.
If there should happen a difference betwixt a Church and the Pastor, and that
to compose it, the Church shall have been advertised two several times of the
time and place of the Colloque, and Synod, and refuses to attend, the said
Colloque, or Synod, notwithstanding absence of one of the Parties, may proceed
on to Judgment.

CONFORMITY.
The Hundred Cannon of the African Code which I cited on the Second Article,
does Authorize this Establishment, and justifies the Conformity of our
Discipline with the Primitive.

VII.
In each Synod as well Provincial as National, shall be Elected with a slow
Voice, by full consent, one of the Pastors to preside, with one or two to
write. His business shall be to govern and moderate the whole Session, to
advise of the Places, Days, and Hours, on which the Assembling and Sitting of
the Synod shall hold, to propose and offer things that shall be in
deliberation, to take, every ones Voice in particular, to declare the major
part, and pronounce the Conclusion: Also to take care that every one speaks by
Order, and not confusedly; to impose Silence on such as are contentious, and if
they will not obey, to make them go out, to consider of their Sensure and
Correction; to make Remonstrances and Answers to those which desire Counsel, or
that send Letters to the Synod. Moreover to preside at the Sensures which shall
be made at the end of the sitting, the whole according to the advice of all the
Assembly, and no otherwise. And he himself also shall be subject to Sensure,
his Office shall expire at the end of the Synod, and it shall be at the choice
of the following Synod, to Elect him or another. The Moderators also of
Colloques, shall be governed after the same manner.

CONFORMITY.
The Great Council of Nice in the Sixth Cannon reserves to each Province its
Rights and Privileges, that one might not intermeddle in the Affairs of the
other, nor usurp its Power, and Authority: To this Establishment may be applied
the Second and Sixth Cannons of the First Ecumenical Council of
Constantinople, the VIII. of Ephesus, the 9 and 17 of Calcedon, the 12 and 15
of Antioch, the 19, 28, and 125 of the African Code, with the Letter of the
Council of Africa to Pope Cellestin, in the same Code, in Number 138. St.
Cyprian taught almost the same thing about 170 years before, as appears by his
55 Letter. Theodoret speaks the same in his 86 Epistle in the Third Volumne of
his Works, and it is on this practice the Eastern Bishops grounded their
complaints in the IV. Century against Pope Julius I. in that he had received
St. Athanasius into his Communion, and some others whom they had
Excommunicated, Read what is related by Zozomen in the VIII. Chapter of the
Third Book of his Ecclesiastical History; Socrates II. Book, chap. 15. and
Julius his Answer in St. Athanasius his Second Apology, to be persuaded of the
truth hereof; for the Letter writ by the Eastern Bishops to Julius is not now
Extant; that at present found in the first Volumne of the Councils being
forged: and contains but a Collection ill put together of what the Authors I
but now mentioned have writ.

It Is true, our Discipline does except some cases of which one may appeal to
the National Synod, after Judgment given by Provincial Synods, but it is even
therein appears its Conformity with the Ancient, provided the time be carefully
distinguished; before the Christian World, which was bounded in the Roman
Empire, had been divided after the Example of the Empire, into several
Ecclesiastical Diocesses, each of which comprehended several Provinces, the
whole extent of a Bishops Jurisdiction, how great soever it was, made but one
Ecclesiastical Province; For Example, In St. Cyprians time, all Africa made no
more but the Ecclesiastical Province of the Bishop of Carthage: And in the time
of the First Council of Nice, Libia, and Pentapolis, made up that of the Bishop
of Alexandria, and then 'twas requisite Affairs should be determined in the
Provincial Synod without being permitted to appeal to the Synod of any other
Province; It is what is deposed by the Sixth Cannon of Nice, which confirms to
the Bishop of Alexandria what Custom had given him Possession of, that is to
say, the Metropolitical Rights only, although the Patriarchal Rights also may
be inferred from the same Cannon, by lawful consequence, when he shall be in a
state to exercise them, that is to say, when his Province shall be divided into
several Ecclesiastical Provinces, and that he shall have under him several
Metropolitans, over which the chief of the Diocese, and the Patriarchs had the
same power, as Metropolitans had over the Bishop^ of their Brovinces.

But after this Division into Diocesses, and of Diocesses into several
Feclesiastical Provinces, each of which had a Metropolitan, had been made,
which the first Universal Council of Constantinople began to Establish, or it
may be but to One Muso^^^s in the Council of Rimini, as St. Jerome testifies in
his Dialogue against the Luciferians, chap. 7. where he observes this Musonius
was of the Byzantine Province, but instead of Byzantine it should be Byzancene,
which was a Province of Africa, wherein was the Diocese of this Prelate.

As for the care the President or Moderator of the Synod should take, to the
end all things should be done in the Assembly regularly and in Order, the XI.
Council of Toledo, in the year 675 ordained in the First Cannon, Tom. 4. Conc.
p. 820.
the same Observations which the Authors of our Discipline here prescribes, not
forgetting those which derogate from the Laws.

VIII.
Elders which are Deputies of Churches, shall have Votes as Ministers, and the
Elders of the place where the Synod is assembled may also be present, and
propose any thing in their Order; Nevertheless but two of them shall have Vote,
to avoid confusion.

CONFORMITY.
After what I have writ on the First Article of the Third Chapter, there is no
difficulty in understanding of this; for the Deacon Hillary has assured us
nothing was done in the Church without the Counsel and Advice of the Elders;
and Firmi^lian Bishop of Cappadocia, that the Prelates and Elders assembled
once every year to order matters committed to their care, and with common
consent to treat of the greatest and most important Affairs.

IX.
What shall be concluded upon by Provincial Synods for ordering the Churches of
their Province, shall be communicated to the National Synod.

CONFORMITY.
The 95th Cannon of the Code of Africa, has a Constitution much like this, for
it Ordains, that private Affairs shall be determined in the Provinces, but as
for the common and general, they referr the Knowledge and Decision of it to the
General Council of Africa: Now it is most certain that what regards all the
Churches of a Province, ought to be put in the Rank of General Affairs, the
Decision whereof appertains to a National Synod.

X.
Because several Persons, to the end to decline or delay the sensure of their
faults, appeal from one Ecclesiastical Assembly to another, even to a National
Synod, which by this means is more perplexed in clearing their Case than any
other, for the time to come, all differences within the same Province; shall be
definitively judged without appeal to the Provincial Synod of the Province,
except what shall concern the suspending and deposing as well of Pastors, as of
Elders, and Deacons, and the changing of Pastors from one Province to another;
also the changing of a Church from one Colloque to another, and also that which
concerns Doctrine, the Sacraments, and the whole Discipline; all which cases may
gradually move even to the National Synod, to receive the last and definitive
Judgment.

CONFORMITY.
To Authorize what Custom had done in several Countries since the Council of
Nice, at least it may seem to be so inferred from the Cannons of the Synod of
Antioch in the year 341, Forty years before that of Constantinople. Afterward
I say, it is certain, Appeal was made from Judgment of Provincial Synods to
Councils of the whole Diocese, for the greater part of the heads contained in
our Discipline, as is verified by most of the Cannons I have but now cited,
particularly by those of Constantinople, of Calcedonia, and of the African
Code, with the 95th of the same Code, to which may be joined the Third Cannon
of the Fourth Council of Toledo, assembled in the year 633. To. 4. Conc. page
582.

XI.
If there should happen a difference betwixt two Provincial Synods, they must
pitch on a third to reconcile them.

CONFORMITY.
This Establishment don't disagree with the 14 Cannon of the Synod of Antioch,
which is conceived in these terms, If after Judgment be given against a Bishop
accused of certain Crimes, it so falls out that the Bishops of the Province are
upon this score in different minds, some declaring him Innocent, and others
guilty; the Synod to put an end to their Contests is of Opinion that the
Metropolitan shall call other Judges of the next Province to decide the
difference; and that he confirms what they shall have concluded upon, with the
Bishops of the Province. It Is true, this Cannon don't speak of differences
which two Provincial Synods might have together: But seeing the Council allows
to call Neighboring Bishops, when those of the Province are at variance about
a business, wherefore should it not permit two Provincial Synods to choose a
third to judge of their differences, the First and Second Cannon of the Council
of Turin in the Year 397, are yet more positive in this matter.

XII.
The Synods in each Province shall represent the Widows and Children of
Ministers which died in the Service of their Church, to be supported and
maintained at the common charge of each Province, as necessity shall require.
And where the Province shall be Ungrateful, the Deputy thereof shall report it
to the National Synod to take care therein.

CONFORMITY.
This Article is not only grounded on Christian Charity, but also on the
acknowledgment which the Churches owe to Ministers dead in their Service,
whereof they should show the marks to their Families, especially when there is
occasion for it.

XIII.
Deputies of Churches shall not be gone from Synods without leave, and till
they carry along with them the Decisions which shall there be made.

CONFORMITY.
There are two things to be considered in this Article, First, That Deputies
are not suffered to depart from the Synod without leave; The Second Council of
Arles made this Decree in its 19 Cannon, Anno Dom. 452, If any one thinks he
may abandon the Assembly of his Brethren before the dissolution of the Council,
Tom. 1. Conc. Gall. p. 105.
let him know that he is deprived of the Communion of his Brethren, and that he
cannot be thereunto received, until he be first of all absolved in the
following Synod: There may be seen in the Fourth Tome of Councils, certain
Fragments attributed to a Council of Sevil in Spain, assembled about the time
of Pope Gregory the I. in the X. of which is to be found word for word the
Decree of the Synod of Arles; which makes me believe, that Burchardus, page 521.
from whom Garsias has taken this Cannon, was mistaken when he attributed it to
the Council of Sevil, and I the rather believe it, when I consider that the
compilation of Cannons made by this Writer, are full of this kind of mistakes.
The Fourth Council of Toledo assembled in the year 633, does defend also in the
Fourth Cannon, to depart from the Council until all things are decided by the
major Votes, and Signed by all the Bishops; Tom. 4. Conc. p. 583.
The Sixteenth of that of Worms of the year 868, prescribes the same thing. To.
6. Conc. page 695.

The Second thing our Discipline prescribes those which are Deputies to Synods,
is to carry along with them the Decisions which shall be made; I find the same
thing practiced in the Ancient Church; in Effect, it may be seen by the 29th
Cannon of the First Council of Orange in the year 451, that each Bishop carried
away with him a Copy of the Acts and Resolutions made in the Assembly, and that
the like was sent even to those as were absent, to advertise them of their Duty
by the Ministry of the Metropolitan; and in the year 431, the First Ecumenical
Council of Ephesus permitted each Metropolitan to take a Copy of the Acts,
whereof his Brother Bishops might have Communication by his means. The Eighth
Cannon where this power is granted to Metropolitans, saying expressly that it is
for their own surety, that is to say, for Conservation of the Rights of their
Provinces, and by consequence the Rights of all the Suffragan Bishops. See what
shall be said on the Tenth Article of the following Chapter.

XIV.
The Authority of Provincial Synods, is inferior to that of National Synods.

CONFORMITY.
There is no difficulty at all in this Constitution, especially after what we
have observed on the Tenth Article, where I have proved by the Authority of
several Cannons of Constantinople, of Calcedon, and the African Code, that
Appeals were made from Provincial Synods to those of the whole Diocese, to
which our National ones at this time do agree.

XV.
Colloques, and Provincial Synods shall be regulated according to the several
Governments, so that one may not pretend to be greater than another; and for
the present, this shall be the Distribution of Provincial Synods.

1 The Isle of France, Country of Chartrain, Piccardy, Champagne, and Brie. 2
Normandy, 3 Brittany, 4 Orleans, Blesois, Dunois, Nivernois, Berry,
Bourbonnois, and La March. 5 Tourain, Anjou, Loudunois, Le Maine, Vandomois,
and le Perch. 6 Upper and Lower Poictou. 7 Zantonge, Aunis, City and
Government of Rochell, Angoulmois. 8 Lower Guyen, Perrigord, Gascogne, and
Limosin. 9 Upper and Lower Vivarez, with the Uclay and Forest. 10 Lower
Languedock, viz, Nimes, Usez, Montpelier, to Beziers inclusively. 11 The rest
of Languedock, Upper Guyen, Toulouse, Carcassona, Quercy, Rouergue, Armagnack,
Upper Auvergne. 12 Bourgundy, Lyonnois, Beaujolois, Bresse, Low Auvergne, Gex.
13 Provence. 14 Dauphine, and the Principality of Orange. 15 The Churches of
the Sovereignty of Bearn. 16 The Sevennes and Givaudan.
If it so falls cut for the convenience of Churches that one or two should be
parted, or to unite several in one, it may be done in the Provincial Synod,
whereof notice shall be given to the National Synods.

CONFORMITY.
Those who please to read the Second Cannon of the First Universal Council of
Constantinople, and the Eighth of that of Ephesus, will easily perceive our
Discipline agrees exactly with the practice of the Primitive Christians. And as
for the dividing one Church into two, or joining several into one, when
necessity requires, there is Examples to be seen in Ancient Records; As for
joining several into one, Tom. 5. Conc. p. 430.
the Eighth Letter of the Second Book of Gregory the Great, gives us an
Example, and the Fathers of the Sixteenth Council of Toledo, An. 693, in the V.
Cannon, Authorizes the joining, and dividing, and declares also in what manner
it must be done. The Emperor Charles the Bald in his Capitularies, Anno 844,
gives power to the Bishops to divide a Church into two, when the Necessity and
Edification of the People require it, and if it gives them power to divide
Churches, Tom. 2. capit c. 7. p. 23. Edit. Balux. 1677
there is no question to be made but it gives them power also to join several in
one, for good and lawful causes. In process of time the Popes have assumed to
themselves this power of Joining and Dividing Churches, although in France they
are not permitted to exercise it without the consent of our Kings, as the late
Mr. de Marca has well observed in the Thirteenth chap. of the Fourth Book of
the Liberties of the Gallcian Church, where he treats of these matters.

XVI.
A Minister deputed by a Provincial Synod to go to a Synod, or Colloque, of
another Province for some public Affairs, may have a deliberative Vote, and
that not only for the business he is come about, but also during the whole
sitting, if his particular Affair be not in agitation.

CONFORMITY.
I do not think any need question but the same thing was practiced in the
Primitive Church, Tom. 1. Conc. Gall. p. 27.
at least it may be collected from the Synod of Turin assembled Anno Dom. 397,
at the request of the Bishops of France; besides that the Synods which are the
Masters of these things, may dispose them as they please.

CHAP. IX. Of NATIONAL SYNODS.
ARTICLE I.
NAtional Synods shall be called once a Year, if possible may be, And this Rule
shall be observed for the Convocation, that at the end of every National Synod,
a Provinte shall be chosen which shall have the charge to assign to the others,
the time and place of the next Synod.

CONFORMITY.
The Third Council of Carthage in the Year of our Lord 397; Tom. 1. Conc. p.
710.
Ordains in the Hundredth Cannon, That the General Council of Africa be
assembled once a Year, to which all the Provinces that have Primates are to
send their Deputies, to the end nothing should be wanting to the Authority of
such an Assembly. The Seventh Cannon also makes mention of such a General
Council, which was assembled once a Year, And the Eighteenth of the African
Code contains in substance the same Decree, And in the Nineteenth there is
mention made of the Universal Council which was held every year. Tom. 4. Conc.
p. 493. and 56.
The Third Council of Tolledo which was thought was held in the year of Christ
589, was composed of all the Bishops of Spain and of Gallicia, that is to say,
it was a National Synod; And as I conceive, it is to these sorts of Assemblies
which the latter part of the Eighteenth Cannon of the same place must be
referred, And before that time Pope Leo the First in his Ninety Third Epistle
speaks of the Celebration of a General Council in Spain; however it be, Our
Discipline which requires National Synods to be assembled from year to year,
does nevertheless add this condition to its Ordinance, Cod. Atric. can. (...).
if it may be done; The Bishops of Africa which were wont, as has been shown,
to call yearly a General Synod of the whole Nation, or as they also term it, a
Plenary Council, found in time, that it was a thing not to be done without
giving too much pains and trouble to the Bishops; therefore they concluded not
to assemble it but in case of Necessity; that is to say, when the common Laws
of all the Churches of Africa obliged them to do it. The Fourth Council of
Toledo, which was National, and which was assembled in the year of our Lord
633, T^m. 4. Conc. p. 582.
declares in the Third Cannon, That these National Synods should not be
assembled, but when there was Question of matter of Faith, or of some other
business wherein all the Churches of the Nation were concerned.

The Article we examine demands yet another thing which we must not pass under
Silence, to wit, That at the end of each National Synod, some one Province
should be appointed to assign to the rest, the time and place of the following
Synod, which amounts near hand to what the First Council of Orange Ordained
Anno Dom. 441, in the Twenty Ninth Cannon, Tom. 1. Conc. Gall. p. 74.
That a Synod should not break up till they had assigned another: The
Eighteenth Cannon of the Third Council of Toledo, of which we spoke before,
prescribes the same thing, and it may be also the 73 of the African Code, and
it appears by the 95th Cannon that the Church of Carthage caused to be
convocated the National Synods of Africa as occasion required.

II.
If there happens any difficulty in a Province, it shall take care to give
notice of it to the Province that shall be entrusted with the care of making
the Convocation, to the end that this calling the said Assembly, might also
give notice of it to the other Provinces, that so by this means, every one may
come to the Synod ready prepared to judge the matter.

CONFORMITY.
It appears by the relation of Eusebius, of the Synods where Paul of Samosatia
was deposed, Hist. lib. 7. cap. 27, 30.0.
and his Heresy Anathematized, It appears, I say, That the Provinces gave each
other Notice of the Affairs which should be debated in some of them, and which
could not be determined but in a Council.

III.
And because it is difficult at this time, and even dangerous to assemble a
National Synod in so great a Number of Ministers and Elders, it has been
thought fit for the present, and during such difficulties, that the Brethren
assembled in each Provincial Synod, choose two Ministers and two Elders, the
most Experienced in Church Affairs, to send thither in the Name of the whole
Province; and these Deputies shall come with sufficient testimonies, and bring
good Memorials signed by the Moderator and Scribe of the Provincial Synod, and
that no default might happen, three or four Pastors, and so many Elders shall
be nominated, that if the first named are hindered from making the Journey,
there might be others to supply their place.

CONFORMITY.
The Third Council of Carthage assembled Anno Dom. 397, reduces the Deputies to
the number of Three in the Second Cannon. The Eighteenth of the Code of Africa,
which is in substance all one with that of Carthage but now cited, speaks of
Two Deputies, referring it nevertheless to the Liberty of the Provinces to send
a greater Number; The 76th of the same Code makes mention in general of those
which shall be chosen by the Provincial Synods to assist at the National
Synods, (...) African. p. 402, 403, 404
but they agree all in one thing, that in each Province should be chosen those
which were to meet at the National Synod. As for the Memorials and Instructions
the Deputies were to bring along with them, there is frequent mention made of
them in the Ancient Discipline under the name of Communitorium, of which
mention is made four several times in the Letter of the Council of Africa to
Pope Boniface, and often elsewhere. The Council of Merida which I cited on the
X Article, prescribes so, in the V. Cannon, and calls it Instructions.

IV.
To the Ministers and Elders Deputed to the National Synod, the Provincial
Synods shall limit no certain time for their return, but shall permit them to
stay at the said Synod, as long as occasion shall require, and the said
Deputies shall travel at the common charge of the whole Province.

CONFORMITY.
The Provincial Synods being inferior to National ones, they cannot limit time
to their Deputies at a National Synod, where they are obliged to attend till
the end of the Assembly, which is very uniform to the Ancient Discipline,
according to which it was not suffered to depart before the Council brake up,
as we have proved on the XIII Article of the foregoing Chapter.

V.
At the beginning of National Synods, the Confession of Faith, and the
Discipline shall be Read.

CONFORMITY.
In the Ancient Councils, To. 1. conc. page 660. Tom 2. page 240. Tom. 3. page
337, 338 339.
was read and confirmed the Confessions of Faith which was believed in the
Church, so it was practiced by the Universal Council of Constantinople in
regard of the Confession of Faith of the Council of Nice; the same Symbol was
read in the first Action of the first Council of Ephesus, and the Council of
Calcedon renews and confirms the Symbols of Nice, and Constantinople, the
Copies whereof was produced, and moreover approved all that was established at
Ephesus against Nestorius, in the year 431.

As for Reading the Canons which contained the Discipline of those times, it
may plainly be collected from the first Cannon of the Council of Calcedon,
which appoints to observe all the Cannons which had been formerly made, Tom. 4.
conc. page 583.
and the 4th. of the 4th. of Toledo, Anno Dom. 633. does formally command the
reading of them. See what I have writ on the IX. Article of the First Chapter.

VI.
And to the End the National Synod be not amused about Questions decided by
Acts of former National ones, the Provincial Synods shall be advertised
carefully to read the Acts which the said National ones have passed before they
make their memorials, and to send nothing but what may be common and general to
all the Churches, or which shall not otherwise merit the resolution of the
National Synod.

CONFORMITY.
The VIII. Council of Toledo assembled Anno Dom. 653, Ibid. page 756, 757.
made a Decree much like this, by which it prohibited to reverse, to
contradict, and oppose the execution and accomplishment of what had been
established by universal Authority; this Synod confirming for ever as the
Fathers speak, the general and universal Constitutions.

VII.
The National Synod may definitively dicide and resolve all Ecclesiastical
matters, the Provinces having been before advertised by that which has the
charge of assembling the Synod, as near as may be done.

CONFORMITY.
This Establishment agrees very well with the Ancient Cannons, for Example,
with the VI of Nice, according to the explication given it by the Bishops of
Africa in their Letter to Pope Cellestin, with the second and the sixth of the
first Council of Constantinople, the eighth of the first of Ephesus, the nine
and seventeen of Calcedon, the twelfth of Antioch, the 19, 28, 95, and 125 of
the Code of Africa, those which desire further Light for the understanding this
Article, may please to read what I have writ on the Tenth Article of the Eighth
Chapter.

VIII.
Resolutions shall be settled by the Deputies of Provinces, and if there are
other Ministers besides the Deputies, they may indeed propose what they think
fit, but they shall not have deliberative, nor decisive voice.

CONFORMITY.
The same Cannon of the Council of Toledo which I alleged on the VI. Tom. 4.
conc. page 756, 757.
Article, says expressly, that if in a Synod a small number, by ignorance, or
contention, is of a different Opinion from the rest, they being warned before,
must yield to the greater Number, or else depart with shame out of the
Assembly, and they shall be Excommunicated for the space of one year. Since the
4th. Century, the great Council of Nice had referred the Decision of Affairs to
the plurality of Voices, in the 6th. Canon, a Decree which the 19th. Council of
Antioch renewed sixteen years after.

IX.
Those which appeal from Provincial to National Synods, shall be obliged to be
there present, or to send full instructions, with lawful excuse of their
absence; and in default thereof, the sentence of the Provincial Synod shall be
confirmed. The same thing is done in appealing from Consistories to Colloques,
and from Colloques to Provincial Synods.

CONFORMITY.
The VII. Cannon of the 3d. Council of Carthage condemns the Bishop who being
accused for something for which he has not been cleared in the Provincial Synod,
Tom. 1. page 910. an. 397.
don't appear at the National One, there to have the complaint preferred
against him finally judged.

X.
The Deputies of Provinces shall not depart without taking along the
Resolutions of the Synod, signed by the President, or Secretary; and a Month
after their return, shall give advice to the Colloques of their Provinces, to
the End they might send for the Acts of the said Synod; and this at the charges
of the said Colloques.

CONFORMITY.
What I have observed on the XIII Article of the 8th. Chapter is sufficient for
the explaining of this; I will only add, that all those whereof the Synods were
composed, subscribed to the Acts, as appears by the subscriptions of Ancient
Cannons; the which is prescribed by the 4th. Tom. 4. conc. page 583. 826.
Council of Tolledo, Anno 633. in the 4th. Cannon; and which is practiced by
the 11th. of the same place, and declares so much in the 16th. Anno Dom. 675,
to which may be added, the 5th. Ib. p. 802.
Cannon of that of Merrida in Portugal in the year 666, being it enjoins the
same thing.

XI.
And to the End the Acts of Synods may be preserved, and that future use may be
made of them for deciding Questions which may be proposed in National Synods;
the said Acts as well of the time past as to come, and all others which concern
the Synods, together with the Articles of Discipline, and confession of Faith
of the conformed Churches, shall be left to be kept in Custody of the Deputies
of the Province which shall be named for convocating the next National Synod,
and the said Province shall stand bound to carry them to the Synod.

CONFORMITY.
We read in the 86 Cannon of the African Code, which is supposed to be of the
Council of Mileua in the year 402, we there read a Decree much like Ours; It
has been thought fit by all the Bishops which have subscribed to this Council,
that the Matricule and the Archives of Numidia, may be preserved in the Church
of the first See, and in Constantinople, which is the Metropolitan City.

XII.
At National Synods, before separating, there shall an amicable sensure be made
of all the Deputies, as well Ministers, as Elders, of that only which has
happened during the Session, and in general, of their Provinces; and the holy
Sacrament shall be celebrated, to testify their Union, provided it be jointly
with the whole Church, where they shall be assembled, the which to this
purpose, shall have timely Notice to prepare themselves.

CONFORMITY.
The Observations I have made on the VI Article of the seventh Chapter, serve
as a Commentary on this.

CHAP. X. Of the Holy Exercises of the Assembly of the Faithful.
ARTICLE I.
THE Irreverence shall be restrained which is seen in several, when they are
present at Ecclesiastic or Domestical Prayers, in not uncovering the Head, and
Kneeling, which things are contrary to Piety, gives suspicion of Pride, and may
scandalize good Men. Therefore Pastors shall be desired, as also Elders, and
Masters of Families, to have a regard that during the said Prayers, every body
without Exception, or accepting of Persons, do give by this mark of outward
behavior, a testimony of the humility of his heart, and of the Homage he owes
to Almighty God, unless some may be hindered to do it by sickness, or
otherwise, the Judgment whereof shall be left to his own constancy.

CONFORMITY.
The Ancient Christians were wont to kneel at Prayers, as Eusebius testifies in
his Ecclesiastical History. St. Chrysostom in his 18 Homily on the 2 to the
Corinthians, says, that he bowed to the ground, and Synesius in his 57
Epistle, that he kneeled down at his Prayers, and that in that posture of a
Beggar, he desired Death rather than a Bishopric: Nevertheless it must be
granted, that about the end of the 2 Century, they began to pray standing, on
Sundays, and during the interval of time, betwixt Easter to Whitsontide,
Tertullian assures us so in the third Chapter of the Book of the Crown, and
with him the Author of Questions to the Orthodox in the Works of St. Justin
Martyr, in the 115 Question; a practice authorized by the great Council of Nice
in the 20th. Cannon, on account of those which used otherwise. In the time of
St. Jerome, that is to say, in the 4 and 5 Century's, the Decree of Nice was
followed, and he also touches the Use of this Custom in his Preface on the
Ephesians, where he observes, that from Easter to Whitsontide, It is a time of
Joy and Victory, during which, says he, we do not bend the knee, and do not
prostrate toward the Earth, Tom. 6. page 161.
but arising with the Lord, we fly up to the highest Heavens: He observes the
same thing in his Dialogue against the Luciferians chap. 4. St. Paul
nevertheless does the contrary, for we read in the 20 chap. of the Acts ver.
36. that having discoursed with the Pastors of the Church of Ephesus, he
kneeled down and prayed with them all, it appears by the 16 verse of the same
chapter, that 'twas betwixt Easter and Whitsontide. St. Luke observes also in
the 21 chap. verse the 5th. of the same Book of Acts, that the Apostle
departing from Tire about the same time, being accompanied with the Disciples
and Brethren of the place, with their Wifes and Children, they kneeled down and
prayed: Moreover, this practice of the Ancient Christians which I but now
mentioned, shows that it was ever their manner to pray kneeling, which is the
most becoming and decent posture to procure the Mercy of God, as the Author of
Questions to the Orthodox does declare; because indeed the Creature can never
too much humble himself before the Sovereign Majesty of his Maker, in whose
presence he must prostrate himself and confess his vileness and nothingness,
saying to him with Abraham, I am but dust and ashes. And as they prayed
kneeling in the primitive Church, there is no doubt to be made but they also
prayed bare-headed; such doubtless were those Common Prayers and Supplications
which were made in their Assemblies, as Justin Martyr and Tertullian do
testify in their Apologies.

As for singing of Psalms, it is what has ever been practiced in Christian
Assemblies. St. Paul recommends it to the Colossians in these terms, Col. 3.16.
See Ephesians. 5.19.
Let the word of Christ dwell in you richly in all wisdom, teaching and
admonishing one another in Psalms, and Hymns, and spiritual Songs, singing with
grace in your hearts to the Lord. Pliny the 2d. in his Relation to the Emperor
Trajan of the Christians in Asia, and of their Assemblies before day light for
fear of Persecution, he observes amongst other things, Lib. 10. Ep. 97.
that they sang Hymns to Jesus Christ as to a God. Tertullian makes mention of
this Letter of Pliny to Trajan in the 2 chap. of his Apology, and in the 39 he
speaks of these spiritual Songs which Christians sang to God in his time;
especially the Psalms of David have ever been highly esteemed in the Church,
which has found the singing of them so comfortable and saving, that it has ever
been practiced without Interruption. The 17 Cannon of the Synod of Laodicea
prescribes the manner of singing them in the Assembly. It would be endless to
relate all the Fathers have said in commendation of these Divine Hymns, the
praise whereof they have endeavored to strive who should most exalt them,
especially St. Basil, St. Ambrose, St. Chrysostom, Theodoret, and several
others, therefore I Will content my self in producing what is said by the Author
of the Christian Topography, That the Psalms of David are sung in all Churches
throughout the World, and that they are almost in every bodies mouth, as well
great as small, and that in each Church they are sung, Ap^d Alla^^um de lib.
Graee. page 61.
and they are oftener read than the Writings of the Prophets, or any other
sacred Monuments.

II.
The Congregations of Believers being also appointed to sing the praises of
God, and to comfort and fortify themselves by the use of Psalms, All shall be
advertised to carry their Psalm Books to Church, and those who by disdain shall
neglect to have them, shall be sensur'd, as also those which shall not be
uncovered in the time of singing, as well before as after Sermon, and also
during the time of celebrating the Sacraments.

CONFORMITY.
Seeing Prayer and singing Psalms are things Essential to Piety, our Discipline
does justly prescribe the Manner and Means to do it as becomes, and to declare
those worthy of sensure which shall transgress their Ordinance.

It requires the same thing in the time of celebrating the Sacraments, and in
desiring it, it nothing differs from the practice of the Ancient Church, which
had so great Respect for Baptism and the Lords Supper, that it suffered not the
Catechumeny, Energumeny, or Penitents, to be present at celebration of one or
the other, calling them both Terrible Mysteries.

III.
In times of great Persecution, or of Plague, War, Famine, or other great
affliction. Also when Election is to be made of Ministers of the Word of God,
and at the time of entering into the Synod, one may if necessity require, one
or more days, have public Prayers, with fasting, yet without seruple, or
superstition, all done with great caution, and consideration. And the Churches
shall be advertised to conform one with another in celebrating a Fast, as near
as they can, according to convenience of time and place.

CONFORMITY.
Tertullian being turned Montanist, and by consequence an Enemy of Catholics
and the Orthodox, cap. 2. p. 545.
whom he treats injuriously and after an unchristian manner: Tertullian, I say,
reproaches them in his Book of Abstinence, which he wrote expressly against
them, he reproaches them that they fasted voluntarily according to the subject
and occasion they had for it, and in the same Book he says, that the Bishops
were wont to appoint the People to fast when the Church had need to humble it
self in the sight of God, Ibid cap. 13. p. 551 Extr.
and that it is in fear of some evil that threatens it; this was the manner of
the Ancient Christians in celebrating of Fasts; an order which we exactly
follow, and which is grounded in that Jesus Christ nor his Apostles, have not
prescribed in any place of the New Testament on what days one should or should
not fast, as St. Austin has observed in his 86 Epistle to Casulanus.

IV.
Those Churches which have been accustomed to make public Prayers on certain
days, may keep the order they have for a long time happily used, and others
may conform thereunto according to the means which God shall please hereafter
to give them, and as their Edification shall require.

CONFORMITY.
This Article has no other Scope but to establish an entire Conformity in the
Churches, as to what regards the Exercises of Piety and Religion, can. 27. Tom.
1. conc. Gal. p. 199.
near hand as when the Council of Epaume in the year 517. ordained, that in the
out Provinces for celebration of Divine Offices, the same Order should be
observed as is by the Metropolitan; the same thing was concluded the same year
in Spain in the 1 Council of the Synod of Gironda, can. 55.
To. 3. conc. page 806, and Anno 633 in the 2 Cannon of the 4 of Tolledo, To.
4. conc. page 582. and in the year 465 a Council of Vannes had appointed that
throughout the whole Province, the same Order and Rule for Divine Offices, and
for singing of Psalms, should be observed.

V.
There shall no Prayer, or Sermon, nor public Alms be given at Burials, to
shun Superstitions, and those which accompany the Corpse shall be exhorted to
behave themselves with modesty during the time, meditating according to the
object before their Eyes, as well the miseries and shortness of this life, as
the happiness of the life to come.

CONFORMITY.
All pretense toward superstition whereunto Men are too apt to incline, is in
this Article endeavored to be avoided.

VI.
Because Mourning don't consist in Apparel, but in the Heart; Believers shall
be warned to demean them therein, with all Modesty, rejecting all Ambition,
Hypocrisy, Vanity and Superstition.

CONFORMITY.
This last Article prescribes Modesty, and excludes Hycoprisie and Ambition,
which were generously opposed by the Primitive Christians.

CHAP. XI. Of BAPTISM.
ARTICLE I.
BAptism administered by one that has no Vocation, is absolutely Void.

CONFORMITY.
The Author of Apostolical Constitutions contents not himself to forbid Women
to Baptize, he also prohibits all Lay Persons, because they are not called to
it; in effect, having employed the Ninth Chapter of the Third Book to show that
Women should not Baptize, he thus begins the Tenth. Neither do we suffer a Lay
Person to Exercise any Priestly Function, as to offer Sacrifice, that is to say
to celebrate the Sacrament, or to Baptize, or impose hands, or to give the
Benediction, whether more or less, for none takes to him this honor, but he
enjoys it, which is called of God. St. Basil was of no other Mind, as the
Jesuit Petau confesses in his Notes upon St. Epiphanius, where he says, St.
Basil seems to have believed that Baptism conferred by Lay persons was Null;
and to speak the Truth, this Holy Doctor speaking of the Opinion of St.
Cyprian, of Firmilian, Page 351.
and others, which taught that all those ought to be Re-Baptis'd which had been
Baptized by Heretics, he says, Epist. ad Ampluit. can. 1. To. 3. p. 21.
That they had appointed they should be purisied anew by the true Baptism of
the Church, no more nor less then if they had been Baptized by Lay Persons: St.
Basil would not have spoke after this Manner had he not been persuaded that
Baptism administered by Lay Men, is not true Baptism.

As for Baptism administered by a Woman, cap. 17. p. 231.
Tertullian had before condemned it in his time, in his Treatise of Baptism,
and had shown that they were not permitted to teach, nor to Baptize. St.
Epiphanius in the Heresy of the Collyridians, which is the 79, in order,
inlarges much in proving the same thing, to stop the rashness of Women, who
would undertake to Baptize, page 1059 1060.
observing also that the Holy Virgin had not this power, for if she had it,
Jesus Christ might have been Baptized by her rather than by John Baptist. The
fourth Council of Carthage made this Decree, Anno 398, That a Woman should not
presume to Baptize. It is not then to be wondered that St. Epiphanius in the
forty two Heresy, observes as a thing blameable, Tom. 1. conc. can. (...).
That the Arch-Heretick Marcion permitted Women to Baptize.

II.
A Doctor in the Church cannot Preach, nor administer the Sacraments, unless he
be both Doctor and Minister.

CONFORMITY.
This Article is but a continuance of the former, for seeing a Doctor in
quality of a mere Doctor, has no vocation to Preach the Word, nor to
administer the Sacraments; it is unquestionable, the Baptism which he shall
confer, shall be no other than that which shall be administered by a Mere Lay
Man, to do it Lawfully, he must not only be a Doctor, but also a Minister.

III.
A Jew, or Pagan, of what Age soever he be, ought not to be Baptized before
being well Instructed in the Christian Religion, and that it appears they are
so by their Confession.

CONFORMITY.
There Is nothing in this Establishment but what was practiced in the Ancient
Church; St. Justin Martyr testifies in his second or rather his first Apology,
that the Christians of those times, would not Baptize those who would turn to
their Communion, until after they had believed, and were thoroughly persuaded of
the Truth of their Doctrine; and moreover promised to live conformable to the
holiness of their Laws, and profession. Pope Victor the 1, ordained toward the
end of the second Century, as the Pontifical Book says in his Life; that in
case of Necessity, one may Baptize all those that turn from Paganism to
Christianity, either in a River, or in the Sea, or in a Fountain, or in a Lake,
upon condition nevertheless, that in the first place they should give an
Account of the Christian Faith, and make an open Confession of it. The Ten
Books of Recognitions falsely attributed to St Clement Disciple of the Apostles,
are very ancient, but forged; and writ before Origin who lived in the third
Century, in the VI of these Books at the end, we read St. Peter Baptized near
the Sea, Those which had fully received the Faith of our Lord and Savior; that
is to say, those which believed in him, and which had been Instructed in the
knowledge of his Gospel. St. Jerome expounding these words of our Savior to his
Apostles, Math. 28.19.
Go teach all Nations, baptising them in the name of the Father, of the Son,
and of the Holy Ghost, St. Jerome observes, In cap. 28. Mat. Tom. 6. page 66.
the Apostles taught them first, and that after having instructed them, they
baptized them with Water, for says he, It cannot be that the Body should
receive the Sacrament of Baptism, unless the Soul has first received the truth
of Faith: Tom. 5. Spirit. page 203.
which the forty six Cannon of Laodicea also prescribes.

St. Owen writes in the VIII Chap. of the 2d. Book of the Life of St. Eloy
Bishop of Noyon, That he baptized every year at Easter, those which in the
compass of the year he could Convert, that is to say, those he could turn from
the darkness of Paganism to the Light of the Gospel. Paulinus Archbishop of
York did the like in the same Century, that is in the 7th. as is related by
Beda in his Ecclesiastical History of England. Theodulph Bishop of Orleans
follows the same method in his 1 chap. of his Treatise of Baptism. Epist. 104,
105.
Aleuin who approved not the Saxons should be constrained to be baptized by
force, alleged for a Reason, that they ought first of all to be Instructed.
But to descend to the last Century, Cardinal Borrome in the Fifth Council of
M^llan, of which place he was Arch Bishop, An 1579 Tom. 9. Conc. page 6.6.
requires two things of Adults which are to be baptized; First, that they know
the Rudiments of the Christian Religion: Secondly, That they repent of their
Sins past: I will add to all I have hitherto observed, the practice of the
Primitive Church, which instructed the Catecumeny, a long while before they
Honored them with Holy Baptism, There is in our Discipline, at the end of the
Chapter we examine, a Form of Baptism of those which shall be converted to the
Christian Faith, And in the Thirteenth Century Nicetas Choniates composed one
for Mahometans, which desired to embrace Christianity. Tom. 12. Bibl. Pat. p.
527. cum 531, 532.
The VI. Council of Paris Authorizes the Decree which it makes in the Year 829.
Cannon the Sixth Book the First, by the Practice of the Primitive Church, To.
2. Conc. Gall. page 846.

IV.
The Children of Fathers and Mothers of the Romish Church, and of Excommunicate
Persons, cannot be admittisme in the Reformed Churches, though they were
presented by believing Godfathers, unless their Father and Mother consent to
it, and desire it, and resign their Authority, in quitting and yielding up to
the Godfathers, their right, as to Instructing them, with promises their
Children shall be Educated in the true Religion.

CONFORMITY.
This Article is grounded on that Children depend of their Father and Mother,
without whose consent they cannot be disposed of, nor christened against their
Will, into a Communion whereof they are not Members; otherwise it were a
Forcing People to be Baptized, which the Church has ever condemned. Hist. lib.
6. cap. 17
King Chilperick, as is related by Gregory of Touers, commanded to Baptize the
Jews, that is to say, he constrained several to be Baptized, which Pope Gregory
the First did not approve, as appears by the Letter he wrote to Virgilius, and
Theodorus, the former being Bishop of Arles, the other of Marsellia, and is the
Forty Fifth of the First Book. So also when King Sisibute had done in Spain,
after the same manner as Chilperick had done in France, Tom. 4. Conc. page 593.
the Fourth Council of Toledo in the year 633, changed their violent practice
in its 56 Cannon, the Decree is contained in these terms,; As for Jews, the
Synod has Ordained that henceforwards no body shall be forced to believe, for
God has compassion on whom he will, and harden whom he pleases, and such should
not be saved by force, but voluntarily, to the end to preserve entirely the way
of Justice; for as Man was ruined by voluntarily obeying the Serpent, he is
also saved by believing, and converting to God, when he calls him by his Grace;
let persuasion there be used, and not violence, to incline them to be converted
truly and without any constraint; Ib. p. 603;
And it is to be observed that the Ordinance of this Prince, comprehended
Children, Hist. Gothor. in si se buto.
and Domestics; therefore St. Isidore Bishop of Sevil, wrote of him, having
regard to this Edict, That he had a Zeal for God but not according to
Knowledge; And we have already seen on the precedent Article, that Alcuin Tutor
to Charlemain, did by no ways approve the force was put on the Saxons in those
times, Read his Letters in 104, and 105, and you will see the truth hereof,
insomuch as he deplored at the beginning of the former, the misfortune of that
People; which as he says, often lost the Sacrament of Baptism, because they
never had in their hearts the Sacrament of Faith; Thence it is, he teaches in
both of them, that one must begin by Instruction, that Faith is a thing
voluntary and not forced, that a Man cannot be forced to believe that which he
does not believe.

But that it may not be thought, the Subject I examine is of little importance,
and that it might be put amongst things indifferent, to be done or left undone
at pleasure, it must be shown there is nothing more contrary to the tenor of
the Gospel than to constrain Men to embrace the profession of it; Jesus Christ
the Author of this Heavenly Doctrine, and the Sovereign Doctor of this Truth
never employed force nor violence to have it received, he was content in
Exhortations and Instructions which he accompanied with a hidden and secret
virtue in regard of those he intended to call to his Communion, and which he
drew with efficacy, but also at the same time, with Sweetness, with Cords of
Love and Bands of Humanity and Charity. The Apostles exactly followed his
Example, Exhorting Men to repent and believe the Gospel, and praying them in
the Name of Jesus Christ to be reconciled to God.

The Christians which succeeded the Apostles did just after the same manner.
cap. 24.28.
Tertullian in his Appollogetick declares positively that the Liberty of
Religion cannot be taken away, nor deny Men the choice of the Divinity which
they adore, without rendering themselves guilty of the crime of Impiety and
Irreligion, because, he pretends, the Service of God ought to have a willing
mind for its first principle. And in his Book to Scapula he says, That it is no
Act of Religion to force the Religion which one should embrace of free will,
and not by constraint. Lactantius in the 20th chap. of the Fifth Book of his
Divine Institutions, says, There is nothing so voluntary as Religion, which
ceases to be, p. 82. G. Par. 1544
at the very moment one has any aversion or hatred to it. St. Hilary of
Poictiers in his First Book to the Emperor Constantius, Page 82. G Paris. 1544.
writes, That God has taught the Knowledge Men have of him, before he required
it, Authorizing his Commandments by his Miracles, not desiring a forced
Obedience, nor an unwilling Confession; And in his Book against Auxentius, Ib.
p. 84.
he reproaches the Arrians to have employed Prisons and banishment to constrain
Men to be of their side, and to enter into their Communion. St. Athanasius was
of the same Opinion, as he shows in several parts of his Works, particularly in
his Epistle to the Solitaries, Tom. 1. p 855.
where he says, That the Nature of Piety and Religion is not to constrain, but
to persuade, after the Example of our Savior who forced no body, but left it
at every bodies choice to follow him, saying to all the World, If any one will
come after me, and to his Disciples, and you, will not you also go? After which
he extremely blames the Conduct of the Emperor Constantius, who at the desire
of the Arrians, tormented the Catholics, and used great violence to make them
declare in his favor, violence which he exaggerates with comparisons too
strong, the which I forbear to write. I might allege other Testimonies of the
Fathers, but I would not be too tedious.

Therefore it shall suffice to observe, page 388.
that there is mention in Mr. Justels African Code of a Law that was published,
by the which it was left to every bodies free choice, to embrace the Christian
Religion. The Emperor Jovian which succeeded Julian the Apostate, Hist. lib.
3. cap. 25. (...).
is praised in Socrates, in that he had suffered every body to make profession
of what Religion he pleased, Ammianus Marcellinus has not failed to praise for
the same thing, the Great Valentinian who succeeded Jovian in the Empire, Lib.
9. tit. 16. de Males. and Ma^^em.
in his Thirtieth Book, which the Prince testifies of himself in the Theodocian
Code, where he declares, that as soon as he began to Reign, he made Laws,
whereby every body had liberty to profess the Religion wherein he had been
instructed and trained up; I cannot tell if I should mention Constantine
Pagonat, or the hairy, who in the Letter he writ to the Bishop of Rome, on
occasion of the Sixth Universal Council he assembled at Constantinople, Tom. 5.
Conc. page 11.
he speaks to him in this manner, We may excite and exhort all the World to
amend, and to join with the Christians, but we will not constrain any body: But
I know I ought not, and examining this matter without speaking of the Emperor
Mar^i^n, by whose Authority the Council of Chalcedon was assembled in the Year
of our Lord 451, for in the Letter he writes to the Archimandrites, and to the
Friars of Jerusalem, and the parts thereabouts, he says, speaking of this
Council, That no body was constrained by his Order to subscribe and consent to
it, and see here the reason he gives; For says he, Tom. 3. Gonc. p. 488.
we will not force or hale any body into the way of truth by threats nor
violence: Words becoming that wise Prince; and which deserves to be graven in
the mind of all Sovereigns: And it is to be wished for the Honor of
Charlemain, Collect. part 2. page 179. cap. 7.
that he had so acted in regard of the Saxons, and not to have threatened with
Death those amongst them as refused to be baptized.

V.
The Children of those also which are called Sarazins may be received to
Baptism in the Reformed Churches, on the conditions abovementioned, provided
also they may be void of all presumption on account of any former Baptism
received, and after serious remonstrances made to Godfathers, to consult how
they may best discharge the promise and obligation they make to the Church, and
moreover that Godfathers and Godmothers charge themselves with the maintenance
and instruction of the Child.

CONFORMITY.
This Article being much like the former, it needs no other explication than
that I have made on the Fourth, where I have observed several things.

VI.
Baptism shall not be administered but in Church Assemblies, where there is a
Church publicly settled, and where there is not a public Church, and the
Fathers and Mothers by reason of sickness fear to have their Children christened
at Church, the Ministers shall prudently advise what to do in the matter;
however that there be the form of a Church, together with Exhortations and
Prayers; But if there be no Church, and that an Assembly is not to be had, the
Minister shall make no scruple to baptize the Infant of a Believer presented to
him, with Prayer and Exhortation.

CONFORMITY.
The Fifty Ninth Cannon of the VI. Ecumenical Council in the year 692, forbids
administering Baptism in Oratories, in private Houses, it requires it should be
performed in the Catholic Churches, Tom. 5. Conc. page 339.
threatening to depose the Churchmen which obey not this Decree, and to
Excommunicate the Laity which shall violate it. Nevertheless the same Council
permits to do it by advice of the Bishop of the place, Cannon Thirty First,
although the Fifty Eighth of that of Laodicea had absolutely prohibited to
Bishops and Priests in the Fourth Century, to celebrate the Eucharist in
private Houses.

But the difficulty is to know what the Council means by the Catholic
Churches, Tom 5. Conc. p. 517.
when it forbids christning any where else, an Expression which I also find in
the Preliminaries of the Second Council of Nice, where it is said, the Bishops
went ad Luteram of the Holy Catholic Church: The term Luter which comes from
the Greek (...) signifies a Basin, or Vessel to wash the feet, and I cannot tell
if in the words I examine, it may not be put for the Baptismal Fountain. After
all, I am inclined to think that by the Catholic Churches here spoke of, is to
be understood the Churches appointed for all the People in general, and where
there was public Fonts, according to which there is mention in the
Capitularies of our Kings, Tom. 2. Conc. Gal. p. 152. Ibid. page 30.
of Baptismal Churches, so called, because there was a Public Font or
Christning Place, as appears by the Seventh Cannon of the Synod which Pepin the
Father of Charlemain caused to be held apud vernum, Anno Dom. 750, There must
not be a public Font in any Parish, but there where the Bishop whose the
Parish is, does appoint. Tom. 16. Bibl. Pal. page 674.
Flodoard in his Second Book of his History of the Church of Reims, chap. 19.
calls these Churches, Baptismal Titles, which distinguished them from others
which had not Fonts.

And it is very probable that there was in each City but one Baptismal Church
where all the People were Christened, which was also observed in Villages in
the Country, so it must be understood the Decree of the Council of Meaux in the
Year 845, Tom. 3. Conc. Gal. Can. 48. p. 45, Tom. 1. Conc. Gal. c. 1^. page 566.
That no Priest presume to Baptize but in the Baptismal Churches which are in
the Villages. As for Oratories it was not permitted there to build Fonts as we
find by the Ninth Epistle of the Second Book of Gregory I. of the 71 and 83 of
the 7th of the Third of the 8th of this practice continued also in Pope
Zacharies time, who also wrote so to Pepin in the year 747 in using the very
terms of Gregory I. But in process of time it was left to the Liberty of the
Bishop to suffer it, provided that the consent of his Clergy also intervened;
It is what may be seen in the Decree of Gratian, cap. 16.9. 1. c. 35. Moreover
these Baptizing Churches which were otherwise named Plebes, and Oracula, were
in so great consideration above others, that Charlemain in his Capitulary in
the year 793, chap. 2. will not have them possessed by Laymen, to whom he
forbids to grant them under the Title of Bennifice, although that was not
always observed; And it may be the Names of Plebes and Oracula, was given to
these Churches, because all the People were wont there to resort to hear the
Oracles of God, that is to say, the Word of his Gospel.

Inasmuch as our Discipline suffers Ministers to baptize out of the Assemblies,
when it is impossible to have them, it agrees very well with the Seventh Cannon
of the Council apud Vernum, which I cited above, where it is permitted in case
of Necessity to Baptize out of the places where public Fonts were erected;
Moreover, Vernum Palatium, was one of the Kings Palaces betwixt St. Dennis and
Compeigne, at least many do think so.

VII.
Seeing we have no command of Christ to take Godfathers and Godmothers to
present our Children at Baptism, there cannot an express Law be imposed on
Persons to do so; Nevertheless because it is an Ancient Custom, and introduced
for a good end, to with to testify the belief of the Godfathers, and the
Baptism of the Infant, and also to maintain the Society of Believers in
Friendship and Amity, those which desire not to follow it but would present
their Children themselves, shall be earnestly exhorted not to be contentious,
but to conform to the Ancient Custom, which is good and profitable.

CONFORMITY.
The Custom of Godfathers and Godmothers to present Children at Baptism, is
very Ancient, seeing Tertullian makes mention of it in his Book of Baptism,
chap. 18. St. Austin in his Twenty Third Epistle says, they are presented by
their Father or Mother, or by others; Tom. 2. cap. 2. and 7. p. 215, 216. 217,
361. Paris 1644.
the pretended Dennis the Areopagite in his Ecclesiastical Hierarchy, speaks
but of Godfathers, which should be faithful, and chosen by those which are to
be Christened, if they are Adults, or by the Fathers and Mothers, if they are
young Children; and he would also make the Reader believe that 'twas instituted
by the Apostles. Gregory the First in his Book of Sacraments, does not also
forget those which present Children at Baptism. As for Cesarius of Arles, he
declares in the Twelfth of his Homilies, given us by Monsieur Baluze, that the
Father and Mother are to be answerable, the VI. Cannon of the Council of Metz
in the year 888, Tom. 3. Conc. Gall. p. 526.
ordains that the Father or Mother of the Child receives it when it comes out
of the Baptismal Fountain, so great Liberty has been used by the Church in
these things: Read the Three last Testimonies I have mentioned on the Twelfth
Article.

VIII.
Women shall not be admitted to present Children to Baptism unless accompanied
with a Godfather, and after having made profession of the Christian Religion.

CONFORMITY.
In all Antiquity there is few or no Examples to be found of a Woman that
presented a Child to be Baptized without a Godfather, and much less of an
unbelieving Woman; in effect, we have seen on the Seventh Article, That those
which presented Children should be believers. What I alleged of the Council
of Metz on the same Seventh Article, not destroying what I say on this, if one
reads all the Cannon, besides that it has sometimes been suffered amongst us
upon some Considerations as appears by the National Synod of Poictiers in the
Year 1560, that is to be understood in regard of believing Women, though this
sufferance is not at present in use.

IX.
No Godfather coming from another Church, shall be suffered to present a Child
to Baptism, without bringing a Certificate from his Church.

CONFORMITY.
Anciently no Stranger was received without a Testimony from his Church, it is
the Order of the Seventh Cannon of the Council of Antioch in the year 341. Let
no Stranger be received, without Pacifick Letters, It is what appears also by
the Fifty Eighth chap. of the Second Book of Apostolical Constitutions, where
we read, that neither Brother nor Sister of another Church, was to be received
without Letters of Recommendation.

X.
Those which present Children to be baptized must be of competent Age, as of
Fourteen years old, having received the Sacrament; Or if they are more advanced
in Years, and have not received the Lords Supper, promise faithfully to do it,
and are duly catechized.

CONFORMITY.
Herraud Bishop of Touers in his Capitulary of the Year 858, makes this
Ordnance, Tom. 3. Conc. Gall. cap. 55. page 113.
That none shall receive any at the Baptismal Fountain, unless he knows by
heart in his own Language, and understands the Lords Prayer, and the Apostles
Creed, and that all know the Covenant they have made with God. Ibid. page 526.
The Sixth Cannon of the Council of Metz prescribes the same in substance in
the Year 888; Tom. 9. Conc. page 548. and 615.
Cardinal Borrome Archbishop of Millan, in the Fourth and Fifth Councils which
he there caused to be held, in the Year 1573, and 1579, orders the very same,
marking also as well as our Discipline the Age of Fourteen Years; and to
observe the exactness of our Discipline with that of the Ancients, it is to be
known that we admit none to participate of the Holy Sacrament of the Eucharist
till after he has given sufficient proof of his being well-instructed, and of
his knowledge, in the Mysteries of Salvation. The Sixth Council of Paris,
precedent to all the Testimonies I have hitherto cited, seeing it was assembled
in the Year of our Lord 829, This Council complains in the Seventh Cannon, Book
the First, That those which present others to Baptism, Tom. 2. Conc. Gall.
page 487. and 521.
have not knowledge sufficient to instruct them, which he attributes to the
negligence of Conducters, and in the Fifty Fourth Cannon, he will by all means
have them taught to be able to answer for the Instruction of those which they
present; even serving themselves in the Seventh Cannon, of some words of a
Sermon of St. Austins to confirm what he says. 163 de Temp.


XI.
Those which are suspended from the Lords Supper, cannot as Godfathers, present
Children to be baptized, whilst their suspension holds.

CONFORMITY.
This same Council of Paris which I but now cited, prohibits in the last of its
Cannons, that is to say, the Fifty Fourth, it forbids those which for some
Crime, is under Penance, and by consequence excluded from the Sacrament, not
to present any Body at Baptism, until such time as they are reconciled to the
Church. Cardinal Borrome in his First Council of Millan, Tom. 9. Conc. page 453.
which he held Anno 1565, forbids the same thing to all that are Excommunicated.

XII.
Ministers shall diligently warn Godfathers and Godmothers to weigh and
consider the promises they make at the Celebration of Baptism, and Fathers and
Mothers also to choose Godfathers and Godmothers well instructed in Religion,
and of good Life and Conversation, and that may be of their Acquaintance, as
near as may be, and that by their means there may be appearance, in case of
need, the Children may be well Educated.

CONFORMITY.
The Author of the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy, Tom. 2. cap. 7. p. 361, 362.
under the name of Dennis the Areopagite, prescribes just what is appointed by
our Discipline; Jonas Bishop of Orleans follows the same Steps in the Ninth
Century, and Establishes by the words of St. Austin, the Duties wherein
Godfathers and Godmothers stand bound to those which they present to be
Baptized, it is to what he imploys the Sixth Chapter of the First Book of
Instruction of the Layity; and the words of St. Austin he makes use of, Tom. 1.
Spicil. page 19.
are taken out of the Sermon 133, of Time, which is in the Tenth Tome of his
works. Tom. 9. Conc. page 453.
Cardinal Borrome in his first Council of Millan, Anno 1565, follows the same
steps with the Ancients, ordering to warn Godfathers of their Duty toward
their Neophytes, Tom. 5. Spicil. page 212.
both as to Doctrine and Manners, where Fathers and Mothers are wanting. A long
while before this Council of Millan, St. Eloy had recommended the same thing to
Godfathers, and in the Second Book of Capitularies, chap. 46. Godfathers are
enjoined to apply themselves to teaching Children they have presented in
Baptism, because they have answered for them; It is also the subject of a
Cannon of a Council of Reims in Reginon, Lib. 1. cap. 272.

XIII.
Those which by Trustees shall present Children to be Baptized in the Churches
of Rome, shall be severely sensur'd, as consenting to Idolatry.

CONFORMITY.
In the Ancient Church those which lived in a Communion separate from others,
never presented their Children to be baptized in those Societies whereof they
were not Members, and with whom they held no fellowship nor correspondence in
matters relating to Religion and the service of God.

XIV.
As for Names given to Children, Ministers shall reject as much as in them
lies, and as shall be expedient, those that savor of Ancient Paganism, and
shall impose on the said Infants, the Names attributed to God, in the Church,
as Emanuel, and the like; and moreover shall admonish Fathers and Godfathers to
choose Names approved in the Holy Scripture, as much as may be possible. If
they have a desire to some other, they may be admitted, those abovesaid only
excepted, and such as may tend to indecency.

CONFORMITY.
Dennis Bishop of Alexandria, observes in Eusebius, That the Ancient Christians
were wont to give their Children, the Names of Peter, Paul, and other Holy Men,
as well to show the Love and Respect they bore those Holy Persons, as to render
their Children as dear in the sight of God, as those Holy Men were. St.
Chrysostom writes that the Antiochians loved Miletius their Pastor so tenderly,
that they called their Children by his Name, for this end forgetting that of
their Ancestors: And in the Twenty First Homily on Genesis, which is in the
Second Volumne, he Exhorts his Auditors not too lightly to impose all sorts of
Names, no not even those of their Grandfathers and Great Grandfathers, and
those which have been illustrious by Birth, on their Children, but rather the
Names of these Holy Men, which have been celebrated for their Virtues, and in
favor with God; and elsewhere he complains of those which do otherwise;
according to which Eusebius speaks in his Book of the Martyrs of Pallestine,
chap. 11. of Five Martyrs, that having quitted the Names they received from
their Fathers, because, says he, they were it may be some Idol Names, they
took the Names of Elias, of Jeremiah, of Esaiah, of Samuel, and Daniel. The
Fourth Council of Millan whereof we spoke on the Tenth Article, requires this
Custom to be followed. I think therefore our Discipline does very well in
keeping the medium, betwixt too great a Severity and too great Indulgence,
whereunto the Establishments of our National Synods agree very well on this
Article.

XV.
Ministers shall warn their Flocks to behave them with all due Reverence when
the Sacrament of Baptism is administered. And to avoid the contempt most People
make of Baptism either going out of the Assembly, or behaving themselves in it
irreverently when it is administered, it has been thought good that for the
future it be administered before singing the last Psalm, or at least before the
last Prayer, and the People shall be warned to bear the same Reverence in the
Administration of Baptism as of the Lords Supper, seeing Jesus Christ with his
benefits is offered us in the one as well as the other Sacrament.

CONFORMITY.
In the Fifth Action of the Council of Constantinople under Memma, Tom. 4.
Conc. page 109.
which was its Bishop about the Year of our Lord 536, there is a request of the
Church of Apamia,, where is shown the profound respect one ought to have in the
time of administering Baptism; thence it is the Ancient Doctors do call it a
Mystery, or terrible Mysteries. There is in the Euchology or Ritual of the
Greek Church, an excellent Oration to the Catecumeny which are on the point of
receiving Baptism, Page 340. Par. 1647
in the which is represented in a touching and Pathetical manner, the dignity
of this August Sacrament, with the reverence and holy fear one should have when
one celebrates it. Cardinal Borrome in his Fifth Council of Millan, assembled
Anno Dom. 1579. Appoints all Curates, To warn frequently all those which assist
at the Celebration of Holy Baptism, Tom. 9. Conc. page 616.
to bring all manner of Piety, Devotion, and attention, meditating secretly and
with care, the promises they have made to God, when they were Baptized: It is
not therefore to be wondered if St. Chrysostom speaks of the Baptismal
Fountain, as of a redoubtable and desirable Pool both together, In illud fi^^^
(...) reg. Caesor. Patrisam. Tom. 6. p. ^^0.
and if he Exhorts those which are going to be baptized to prostrate themselves
as Captives before their King, to cast themselves on their knees, lifting up
their hands to Heaven where the King of us all, says he, is sitting on a Royal
Throne, because in effect, we owe this respect and veneration to his
Sacraments, at all times that we are present when they are Celebrated.

XVI.
The Consistory shall have an Eye over those which without great
Considerations, keep their Children long from being Baptized.

CONFORMITY.
St. Cyprian, Ep. 59. page 95.
or rather a Synod of 66 Bishops of which he was Chief, appointed that Infants
newly born should be Baptized, without deferring too long Baptising them, and
condemned the Opinion of a certain Bishop called Fidus, that would have it put
off to the Eighth day, as formerly to Circumcise them. Pope Syricius in his
Letter to Himerius Bishop of Tarragona, Tom. 1. conc. c. 2. page 689.
writes toward the end of the 4th. Century, that he thinks convenient young
Infants should speedily be Baptized. The V. Cannon of the Council of Gironda in
Catalonia, assembled in the year 517, prescribes that they should be baptized
the very same day they are born, if it happen they are infirm, which is very
common. Tom. 3. conc. page 806.
Peter Chrisologus Bishop of Ravenna shows sufficiently in his 10th. Homily,
that care must be taken to administer Baptism to young Children. Him that writ
the forged Ecclesiastical Hierarchy in the name of Dennis the Areopagite, Tom.
2. page 360, 361.
is of the same Mind, and even attributes it to the Apostles, although he
determines not exactly the time. I should never have done should I produce all
the Testimonies of the Ancients touching the Baptising young Children, seeing
it has always been practiced in the Church; my design is chiefly to show that
the Authors of our Discipline had reason when they appointed not to defer
Baptising of young Children too long; and I have sufficiently showed that this
practice is conformable to that of the Ancient Church.

Nevertheless it is not to be thought this practice has always been so well
established in the Church, that it has not found some Opposers, Tertullian in
the Eighteenth Chapter of his Treatise of Baptism, would have their Baptism put
off till they were of Age to give an account of their Faith. Gregory of
Nazianzen don't go quite so far, Orat. 40. p. 658. To. 1.
but at least it should seem convenient they should be of three or four years
of Age before they receive the honor of Baptism; because he thinks at that Age
they may understand some questions as may be asked them, and make answer
thereunto. The Christians of Thessaly referred the Christening of their
Children till Easter whatever accident befell them, so that a great many of
them dyed without Baptism, as Socrates observes in his Ecclesiastical History,
Chap. 12. Book 5. The more I consider all these things, the more I approve the
Conduct of our Discipline, which prudently enjoins Consistories to take care
that the Baptising of Infants should not be deferred too long.

As for Adults, it is well known that in the Primitive Church, many deferred
their Baptism a long while, and many times to the end of their Life; but it is
also known that the Fathers have condemned those which did after this Manner.

XVII.
Although a believing Man has a Wife of the contrary Religion, yet is he not
excused if his Child be presented to be Baptized in the Romish Church, and
therefore, shall not be admitted to the Lords Supper, unless it be so that he
has hindered it with all his might.

CONFORMITY.
Besides what I have said on the 13th. Article, it must be observed, that the
Father is Master of his Children, and shall join to this remark the 14th.
Cannon of the Council of Calcedon, which prescribes to Readers and Singers,
which are Married, not to permit their Children to be Baptized elsewhere than
in the Catholic Church, if by chance their Wifes lived in another Communion;
and if unknown to them they have caused them to be Baptized in the Society
whereof they are Members, it enjoins them, that is to say, the Husbands, to
bring them back into the bosom of the Church, out of the which they have been
Baptized.

XVIII.
Baptisms shall be Registered, and carefully kept in the Church, with the Names
of Fathers and Mothers, and Godfathers and Godmothers, and Children baptized;
and the Fathers and Godfathers shall be bound to bring a Ticket wherein shall
be contained the Name of the Child, of the Father and Mother, and Godfather and
Godmother thereof, and the Day of its Birth also shall be expressed.

CONFORMITY.
The Author of the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy, falsely attributed to Dennis the
Areopagite, makes mention of this Custom, according to which was Registered the
Names of those which were Baptized, Tom. 2. cap. 2.
and of the Persons which presented them. The Friar Maximus his Scholiast,
confesses it so in the VII. Century. As he fully explains himself in his Notes
on the place we but now obser'd, and Pachymeres who made a Paraphr^se on this
same Writer, in the 13th. Century, has not passed over this Circumstance in
silence, observing that the Priests and Deacons wrote on Holy Tables, the Names
of them who were Christened, and of their Godfathers; It Is true he was mistaken
in thinking these Tables was that which in the Church was called the Book, or
the Diptyches of the Living; for this public Begister where the Names of the
Baptized and those which presented them, was a different thing from the Sacred
Diptychs, which were a kind of little Book of two Leaves, in one of which was
writ the name of the Living, whereof there was commemoration made at the time
of Celebrating the Eucharist.

However it be, page 216. page 341.342. Tom. 9. conc. page 412. cap. 2. de
reform. Matrim.
I make no question but the Greek Ritual makes allusion to the practice I
Examine, in a fine Exhortation which the Bishop makes to the Catechumeny on Good
Friday; The Council of Trent in the 24th. Session, Anno 1563. appoints Curats
to write the Names of the Baptized, and of the Godfathers and Godmothers.
Cardinal Borrome who gloried to hold to the Decisions of the Council of Trent,
Ibid. p. 453.
and to see them put in Execution; failed not to prescribe to his Curats in the
first Council of Millan held in the year 1565, Ibid. p. 548, 549, 674.
to have a Book and therein to write the Names and Surnames of the baptized,
also of Father and Mother and Godfathers and Godmothers, together with the day
of the Childrens birth, and of that when they are baptized, which he also
repeats in two other Councils held in the same place, that is in the 4th. and
5th.

XIX.
The Names of Fathers and Mothers of unlawful Children or Bastards, shall be
Registered in the Church Book, that they may be known, except such as are born
in Incest, to the end to extinguish the remembrance of so heinous a Sin, in
which case it shall suffice to name the Mother, with him or her that shall
present the Child. And in all illegitimate, it shall be said, that they are not
born in Lawful Marriage.

CONFORMITY.
This Article is much the same with the precedent One, saving only that there
is question of Children born in unlawful Copulation, which our Discipline
requires to have their baptism Registered, on condition nevertheless, that it
shall be observed they are born bastards; it is to what amounts the Ordinance
of Cardinal Borrome, in the place of the Council of Millan but just now cited,
for he enjoins, that it be marked in the Church-book, if the Children are
begotten in lawful Wedlock.

A Form of Baptism of those which shall be Converted to the Christian Faith, as
well Pagans, Jews, Mahometans, and Anabaptists, which have not been Baptized;
made at the National Synod of the Reformed Churches of France held at
Charanton, in the year, 1644. the 26 of December, and the following Days.
AFter that the Catechumeny has been sufficiently instructed and Catechis'd to
give an account of his Faith, and that the Church shall by good Testimonies
have taken cognizance of the Integrity of the Persons Life and Learning, they
shall by the said Persons be presented to the whole assembly of believers to be
baptized in their presence; And the Minister shall say.

The first Demand.

Do you not confess that you are a Child of Wrath, deserving death and
everlasting damnation?

Answer, Yes.

Demand. Are you not displeased and grieved for all the the sins you have
committed ever since you were born, and don't you promise for ever to forsake
them?

Answer. Yes.

Them. Do you not with all your heart forsake the seducements and temptations of
the Devil and his Angels, of all the Pomps and Vanities of the World, and of
all the Affections and Lusts of the Flesh.

Answ. Yes.

If it be a Pagan the Minister shall say to him.

Them. Do you not believe there is one only God which made Heaven and Earth, who
supports all things by his powerful Word, and in whom we live, move, and have
our being?

Answ. Yes.

Then the following demand shall be made which is common to all, and which are
to be offered to all.

Them. Do you not believe this great God which has created Heaven and Earth is
one in Fssence, and distinguished into three Persons, Equal and Coeternal, the
Father, the Son begotten of the Father from all Eternity, and the Holy Ghost
proceeding Eternal from the Father, and the Son?

Answ. Yes.

If it be a Pagan, the three following Questions shall be proposed.

Them. Do you not believe this great God never leaving himself without Witness,
has manifested himself to Men, not only by his Works, which from their first
production continually publish his Praise and Glory, but also by revealing his
Will for the Salvation of Mankind, contained in the Holy Scriptures called the
Old and New Testament?

Answ. Yes.

Them. Do you not believe that all these Holy Scriptures are divinely inspired,
and continue the perfect Rule of our Faith and good Living?

Answ. Yes.

Them. Do you not protest to resist the Devil to the last minute of your Life,
whom you have hitherto adored, serving sdols made with hands, or the host of
Heaven, or to conclude, those which by Nature are no Gods?

Answ. Yes.

If it be a Jew, these sive Questions shall be made, omiting the four above
expressed, they belonging to Pagans.

Them. Do you not detest the Rebellion and Obstinacy of the Jews, and do not you
beg pardon for having been so long time engaged therein?

Answ. Yes.

Them. Do you not believe that what God has been pleased to reveal to us of his
Will, is contained not only in the Books of the Old, but also in those of the
New Testament?

Answ. Yes.

Them. Do you not believe that Jesus the Son of the Blessed Virgin Mary,
conceived in her by the ineffable Power of the Holy Ghost, and after condemned
to dye on the Cross through the false Accusation of the Jews, by the wicked
Sentence of Pontius Pilate, raised from the dead the third day, and now sitting
in Glory; is God manifest in the Flesh, the Eternal Word of the Father, by
which he created and maintains the whole Universe, the blessed Seed promised to
Adam presently after his Fall, by virtue of whom the Serpents head is broken,
whose coming all the Patriarchs expected with Hope, and the great Prophet and
true Messiah foretold as well by Moses, as by the other Prophets which lived
after him?

Answ. Yes.

Them. Do you not believe that the Lord Jesus is the fulfilling of the Law in
Righteousness to all which believe, the truth of his Types and Figures, the
true Lamb of God which takes away the Sins of the World, and that in him
dwells the fullness of the Godhead bodily?

Answ. Yes.

Them. Do you not believe that now the observation of Legal Ceremonies is not
only superfluous, but also wholly prejudicial to a good Conscience?

Answ. Yes.

If the Catecumeny be a Mohammedan, the Minister shall ask these following
Questions, omitting the former, which particularly refer to Pagans or Jews.

Them. Do you not believe that the Scriptures of the Old and New Testament are
inspired of God, and conttain his whole Will for the Salvation of Mankind, and
the only perfect Rule of Faith and good Living.

Answ. Yes.

Them. Do you not believe that Jesus the Son of the Blessed Virgin Mary,
conceived in her by virtue of the Holy Ghost, and made after the Flesh of her
substance, is God and Man blessed for ever, perfect God, and perfect Man, Man
made of a Woman in the fullness of time, and God ingender'd of God the Father
before all Eternity?

Answ. Yes.

Them. Do you not believe that the Lord Jesus from his first conception after
the Flesh, was Holy, Innocent, without Spot, separate from Sinners, and that he
suffered not Death for his Sins, but for ours

Answ. Yes.

Them. Do you not believe that his Death is the propitiation of our sins, yea,
for the sins of the whole World; and that this propitiation is of infinite
Merit, whereby Eternal Glory and Salvation has been acquired for us?

Answ. Yes.

Them. Do you not believe Mahomet was a Deceiver, and that his Alcoran is a
Sacrilegious heap of Dreams full of absurdities, and broached a purpose to set
up a false and abominable Religion.

Answ. Yes.

Them. Do you not believe that the Gospel of our Lord Jesus is the power of God
to Salvation in all them which believe, That the only Christian Religion, is
the power of God to Salvation in all them which believe, that the only
Christian Religion, is that alone whereby God the Father has revealed his good
pleasure for the Salvation of Mankind until the end of the World, that since
the manifestation thereof, there is no other to be expected, that the Lord
Jesus Christ only, is the great Prophet promised to the Believers of the Old
Testament, and that God having formerly spoken in diverse manners to Men,
before, and under the Law, has spoke to the Church of the New Testament by the
Mouth of his only Son Jesus?

Answ. Yes.

Quest. Repeat the summary of your Faith?

Answ. I believe in God the Father Almighty, Maker of Heaven, and Earth, etc.

If the Catecumene be an Annabaptist, the Minister shall say,

Quest. Do you not believe that the Lord Jesus is and shall be true God and Man
in both Natures Eternally, that he was according to his Manhood like to us in
all things sin only excepted, so that he was the true Son of Abraham, of David,
of the Blessed Virgin, proceeding from their Blood and Seed, and that the
substance of his Body was formed not only of the Virgin, according to what the
Apostle says, that he was of the Seed of David according to the Scriptures,
that he was made of a Woman, and that he partook of Flesh and Blood like other
Children?

Answ. Yes.

Quest. Do you not believe that the baptizing of young Infants is grounded in
the Scriptures, and in the continual practice of the Church?

Answ. Yes.

Quest. Do you not with all your heart renounce the Errors of those which deny
it; and are you not sorry for having hitherto slighted it.

Answ. Yes.

Quest. Do you not believe that the Establishing of Magistrates is an Ordnance
of God, to the which those which refuse to submit, draw down damnation on
themselves; And that all manner of Obedience after the Will of God is due to
them?

Answ. Yes.

Quest. Do you not believe that this good God which calls us all by the
Preaching of his Word to Life and Salvation, has instituted some Signs and
Sacraments in his Church, which Seal and Confirm to us the Covenant of Grace,
which is offered to us by the Preaching of the Gospel?

Answ. Yes.

Quest. How many Sacraments think you there are in the Christian Church?

Answ. Two, to wit, Baptism, and the Lords Supper.

Quest. Do you not desire to be instructed in the Nature and Use of Baptism
which you desire in the Church?

Answ. Yes.

Quest. The Minister shall say, Our Lord shows us all in what poverty and
misery we were born, in telling us we must be regenerated, for if it be needful
our Nature be renewed to have admission into the Kingdom of Heaven, it is a
sign it is wholly sinful and cursed; therein therefore he warns us to be
humbled, and cast down in our-selves, and in this manner he prepares us to
desire and seek his favor, whereby all the perverseness and evil of our first
Nature shall be abolished; for we are not capable of receiving it, until first
we have wholly laid aside all trust in our own Strength, Wisdom, Righteousness,
even to condemning all that is in us.

Now when he has shown us our misery, he then comforts us by his mercy,
promising to regenerate us by his Holy Spirit to a Holy Life, which shall be to
us as the entrance into his Kingdom; This Regeneration consists in two parts,
which is that we should deny our selves, not following the way of our own
reason, our Pleasure, and own Will, but subjecting our understanding and heart
to the Wisdom and Will of God, mortifying all that is of us, and of the Flesh,
afterward we should follow the light of God, to comply and submit to his Holy
Will, as he commands us by his Word, and bads us by his Spirit. The
accomplishment both of the one and the other is in our Lord Jesus, whose Death
and Passion is of such Virtue, that partaking thereof, we are as it were Dead
to Sin, to the end that our fleshly Lusts should be mortified. In like manner
by virtue of his Resurrection, we may be raised to a new Life, which is God,
being Governed and Conducted by his Holy Spirit which works in us things well
pleasing in his sight. Nevertheless the first and principal point of our
Salvation, is that by his Mercy he pardon and forgives us all our sins not
imputing them to us, but blotting them out that they should not rise up in
Judgment against us. All these Graces are bestowed on us when he is pleased to
ingraff us into his Church by Baptism; for in this Sacrament he assures us of
the pardon of our sins; And to this end he has appointed the Sign of Water, to
show us, That as by this Element Bodily filthiness is washed away, he will also
wash and purify our Souls, that there might be no spot in them. Then he shows
us our Renovation, the which lies, as has been said, in the Mortification of
our Flesh, and in a Spiritual Life which he works in us.

So shall we receive double Grace and benefit of our God in Baptism, provided
we do not frustrate the virtue of this Sacrament by our ingratitude, which is
that we have therein certain assurance that God will be a merciful Father to
us, not imputing our Sins and Offenses.

Secondly, That he will assist us by his Holy Spirit, to the end we may resist
the Devil, Sin, and the Lusts of the Flesh, even till we triumph over them, to
live in the liberty of his Kingdom, which is the Kingdom of Righteousness.

Seeing then it is so that these two things are accomplished in us by the love
of Jesus Christ, it follows that the virtue and substance of Baptism is
comprised in him, and indeed we have no other cleansing but his Blood, nor no
other renewing but in his Death and Resurrection, but as he communicates to us
his Riches, and Blessings by his Word, so also he distributes them to us by his
Sacraments.

Now herein appears the wonderful Love of God toward us, that those Graces he
bestows upon us, having before the coming of the Messiah been restrained within
the People of the Jews, and the partition Wall which separated the Jews and
Gentiles being taken away by the Death of Jesus Christ, he shed abroad the
Waters of his Saving Grace in such abundant manner, on the Children of Men,
that in him there is now neither Jew nor Greek, Male nor Female, Circumcision
nor Uncircumcision, nor any other Creature else, which can hinder us from this
great Salvation, that Jesus Christ will be preached to all Nations, and the
Covenant of his Love confirmed by Baptism, according to the Commission given
to his Apostles, saying, Go Preach to all Nations, Baptizing them in the Name
of the Father, of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost; And it is this Grace,
Brother, which you desire to partake of by Baptism, is it not true?

Answ. Yes.

Quest. But because entering into the House of God every one should take care of
his ways, fearing to profane the the Sanctuary, in adventuring according to
the saying of the Wise Man, least he should offer the Sacrifice of Fools, and
that he should be cleansed from the Leven and Error of Malice, do you not
detest all the Errors which are contrary to the Holy Doctrine taught in our
Churches.

Answ. Yes.

Quest. Seeing you are about to receive Holy Baptism, do not you promise to
live and dye in the Faith of the Lord Jesus heretofore confessed by you,
accompanying it with a Holy Life and Conversation, and to employ all your
Thoughts, Words, and Actions to glorify God, and edify your Neighbors,
submitting your self to the Order of the Church, and to the Discipline whereby
this Holy Order shall inviolably be maintained.

Answ. Yes.

This being done, the Minister shall add, Let us pray to God that he would be
pleased to Bless this Holy Action, and shall pray after this manner.

Lord our God, infinitely Wise and Merciful, we Praise and Bless thy Holy Name,
for the favor thy good hand has vouchsafed to shed abroad on this thy Servant,
who was in the most profound darkness of the shadows of Death when thou did
illuminate him, causing to shine on him the saving and quickening Light of the
Day Star from on high, drawing him from a deplorable hardness to soften his
heart, and freeing him from the bands of Death, to restore him to Life; as Lord
thou have taken away the vail which was on his heart, calling him to confess
the only true God, and him whom thou have sent, Jesus Christ, and have at this
time inspired him with courage to make public Confession of thy most Holy
Faith, and of the hope thou have caused to spring in his Soul, enabling him to
present himself in thy sight to receive Holy Baptism, the Seal of thy
Covenant, pledge of the remission of sins, and Symbol of our entrance into thy
House by Spiritual Regeneration. Look Lord, more and more on him, with the eye
of thy favor, forgiving all his sins, sprinkling his Soul with the precious
Blood of the Lamb without spot, which takes away the sins of the Woold, and
making him feel the powerful virtue of its propitiation, let thy Spirit
sanctify and make him a new Creature, to the end that dying to sin, he may
live unto Righteousness, and laying aside the Old Man with its Lusts, he may
put on the New Man, which is renewed in Righteousness and true Holiness: And as
we are about to pour on his head the water of thy Sacrament, shed forth on him
the Gifts and Graces of thy Holy Spirit, receiving him into the number of thy
Servants, and honoring him with the Adoption of thy Children. Enable him to
offer unto thee during the whole course of his Life, the Obedience and
Religious Service which is due unto thee, and for ever to persevere in thy Holy
Covenant, to the end that as now in thy Name, we receive him into the Communion
of thy Church Militant, thou will vouchsafe one day to receive him into thy
Church Triumphant, and gather him for ever into the Assembly of the First born
whose Names are written in Heaven. Hear us O Father of all Mercies, to the end
the Baptism we confer upon him according to thine Ordinance, may produce its
Fruit and Virtue, as it is revealed to us in thy Holy Gospel in thy Son our
Savior Jesus Christ, who has commanded us to pray unto thee, and say, Our
Father which art in Heaven, etc.

Speaking to those who present the Catecuminy, the Minister shall say to them.

Quest. As you have been charitably employed in the Teaching and Instructing
our Brother, and are Witnesses of the Baptism he is to receive at this present
by our Ministry; Do you not promise in the presence of God and this Holy
Assembly, to continue more and more to strengthen him in the Faith, and exhort
him to good Works.

Answ. Yes.

This being done, speaking to the Catecumeny which waits, kneeling to receive
Baptism, powing the Water on his head, the Minister shall say, Having seen the
Testimonies of your Faith, N. I Baptize you in the Name of the Father, of the
Son, and of the Holy Ghost; Amen.

CONFORMITY.
There is nothing in all this formulary as large as it is, which is not found
in substance in what we have remaining of the Catechisms of the Ancient Doctors
of the Church, and in what was practiced toward those to whom Baptism was to
be conferred; and because most part of those which converted themselves to the
Christian Faith, turned from Paganism, where they had learned to believe and
serve several Gods, the first step they were made go in the way of Salvation,
was to make them renounce this Diabolical Doctrine, afterward to believe, and
be thoroughly persuaded that there is but one True God, which has made Heaven
and Earth, that supports all things by his Almighty Word, who gives us our
Life, Being, and Motion, who never left himself without Witness, and has
manifested himself to Men, not only by his Works, but also by Revelation of his
Will, contained in the Holy Scriptures of the Old and New Testament. Tom. 1.
page 93.
The first act of Faith of the Catecumeny's, says St. Cyril of Alexandria in
the third Book of Adoring in Spirit and Truth, is to depart from the belief and
opinion touching the plurality of Gods, and to embrace him who is the only true
God by Nature.

Theodolphus Bishop of Orleans in a Treatise he made of the Order, which is to
be observed in the administration of Baptism, establishes near hand the same
practice when he writes in chap. 2. that the first instruction which is given
to Catechumenies, is, that there is one true God, to the end that leaving the
worship of the creature, they should Consecrate themselves to the Worship of
God the Creator.

It Is true that when 'twas a Jewish Proselite, he was obliged before Baptism,
to renounce particularly all legal Ceremonies, to the Ancient, Material and
Typical Worship, to the Jewish Washings and Purifications, to their Feasts,
their New Moons and Sabbaths, and generally to all that pertained to the
Synagogue, especially to the false Messiah they yet expect, and will never
come. Moreover they were to make open profession to believe in God the Father,
Son and Holy Ghost, Holy, Consubstantial and individual Trinity, that they
should admit of the Incarnation of the Eternal Word Jesus Christ our Savior,
in confessing he is come into the World, and that he is made Man, but not
ceasing to be God, the Holy Virgin having brought him forth after the Flesh,
and by this means being become the Mother of God. It is after this manner they
proceeded with the Jewish Proselites, Page 344. Par. 1647
as we find by a Catechism in the Ritual of the Greeks, which in substance
answers to what is prescribed in our Discipline.

But if it was a Mahumetan that embraced the Christian Religion, the first
thing that was required of him, was to Anathematise Mahomet, his Sectators, his
Successors, his lying Alcoran, full of Impostures and Dreams, especially in
what regards our Savior Jesus Christ; in a Word, all the impieties which
depend of the Carnal Religion of this infamous Impostor of the East; which
being done this Proselite made this Declaration; I now adhere to Jesus Christ
the only true God, I believe in the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, holy,
indivisible and consubstantial Trinity, I believe the Mystery of the
Incarnation, and the coming into the World of one of the holy Trinity, that is,
of the Word and only begotten Son of God, who was begotten of the Father before
the World began, by whom all things were made, and I am persuaded he is true
Man without being divested of his Divinity, for he is true God and true Man,
without confusion, without conversion, and without alteration, with two Natures
in one sole Person; I confess also he suffered all things voluntarily, that he
was crucified according to the Flesh, the Divinity remaining impassible, that
he was buried, that he rose again the third day, that he ascended into Heaven,
and that he will come in glory to Judge the quick and the dead; to conclude, I
confess and believe that the holy Virgin is preperly and truly Mother, and the
Mother of a God which made himself Man.

Those who desire to be more fully informed of what I have now discoursed, may
Read the formulary of Nicetas whereof I have made mention on the 3 article of
this chapter, and in the place I marked.

After all, it is most certain the Catechumeny were instructed on all the
articles of the Symbol, which comprehend the principal points of Christianity,
and the essential and capital points of Religion; the Catechisms of St. Cyrill
of Jerusalem show so much, seeing he there Explains all those saving truths,
which those ought to know which fitted themselves to receive holy Baptism: in
effect, they often heard mention made of God the Father and the Work of
Creation, with the Titles of Father, of Almighty, and of Creator, which are
given to him; of Jesus Christ, and of the work of Redemption with his quality
of only begotten Son of God; of the Holy Ghost, and the Work of Sanctification;
they were taught there were three Persons in Unity of One and the same Essence;
that the second Person of the Trinity took on him our Nature in the Womb of the
Virgin Mary by the Operation of the Holy Ghost, to the end he might dye, and by
his death make Expiation for our Sins, fully satisfy his Fathers Justice for
us, appease his Wrath, and restore us into his Favor.

They often heard mention made of his Person, of his two Natures, Divine and
Humane, of his Employments and Offices, of the Mysteries of his Incarnation,
the Wonders of his Birth, the Holiness of his Life, the Glory of his Miracles,
the meanness of his Cross, the shame of his Sufferings, the power of his
Resurrection, and the Glory of his Ascension and of his Triumph; thence they
proceeded to the Explication of the Article of the Holy Ghost whose Divinity
and Operations were established; Jesus Christ having sent Him from Heaven on
the Apostles for the establishing his Kingdom, and for Illuminating and
Sanctifying those which he was effectually to call to the Communion of his
Gospel. To conclude, they were made understand the Nature of the Holy Church
which was to beget them anew unto God, of the Graces he bestows on it in this
Life, and of the Glory he prepares for it in that which is to come. All these
thing are at large treated of in the Catechisms of S. Cyril which I have cited;
and they are seen more succinctly in the 7 chapter of the little Treatise of
Theodulphus of whom I have also spoke, and in that of Amalarius Archbishop of
Treves, Page 1151 Par. 1617
dedicated to Charlemain in the works of Alcuin.

Besides, it must not be thought that in the ancient Church they satisfied
themselves with explaining to the Catechumenies the things which I but now
touched, it was also necessary they should give an account in answering the
questions put to them on each article; according to which Eusebius makes
mention in his Ecclesiastical History of a man, Lib. 7. c. 9.
which had assisted at the Baptism of those which had been newly Baptized, and
he said, he heard their Questions and Answers: St. Cyprian in his 70 Epistle
speaks also of this custom, when he says, the Question it self made at
Baptism, is witness of the Truth. Firmillian Bishop of Cesaria in Cappadocia
teaches us the same thing, when speaking of a woman which boasted to be a
Prophetess, he says that to give the more color to her Delusions, Apad Cypri.
Ep. 75. page 147.
She Baptized several persons using the usual words which were wont to be
employed in the Interrogations, to the end her Baptism should not seem to differ
in any thing from the Ecclesiastical Rule, seeing that neither the Symbol of
the Trinity, nor the usual and Ecclesiastical Interrogations was omitted by her.

It is to which doubtless the first Council of Arles had regard, Tom. 1. conc.
Gal. page 6.
when in the year 314 it appointed in the 8th. of it is Cannons, not to
re-baptise Heretics, if after Examining them on the Creed, one found that they
had been Baptized in the Name of the Father, of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost;
but only those amongst them who being interrogated, answered not this Trinity,
that is to say, to the questions made them touching the Trinity of Persons, and
unity of their Essence.

St. Page 86. Par 1631
Cyril of Jerusalem has not forgot this Circumstance in his two Mystagogical
Catechisms, no more than Optatus of Mileua in his 5th. Book against Parmenian;
nor St. Jerome in the 5th. Chapter of his Dialogue against the Luciferians, nor
St. Austin in the 20th Chapter of the 5th. Book against the Donatists, and he
even tells us in his 23th. Epist. to Bonifacius, that when Little Children were
Baptized, those which presented them, answered for them to all the
Interrogations which were made, and the Author of the Book of Ecclesiastical
Dogma's in the Appendix of the 3d. Tome of his Works, establishes the same
Custom in the 52 Chap. The Author of the Book of Sacraments in the 4th. Vol. of
the Works of St. Ambrose, also observes this Custom in the 7th. Chap. of the
2d. Book. And a great while before, Tertullian in the 3d. Chap. of the Book of
the Crown, had made mention of the Answers of those which were Baptized;
therefore he could have wished they had deferred the Baptism of Children, until
they were in a state of being able to give an account of their Faith; which
opinion St. Gregory of Nazianzen seemed also to approve.

In the book of Sacraments of Gregory I. Page 73.
it is demanded of the Party to be baptized, Do you believe in God the Father
Almighty, maker of Heaven and Earth? He answers, I do believe. Do you believe
in Jesus Christ his only Son our Lord, which was born, and suffered? I do
believe. Do you also believe in the Holy Ghost? do you believe the holy
Catholic Church, the Communion of Saints, the forgiveness of Sins, the
Resurrection of the Body, and the Life Everlasting? I do believe. Do you desire
to be Baptized? I do. Something to this purpose is to be read in the book of
Sacraments, whereof I made mention in the foregoing Section, and in the place I
noted. Besides, there is great probability that St. Peter made Allusion to this
practice when he said in the 3d. Chap. of his first Epistle, that the Baptism
whereby we are saved, is not that whereby the filthiness of the Flesh is
washed, but the witness of a good Conscience in the sight of God the
Resurrection of Jesus Christ. The Greek Word which we have translated Witness,
signifies properly Interrogation. I add for a Conclusion of these matters, that
those which were to be baptized were bound to recite the Symbol of their Faith,
to renounce the Devil, to his Power, and his Angels; to acknowledge that they
were by Nature Children of Wrath, and to show Repentance and Sorrow for their
Sins committed during the time of their Ignorance, and if they were instructed
in the knowledge of Heavenly things, they were also taught to live well, that
is to say, holily, and in a way answerable to their Vocation. The Nature and
Fruits of Baptism was explained to them. They had also some Light of the
Eucharist showed them, because they did communicate presently after being
baptized, and all these things were accompanied with Ardent Prayers to God as
well to render him thanks for calling them to his blessed Communion, as to
implore his Grace and Benediction on them at the very instant that he honored
them with the seal of his Covenant, and Sacrament of our Salvation. After all I
have said, the perfect resemblance may easily be seen which is found in the
Matter I Examine, betwixt our practice and that of the Ancient Church, if you
except what regards Anabaptists, which appearing but in the last Century, could
be neither the Subject nor Matter of any of the Decrees of the Cannon Law.

CHAP. XII. Of the LORDS SUPPER.
ARTICLE I.
WHere there is not a settled Church, it is not permitted to celebrate the
Lords Supper.

CONFORMITY.
The reason of this First Article is, because the Lords Supper is so called by
reason of the Communion of those which participate thereof, it is the Opinion
of St. Chrysostom which he has thus Expressed, Hom. 21. Tom. 5. page 312.
The Apostle calls it the Lords Supper, because all those which are invited,
take it in common, with concord. The Author of the Commentaries on St. Paul's
Epistles in St. Jerome's Works, says, That the Lords Supper ought to be common
to all: In 4 Cor. 11.
The Lords Supper, says St. Isidore of Sevil, is so called, from the Communion
of those which Eat of it, and the Communicants, from their assembling in
Common; Orig. l. 20. page 132.
thence it is that Justin Martyr writes in his first Apology that they
assembled on Sundays from the Cities, and from the Country round about, to hear
the Word of God, page 93. cum. 97.
and to partake of the Holy Sacrament, and he also observes they sent some to
the absent, to show doubtless the Communion they had together, and I cannot tell
but 'twas with respect hereunto that the Council of Laodicea conceived in these
Terms the 58th. Cannon; Bishops nor Priest must not make Oblations in private
Houses: that is to say, that they should not there Celebrate the Eucharist,
which was not begun to be celebrated without Communicants till about the 12th.
Century; Part. 1. c. 11.
as I have sufficiently proved in the History of the Sacrament.

II.
Children under twelve years of Age shall not be admitted to the Lords Supper,
but above this Age, it shall be at the discretion of the Ministers to Judge of
those which shall be fit to be admitted or not.

CONFORMITY.
It may seem to be collected from the place in St. Justin Martyr, which I cited
on the other Article, that only persons of Age, and not little Children were
admitted to the Holy Sacrament, and it is very probable that Tertullian was of
this Opinion, because he thought fit to defer the Baptising of Children for
some years, as well as Gregory Nazianzen, as I showed on the foregoing Chapter;
It Is true that since the time of St. Cyprian until about the 12th. Century,
Children were received to the Communion; but this Custom is justly rejected by
those also of the Church of Rome, as well as Protestants: In effect, young
Children are incapable of the Examination St. Paul requires of those which
approach to the Holy Table.

III.
Priests, Friars and other Ecclesiastical Persons of the Church of Rome, shall
not be admitted to the Lords Supper, until they have first made confession in
public of their past life and profession.

CONFORMITY.
This practice is wholly conformable to that of the first Christians, It is not
permitted unto any one whatsoever, says, St. Justin Martyr, to partake with us
of the Sacrament, unless he be fully persuaded of the truth of our Doctrine,
that he has been Baptized to obtain Remission of his Sins with a new Birth,
Apol. 1. p. 97, 98.
and that he lives according to the Laws of Jesus Christ.

IV.
Dignitaries which bear the Name and Title of their benefices, and those which
therewith mingle Idolatry Directly or Indirectly, whether they enjoy their
Benefices by their own hands, or by the hands of others, shall not be admitted
to the Lords Supper.

CONFORMITY.
Those here described not being in the State nor Disposition desired by Justin
Martyr, they cannot be received to the Holy Communion in a Christian Society,
whose Doctrine they do not believe, or that don't gather themselves within the
Laws, and under the Discipline observed in the midst of them.

V.
Ministers shall be warned not to receive to the Lords Supper, Persons of other
Churches, unless they have sufficient testimony from its Minister, or in
default thereof from an Elder, if it possible may be.

CONFORMITY.
The Church has observed this Order from the First Ages; for the Council of
Antioch in the Year 341 forbids in the Seventh Cannon, to admit of any Stranger
without having Pacifick Letters. The Seventh Cannon of the First Council of
Carthage Assembled under Gratus about the Year 348, speaks also more clearly,
forbidding plainly both Clergy and Layity to communicate in any other Church
without their Bishops Letter; Lib. 2. c. 51.
The Author of Apostolical Constitutions prescribes almost the same thing. Page
601, 602.
In the Third Volumne of the French Councils, there is a Synod of Nants, the
time it held is somewhat uncertain, the Two First Cannons whereof are employed
to confirm this same practice.

VI.
A Man that is Deaf and Dumb, which by evident Signs, Tokens, and Gestures,
showing his Piety and Religion what he can, may be admitted to the Holy
Sacrament, when by a long Experience of the Holiness of his Life, the Church
shall perceive he has Faith, and shall be truly taught of God.

CONFORMITY.
The Church never required of Communicants, more than a Holy Mind and
Disposition; wherefore if it is found in a Deaf and Dumb Man, and that he gives
signs of it, he ought to be admitted to the Sacrament, and when I speak of the
Church, I mean that of the Primitive Christians; for in process of time, they
imposed on Communicants an Obligation of Auricular Confession; especially since
the days of Innocent the Third, who made the first Decree for it in his
Latteran Council in the Year of Christ, 1215.

VII.
The Bread of the Sacrament ought to be administered to those which cannot drink
Wine, in making protestation that it is not through contempt, and doing what
they can possible toward it, by putting the Cup as near their Mouth as they
possible can, to avoid giving any manner of Offense.

CONFORMITY.
This is a wise and charitable condescendence toward an insurmountable
weakness of Nature; it was by this Principle the Ancient Church gave the
Sacrament mixed and soaked, to those who lay at the point of Death, Apud. Eusebius.
l. 6. c. 44.
so it was practiced in the Third Century toward a certain Old Man called
Serapion, who was a dying Penitent, for a Priest of Alexandria, sent by a Young
Man, a little, or a Portion of the Sacrament, commanding it should be steept,
and put in the Old Man's mouth that he might swallow it down; but this was not
done, but in case of great necessity; as Hugh Maynard a Learned Benedict in
observes in his Notes on the Book of Sacraments of Gregory the First. The same
favor was used toward Young Infants in the times as they were admitted to the
participation of the Sacraments; and not that only, but Pope Paschal who
succeeded Urban the Second, in the year 1099 commanded that the Two Symbols
should be distributed apart, except 'twere to little Children, and to such as
are extreme sick, for to such he permits that they might be communicated with
the Wine only, because they cannot swallow Bread, The charitable Indulgence
then allowed by our Discipline toward such as have an invincible aversion and
antipathy against Wine, ought not to be blamed.

VIII.
It remains in the Liberty of Ministers, in distributing the Bread and Wine, to
use the accustomed words, the thing being indifferent, provided words are used
that tend to Edification.

CONFORMITY.
When Jesus Christ gave to his Apostles the Sacrament of Bread, he said, this
is my Body, and in giving them the Symbol of Wine, this is my Blood, or, this
Cup is the New Testament in my Blood. As for the Apostles we do not find they
said any thing. In the time of Justin Martyr, Apol. 1. page 97.
the Giver, nor the Communicant said nothing, but the Deacons gave to the
faithful Bread and Wine, which had been Consecrated; And it is gathered from
Clements of Alexandria, Strom. lib. 1. page 271.
that 'twas so practiced at the end of the Second Century, sometime after, it
was said to Communicants in giving them the Sacrament, The Body of Christ, The
Blood of Christ. In the Sixth Century and after, it was said, particularly in
the West, The Body of our Lord Jesus Christ preserve you to Everlasting Life;
The Blood of our Lord Jesus Christ Redeem you to Eternal Life: Euchol. p. 83.
The Greeks say at this time, You participate and communicate of the Holy Body
and Precious Blood of our Lord and Savior, Jesus Christ, for the Remission of
your sins, and to Life Everlasting; Amongst us is commonly said, This is the
Body of Jesus Christ, this is the Blood of Jesus Christ. The Church as any one
may see, having at all times used a great freedom in this matter.

IX.
The Churches shall be advertised, that the Cup is to be administered by the
Minister.

CONFORMITY.
As Jesus Christ Blessed and Consecrated his Eucharist, so he also administered
it, for there was none but him, that did the Office and Duty of a Minister. A
little more than a Hundred years after, Apol. 1. page 97.
Christians received the Communion from the hands of Deacons, as we find by
Justin Martyr, a practice observed a long while, but with some difference; and
it is probable those who did so, grounded themselves on what is said in the VI.
chap. of the Acts, that Deacons should serve at Tables, as if by this
Expression was to be understood the distributing the Sacrament at the Holy
Table, whereas it means no more but the distributing of Alms and Charities, to
Widows and Orphans, and in general to the Poor of the Church. After all, lio.
de Coron. c. 3.
Tertullian observes it was not received but of the hand of him which presided,
that is to say, of Pastors, and probably 'twas in his time the use of the
Churches of Africa, which doubtless were more conformable to the Example and
Practice of Jesus Christ, to which we may add what is said by St. Chrysostom
in his Forty Sixth Homily on St. Matthew; The Priest only is permitted to
distribute the Cup of the Blood of Jesus Christ: The Greek word designs also
Bishops, as well as Sacerdos, which the Interpreter has used.

X.
Inasmuch as distributing the Lords Supper, several sick Persons came to
receive, which occasions that several make scruple of drinking the Wine after
them, the Pastors and Elders shall be warned to take prudent care, and give
good Order therein.

CONFORMITY.
It is a prudent and cautious Establishment, to avoid greater inconvenience.

XI.
Those who have been a long time in the Church, and will not communicate of the
Lords Supper if they do it through contempt, as for fear of being obliged to
forsake all manner of Idolatry, after several admonitions, they shall be cut
off from the body of the Church; but if it be by infirmity, they shall be borne
with for some time, until they can be Established.

CONFORMITY.
There Is nothing in this Article that differs from the practice of the Ancient
Church, which obliged all those which heard the Word of God to participate of
the Lords Supper; it is what is intimated by the Second Cannon of the Council of
Antioch, Those which enter into the Assemblies, and hear the Holy Scriptures,
but by a certain looseness, do not communicate in Prayer with the People, and
deprive themselves of the participation of the Lords Supper, let such be cast
out of the Church. The Ninth of those attributed to the Apostles, and which
probably was borrowed of that of Antioch, is no less positive; All the
Believers which enter into the Church, and that hear the Reading of the
Scriptures, but which stay not for the Prayers, nor do receive the Holy
Sacrament, let them be cut off, because they give offense to the Church. Thence
it is that in the Eleventh chap. of the Eighth Book of Constitutions, called
the Apostles, it is Ordained, That the Deacons should stand at the Doors where
the Men sit, and the Vnder-Deacons of that of the Women, to hinder that no body
go out during the time of the Oblation; that is to say, during the time of
celebrating the Eucharist.

XII.
Those which frequent the Christian Congregations but on the Communion Day,
shall be reproved, and warned to do their Duty, and even to this purpose, to
join to one certain Church.

CONFORMITY.
The Author of Constitutions which go in the Apostles Names, prescribes to
Believers, to frequent the Holy Assemblies not only when the Lords Supper is
celebrated, but also on all other Days, Lib. 2. cap. 59.
there to attend on calling on the Name of God, in singing Psalms, and the
hearing of his Word; The 80th Cannon of the Sixth Ecumenical Council does
depose Churchmen, Tom. 5. Conc. page 344.
and Excommunicate Lay Persons, who being in Town, pass Three Sundays without
being present at the Holy Exercises made in the Assemblies of the Church.

XIII.
Those which make it their practice to hear Sermons in one Church, and to
receive the Holy Sacraments in another, shall be advertised and sensur'd, and
shall associate themselves to the nearest and most convenient Congregation, as
shall be advised by the Colloque.

CONFORMITY.
In the time of St. Justin Martyr, Apol. 1. page 97.
the Christians met together in one place from City and Country, not only to
hear the Word of God, but also to receive the Holy Sacrament. The Council of
Agde in Languedock, which held in the Year 606, Tom. 1. Conc. Gall. cap. 21. p.
165.
suffers those that are far from Parish Churches to have private Oratories for
the ease of their Families, nevertheless enjoins them to be present at their
Parishes on the chief and solemn Feasts of the Year.

Charlemain in his Capitulary of the Year 789, Tom. 2. cap. 9. page 157.
requires it should be done on all Holy Days, and Sundays, and forbids private
Persons to desire Priests to say Divine Service in their Houses on those Days.
Ibid. cap. 45.46. p. 223
Theodulph Bishop of Orleans prescribes the same thing in his, in the Year 797;
to this same Discipline may also be referred the Second Cannon of the Council
of Nants, whereof I spoke on the Fifth Article.

XIV.
Although in our Churches the Lords Supper is not wont to be celebrated above
four times a year, yet it were to be desired it were celebrated oftener, the due
Reverence thereunto belonging being observed, because it is very necessary that
the most upright may be Exercised, and Mercies in Faith by the frequent use of
the Sacraments, as also the Example of the Primitive Church does teach us: And
therefore the National Synod shall give Direction as the good of the Church
shall require.

CONFORMITY.
The lukewarmness of Christians in Piety has been the cause that Communions
have been less frequent than they were in the Primitive times. Therefore our
Discipline has settled them at four times a year, desiring nevertheless that
People were in a state fit to Communicate oftener. The Council of Agde which I
cited on the foregoing Article, reduces it to Three times in the 18th. Cannon.
That of Autun, Can. 14. p. 71.
in the Supplement of French Councils, does the same in the Year 630. Atto
Bishop of Verceil in the Tenth Century renews that of Agde, in its Capitulary.
Tom. 8. Spicil. c. 73. page 27.
Ratherius of Verona in the same Century, speaks of Four times a year in his
Synodal Epistle to the Priests of his Diocese, which is inserted by Don Luke De
Achery in his second Spicilegium. Peter de Celles in his Treatise of Monastical
Discipline, which is in the Third Spicil. writes, page 94.
That it is sufficient for a Lay Person to communicate once a year. The Council
of Trent in the Thirteenth Session under Julius the Third, Anno 1551, the 11th
of October, Anathematises in the Ninth Cannon, Tom. 9. Co^c. p. 382.
all those that shall deny that Believers of both Sexes are obliged to
communicate at Easter, at least once a year, although in the 22th Session,
which is the Sixth under Pius the Fourth in the Year 1562, and the 17th of
September, Ib. p. 40^.
touching the Doctrine of the Sacrifice of the Mass, chap. 6. The Synod desires
that all the Believers which are present should communicate, not only by a
Spiritual affection and desire, but also by a Sacramental participation, which
Cardinal Borrome has not failed to observe, and confirm, in some of the
Councils which he held at Millan. ^^. p. 453, 517, 549.
I almost forgot the Fiftieth Cannon of the Council of Tours, assembled Anno
813. That Lay Persons communicate at least thrice a year, if they cannot
receive oftener, unless that they were hindered by some great Sin; which is
repeated word for word in the 45th. chap. of the Second Book of the
Capitularies of our Kings. Theodulphus Bishop of Orleans, contented himself at
the end of the Eighth Century, to warn Believers that they should not abstain
too long from receiving the Holy Sacrament, and to procure the qualities fit
and necessary when they intended to approach to so great a Sacrament. Ib. c.
44. page 223.
Honorius of Autun observes in the Tenth Volumne of the Library of the Holy
Fathers, page 1198. that 'twas agreed on by reason of worldly Men, that one
should communicate either every Lords Day, or every Third Sunday, or on great
Holy Days, or three times a year.

CHAP. XIII. Of MARRIAGES.
ARTICLE I.
THose which are under Age cannot Contract Marriage without consent of their
Father and Mother, or others under whose care they are committed, nevertheless
if their said Father and Mother be so unreasonable as to refuse to agree to a
thing so Holy and Profitable, even doing it in hatred to Religion, the
Consistory shall advise the Parties to have their recourse to the Magistrate.

CONFORMITY.
The Discipline of the Ancient Church has provided for what ours does here
enjoin, and has taken care to keep Children in the respect and obedience which
they owe to their Parents, forbidding them to marry without their consent, and
it is not only in regard of Children it does so, but also in regard of all such
as are under Tuition of others; It is the matter and subject of the 42 Cannon
of St. Basils second Canonical Epistle. Tom. 3. p. 33.
Marriages made without consent of those under the power of whom one is, are
Fornications, those then who marry during the Life of Father, or Guardian, are
not excusable till their consent be had, for then the Marriage becomes lawful,
and receives the virtue which it ought to have: This Cannon is as 'twere an
abridgement of Two preceding ones, as is observed by Balzamon and Zonares,
Greek Cannonists, who pretend that Marriage is void without the consent I but
now speak of, and that it ought to be dissolved. The 23th Cannon of the same
Epistle is also very full to this purpose, Maids which follow their Lovers
without consent of Father, etc. live in Fornication, but if Father and Mother
are reconciled to them, the thing seems to be settled in a good state by this
remedy; nevertheless that they be not admitted to partake of the Lords Supper
until after three years Penance: Whereupon the same Greek Cannonists
abovementioned, observe, that the consent of Parents, that is to say of Father
and Mother, does change Fornication into lawful Marriage, without departing at
all from the sensure contained in the Cannon.

The 22th Cannon of the Fourth Council of Orleans, Tom. 1. Conc. Gall. p. 265
Ib. p. 316 page 5^4.
in the Year 541, prohibits the taking a Maid in Marriage without consent of
Father and Mother, the Sixth of the Third Synod of Paris, Anno 557 forbids also
the same thing. The Third Council of Toledo made a like Decree Thirty Two years
after the Synod of Paris, and it is still to be seen in the Fourth Volumne of
the Councils, and in the Tenth Cannon, it is to what amounts the 358 chap. of
VII. Book of the Capitularies of Charlemain, and Lewis the Debonnaire. Photius
Patriarch of Constantinople says the same in the Fifth of his Letters taken
out of an Ancient Eastern Manuscript; there is not so much as the very cheat
that has forged Two Decrees in the Name of Pope Evaristas, page 391.
but has in the first of them taught the same Doctrine, and word for word as it
is expressed in the Capitulary, but now cited; so that of necessity one must
have borrowed it of the other. It is easy to judge after all I have hitherto
said, Whether the Council of Trent does march in the steps of the Ancient
Tradition, when in the 24th Session, which is the Eighth under Pius the Fourth,
in the Year 1563, and in the First chap. of the Decree touching the Reformation
of Marriage, Tom. 9. Conc. p. 411.
It anathematises those which affirm Marriages contracted by Children without
consent of the Father and Mother are void, and that the Father and Mother may
break or ratify them: a Condemnation wherein Pope Celestin the First is
concerned if we believe what Gratian reports of him in the First Volume of the
Councils, cap. 4. p. 910.

Whereas our Discipline adds, That if Fathers and Mothers should be so
unreasonable as not to consent to so holy and profitable a thing, the
Consistory may advise the I arties to have their recourse to the Magistrate; it
says nothing therein but what is agreeable to the Ancient Practice, as we find
by the Letter of Photius, page 392.
which I mentioned; for he declares that then the Judge may take cognizance of
the Marriage, and declare it lawful, in preferring the protection of the
Children, and their lawful desire, before the perverseness of Father and Mother.

II.
As for those which are of Age and in possession of their own Rights, they
shall be warned by the Ministers and Public Assemblies of the Church, not to
make any promise of Marriage but in presence of their Parents, Relations,
Neighbors, and good Friends; and those which do otherwise shall be sensur'd of
their lightness, and slight of the said warning; and 'twere to be wished the
said promises of Marriage were made with invocation on the Name of God.

CONFORMITY.
This Establishment was made to prevent Clandestine Marriages; there are put
into the First Volume of the Council, some Decrees attributed by Gratian to
Pope Celestine the First, which in the 4th, ordains that Parents of both Sexes
should be present to witness the Marriage. Paulinus Bishop of Aquilea, in the
Council he caused to assemble in a part of his Diocese called forum-Julii,
desires the Neighbors and chief of the place, should be present at Contracts
of Marriage, to prevent the mischiefs may ensue by Clandestine Marriages. The
Council of Trent in the 24th Session which I mentioned on the other Article,
and in the same Decree of Reforming Marriages, chap. 1. Will, That it be done
in presence of the Curate, or some other Priest that supplies his place, and of
Two or Three Witnesses; Which thing is renewed by Cardinal Borrome, in the
Fifth and Sixth Councils of Millan.

III.
Believers which are of Age, although they have been married, yet shall so far
honor their Father and Mother, as not to conclude upon Marriage without first
communicating it to them, and for not so doing, shall be sensur'd by the
Consistory.

CONFORMITY.
We have already seen on the First Article, That Children under Power of Father
and Mother, cannot lawfully contract Marriage without their consent. In this
there is mention of those which have already been married, and who being
desirous to marry a second time, ought in civility to impart it to them. St.
Ambrose in the Ninth chap. of the First Book, touching Abraham requires that
the Widow Woman which intends to remarry, should refer to Father and Mother to
make choice of the Person which she ought to marry. Balzamon and Zonaras
explaining the 42 Cannon of St. Basils second Canonical Epistle, distinguishes
Widows which are under the power of any Relation, from those which depend only
of themselves; And for these last, they pretend they are at liberty to marry to
whom they please, so it be in the Lord, and according to the Laws and Cannons;
but as for the others, they think they ought to have the consent of those under
whose Tuition they are, and who, without it, have right to dissolve the
Marriage. There is in the Third Tome of the Councils a Decree Attributed to
some Council of Arles, page 823.
where there is mention of the Marriage of Widows, and of the consent of Fathers
and Mothers.

IV.
Fathers and Mothers making profession of the Reformed Religion, whose
Idolatrous Children would contract Marriage with Idolatrous Wifes, shall be
warned as much as possible to divert their Children from such Marriages; and
especially when they are not too hasty, the Fathers shall employ their Paternal
Power to hinder them; if they cannot prevail with them, being present when
contract marriage is passing, they shall declare to have abhorrence of the
Idolatry wherein their Children do more and more plunge themselves; which being
done, the said Fathers may consent to the promises and conditions concerning
the Portion, and the like; and shall represent in Consistory the endeavors
they have used to prevent such marriages.

CONFORMITY.
We shall see on the Twentieth Article that it was prohibited to the Orthodox
to marry with Persons of a contrary Religion, unless they promised to embrace
the Orthodox Religion, and that they should accomplish their promise before
Marriage; therefore the Fathers and Mothers could not consent to such Marriages
but under the Conditions enjoined by the Cannons. It cannot then be said that
our Discipline differs from that of the Ancient Christians in the Matter which
we Examine, and the which shall receive farther Explanation from what shall be
said on the Twentieth Article.

V.
Henceforward shall be used in promises and Contracts of Marriage, terms of the
Future Tense; and the said words shall not be esteemed so binding as words of
the Present, seeing words of the Present do not promise Marriage; but does it
in effect; nevertheless these promises by words of the Future, shall not be
dissolved without great and lawful causes.

CONFORMITY.
Of all the Articles of our Discipline, there has scarce any one been so often
touched by the National Synods as this, by reason of the difference which is
found betwixt the Ancient and Modern way of Marrying; for formerly the promises
of Marriage were made by words of the Present, and now they are made by words
of the Future Tense, according to the Laws of the Kingdom, and the
Establishment of this same Discipline. I find nothing in the first Ages of the
Church that can inform me the manner that was used in contracts of Marriage,
that is to say, whether promises of Marriage were conceived by words of the
Present, or by words of the Future Tense: I only judge by things happened in the
latter Ages, that in some places these promises were made by words of the
Present; which at last was forbidden.

In effect, Tom. 11. Spicil. p. 205.
in the year 262. Nicholas Gilant Bishop of Angers, made this Synodal Decree,
We appoint our Priests that they do not consent, but to forbid publicly in
their Churches, to contract Marriage by words of the Present, until one be come
to the Nuptial benediction. The Fifth Council of Millan under Cardinal Borrome
^^^scribes the same thing in the Year 1^79. Tom. 9. Conc. p 633.


VI.
As for Consanguinity and Affinity, Believers cannot contract Marriage, any
other way than is permitted by the Kings Edict.

CONFORMITY.
When one lives in a Country, one must submit to the Laws Established for the
quiet of the Subjects, as to what concerns the things of this Life; and it is by
this maxim that we carefully observe the Edicts and Laws of our Kings touching
the Degrees of Affinity and Consanguinity in marriage.

VII.
It is by no means Lawful to go to the Pope to demand to be dispensed in the
hindrances of Marriage, because in doing hereof one owns his Tyranny, but one
may in a Degree not forbidden of God, though prohibited by the Civil Power,
Address one self to the King.

CONFORMITY.
As we do not acknowledge the Popes Power, we do not vouchsafe to Address our
selves to him to obtain any dispensings touching the hindrances of marriage: It
is to the King we Address our selves to be dispensed of Degrees forbidden by
the Civil Law of his Kingdom, and not by the Word of God.

VIII.
The Cognations called Spiritual, are not so much as comprised nor understood
by the Words of Consanguinity or Affinity in the Kings Edict, and cannot hinder
the contract of Marriage.

CONFORMITY.
The more I read our Discipline, the more I therein find a resemblance with
that of the Ancient Christians, I speak of Christians of the first Centuries;
for those which have applied themselves to the reading Ecclesiastical
Antiquity, might perceive the changes that have succeeded in process of time in
the Ancient Discipline, as well as in the Doctrine, the Establishment I am
about to Examine is an Authentic proof; for until the 7th. Century or at least
to the end of the 6th. it was never thought of to propose in the works of
Ecclesiastical Writers, nor in Councils, Spiritual Cognations, as lawful
hindrances of wedlock. If the Epistle attributed to Pope Deus-dedit were true,
it would not be denied that since the 7th. Century, these pretended Spiritual
Cognations were admitted in the Church, but it is most certain it is false and
spurious, it needs only to Read it to find that it is false and forged, besides
that a good while since, Pseudoisid. page 676.
the late Mr. Blondell has showed clearly in the Judgment he gave of it, that
'twas the work of a Cheat and Impostor.

I know there is in the 2d. Volumn of the works of Gregory the Great, certain
Decrees in one of which one Anathematises him that shall have Married his
spiritual Gossip, so that if these Cannons are truly his, one must own that
these spiritual Cognations has been used in the Latin Church since the latter
end of the 6th Century; but what makes me doubt if these Constitutions were
his, is, that Dom. Luke D' Achery who has caused them to be printed in the 2
Volumns of his Spicilegium, amongst an Ancient Collection of Cannons, which he
thinks to have been Antecedent to the 9th. Century does indeed represent them
under the Name of Gregory, but something dubiously, not saying of what Gregory,
so that they may as well be of some other Gregory; for Example, to the second,
or third, and so the one must come down to the 8th. Century in which the one
and the other filled the Roman See.

In effect, in that Century, Tom. 2. conc. Gal. p. 5.
spiritual Affinity were frequently in the West a hindrance of Marriage, as
appears by the first Cannon of a Synod held at Metz under Pepin in the year 753
by the 5th. Chap. of the 5th. Book of Capitularys, Ibid. p. 15
and by the answer of Pope Stephen the 2d. to the 4th. Question was made him on
this Matter, as also by the 12th. Cannon of the Council of Compeigne, Anno 757.
Ibid. p. 43
Since that time the Latins has almost always prohibited marriages of persons
betwixt whom there was any spiritual affinity, as for having presented a Child
together to be Christened. I observe nevertheless in the 10 Century, that a
certain Bishop called Azo, Tom. 8. Spicil. p. 113. ad 118.
maintained by the holy scriptures, against Atto Bishop of Verceil, that these
spiritual affinities were not sufficient to hinder Marriage, whereas Atto did
not defend himself to any purpose, but by the Laws and Customs of Princes and
Sovereigns, especially by that of Luitprandus who Reigned then in Italy. It is
not therefore to be wondered if the Council of Trent Authorized this sort of
Affinities the 11th. of November Anno 1563 in the 24th. Session, Tom. 9. conc.
page 412.
under Pius the 9th. as is explained in the second Chap. of the Decree of
Reformation of Marriage; although at the end of the 9th Century it was not
exactly observed in all the West, as appears by the Cannons 47 and 48 of the
Council of Tribur, of which I will speak of on the 13th. Article.

The Greek Church would in nothing come behind the Latin in this matter; for at
the end of the 8th Century, the 6th. Ecumenical Council assembled at
Constantinople made a decree, when after having established that the affinity
of the Spirit is more considerable than that of the Body, the Fathers declare
it is come to their knowledge, that in some places, those which have presented
Children to be Baptized, do after marry the Mothers of those Children, when
they are become Widows, which the Council forbids to be done for the future,
and do even make null Marriages of this kind, which shall be made after the
Prohibition' and condemn those which contract them to the punishment of
Fornicators. We learn by this Decree, that till then no difficulty was made in
diverse Places to make these kinds of marriages, and to pass by the
consideration of spiritual Cognations which might be betwixt those as made them.

Nevertheless since the 6th. Century, the Emperor Justinian had ordained that
spiritual Cognation should be a lawful hinderance of Marriage, Lib. 5. Cod.
Just. tit. 4. cap. 26.
although the Greek Church made no Decree before that I but now cited and which
is after that of Justiniam above a 100 years. Also the Greek Cannonists which
have searched the Original of this custom, have gone no farther then the Cannon
of Constantinople, and the law of this Emperor. But what surprises me is to
see Pope Nicholas the first in his Answer to the Interrogatories of the
Bulgarians, in not making these Impediments of Marriages proceed from the
Decrees of his Predecessors, but from the laws of Princes and Sovereigns, as if
what the Church has done in this occasion was only the Execution of the command
of Kings and Emperors. I will say nothing of the Arabian Cannons, attributed
to the first Council of Nice, the 21th. and 23th. of which treat of spiritual
Cognations, because by confession of the Learned which have any candor and
sincerity, these are forged Cannons, and were forged several years after the
Council of Nice. It is better I should finish the examining of this Article by
this remark, that when our Discipline declared that these cognations, called
spiritual, hindered not to contract Marriage, it followed the steps of the
Primitive Christians to whom this sort of Affinitys and Relations was unknown
for the first 6 whole Centuries, or little less, for toward the end of the
6th. the Emperor Justinian made a Law, but 'twas not soon observed in the
Church.

IX.
It is not lawful to Marry the Sister of the deceased Wife, such Marriages are
forbidden not only by the Laws, but also by the Word of God. And although by the
Law of Moses it was ordained that if the Brother died without Children the
Brother should raise up seed to his Brother, nevertheless such a Law appointed
for the People of Israel, was temporal, regarding only the preserving a Lineage
of the said People. There is another Reason in the Sister of the deceased
Married Person, in as much as the Alliance is not contracted by commixture of
Blood, therefore such a Marriage ought to be received and approved.
Nevertheless heed must be taken, the Magistrate and weak Brethren be not
offended.

CONFORMITY.
The 19th. of the Cannons that go in the Apostles Names, does not admit him
into holy Orders that has married two Sisters, whereupon Balsamon observes,
that such a marriage is Null. And the 2d. of the Synod of Neosesaria, assembled
as is thought, in the year 314. Excomunicates for life, her that shall have
Married two Brothers; that is to say, that shall have Married them one after
another; but if in danger of Death, she promises to break the Marriage when she
is recovered, the Sinod by movement of pity, shall admit her to do Penance,
whereas it declares, that if she or the Husband dye in this Marriage, the
Surviver shall scarce be admitted thereunto. St. Basil in the 2d. or 3d. of his
Canonical Letters, also condemns Marriages made with two Sisters successively;
he also explains himself more clearly in a Letter he writes to Diodorus of
Tarsus, and which is in the 2d. Tome of the of the Greek Pandects printed at
Oxford of late years; and it is the 197 amongst St. Basil's Letters; upon this
Letter Balsamon observes, that it has no great need of Interpretation, because
in his time there was no Christian Man that would contract such Marriages; that
it may be was true in regard of the Greek Church which suffered it not, but not
in regard of the Latin, where the Bishops of Rome grant Dispensations for two
Brothers and two Sisters to marry, and I admire Balsamon knew nothing of it, or
if he did, that he said nothing of it; seeing that even in the Age he lived,
that is in the 12th. Century, there is found amongst the Latins, these kind of
marriages. The Friar Blastares in the same Tome of Pandects but now mentioned,
Page 68, 59. Let. ^. c. 9.
follows the Authority of Ancient Cannons, which prohibit the Marriages we now
Treat of. Avitus of Vienna does not otherwise, in his 14.15. and 16. Letters. I
may also allege against these same Marriages, a great number of other Cannons,
as the 18th. of the first Council of Orleans of the year 511, the 65 of of that
of Agde in the year 506, the 30 of that of Epaume in the year 517, the 21 of
the 2d. of Tours, Anno 567, the 30 of Auxer in the year 578, and several others
which are, as well as these, in the first Volumn of French Councils, by
Sirmondus; but it suffices what I have hitherto said, I shall only add, that I
find not in any of the Cannons, nor in others made a long time after on the
same subject, I say, I do not find, there has been reserved to Bishops, nor to
Popes, the right of dispensing in these occasions, because such marriages are
prohibited, not only by Humane, but by Divine Laws, as the Fathers of the 2d.
Council of Tours do plainly acknowledge, in the Cannon I but now mentioned.

But if it be prohibited to marry the sister of the Deceased Wife, our
Discipline does not condemn marrying the sister of one contracted, that is
dead, because it supposes that an Alliance is not consummated but by Commixtion
of Blood, or as St. Austin speaks in Gratian, Cap. 27. q. 2.
by commixture of Sex, saying, without this Accouplement there is no Marriage;
nevertheless this Discipline enjoins to Act so as not to give distaste to the
Civil Magistrate, nor weak Brethren scandalized, there can nothing be more
prudent, nor more Circumspect. Pope Alexander the 3d. in the Appendix of the
Council of Latran, Anno 1180, reports this Decree from one Benedict his
Predecessor, of whom it had been demanded if one might marry the sister of one
he had been contracted too, who died before accomplishment of the Marriage,
Tom. 7. conc. page 692.
We order and command by Apostolical censure, that it may be done without
danger; for wherefore should I forbid what the Scripture never says was
prohibited, and that the very Laws of the Land say nothing against, when they
reckon up the persons betwixt whom it is not lawful to contract Marriage; and
this shows by the way, cap. 27. q. 2.
that the Decrees which Gratian attributes to Julius the I. and to Gregory the
I. are but forged Decrees, or at least that they were of no use in the Roman
Church.

X.
The betrothed may not Marry the Mother of his betrothed, deceased.

CONFORMITY.
This Article having something in it of the Nature of the former, it is with
great Justice the Rules of our National Synods refer it to the Magistrate,
without whose Authority they will not have us proceed in our Churches to the
Celebration of such Marriages as are now treated of; see here how the National
Synod of Charanton in the year 1644, cleared up the Article, The betrothed may
not marry the Mother of the betrothed, defunct, unless it be so that the
Magistrate has authorized it by his Order, which shall be known as well by the
Pastor, as by the Parties contracting, which is so much the more reasonable, as
that the Laws of Emperors formerly prohibited such Marriages.

XI.
Neither shall it be lawful for any one to marry the Aunt of his Wife, such
marriage shall be Incestuous, and though the Magistrate should suffer it, yet
shall it not be celebrated in the Church; to which the Pastors shall take great
heed: And by the same reason is prohibited to marry the Niece, of his deceased
Wife.

CONFORMITY.
Our Discipline looking upon the marriage of a man with his Wifes Aunt to be
Incestuous, it has reason not to suffer it to be celebrated in the midst of
us, whatever permission the Magistrate may give for the same, because the
Authority of the Magistrate cannot render a marriage lawful which of it self is
Incestuous. The Ancient Cannons have not fully explained themselves on this
matter, nevertheless they have so well understood the nature of Incestuous
marriages, that I make no doubt but they would have included in the number that
which we Examine; at least it appears to me it may be so gathered from their
conduct in such like Occasions. However it be, Ep. 1. ad Bonifac. Tom. 5. Conc.
page 497.
I cannot tell, but Pope Zachary, who condemned the marriage with the Widow of
his Uncle, would also have condemned it with the Aunt of his Wife, deceased.

The Authors of our Discipline, treat after the same manner, Marriage with the
Niece, and second Niece of ones Wife deceased; the reason is, because the
Husband and Wife by Marriage become one Flesh, and as it may be said, one
Person, and so by reason of this strait and intimate Union, the Aunts and
Neeces of one, are the Aunts and Neeces of the other; now marrying with the
Aunt, and Niece, or second Niece, is forbidden not only by the Word of God, but
also by the Discipline of Ancient Christians, as may easily be proved by a
great number of Cannons, if it were necessary; but because the thing is without
difficulty, To. 5. p. 306, 307.
I Will content my self to show that St. Ambrose highly condemns marriage with
the Niece, in his 48 Letter, Book 6. Gregory I. Collect. Romans p. 2. page 46.
and 94.
does Anathematize it in a Roman Synod. The Popes, Eugenius XI. and Leo IV. in
the 9th. Century, does the same as Gregory I. did in the 6th. having each of
them held a Synod at Rome, where Anathema is pronounced in the 38th. Cannon,
against those that marry with their Neeces. Nevertheless Popes at this time are
not so scrupulous, nor so observant of the Decrees of their Predecessors, but
that they have sometimes dispensed an Uncle to marry his own Niece, we have
seen examples of it in our Days, although the Holy Scriptures expressly forbid it;
and as for marrying with an Aunt, Tom. 2. Conc. Gall. p. 5.
it is also reckoned amongst Incestuous Marriages, by the first Cannon of the
Synod of Metz in the Year 753.

XII.
As for Marrying ones Wifes Brothers Widow, Civility nor Decency will not
permit it.

CONFORMITY.
All the Cannons of the Councils of France, which I cited on the 9th. Article,
and many others which I have not alleged, do absolutely forbid marrying ones
Brothers Widow; but I have not met with one that has spoke of marrying ones
Wifes Brothers Widow; Our Discipline also says no more of such a Conjunction,
but only that it is contrary to the Laws of Decency, and Gentility;
nevertheless because the Magistrate in these occasions, has power to overpass
these Considerations, of Civility, and Decency; the National Synod, whereof I
spoke but now and whose direction I cited on the 10th. Article, does absolutely
refer the decision of the Case to the Civil Magistrate, in these terms: The
Churches shall make no difficulty to confirm such Marriages, if it appears that
the contracts has been before duly authorized by the Magistrate.

XIII.
No man may after the death of his Wife, marry her with whom he committed
Adultery in his Wifes life time, unless such marriage was authorized by the
Magistrate.

CONFORMITY.
St. Basil in his 2d. Cannonical Epistle to Amphilochius teaches the same
thing, Can. 39. Tom. 3. and in Pandect. Graec.
according to Balsamon's Explication. The Friar Blastares in his Alphabetical
Collection of Cannons, is of the same mind, Tom. 2. page 97.
as he explains himself in the 8th. Chap. of the Letter B. However our
Discipline that condemns such a marriage, nevertheless suffers it to be
celebrated if the Magistrate appoints it.

The Council of Tribur, Tom. 7. Conc. c. 71. p. 157
which was formerly one of the Kings Houses, not far off of Mayance, this
Council assembled Anno Dom. 895, under the Emperor Arnulphus, made this Decree,
which agrees very well with that I now Examine; We appoint and publish by one
consent, according to the difinitions of Cannons, that if any one has committed
Adultery with another Woman during her Husbands Life, and that this Husband
comes to die, this unlawful access shall be forbidden him by Judgment of the
Synod* to the end he should not marry her with whom he had before committed
Adultery; for we will not, and it is not suitable to the Christian Religion, that
any one should take to wife her whom he had before defiled with Adultery: and
as for the Caution given by our Discipline in regard of the Magistrate, the
Fathers of Tribur have not passed it in silence; for in the manner they speak
to King Arnulphus in the preface, they give plainly to understand, that they
were persuaded that it was a civil case, wherein the Prince might Exercise his
Power.

XIV.
It being so, that the principal occasion of Marriage is to have Issue, and
propagate, and to avoid Fornication, and Adultery, the Marriage of a Man known
to be an Eunuch, cannot be allowed of nor solemnized in the Reformed Church.

CONFORMITY.
The Council of Verbery in Vallois, requires Marriage should be Dissolved for
insufficiency of the Husband, Tom. 2. conc. Gall. c. 17. page 4.
being complained of by the Wife and duly proved, to whom the Synod permitts
to do what she will, that is to say, Ibid. c. 2. page 14.
to re-marry: Pope Stephen the second however two years after, prohibits
separation for cause of insufficiency, nevertheless he orders dissolution if
one of the parties be tormented with the Devil, or infected with Leprosy,
wherein he followed not the sentiment of Gregory the second his Predecessor,
Ep. 9. ad Bonif. c. 2. l. 1. conc. Gall. page 519.
who about 30 years before suffered a man to separate from a woman who was
insufficient, and to re-marry with another. The 55th. chap. of the 6th. Book of
Capitularies of Charlemain, gives the same liberty to the woman, if the man be
insufficient, which Isaac Bishop of Langres repeats in the 13th. chap. of the
second Treatise of his Cannons. Tom. 3. conc. Gall. page 673.
Photius a Writer of the 9th. Cenury and Patriarch of Constantinople, speaks
no otherwse in the 13th. Title, chap. 4th. of his Nomocanon; Its true he
requires this separation be made after having suffered three years her Husbands
insufficiency, and in the first of his Letters taken out of an Ancient Eastern
Manuscript, he sets down insufficiency as a lawful cause of separation, with
free liberty to the other party, whither the Man, or Woman, to re-marry.

XV.
Marriages shall be proposed in the Consistory, with sufficient attestations of
promises.

CONFORMITY.
This Establishment is to prevent Clandestin Marriages. I will show on the
19th. Article, that it is conformable to the Ancient Discipline.

XVI.
Baines shall be asked in places where the Parties do reside and are known, and
if they will be Married in some other place than where their Banes have been
called, they shall take sufficient attestation that they have been published
three several times.

CONFORMITY.
Pope Innocent the third making Answer to the Bishop of Beavais, in the 4th.
Book of Decretals, Tit. 1 de Sponsal. cap. 27.
makes mention of a publication of Banes, and in the Council of Latran which he
assembled in the year 1215, he appointed that the Custom of publishing Banes of
Marriage in Churches, observed in some places should be generally observed in
all places: Tom. 7. conc. cap. 51. p. 818
accordingly we Read in the second volume of Dom. Luke D' Achery a Benedictine
Friars Spirilegium, that Nicholas Bishop of Angers, prohibited in the year
1270, page 217, 221, 222.
to confirm or celebrate any marriage whatsoever, until publication was first
made of it in the Church, he also mentions the same practice in another Synod
in the year 1274, Ib. p. 255. Tom. 9. conc. page 411. Decret. de refor. Matrim.
cap. 1.
which William his successor also renewed in the year 1304. The Council of
Trent in the 24th. Session the 11th. of November, 1563. the 8th. under Pius the
IV, prescribes also the same thing.

Cardinal Borrome failed not to confirm this custom, and to recomend the
observing of it in his Councils at Millan, and it is to be observed the
testimonies I have alleged, require that publication shall be made in the
Churches of the parties contracting.

XVII.
Banes shall be published three several Sundays in places when there is
Sermons, and in other places when public prayers may be said. However, the
Publication ought to continue the space of 15 days, after which time the
Marriage may be Solemnized in the Assembly, and even on the third Sunday.

CONFORMITY.
The same Testimonies I alleged on the foregoing Article, do prescribe in
substance, the same thing as our Discipline does; for some will have it, that
the publication now spoke of, should be made in a certain time, which should
give leisure to those who would oppose a Marriage, to prepare their Reasons;
others that Banes should be asked several times on Holy Days, others to the
Number of three several times.

XVIII.
Those which live in places where the usual Exercise of Religion is not
Established, may cause their Banes to be published in Romish Churches, inasmuch
as it is a matter partly political.

CONFORMITY.
The publishing of Banes being a thing merely political, our Discipline had
reason, when it suffered those of our Religion, in the case hinted at, to have
them done in Temples of the Romish persuasion.

XIX.
The Churches shall not Marry any body without having full knowledge and
approbation.

CONFORMITY.
Besides what I have said on the second Article, it appears by the first Cannon
of the Council of Laodicea, that Clandestin Marriages were condemned even in
that time. There is in the third Volume of Councils, a Decree of Pope Hormisdas
taken out of Gratian, and is conceived in these Terms; Can. 2. page 801.
That no Believer of what quality soever, do not Marry clandestinely and in
secret, but let him Marry publicly in our Lord, Tom. 3. conc. Gal. page 116.
Tom. 7. conc. page 818.
in receiving the Priests Benediction. This Hormisdas was Pope in the beginning
of the 6th. Century. Herrald Bishop of Tours makes the same prohibition in the
130 chap. of his Capitulary Anno Dom. 858. and the 15th. Can. of those which
Pope Innocent the third proposed and caused to pass at the Council of Latteran
in the year 1215, contain the very like constitution. It is therefore that in
our Churches, no Stranger is Married without having a good attestation from the
Church whereof he is member, to know if the Banes have there been published
three several Lords days without any opposition. Cardinal Borrome in his
second Council of Millan, Anno Dom. 1569, Decree 26, will have it so practiced,
Tom. 9. conc, page 590.
according to the Ordinance of the Council of Trent.

XX.
When one of the parties is of a contrary Religion, the promises of Marriage
shall not be received nor published in the Church, until the party of contrary
Religion be sufficiently instructed, does protest publicly in the Church of
the place where the said party is known, that with full resolution he renounces
all Idolatry, and Superstition, particularly the Mass, and will by Gods
assistance persevere therest of his life, in his true worship and service, of
which instruction the Consistory shall take account. And it shall not be lawful
for any Pastor or Consistory to do otherwise, under pain of being suspended,
and even of being turned out of their office.

CONFORMITY.
Even from the first Ages of Christianity, the Orthodox were forbidden to Marry
with Persons which were not of their Communion, but of some other Sect which
was looked on as Heretical and contrary. Tom. 1. conc. page 234.
The Council of Elebori, or Eluira in Spain, in the year 305, imploys to this
purpose the 6th. of its Cannons. The 10th. and 31st. of Laodicea about the year
360, treat of the same thing; But the 14th. of Calcedon is more full; for it
prohibits those kind of Marriages, unless him that intends to Marry an Orthodox
Maid, Let. G. c. 12.
does promise to be converted to the true Faith: The Friar Blastares in his
Pandects printed at Oxford, of whom I have spoke already, explaining this
Cannon of Chalcedon, makes two considerable remarks; first, that the
Consummation of Marriage now spoke of ought to be deferred until the Heterodox
party has accomplished his promise; the second, that the same thing is to be
required of Latins (that is, to say of those of the Church of Rome) when they
desire to marry Women that are Orthodox; an evident proof that the Latin Church
was esteemed a Hetorodox Church by the Greeks, in Blastares's time, which was
in the XIV. Century.

I may allege several other Cannons against the Marriages now spoke of, Tom.
1. conc. Gall. page 231. 242.
as the 72 of the 6th. Ecumenical Council at the end of the 7th. Century. The
19th. of the 2d. Council of Orleans in the year 533. the 6th. of that of
Auvergne, assembled 2 years after, and the 25, and 26 Decrees of the 1 Title of
the 2d. Council of Millan, which I cited on the foregoing Article.

If from Councils we pass to Ecclesiastical Writers, Tom. 1 p 239, 240.
we shall find several which have explained themselves after the same manner.
St. Ambrose in the 9th chapter of his first Book touching Abraham speaks so
clearly, Tom. 2. p. 1071.
and alleages such strong Reasons that it is not to be doubted but he condemned
Marriages, contracted betwixt Persons of different Religions; it is what he
teaches also on the 118th Psalm, and according to the Hebrews the 119th. page
232.
And in the 24th Epistle of the Third Book in the 5th Volume of his Works, he
is not far from this Opinion. The Deacon Hillary in the Third Volume of the
Writings of the same St. Ambrose, explains the words of the 39th verse of the
7th chap. of the 1st Epistle to the Cor. Let her marry in the Lord, by these,
to a man of her own Religion; and Balsamon, to an Orthodox, Lic. G. c. 4.
in interpreting the 41 Cannon of the Second Canonical Epistle of St. Basil;
Blastares on this same Cannon, to a believing man.

XXI.
If one of the Parties that desire to be Married is Excommunicated, the
Marriage shall not be admitted in the Church unless the Excommunicate Person
makes confession of his faults. As for those which are suspended from the Lords
Supper, the Consistory may permit them to marry notwithstanding the suspension,
however having good reason for it.

CONFORMITY.
Excommunicate Persons not being looked upon as Members of the Church during
the time of Excommunication, it is absolutely necessary they should make
public acknowledgement of their faults, to repair the Scandal they have
committed, before one can proceed to Celebrate their Marriage; And I have shown
on the 11th Article of the 11th Chapter, that they were not so much as suffered
to present a Child to Baptism.

XXII.
The Panes of Widows which re-marry shall not be published in the Church till
Seven Months and half at least after the Decease of their Husband, to avoid the
Scandals and inconveniences may happen by it; unless it so happen that the
Magistrates Order may interpose to the contrary.

CONFORMITY.
Herraid Bishop of Touers in his Capitulary of the Year 858, Tom. 3. Conc.
Gall. cap. 41. p 113 Tom. 2. Bibl. Jur. Can. Just. p. 1075. ad 1078. Litt. B.
c. 8. and G. c. 4.
assigns but 30 Days, but Photius in the 2. chap. of the 13. Title of his
Nomocanon, requires there should be a years mourning before a Woman should
marry again, unless the Prince suffer her to marry in the first year of her
Widowhood, or that she had not layn In till the end of the year. The Friar
Blastares of whom I have so often spoke, proves this same practice by the Laws
of Emperors, and also does Photius, to which our Discipline well agrees.

XXIII.
Marriage shall be celebrated publicly in the Company of Believers; and that
by the Ministry of the Pastors, and none else.

CONFORMITY.
It is a very long time since Christians have been wont publicly in the Church
to cellebrate Marriage, seeing Tertullian in the Fourth chap. of his Book of
Pudicity, causes those which have not done so, to pass for Adulterers and
Fornicators, and in the Eighth chap. of the Second Book he writes to his Wife,
he publishes the happyness of those which the Church has blessed, this
benediction preventing the course of private Meetings, Tom. 1. Conc. and Ann.
358 page 728. Tom. 3.
and of Clandestine Marriages. Thence it is the Fourth Council of Carthage
orders Fathers and Mothers or the Bridegrooms, to present the Bride and
Bridegroom whose Marriage is to be Celebrated. Pope Hormisdas in the beginning
of the Sixth Century appoints also it should be done publicly in the Church.
There is in the Book of Sacraments of Gregory the First, which Maynard a
Benedictine Friar has Printed, page 286.
a whole Liturgy about Cellebrating Marriage, which was taken out of a
Manuscript of the Church of Rheims. The Deacon Hillary in the Third Volume of
the Works of St. Ambrose, speaks of this benediction on the 12th verse of the
3. chap. of St. Paul Ep. to Timothy, and on the 3. of the 5. chap. it is likely
St. Tom. 2. p. 681. Par. 1614
Chrysostom had it in his thoughts when in his 48th Homily on Genesis he
exhorts to send for the Priests to knit by Prayers and Blessings, the Union and
Concord of Marriage. St. Isidore of Sivill in the 19th chap of the 2. Book of
Divine Offices, says, That when the Priest blesses Marriages, he does it in
imitation of God, who blessed the Marriage of the first Man. The Kings
Charlemain, and Lewis the De bonnaire, in the Seventh Book of the Capitularies
chap. 358, amongst several Conditions they prescribe necessary to a lawful
Marriage, they have not forgot the Blessing we treat of; And in the
Capitularies of Charles the bald, is to be seen the Nuptial Blessings of his
Daughter Judith with Edelwolf King of England, and of Hormintrude with himself.
I would allege other proofs of this Ancient Practice, but not to tire the
Reader, I will conclude with the Testimony of Photius, who in two of his last
five Letters by way of Augmentation at the foot of the rest, that is in the
First and Fifth, he several times makes mention of the public benediction of
Marriages by the Pastors.

XXIV.
It is convenient for the Order of the Church not to Celebrate Marriage on
Sacrament Days; and this Order shall not be broken but on weighty reasons,
which the Consistory shall advise upon. Neither shall Marriages be solemnized
on Days of Public Fasting.

CONFORMITY.
The Cellebration of the Lords Supper which invites us to meditate of the Death
of our Savior, and which requires of us Holy Dispositions to partake worthily
of it: the Cellebration I say of this Holy Sacrament, not agreeing very well
with what usually passes at Christian Weddings, it is with great Reason the
Authors of our Discipline has forbidden to solemnize any Marriage on the Days
appointed for the Communion; no more than on Days appointed for Cellebration of
a Public Fast; because Fasting is an occasion of Affliction and Tears, and
Marriage on the contrary, after the manner most People use it at this time, is
of profane Rejoicing, and very often of Debauchery and Excess. The Ancient
Church prohibited, although after several ways, to Cellebrate Marriages in
certain times, as appears by the 52 Cannon of Laodicea, and by a fragment of a
Council of Lerrida in the Year 524. Tom. 3. Council. and the Second Council of
Aix la Chapella, page 817.
in the year 836 defends in the 18th Cannon of the Third chap. to solemnize
Marriages on Sundays, for the Reverence of the Day. Tom. 2. Conc. Gall. p. 394.

XXV.
Those who have been contracted; and that have cohabitted together before being
lawfully Married, whether their fault came to be known before or after Marriage
is solemnized, they shall make public confession of their fault, or before the
Consistory, according as it shall think convenient. And it happening before
Marriage, such Solemnities shall be observed at the said Marriage as the
Consistory shall think fit. Except those who shall have lived together during
the time of their ignorance without contempt and slighting of the
Ecclesiastical Order; also those which shall have cohabited together when there
was no Church settled at the place of their Habitations, or in the Province. All
which shall only be cited to the Consistory, to the end the Marriage may be
Ratified and Blessed in the Church, if the Consistory shall see it Expedient.

CONFORMITY.
St. Basil in his Third Canonical Epistle, Can. 69. Tom. 7. page 33.
had appointed something of this kind in these terms, If a Reader has known his
Sweetheart before Marriage, he shall be suspended from his Office for a year,
at the Expiration whereof he shall do his Duty, without being capable of
advancement. By this may be seen, he would have decreed against Lay People
which should have committed the like Offense, the pains expressed in our
Discipline. The Friar Blastares which I have often cited, especially on the XX.
Article of this Chapter, will, Litt. G. c. 4. page 62.
that the Punishment of Fornicators be given to those that have known each
other before they have been lawfully Married.

Cardinal Borrome in the Second Council he caused to be held at Millan in the
year 1569, Tom. 9. Conc. Dec. 27. page 500. Ibid. page 684.
remits the Absolution of the Sin now treated of to the Bishop, because it is
frequently committed, and prescribes severe Penance for those that are guilty
of it; which he repeats again in the Sixth Council Assembled at the same place
Thirteen Years after the Second.

XXVI.
To prevent Inconveniences which arise by too long deferring Cellebration of
Marriages, the Parties, and those in whose care they be, shall be advertised
not to delay the Cellebration of Maraiage above six Weeks if possible.

CONFORMITY.
It is an Establishment of Policy, to prevent the inconveniences
conveniences and ill consequencies as may happen in too long deferring the
Solemnizing of Marriage; And it is with regard hereto, that Cardinal Borrome,
prohibits in the place I but now cited, I say, he prohibits all manner of
Familiarity and Commerce to contracted Persons.

XXVII.
Marriages shall be Registered, and carefully kept in the Church.

CONFORMITY.
This Rnle regards the Public good, therefore oftentimes recourse is had to
Registers of Marriages which are kept in both Communions, and the Copies taken
many times serve to terminate great Law Suits. The Council of Trent appointed
in the year 1563, Session 24. chap. 1. of the Decree touching the Reformation
of Marriage, Tom. 9. Conc. page 412.
it ordains Each Curate should have a Book, wherein he should write the Names
of the Married Folks, and of the Witnesses, with the Day, and Place where the
Marriage was contracted: Ibid. p. 480, 481, 590.
Cardinal Borrome renews this injunction in the First and Third of the Councils
he held at Millan.

XXVIII.
Believers whose Wives and Husbands shall be convicted of Adultery, shall be
admonished to be reconciled to each other, but if they will not, the Liberty
they have by the Word of God shall be declared to them; Nevertheless should
this happen to one that is employed in the Church, he may not reassume his
Wife, and exercise his Office.

CONFORMITY.
St. Tom. 6^ p. 358.
Austin has made Two Books on Adulterous Marriages, that is of Marriages
wherein Adultery does intervene, and in the Second of these Books, chap. 6, 8,
9. he requires the same Conduct should be held toward the Party convicted of
Adultery as is Established by our Discipline, that is to say, that the Innocent
Party should continue with him that violated their Marriage Vow, and he
alleages for a Reason, That being a Believer we ought to believe, that she has
been washed from her Sin, by Baptism, or by Repentance; Nevertheless this is
but an Advice or Council, which he gives, without imposing any necessity to do
so, on the Party unconcerned, which is just the Rule prescribed by the Article
we examine, unless it be that it declares, that if such a thing should happen to
any one that had an Office in the Church, he could not take his Wife again, and
execute his Office, because doubtless he would not be so much to Edification,
and the remembrance of his Wifes Adultery, would be at least to the weak, a
Subject of Offense, and Scandal. So 'twas the Council of Neosesaria ordered it
in the Year 314, Can. 8. which enjoins those that are Established in the
Ministry of the Church, whose Wifes have committed Adultery, it enjoins them to
forsake them, or if they will live with them, it declares they can no longer
Execute their Offices. See Gratians Decree, Cause. 32. q. 1. can. De Benedicto
where the same Practice is Authorized, although some of the Fathers, forbid
cohabiting with the Adulterous Party.

XXIX.
To regulate the Extravagance of Marriages by reason of Adultery, the Party
grieved may prosecuee at Law the Party that has offended, before the
Magistrate, until that by definitive Sentonce and Judgment they be justly
convicted, the which Sentence the Party grieved shall produce in Consistory,
who shall let him understand the Liberty the Word of God allows in such cases:
But by reason of the difficulty of the times the Ministers of this Kingdom are
advised not to re-marry the Parties who are at liberty to provide themselves
elsewhere; and as for the Party that has transgressed, great deliberation and
care shall be used before he be restored to Liberty.

CONFORMITY.
Those which accommodate the Cannons, to the times, and which judge of the
Discipline of the Ancient Christians by that which they follow at present, do
think that 'twas never permitted in the Church that those should marry any
other Person who were separated for Adultery; Nevertheless with the least heed
that is taken in reading what remains to us of the Writings of Ecclesiastical
Antiquity, it may therein be observed, that for several Ages the Liberty of
re-marrying was granted to those whose Marriage had been dissolved for
Adultery. I should be over-tedious to relate all I could allege for
Establishing this Truth; I shall therefore content my self to prove it by some
formal and positive Testimonies which shall be above the reach of any
contentious Spirits to control.

To do it with the better method, First of all, 'twill be necessary to
transcribe two passages of the Gospel, where our Savior Jesus Christ has fully
explained himself on this matter, The First is in the Fifth chap. of St. Matthew,
ver. 31, 32. It has been also said, Whosoever shall put away his Wife let him
give her a Writing of Divorcement: But I say unto you, That whosoever shall put
away his Wife saving for the cause of Fornication, causes her to commit
Adultery, and whosoever shall marry her that is divorced commits Adultery.
These words as every one sees, teach us two things, one, that there is nothing
but Adultery which is a lawful cause of breaking of Marriage; and the other,
that here is to be an entire Separation, both from Bed, and as to Obligation.

The Second is in the 19th chap. of the same Gospel, verse 3, etc. The
Pharisees also came unto him, tempting him, and saying unto him, Is it lawful
for a man to put away his Wife for every cause, and he answered and said unto
them, Have you not read that he which made them, made them at the beginning
Male and Female, and said, For this cause shall a man leave father and mother
and shall cleave to his Wife, and they twain shall be one flesh, wherefore they
are no more twain but one flesh; What therefore God has joined together, let no
man put asunder. They say unto him, Why did Moses then command to give a
writing of divorcement, and to put her away: He says unto them, Moses because
of the hardness of your hearts suffered you to put away your Wifes, but from
the beginning it was not so. And I say unto you, whosoever shall put away his
wife except it be for fornication, and shall marry another, commits
Adultery: And whosoever marryeth her which is put away, does commit Adultery.
As the Pharisees in their demand understood a total Separation, it must not
also be doubted but Jesus Christ meant it so also in the Answer he made them;
In effect, amongst the Jews the term to repudiate comprehends an entire
rupture, with power to re-marry again; Therefore in the Ancient formulary of
Divorces amongst the Jews, the Husband spoke thus to the Wife which he put
away, I send thee going, and repudiate thee, to the end thou may be at
liberty to marry whom thou will.

Let us now see what the Witnesses do depose which I have engaged to produce
for establishing the matter in dispute. I Will begin by Chromatius Bishop of
Aquilea, one of the Holiest and most Learned Prelates of his time, that is to
say of the Fourth Century, and the beginning of the Fifth. This Learned Writer
Interpreting the two verses of the Fifth chap. of St. Matthew above
transcribed, speaks in this manner; Let them know how great the crime of
condemnation is which those do incur in the sight of God, Tom. 2. Biol. Sal. p.
168.
who being overcome with the unbridled pleasure of Lust, and without cause of
Adultery, cast off their Wifes to pass on to another Marriage. It appears by
the reasoning of Chromatius, that if they cast them off for Adultery, they were
permitted to re-marry, and having shown that though the Laws of Men suffered to
repudiate ones Wife for other cause than Adultery, those which did it were
nevertheless inexcusable, but their sins was so much the greater, that they
preferred the Laws of Men before the Law of God; After this I say, he adds, As
it is not permitted to cast off a woman that lives chastely and honestly; so
also it is permitted to repudiate an Adulteress, because such a one renders her
self unworthy of her Husbands Company, which in sinning against her own Body,
had the boldness to defile the Temple of God.

The Deacon Hillary, a Writer of the Fourth Century, in his Commentaries on St.
Paul's Epistles, in the Third Volume of St. Ambrose his Works. Hillary
Expounding these words of the 11th verse of the 7th chap. of the ^. Ep. to the
Cor. page 365.
Neither let the Woman forsake her Husband, he thus explains himself, it must
be understood, except it be for the cause of Adultery, because it is permitted
for the Husband to marry, after having repudiated his Wife for cause of
Adultery.

St. Epiphanius is full in the case, seeing he expresses himself in this
manner; Him who could not be content with one Wife, whether she dyed, or that
he put her away for Adultery, Fornication, or some other Crime, if he join
himself to another Wife, or if a Woman for the same cause takes a second
Husband, the Word of God condemns them not, neither deprives them of the
Communion of the Church nor of Eternal Life; but it bears with them for
infirmity sake, not that he should have two Wifes at once, the one being yet
alive, and in being, but to the end that after having left one, he may, if he
will, take another lawfully. The Jesuit Petau in his Notes on the words of St.
Tom. 2. p. 255.
Epiphanius does acknowledge this was the Opinion of this Ancient Doctor, but
he adds, That if at that time it was suffered to have it, because the Church
had not yet determined any thing in this matter, it is not permitted at this
time, after the decision of the Council of Trent, Sess. 24. cap. 7.
nevertheless he owns this Decree of Trent is not agreeable to some of those
cited by Gratian, causa 32. quaest. 7. and also that Cardinal Cajetan, and some
other Doctors of his Communion have followed an Opinion contrary to the
definition of the Fathers of Trent; that is to say, That they believed that
it is permitted to a Christian to put away his Wife for Adultery, and to marry
another; in effect, not only Cajetan on the 19th chap. of St. Matthew. but also
Ambrose Catharine in the Fifth Book of his Annotations, and Erasmus on the 7th
chap. of the 1 Ep. to the Corinth. have been of this Judgment.

Auitus Bishop of Vienna at the end of the Fifth Century, and beginning of the
Sixth, sufficiently manifests that in his time, Divorcement was made for
Adultery, with liberty to re-marry, Ep. 49. p. 110.
observing in one of his Letters, That it is for that cause alone God permits a
man to separate from his wife: Upon which Father Sirmond who has Published the
Works of Auilus, makes this observation; It from hence appears, that in that
time it was believed in France, that the Husband might by the permission of
Jesus Christ, leave his Wife in case of Adultery, and marry another, Which he
confirms by a Cannon of a Synod of Vannes, which I will cite anon.

Loup Abbot of Ferriers in Gattinois was in the Ninth Century of the same
Opinion with Auitus, Ep. 29. page 54.
for he says as well as him, that it is only Fornication can dissolve Marriage,
to which Monsieur Baluze, who completed the last Edition with Learned Notes,
applies also the Jesuit Sirmond's Observation which I but now mentioned.

Isaac Bishop of Langres, in the Third Title of his Cannons which treat of
Adulterys, says plainly, chap. 1. That the Husband whose Wife is an
Adulteress, has power to take another if he please: This Prelate wrote and
lived in the Ninth Century.

I now come to the Councils whose Authority may contribute to the Establishment
of the matter I examine, and I begin with the First Council of Arles, which the
Emperor Constantine assembled in the Year 314, a Council famous for the
Decrees there made, and for the number of Bishops which were there present, for
there was 600, if several Writers may be credited. In effect, there is in the
Collection of Letters of Ireland by Bishop Usher, a Letter of Cummin a Priest,
to the Abbot Seguinus touching the keeping Easter, Ep. 11. p. 28.
wherein he wrote to him above a 1000 years ago. That the Council of Arles
composed of 600 Bishops, confirmed in the First Cannon what had been concluded
upon for the observing of Easter, that is to say, that it should be Celebrated
all over the World at one time, and one day: Ado Bishop of Vienna, in the Ninth
Century, writes in the Sixth Age of his Chronicle, That in the time that Marin
was Bishop of Arles, there met a Council of 600 Bishops In the 10th Spicilegium
of Dom Luke D' Achery, and in the Additions, there is to be seen an observation
touching Synods, which was taken from an Ancient Collection writ above 800
years ago, wherein mention is made of the Council we speak of, Tom 10. p 633.
and of the number of 600 Bishops there present; and apparently it was in
reference to this great number of Prelates, Tom. 1. Conc. Gall. p. 105. Tom. 1.
Conc. Gall. p. 6.
that the Fathers of the Second Council assembled in the same City in the year
542, said in the Eighteenth Cannon, That the first was assembled from all parts
of the World.

However it be, the Tenth Cannon of the First Council which concerns the
business we treat of, is expressed in these terms: As to young Men that are
Believers, which surprise their Wifes in Adultery, and who are forbidden to
marry others, It has seemed good to us that they should be advised as much as
may be; not to marry again during their Wifes life time although Adulteresses.
I gather two things from this Cannon, First, Before the holding this Council,
there were those which prohibited them which left their Wifes for Adultery to
marry again. Secondly, That the Fathers of the Council to the number of 600,
amongst which there are Two Priests and Two Deacons of the Church of Rome,
which held the place of Silvester its Bishop; these Prelates having maturely
examined the business, changed the Prohibition into an Advice which they
desired might be followed, but no farther than Man's weakness could bear, which
shows that they did not believe as now a days in the Romish Communion, That the
Band of Marriage is indissolvable, though Adultery should intervene.

In the year of our Lord 465 there was held a Council at Vannes in Brittany,
see here its Second Cannon. As for those who forsake their Wifes, Tom. 1. Gall.
p. 138.
unless it be in case of Adultery, as is expressed in the Gospel, and do Marry
others without having proved the Adultery, we ordain they shall be deprived of
the Lords Supper, that is to say Excommunicated, lest through our remissness
Sins unpunished may incline others to licentiousness. It appears by this
Cannon, that when the Adultery was proved, it was permitted to conclude another
Marriage; it was so 'twas understood by Father Sirmond on the Letter of Auitus
abovementioned, wherein he was followed by his Nephew Mr. De la Land
Treasurer, of the Church of St. Framburg of Senlis; for in the Supplement of
French Councils, page 349.
he explains this Cannon in the same manner as I have explained it, and this
ought not to be regarded as a private interpretation, seeing this Supplement
was approved by the Clergy of France assembled at Paris in the years 1655, and
56.

The Synod of Agde in Languedoc in the year 506, Tom. 1. Conc. Gall. p. 166.
marches in the same steps of that of Vannes, in the 25th Cannon, which
Excommunicate those which put away their Wifes to marry themselves to others,
before they represent to the Bishops of the Province the causes of their
Separation, and before their Wifes have been condemned, that is for Adultery;
for when they were once convicted, Husbands were permitted to Marry others; it
is what is lawfully inferred from this Cannon.

Theodore Archbishop of Canterbury held a Synod in the year 670, as Beda
writes in his Ecclesiastical History of England, wherein he made these Cannons
relating to Marriage. Lib. 4. c. 5.
Let no Man forsake his Wife unless it be for Fornication, as the Gospel does
direct: If any one puts away his Wife whom he has lawfully married, let him not
marry another; if he will be a good Christian, but let him continue as he is,
or let him be reconciled to his own Wife: That is, If he puts her away for any
other cause than for Adultery; And it cannot be questioned but this is the true
meaning of the words of Theodore, especially if one considers that in Dom Luke
D' Achery's Ninth Spicilegium, There are a certain number of Cannons chosen out
of all those of the said Theodores, the 116th of which formally contains this
Decree, page 62.
It is permitted to him whose Wife has committed Adultery, to put her away, and
to take another.

Gratian attributes this Decree to Pope Zachary who lived in the Eighth
Century; ca. 32. c. 7. Conc. Concnbai^ii.
You have layn with your Wifes Sister, if it be so, you cannot have to Wife
neither the one nor the other; but as for her that was your Wife, if she
consented not to this crime, and that she cannot contain, she may marry in the
Lord to whom she thinks sit. The Ancient Copies, Manuscripts and Old Editions
of Gratian produce this Decree, as being Pope Zachary's; yet there are
Compilers of Decrees which have cited it as having taken it out of the Roman
Penitential; Binchard. lib. 19. c. 5. Enq.
but it is nothing the less considerable, seeing 'twas the Penitential whereof
Zachary was the Compiler. The Author of the Gloss explains the last words of
the Cannon in this manner, Let her marry to whom she will: He explains them in
adding these others, after the Death of her Husband; As if a Woman whose
Husband was Dead, was not in full liberty to re-marry, without having any
permission for so doing; whereas here there is question of a Man convicted of
Adultery, whereby Marriage is dissolved; therefore the Woman which is Innocent,
and has no share in the Husbands Crime, she is permitted to re-marry; Erasmus
on the 7th chap. of the 1. Ep. to the Cor. where he examins the Question,
Whether Divorce is sometimes permitted amongst Christians; Erasmus reproves and
condemns the Gloss I but just now cited, as being contrary to the words of the
Decree, and to the intention of Pope Zachary, to whom it is attributed, and he
does so against the Master of Sentences, Lib. 4. did. 34.
who had interpreted the Cannon with this addition, that is to say, after the
Death of the Husband.

The Council of Verberie in Vallois assembled in the year 752, Tom. 2. Conc.
Gall. p. 2.
made several Decrees, the Second whereof is comprised in these terms. If any
one carnally knows his Wifes Daughter, he cannot have the Mother nor Daughter,
and neither she nor him cannot never after marry any others; but as for the
Wife, if she will, and if she cannot contain, if after she comes to know the
Husband committed Adultery with her Daughter, she has no farther carnal
knowledge with him, she may marry another Person, unless she will voluntarily
abstain; and in the Tenth Cannon; If a Son has committed Adultery with the Wife
of his Father, neither he nor she cannot marry, but as for the Husband, if he
will, he may marry another Wife; yet it were better to abstain.

That of Compiegne made this Decree Seven years after: Ib. Can. 8. p. 43.
If a Man has a lawful Wife, if his Brother commits Adultery with her, let not
the Brother nor Wife which have been guilty of Adultery, never marry during
life; But as for the Husband of the Wife, he is at his liberty to marry again
if he please: The Fourteen and Fifteen Cannons Establish also the same
Discipline. The Eighth Cannon is also found in the Fifth Book of Capitularies,
chap. 19. it is apparently the Eighth Cannon of the Council reported by
Gratian, though in something different terms. Cause. 32. q. 7. c. Quaedam; under
the Name of a Decree of a certain Council.

In the Roman Collection printed at Rome Fifteen years ago by Order of Cardinal
Francis Barberin, Vice Chancellor, and Dedicated by him to Pope Alexander the
Seventh. There is found Two Synods held at Rome in the Ninth Century, One under
Eugenius, the Second, the other under Leo the Fourth, and by the constitutions
of the one and the other, one may separate for reason of Adultery, with power
to re-marry; See here what is contained in the 36th. Cannon of the former; That
it be not permitted to any one whatsoever to forsake his Wife, and to join
himself to another, unless it be in case of Adultery, otherwise the offender
must take the former. The same Cannon is repeated in the Second, in the same
Terms, and under the same Number of 36. Ibid. p^g. 92.


The Council of Tribur, whereof I have already spoke, on the 13th Article,
confirms the same practice in the 41. Cannon, where the Fathers require, that
Bishops having regard to human frailty, should comfort those who have been
separated for Adultery, and which cannot contain, in suffering them to re-marry
after having fulfilled the time of their penance.

The Friar Blastares whom I have already cited several times, Let. G. c. 13.
page 73, 74.
testifies that the Greek Church used so in his time, that is, in the 14th.
Century, for amongst the several reasons for dissolving Marriage, he reckons
Adultery, for the which he declares Marriage may lawfully be dissolved, and
contract another, after sentence of the Judges.

It was in regard to this practice of the Eastern Nations, Hist. of the Council
of Trent by P. Saovo. lib. 8. page 920, 921.
that the Ambassadors of Venice caused to be read in the Council of Trent a
demand they made on the Anathema of divorces, which contained in substance,
that their Republic held the Islands, and Kingdoms of Cyprus, Candy, Corfou,
Zante, and Cephalony, inhabited by Greeks, who time out of mind have been wont
to put away the wife guilty of Adultery, and to Marry another, and that this
Custom known to the whole Church, Was never condemned nor blamed by any
Council, and therefore that the Fathers would be pleased to dispose the Cannon
that treated thereof in such a way, as should not be prejudicial to them, to
which the Council had some regard, for the Opinion of the Greeks was not there
directly condemned.

It appears clearly by what has been hitherto said, that the Establishment of
our Discipline, is very judicious and very conformable to the use and practice
of the Ancient Church, and also to that of the present Greek Church; so that
the innovation is in those which have forsaken the ways of their Fathers, and
have taken a quite contrary course, in teaching that the band of Marriage is
not to be broke, not even for cause of Adultery; yet I cannot think Pope Urban
the second was so severe, nor that he would absolutely have forbidden Marriage
to a man that had left his wife after having convicted her of Adultery, and
what makes me think so, is, for that in a Synod he held An: Apud Marcam de
conc. li. 4. c. 14. page 282.
1093. At Troys in Poulle, it was resolved in the first Cannon, to dissolve the
Marriage of two persons that were nearly related, on this condition however,
That if they separated according to the Judgment of the Bishops, they were
permitted to contract other Marriages, because they were young; what likelihood
that Urban with his Synod composed of 70 Bishops and 12 Abbots, should not have
judged the band of Matrimony indissoluble in regard of those, and that he would
have thought it so after the Adultery of one of the parties.

I am confident if occasion had offered, this Pope would not have done
otherwise in regard of persons which separated by reason of Adultery, then the
two Roman Synods I but now cited in the 9th. Century, and the Councils of
Verbery and Compeign, in the 8th. who permitted as has been shown, to the
innocent party, to re-marry, when the band of the former Marrirge is quite
broke by Adultery; certainly the Fathers of these two Councils intended not to
forbid Marriage to those which Adultery had separated, seeing they allowed
separation for things of much less moment than is that of Adultery, and that at
the same time they grant power and liberty to re-marry anew, for Example, the
3d. Tom. 1. conc. Gal. page 3.
Cannon of the Synod of Verbery is conceived in these terms; If a Priest has
Married his Niece, let him leave her, and be deposed; If another takes her to
wife, let him put her away also, because it is a thing blame worthy that another
Man should marry her which was put away by a Priest; but if the man cannot
contain, let him marry some other.

The 5th. cannon contains this Decree; If a Woman has contrived the Death of
her Husband with other Men, and that the Husband in his own defense kills him
that comes to murder him, and that he can prove it; he may repudiate his Wife,
and marry another if he please. The 9th. permits him that is forced to quit his
Country to go to live in another, and that his Wife will not follow him, it
permits him to Marry another.

In the 6th. it is permitted to a free Man that shall have Married a slave,
thinking her to be of a free condition, he is permitted to take another, if the
first be put again under servitude, and that she cannot be ransomed, the same
power is given to a free woman that shall marry a slave, not knowing he was so,
unless he had been forced by famine to sell himself by consent of his Wife, and
that the price of the sale of the Husband had served to preserve the Wife from
Want and perishing by famine; besides this, the Woman might put away her
Husband, and Marry another, if she cannot contain.

This last Cannon of the Synod of Verbery in the 5th. Ubi supra 42, 43, 44
of that of Compeign, where we Read these words; If a free man has taken in
Marriage a woman whom he thought to be free, and afterward he found she was
not, let him put her away if he will, and let him Marry another.

The 4th. of the same Council of Compeign makes this ordinance; If a man has
married his Wises Daughter being of a free state, to a free man, or to a slave,
or to a Churchman, and that he married her against her will, and against the
will of her Mother, and her relations, if she will not have him for a Husband,
and that she leave him, her Relations may give her another, or if she herself
has Married another, after having left the first, let them not be separated.

In the 13th. we Read this, if any one has left his wife; and in consideration
of Piety and Religion, he has given her liberty to enter into a Monastery; or
that for the Love of God, he has suffered her to take the vail out of a
Monastery; let this Man take a lawful wife, and let the Woman do the same on
the like occasion.

The 16th. is contained in these words, if a Leprous man has a Wife that is
clean and sound, and that he will suffer her to marry another, let the woman
marry another if she please, Ib. can. 2.9.
and let the Husband do the same. Pope Stephen the second prescribed near hand
the same thing three years before, from whence may be gathered, that according
to all appearance he would have made no difficulty to approve the re-marrying
of those whom Adultery had separated.

Nevertheless I could produce several other proofs for Establishing the matter
I Examine, if I feared not to be to tedious, I will therefore end this enquiry
by two remarks; the first concerns Ecclesiastical Writers which teach, that it
is lawful to separate for Adultery, as Tertullian who thus explains himself;
Contr. Marc. l. 4. c. 34.
If God has prohibited under such condition to put away ones Wife, he has not
absolutely forbidden it; and what he has not absolutely forbidden, be his
permitted. Lactantius says, That he is an Adulterer that forsakes his Wife,
Lib. 6. Divin. Instit. orat. 31. p. 501
to marry another, if he leaves her for any other cause then for the Sin of
Adultery, The Law says Gregory Nazianzen gives the Bill of Divorce for all
things; but as for Jesus Christ he gives it not for all things, but he only
permits to separate from the shameless and adulterous woman: This separation if
we follow the Explication of Father Sirmond on the 46th. Letter of Auctus,
imports the Power of Marrying another, to which amounts also what is said by
Theophilact on the 5th. chap. of St. Matthew: That he that put away his Wife for
just cause, That is to say for Adultery, is not subject to any condemnation: I
say the same of all those which have explained themselves near hand in the same
manner, as St. Basil in his first Cannonical Epistle to Amphilochius, Can. 9th.
and some other.

In my second Remark I produce the Testimonies of two famous Doctors of the
Greek Church, which testify Marriage is entirely dissolved by Adultery, and
that the band is quite broke, the first is of St. Hom. 19. page 484, 485.
Chrysostom who in his Homilies on the 7th. chap. of the first Epistle to the
Cor. teaches positively, That the Husband which puts away an Adulterous Wife is
not culpable; And if you ask him the Reason, he will tell you it is, The Marriage
is already dissolved, and that after the fornication, the the Husband is no
longer a Husband.

The other Witness is Theodoret, who Treating of this business in his
Therapeutique, or manner of healing the affections of the Greeks, makes this
Reflection, Sermon. 9. Legib. l. 4 page 619.
worthy himself: The Author of Nature in Creating human Nature made at first
one Man and one Woman, and forbid to dissolve Marriage, having not suffered to
dissolve it, but for one only cause which indeed does break the band: And
having instanced the Words of the Gospel where Jesus Christ suffers to separate
for Adultery, and to Marry again, He adds. Ib. p. 620.
By these Words Jesus Christ commands to bear all other faults in a Woman, her
prating, Drunkenness, Evil speaking; but if she violates the Laws of Marriage,
then He commands to dissolve and break the Bands: Nothing can be desired more
positive nor more clear for proving the matter I treat of, therefore I
conclude, in observing, that St. Chrysostom and Theodoret's Depositions do no
less favor the Article of our Deposition, than the Testimonies I produced at
first, as well of Ecclesiastical Writers, as of Councils, by all which I have
made clearly appear, that in the Ancient Church they were persuaded, as they
are at this present amongst the Greeks, and amongst the Protestants, that Jesus
Christ suffers Christians to separate from their Wifes for the reason of
Adultery, and to marry others.

XXX.
If it should happen that after Contracts and Promises made, and before the
accomplishing of Marriage, the Bride is found to have committed fornication,
before or after the said promises, and that 'twas unknown to him that had
promised her Marriage, after definitive sentence as abovesaid, the Consistory
may proceed to a new Marriage; the Bride shall have the same liberty if it be
found that the Bridegroom has been guilty of fornication before the said
promises.

CONFORMITY.
There is in the third Volume of the Councils of France, a Letter of Pope John
the 8th. to Walenus Bishop of Metz, An. 879. page 491.
by which he lets him understand that he is to blame against the Authority of
the Cannons to go about to constrain a Man to Marry his Sweetheart although
she be found with child by some body else before consummation of the Marriage.

XXXI.
The Wifes whose Husbands shall be absent a long while in Voyages, for
Merchants or otherwise, shall have recourse to the Magistrate, if they desire
to be re-marry'd.

CONFORMITY.
St. Can. 31.36.4.3. page 32.
Basil in his 2 Canonical Epistle puts in the Number of Adulterous Women those
which re-marry before they are certain of the death of their absent Husbands,
yet in such a way as that he will have the Wifes of those that are in the Wars
treated something more favorably than others, because a long absence makes it
more be believed they are dead, than others which are absent for some other
Subject.

Pope Leo the first Writing to Nicetas Bishop of Aquilea touching Women that
have re-marry'd after a long absence of their Husbands who had been carried
away Captives, he Orders that at their return, Ep. 79. c. 1, 2, 3, 4. page, 148,
149.
they may be permitted to reassume their Wifes, who to this purpose are to
separate from their second Husband, it was also the Opinion of Innocent I. Ep.
9.

Theodore Archbishop of Canterbury whom I cited on the 29th. Article, Can.
113.4. q. Spicil. p. 62.
suffers a Lay man whose Wife has absented, to marry another at the expiration
of seven years, with consent of the Bishop, and at the End of one year, if she
has been taken away Captive by force.

The 83 Caunon of the 6 universal Council, Tom. 5. conc. page 347.
follows near hand the Discipline of St. Basil, and partly that of Leo the
First.

The 9th. of that of Verbery, which I have mentioned several times, suffers a
Man who is forced to change Countries, and whose Wife will not follow him, it
suffers him to marry another, if he cannot contain, Tom. 2. Conc. Gall. page 3.

Photius in the 13 Title, Can. 2. of his Nomocanon, declares the Time and the
Manner that the Wife of the absent Husband is to observe before she re-marries.

The Friar Blastares follows the steps of Photius, and when the absence of the
Husband or the Wife is caused by Captivity, he determins that if in five years
no news be heard, the Marriage is void.

XXXII.
As for the Wifes of Priests and Friars, which revolt and return to Idolatry,
singing Mass, or returning to their Cloisters from whence they came out before,
they are advertised to inhabit no longer with their said Husbands during their
Apostasy, not to load Marriage with blame and ignominy, and also shall not
marry with others, until the first marriage be dissolved by the Magistrate.

CONFORMITY.
To this Article may be referred the 44 Cannon of the 2d. Cannonical Epistle of
St. Basil, with the interpretations of Balsamon, and Zonaras, the 13th. Cannon
of the first Council of Orleans of the year 511. and the 3d. of that of
Verbery, assembled Anno 752. for in all these places, Tom. 1. conc. Gall. page
150. and Tom. 2. page 2.
something is ordained which comes very nigh the Establishment of our
Discipline.

CHAP. XIV. Of Particular Rules and Advertisements.
ARTICLE I.
NO Body shall be received to the Communion of the Church. until he has first
publicly renounced all Superstitions and Idolatries of the Church of Rome, and
of the Mass, especially.

CONFORMITY.
The Church in all Ages has refused to receive Persons into her Communion,
until they had first given an account of their Faith, and had renounced all
Errors they had formerly professed, and all the false Worship they had before
preached; I may prove this Truth by sundry Cannons, but I Will only produce some,
the thing being clear of it self; The Sixth Cannon of Laodicea is express on
this Subject. Heretics must not be permitted to enter into the House of God,
if they persevere in their Heresy. The Seventh is no less formal; Those
amongst the Novatians, Photinians, or Quarto decimans, nor those amongst them
they call Believers, until they first anathematize all Heresy, especially that
wherein they were detained. To this same Subject may be applied the 37th and
58th Cannons of the same Synod; about Forty years before the Great Council of
Nice had ordered in the VIII. Cannon touching the Catharians, that when they
returned to the Communion of the Church, they should be obliged to declare by
writing, That they embraced all the Doctrines of the Catholic and Apostolic
Church: And that by consequence they renounce all the Errors contrary to them,
and wherewith they had been infected, and because all Errors are not alike
dangerous, the Second Ecumenical Council assembled at Constantinople in the
year 381, prescribes in the Seventh Cannon, the manner of receiving those which
turn to the Church, and this method is different according to the Diversity of
Errors of those which are converted, but after all, the least that is expected
of them, Is to anathematize by Writing, all manner of Heresy as does not agree
with the Dogma's of the Holy Catholic and Apostolic Church.

II.
A Believer is not permitted to intermeddle in any thing wherein there may be
an intermixture of Idolatry, as that which is called the Kiss of the hand, or
the Ceremony of the Church, keep Masses, Vigils, and maintain Friars which are
appointed for that purpose; But to hold Priories, Revenues, Rents,
Chappellanies, and Tithes to pay the Revenue to Churchmen, inasmuch as they are
Temporal Lords, it is a thing indifferent, and at the liberty of those that
please to do it; Nevertheless Believers are advertised not to intermeddle in
those matters, if they find any abuse therein, or appearance of any ill
consequence, whereof the Consistories shall take special heed.

CONFORMITY.
It Is only requisite to read what I have said on the Nineteenth Article of the
Fifth chap. which is that of Consistories, to see after what manner those are
treated in the Primitive Church as were any way poluted with Idolatry: I will
here only add two things, First, That the Ancient Fathers called Idolatry,
Crimen principale, summum scelus, principale crimen genneris humani, summum
saeculi reatus, tota causa judicii: And by these expressions they would let
Christians, see how much they should abhor Idolatry, seeing it breaks all
manner of Communion with God. Secondly, That the Council of Laodicea after
having declared in the 35th Cannon, that Christians should not forsake the
Church of God to follow Angels to invoke them it makes this Mennace, If any one
be found to serve this hidden Idolatry, let him be anathematised, because he
has forsaken our Lord Jesus Christ the Son of God, and is turned to Idolatry.

The Reader may observe if he please that the Fathers of Laodicea, think one
abandons Jesus Christ, and for sakes him, at the very instant one makes any
step toward Idolatry; and 'twill be to no purpose to say that one often thinks
there is Idolatry where there is none, because that as soon as ever a Man
thinks there is Idolatry he ought not be concerned, more nor less, although he
might be mistaken in his Judgment; for he would betray his own Conscience, and
endanger his Salvation, seeing that in matter of Religion, all that is done
without Faith is Sin, as St. Paul says.

III.
Those who by unlawful means, as by Popes Bulls, or for Money, shall hold
Benefices, and also those which shall uphold Idolatry directly or indirectly,
are declared unworthy to be admitted to the Holy Communion of the Lords Supper.
As for benefices conferred on any Body by right of Patronage, whether it be by
Provision of the Lord Lay Patron, or by Collation of the Bishop, Believers are
advertised not to accept of any that shall be given them, under any open or
tacit condition of service deditated to the Idol.

CONFORMITY.
This Article being a consequence and dependence on the former, it has no need
of any other Interpretation.

IV.
Printers, Booksellers, Painters, and other Tradesmen, and in general all
Believers, especially those who have any Office in the Church, shall be
admonished not to make any thing in their way, as depends directly on the
Superstitions of the Church of Rome. And as for private Actions, and the
corrections proper thereunto, it shall be what the Consistory shall judge
convenient.

CONFORMITY.
The same may be said almost of this as I said of the Third, and add withal,
That after our Separation from the Church of Rome for things which we do not
approve, we cannot with safe Conscience practice any of those things which have
been the motive and cause of our Separation.

V.
Notaries, Secretaries, and others who by their Offices are obliged to Sign and
Seal things indifferently, which are presented to them, shall not be blamed for
receiving Testaments, passing Contracts, and dispatching Letters of things
which concern Idolatry; nor Judges for judging causes concerning Ecclesiastical
Matters, and the Execution of Edicts.

CONFORMITY.
The Authors of our Discipline have prudently permitted those of our Communion,
in preferrence to those of the Church of Rome, to do all things as may be done
without prejudicing ones Conscience, or indangering Salvation.

VI.
Arbitrators shall not meddle with any Matters that concern Idolatry directly
nor Indirectly.

CONFORMITY.
There needs no other Commentary on this Establishment then what I have
remarked on the Tenth and Eleventh.

VII.
Advocates and Attorneys may not plead in causes which tend to taking away
Preaching and setting up Mass; and generally they shall not be suffered to give
Council to the Romish Clergy in causes which tend directly or indirectly to the
oppression of the Church, and true Religion.

CONFORMITY.
There can be nothing more just than to forbid all Persons of our Religion to
Establish what we do condemn, and to destroy what we set up.

VIII.
Neither Bishops, nor Officials, nor Archdeacons, such as they are at present,
have by right, any Jurisdiction, Ecclesiastical nor Civil; Nevertheless because
Believers are sometimes constrained to appear before them to gain their Right,
which otherwise were not to be obtained, they may thither make their address,
being referred by the Magistrate, to whom they are first to apply themselves.

CONFORMITY.
One may and ought also submit to all the Jurisdictions Established in a
Country by Consent and Authority of the Sovereign, especially when one is
appointed so to do by Order of the Magistrate, under this condition
nevertheless, That the Service of God be not thereby injured, nor the
Conscience concerned.

IX.
Advocates that are Believers ought not to plead on any account whatsoever,
before Officials, but only in cases for which one may prosecute their Right
before them according to the precedent Article.

CONFORMITY.
This Article depending of the former, its needless to look for any other
Explication.

X.
It is not a thing unlawful in it self to exercise Civil Jurisdictions and
Procurations under Ecclesiastical Persons, which do not at all concern that
which they call the Spirituality.

CONFORMITY.
Seeing it is permitted to acknowledge the Jurisdictions of Ecclesiastical
Persons, on certain occasions, and in the manner above established, it may also
be permitted to Exercise them.

XI.
Believers may not obtain nor publish Monitories, nor Excommunications of the
Roman Church.

CONFORMITY.
The Protestants not acknowledging the Popes Authority to be Legitimate, they
ought not to have recourse to it, Directly nor Indirectly.

XII.
Inasmuch as it is not lawful nor expedient to go hear the Preachers of the
Church of Rome, or others that intrude themselves without being lawfully
called, the Flocks shall be hindered by the Ministers from going thither; and
those that will go, shall be summoned before the Consistory, and sensur'd as
the case shall require.

CONFORMITY.
It Is above Thirteen Hundred years ago, that the Council of Laodicea made this
Decree; Those which are Members of the Church shall not be permitted to go to
Church yards nor to Oratories of any Heretics whatsoever, either to Pray, or
to obtain the healing of any Sickness; but the Believers that have so done
shall for a time be deprived of the Holy Communion, and upon confessing and
repenting their fault, shall afterward be restored again.

XIII.
Lords, Gentlemen, and others, shall be advertised not to entertain in their
Houses, scandalous and incorrigible Persons; and especially if they suffer
Priests singing Mass, or discoursing to debauch their Servants, or if they do
anew, take, and receive such into their Service.

CONFORMITY.
This Establishment tends only to the purity of Life, and preservation of true
Religion, which are things to which every body ought diligently to apply
themselves.

XIV.
Fathers and Mothers shall be Exhorted to take great care in Teaching and
Educating their Children which are the Seed and Nursery of the Church. And
those which send them to the Schools of Priests, Friars, Jesuits, and Nuns,
shall be prosecuted by the severest Church Sensures. Those also which put their
Children to be Pages, or otherwise, to Lords and Gentlemen of the contrary
Religion, shall be advised how they do so.

CONFORMITY.
This proceeds from the same principle the other did, and was made by the same
Motives, which are Motives very reasonable, and very conformable to the
practice of the Ancient Church.

XV.
Those who have Brothers, Sisters, and other Relations, who having quitted
Monasteries to serve God with a pure and good Conscience, shall be Exhorted to
assist them, and to do according to the Laws of Humanity and Affinity.

CONFORMITY.
If Christians are obliged, and they are obliged by the word of God, and by the
Ancient Cannons, to exercise toward all Men, Works of Charity; of greater
Reason should they do them to their near Friends and Relations, especially when
they are reduced to necessity for serving God with a good Conscience, in
departing from a Communion wherein they were fully persuaded they could not be
saved.

XVI.
Ministers nor any else in the Church, cannot Print Books made by themselves or
others touching Religion, nor any way publish them, without communicating them
to the Colloque, or if need be to the Provincial Synod, and if the matter
require have, to the Accademies, or to two Pastors which shall be nominated by
the Synod, and shall attest the Examination by them made of the said Writings.

CONFORMITY.
This Ordinance is very necessary to prevent all the evil consequences as may
sometimes ensue without the Examination therein prescribed; the same thing is
done amongst the Papists, whose works are commonly approved by some Doctors,
and at Rome by the Master of the Sacred Palace. See what I have said on the
Fifteenth Article of the First Chapter,

XVII.
Those which take Pen in hand to treat the Histories of the Holy Scriptures in
Meter, are advertised not to mix therein any Poetical Fables, and not to
attribute to God the Name of false Gods, and not to add nor diminish to the
Holy Scriptures, but to keep as near as may be to the Style of it.

CONFORMITY.
This Article will find it self sufficiently explained, by the things I have
remarked on the Twelfth Article of the First Chapter, whether I refer the
Reader.

XVIII.
The Books of the Bible whether Cannonical, or Appocriphal, shall not be
transformed into Comedies, nor Tragedies.

CONFORMITY.
This Respect is due to the Holy Scriptures, as not to make it serve for
Subject nor Argument to these pieces of Theater, which the Ancient Church has
securely condemned, forbidding her Children to be there present.

XIX.
Churches where there shall be Printers, shall warn them not to print Books
that shall concern Religion or Ecclesiastical Discipline, without first having
communicated them to the Consistory to prevent the mischeifs that have arisen
thereby. The Printers, Stationers, etc. shall be warned not to sell any Books
relateing to Idolatry, that may be impious, or scandalous, or which may tend to
the corrupting of good Manners.

CONFORMITY.
After what I have observed on the 2, 3, and 16th. Articles of this Chapter,
this does not require any new interpretation.

XX.
Although the Priests do wrongfully usurp Tithes by reason of their
Administration; nevertheless they ought to be paid in respect to the Kings
command, and to avoid sedition and giving offense.

CONFORMITY.
In that we pay Tithes to the Curate, is an Effect of the obedience we owe to
the Ordinance of our King, and a mark of the care our Synods have had in
accomodating in indifferent things with those from whom we have separated for
mere Conscience sake, and not for worldly considerations, nor for private
Interests.

XXI.
Believers shall be exhorted not to give any offense in working on fast days,
according to the Edict.

CONFORMITY.
It is also by a Principle of Obedience and submission that we observe
Holy Days, not to offend our Neighbors, and to keep our selves up to the Edict
under whose Rules we live.

XXII.
All Vsuries shall be very strictly prohibited, because they are Exorbitants,
and many abuses is therein committed

CONFORMITY.
The Ancient Cannons very strictly prohibited usury, because it was cruel, and
many great crimes were therein committed; Our Discipline follows a moderation
in declaring that in matter of Lending, one shall act according to the Kings
Ordinance, and moreover that the Rules of Charity be consulted.

XXIII.
All violence and unbecoming language against those of the Roman Church, and
even against Priests and Friars shall not only be hindered, but also wholly
suppressed as much as possible may be.

CONFORMITY.
This Article is grounded on the Gospel, which puts in the number of Murderers,
those which violate their Neighbors by injurious words, and shows the
disposition we have ever had to live peaceably with our Countrymen, not to
instance in Cannons which forbid all manner of Outrages.

XXIV.
Swearers, who through Custom or Anger take the Name of God in vain, and others
who profane the Majesty of the Lord, shall be grevously censured and after one
or two admonitions, if they desist not, shall be suspended the Lords Table; and
outrageous Blasphemers, as also Damee's, and the like, shall by no means be
tolerated in the Church, but from the first offense, shall be censured even to
suspension from the Sacrament, and if they persist, they shall be publicly
Excommunicated.

CONFORMITY.
The foundation of this Article is taken from the third Commandment of the
first Table of the Law, Thou shall not take the Name of the Lord thy God in
vain, for the Lord will not hold him guiltless that takes his Name in vain,
After so strict a prohibition, and so terrible a Commination our Discipline had
Reason to establish punishments against the Infringers of this Commandment, to
avoid all blame and reproach, L. 7. Ind. 2 Epist. 6. Tom. 2. Spicil. page 548.
because as Gregory the first says, Him that corrects not what should be taken
away, does commit it; Our King St. Lewis, made an Ordinance in the year 1270,
to bannish out of his Kingdom, Blasphemies, and Oaths, whereby the Majesty of
God is criminaly profaned.

XXV.
The Churches shall advertise Believers both Men and Women to use great
Modesty, especially in Apparel, and shall give Order to abate the superfluity
therein committed: Nevertheless the said Churches shall make no Law
thereabouts, it being a thing appertaining to the Magistrate to do; but shall
give notice to all, that the Kings Ordinances in those Cases shall be
diligently observed.

CONFORMITY.
The remarks I have made on the 20th. Article of the first Chapter will show
the Conformity of this, with the Discipline of the Ancient Christians.

XXVI.
No body can be debarred from the Lords Table for wearing any kind of habit
that shall be of Common use and Custom in this Kingdom, but in this rank ought
not to be comprehended those which leave the open marks of shame,
dissoluteness, too much newness, as Painting, naked Breasts, and the like, the
Consistories shall use all possible means to suppress such Dissolutions by
Sensures, and against obstinate Persons, shall proceed to suspending them from
the Lords Table.

CONFORMITY.
I say the same of this as of the former.

XXVII.
Dances shall be suppressed, and those who make account to Dance, or be present
at Dancing, after having been several times admonished, shall be Excommunicated
when they shall grow obstinate and Rebellious. Consistories are strictly
enjoined to see this Article duly executed, and to cause it to be publicly
read in the name of the Synods, and the Colloques exhorted to take Notice of
Consistories which shall not take care, to Sensure them.

CONFORMITY.
Can. 53.
The Synod of Laodicea about the middle of the 4th. Century made a Cannon
against Dances, contained in these Words; Christians which go to Weddings, must
not Dance, but let them Dine or Sup civilly, as becomes Christians.

In the third Volume of the Councils, a like Decree is attributed to the
Council of Lerrida in the year 524. Though its nothing but the same of that of
Laodicea a little varied, but just now mentioned. Herrald Bishop of Tours in
his Capitulary's of the year 858, Page 818.
in the third Volume of the Councils of France, forbids also Dances, not only
at Weddings, Cap. 112, 114. page 115.
but also on other occasions; the Friar Blastares has not in his Collection
forgot the Cannon of Laodicea, Chap. 7. of the Letter G. page 66. St. Eloy
Bishop of Noyon in the 7th. Century inveighed much against Dancing, which he
put in the number of Devilish Divertisments, as is reported by St. Owen in the
second Book of his life, chap. 15. Tom. 5. spiril. page 217.

In the year 589 the third Council of Toledo had appointed in the 23d. Tom. 4.
conc. page 507.
Cannon to exterminate this profane and Irreligious Custom from amongst the
people, who instead of attending diligently on Gods service on Holy Days, spent
the time in Dancing and singing filthy and impure Songs, and the Fathers enjoin
the Bishops and Judges with care to clear Spain from this extravigance. And
about the beginning of the V. Century a Council of Africa had ordained in the
27th Cannon, that the Emperors should be desired to prohibit Dances in the
Streets on Days appointed for Celebrating the Memory of Martyrs; Tom. 1. conc.
page 915.
In the 6th. Book of the Capitularies of our Kings of the second Race, Dances
and Lascivious Songs were absolutely forbidden, and it is therein declared that
they which shall disobey this Ordinance shall suffer the punishment contained
in the Cannon, alleging for a Reason that they are the remainders of Paganism.

XXVIII.
Mommery's, and Stage Plays shall not be allowed, nor the Ceremony of King
Drinks, nor Carnavals, nor Hocus Pocus, slight of Hand, and Poppet and Stage
players, and Christian Magistrates are exhorted not to tolerate them, because
these things only cause loss of time, and entertains Idleness, Curiosity, and
Expense. Neither shall it be lawful for Believers to assist at Comedies,
Tragedies, Farces, Moralities, and other plays acted in public or in private,
seeing that in all Ages they have been prohibited amongst Christians, as
inclining to the corrupting of good Manners, especially when the holy Scripture
is therein mingled. Nevertheless when in Colleges it shall be thought fit that
Youth may represent some History, it may be tolerated, provided it ben't
contained in the Holy Scripture, which is not given to be dally'd with, but to
be truly Preached, also it shall be done but very seldom, and by advice of the
Colloque, which shall first see the composition.

CONFORMITY.
There may be applied to this Article as to what regards Mummery's, the
Liberties of Shrovetide, and other the like Pastimes, what the Fathers have
said and done against Christians which allowed themselves in Libertinism after
the Manner of Pagans in the Callends of January that is to say, the first day
of that Month, who used near hand the same Sports now practiced at Carnaval;
but to draw to a Conclusion, it suffices to refer the Reader to the first
Cannon of a Synod at Auxer in the year 578, to a Homily of Maximus Bishop of
Turin, and a Writer of the V. Century, Entitled, A Homily on the Circumcision
of our Lord, or a reprehension of the Callends of January: In this Sermon he
explains the Follies and Debauches committed by Christians on that day, and to
what St. Owen writes of St. Eloy in the same Chapter cited on the foregoing
Article, whereby we find they abandoned themselves to very great Extravagancy,
they put on Vizards, and put themselves in the shape of sundry Beasts, as of
Sheep, Stags, Cows, Bears and other Beasts, to act with greater Liberty and
Freedom, until that at last these extravagancies being restrained by
Ecclesiastical and Civil Laws, Christians changed these Follies of the Callends
of January, to the time a little before Lent, as if one were bound to commit
Sin, to have greater occafion of Repentance.

As for the rest of the Article which concerns Stageplays, and the Theater, the
Ancient Doctors of the Church incessantly cry against these worldly pastimes;
Tertullian and St. Cyprian have writ whole Treatises on purpose to divert
Christians from them, and has called them spectacles: I actantius, St. Basil,
St. Lib. 6. page 127. Par. 1669
Cyril of Jerusalem, Isidore of Petlusta, St. Crysostome, St. Austin, has
highly condemned them; and Salvian in his Treatise of Providence, does
vehemently exagerate the evils that proceed from them, and says several things
as may justly be applied to those amongst us as do frequent the Theater, and
Comedies.

The third Council of Carthage in the year 388 expressly forbids it in 11th.
Cannon. And the 4th. Tom. 1. Conc. page 710.
which was assembled the year following, Excomunicates in the 81th. Cannon, all
those which on a solemn day abandon the assembly of the Church to be present at
Stage Plays; Ib. p. 730.
therefore in another Council under Aurelius, the Fathers of Africa resolved to
beseech the Emperors to prohibit those worldly divertisments, especially on
solemn days set apart for the Exercise of Piety and Religion; The 6th.
Ecumenical Council employes to this purpose the 51st. Cannon at the end of the
7th. Century. Ib. c. 28. page 915.
Thence it is that the Ancient Discipline excomunicates Stageplayers, Jesters,
Comedians, and all those as mounted on the Theater to show these Divertisments
to the people; and worldings must not abuse what is added at the end of the
Establishment I examine, saving the only scope of it was but sometimes to
Exercise Scholars in Colleges.

XXIX.
All Plays prohibited by the Kings Edicts, as Cards, Dice, and other Games of
hazard, and those of cevetousness, immodesty, scandal, or notorious loss of
time, shall be suppressed, and the parties reproved and admonished by the
Consistory, and Sensured as the Circumstances shall require: Lotteries also are
not to be allowed, whither tolerated by the Magistrate or otherwise.

CONFORMITY.
The 6th. Tom. 5. Conc. page 337.
universal Council made this Decree, contained in the 50th. Cannon, That no
Christian whether of the Clergy or Laity, do henceforth play at the game called
Hazard, and if any be found doing it, if of the Clergy, that he be deposed, but
if of the Laity that he be Excommunicated.

XXX.
To be present at Feasts and Collations of Weddings, at Birth and Marriage of
Children, made by those of the Romish persuasion, is in it self indifferent;
nevertheless Believers are advertised to use it to Edification, and to consider
if they are sufficiently able to resist the dissolutions and other evils which
may there be committed, and also to reprove them. In which Feasts are not
comprised those made by Priests at their first Mass, to which it is not lawful
to go.

CONFORMITY.
The Council of Loadicea has proved in the 35th. and 54th. Cannons against the
debauches which may happen at Feasts, and has warned Christians not to
participate thereof.

As for the Feasts made by Priests at their first Mass, our Discipline had just
reason to forbid those of its communion not to be there present, because
'twould be in some sort a silent approving of a thing which has occasioned one
of the greatest causes of our separation from the Romish Church, it was by a
like principle the Synod of Laodicea prohibited Christians in the 37th. 38th.
and 39th. Cannons, not to communicate of any thing as they were wont to use in
the Feasts of Jews, Heretics, and Pagans.

XXXI.
It shall be no means be permitted to be present at the Feasts or Weddings of
those which to marry a Person of contrary Religion shall revolt from the
profession of the Gospel. As for those which have been a good while revolted,
or are wholly Papists, it is at the discretion of Believers to do what they
shall in Wisdom think convenient.

CONFORMITY.
What I have observed at the end of the former Article, may be applied to this.

XXXII.
Those which challenge or cause to be challenged to Duel, or that being
challenged accept it, and even kill their Adversasaries, although they might
obtain their pardon, or be otherwise claered, shall be sensured to the being
suspended from the Lords Supper, which suspension shall be speedily published,
and if they desire to be received to the peace of the Church, they must make
public confession of their Crime.

CONFORMITY.
Duels being expressly condemned by the Word of God, and by the Laws of our
Invincible Monarch its very just severely to sensure Transgressors, and all
those which passing over the Laws of Heaven and Earth, give way to these furies
and passions, which proceed from an insatiable desire of anger and revenge.

XXXIII.
These Articles here contained touching Discipline are not so settled amongst
us, but if the good of the Church require it, they may be changed; but it shall
not be in the power of Ministers, Consistories, Colloques, and Provincial
Synods thereunto, to add, alter, or diminish, without the advice and consent of
a Nati^nal Synod.

CONFORMITY.
Upon the least knowledge of Ecclesiastical Antiquity, it is apparent that the
Conducters of Christian Churches has on several occasions done what our
Discipline tolerates in this last Article, and after the manner it prescribes;
thence it is that when there was any question made of a point of Discipline
which regarded the Churches of the Roman Empire all in general, it was only an
Ecumenical Council could determine it, as I have made appear on the second
Article of the 6th. chap. to which I referr the Reader, moreover it were easy
to produce sundry examples of changes made at several times, in the Ancient
Discipline; but as it is a truth owned by all the world, I will only touch at
the matter of penance the practice whereof has been various according to the
diversity of times, Councils having therein made several changes as occasion
has required, as appears by Reading the Ancient Cannons; see what I have writ
on the 19th. Article of the 5th. chap. which is that of Consistories. However
Ecclesiastical Discipline should allways be conformable to the genious of the
Gospel, and to the mind of Jesus Christ, and have for its foundation this maxim
of St. Paul, That all things should be done decently and in order in the Church
of God: ^ib. 2. de Bapt. c. 3. Tom. 7. p. 40.
This being so, the Chrch has allways had power to change what it thinks fit in
matter of Discipline, seeing that according to St. Austins remark, the last
Ecumenical Councils have often corrected the former, its true he says it
ought to be done without arrogance, or pride, without strife or contention,
wirh o^ spirit of love and charity. For the Rule of faith remaining entire,
says Tertullian, the rest which relates to Discipline; admits the novelty of
Correction by means of the grace of God, which operates and makes farther
progress in us to the end,

FINIS.
A TABLE of the Chapters contained in this Book.
Chap. 1 OF Ministers Page. 1 Chap. 2 Of Schools Page. 111 Chap. 3 Of Elders
and Deacons Page. 118 Chap. 4 Of Deaconship Page. 138 Chap. 5 Of Consistories
Page. 146 Chap. 6 Of Uniting Churches Page. 153 Chap. 7 Of Colloques Page. 158
Chap. 8 Of Provincial Synods Page. 161 Chap. 9 Of National Synods Page. 181
Chap. 10 Of Exercises of Believers Page. 191 Chap. 11 Of Baptism Page. 197
Chap. 12 Of the Lords Supper Page. 239 Chap. 13 Of Marriage Page. 250 Chap. 14
Of Particular Rules Page. 289
FINIS.
Advertisment.
Liptines vulgarly Lestines, was a Royal House in the Diocese of Cambray.

Vernum Palatium, was another betwixt Compiegne and the Monastry of St. Dennys;
and if I have called it Vernum in some places of this Work, it is because
Vernum has more likeness to Vernon than to Verneuil; In the main, whatsoever it
is called, it is known it is not Vernon on the River Sein.

Forum July, Fruil in Austria, Urbs Carnorum.

Editions of some BOOKS I have made use of.
The Library of the Fathers Paris 1664 The Tomes of General and particular
Councils, ibid. 1636 The Councils of France by Sirmond ibid. 1629 Supplement of
the Councils of France. ibid. 1666 The Code of the Canons of the Universal
Church which Contain the Canons of the Council Nice, of Auryra, of Neoraesaria,
of Gangre, of Antioch, of Laodicea, of Constantinople, of Ephesus, of
Chalcedonia Paris 1661 The African Code ibid. 1661 Eusebius his Ecclesiastical
History ibid. 1659 Socrates and Zosomen ibid. 1668 Theodoret, Evagrius,
Theodous Lector ibid. 1673

