THE HISTORY OF THE EUCHARIST.

Divided into Three Parts.

The First, Treating of the Form of CELEBRATION, The Second, of the DOCTRINE,
The Third, of WORSHIP IN THE SACRAMENT.

Written Originally in French, by Monsieur L'ARROQUE, Minister of the
Protestant Church at Quevilly, near Roan; with the new Additions.

Done into English by J. W.

LONDON, Printed for George Downs, at the Three Flower de Luces, over against
S. Dunstan's Church in Fleet Street. MDCLXXXIV.

The History of ye EUCHARIST
Printed for g: Downs at ye three flower de luces in fleetstreet 1684



To the Honorable Sir HVGH WINDHAM, Knight One of the JUSTICES Of His MAJESTY's
Court of COMMON PLEAS, etc.
SIR,
WHEN on the one hand I consider the incessant diligence used by WITS,
pretended or real, in glutting our Nation with the froth and vanity of
outlandish Novels, Romances, and other impertinences, tending rather to deprave
the Natives, than to implant in them the Seeds of Virtue and true Gallantry;
and on the other hand, how few there are who employ themselves in seeking out
the little Gold which lies hid under their great heaps of Dross and Rubbidge: I
thought my self indispensably obliged to adhere to the Council of the famous
Moralist, who said, Stultissimum credo ad imitandum non optima quaeque
proponere.

Therefore passing by the polite and disguised Writings of an Arnaud, a Friar
M^imbourg, a Simon, and the like Ambodexters of the times, who in vain rack
their Invention to please two Masters at once, halting betwixt God and Baal,
their Duty and Obedience unto their King, and Allegiance to the Bishop of Rome,
following the steps of a S. Becket, they may in time receive his Reward: I say,
not meddling with such contagious Works and Writings, I have essayed to
communicate to the Public, something which may tend as well to the Profit as
the Pleasure of the Reader. Also remembering how acceptable the Labors of the
admirable Du Bartas were in this Climate, both at Court, and also in the City
and Country; and looking round the many Writers of the Age, I have singled out
his Neighbor and Countryman, the venerable Monsieur L'ARROQUE, of whom it may
be said, in the words of our Savior, (if Metaphysical Dissertations are
preferrable before Natural) That a greater than Du Bartas is here: For he sang
but the Works of the Six Days Creation, which shall be destroyed and burnt up;
but our Author takes a higher flight, and as well from the Records of Heaven,
as from the Registers of the soundest Antiquity, displays unto us the
excellency of that august Sacrament, instituted by our Lord himself, and which
is to be commemorated in the Church, unto the end of time, that thereby we may
be translated into the new Jerusalem, there to be everlastingly fed and
refreshed with the Fruit of the Tree of Life. As an Angel was set at the
Entrance into the Garden of Eden, with a flaming Sword; so here Entrance is
denied unto the profane Rout, but free Admission proclaimed unto all that are
sincere, and endeavor to be so, even from the frozen Laplander unto the
scorched Ethiopian, and from the Christians of Malabar, unto those of Mexico.

I cannot omit informing your Honor, that not many years past, with my eyes I
beheld the venerable Author of the following Treatise, weeping and praying in
his Church at Vitry, for its preservation, then in danger of being suppressed
and demolished by restless Enemies, who effected their wicked design soon
after; and it is supposed, with the greater facility, by reason of the Coldness
and Apostasy of the Lord Proprietor of the place, whose Honor and Glory was,
about the same time, laid in the Dust with the Ruins of that stately Edifice.
I say, I beheld the Author, much I suppose after the same posture Alexander and
Paulinus, Bishops of Constantinople and Tire, were in, when the violent
persecutions of the cruel Donatists so far prevailed, as to destroy those
sumptuous Fabrics, set apart in those Cities for God's true Worship and
Service; and which was doubtless, in effect, the same doleful condition which
our pious Bishops and Martyrs, the Famous Cranmer, Latimer, Ridley, etc. were
involved in, when the Floodgates of Romish Persecution had overflowed the Land.

I have observed, That Divines (the more to affect us with the greatness of
God's Mercy, in continuing the purity of his Word and Sacraments amongst us)
many times look back upon the sometime flourishing estate of those happy Souls,
who lived under the conduct of their Godly Pastors, in the famous Churches of
Ephesus, Smyrna, Sardis, etc. wherein, with pure and undaunted zeal, they sang
the Praises of their Glorified Savior; until, by degrees, the rage of Heathen
Enemies, either demolished their Churches and Temples, or, which is worse,
introduced Idolatrous and Superstitious Worship into them. We need not now
travel so far as Asia nor Greece for Instances to inhaunse our due resentments
of God's Benefits, on the one hand; nor to work in us a detestation of the Rage
and Cruelty of the Enemies of his Church and People, on the other: our
neighbor Nation affords us too fresh and lively a Scene of the sad Catastrophe
which happened unto the Primitive Churches, that I had much rather cover with a
Vail, than go about to expose unto public view, did not the present occasion
invite me to say something relating thereunto.

All the World knows with what great Advice and Solemnity the Edict of Nantes
was agreed upon and confirmed by the great King Henry the Fourth, for settling
and assuring the Peace and Safety of the Protestant Churches and Subjects of
France. The same Edict was renewed and confirmed by his Son Lewis the
Thirteenth, and all the great Officers of his Kingdom, but how well kept, the
forcing Rochel, etc. may testify.

At the Coronation of the present King Lewis the Fourteenth, it was again amply
confirmed by him, as it had been before by his Father and Grandfather, and as
solemnly sworn unto as the Pyrenaean Treaty, so that every body concluded the
Protestants of France would not have been molested nor injured in his Reign;
and yet it is in his time found by sad experience, that they have been most of
all oppressed and persecuted, and that without any pretense of taxing them of
engaging in the Projects of a Queen Mother, or Prince of Conde: but all Civil
Dissentions being past over and pacified, within the compass of these last
twenty years, wherein they desired only to live peaceably, under the protection
of the Laws and public Faith, contrary thereunto, the insatiable rage of
wicked Men has deprived them of their Commands, Offices, and Employments, and
the liberty of executing them, in Civil as well as Military Affairs; whereby
many thousands had starved, had they not found support and sanctuary under the
Wings of our great Defender of the true Faith. And whereas, by the Laws of the
Land, there was no difference to be made betwixt Protestant and Popish
Subjects, for enjoying and executing all manner of Trades, and places of trust,
the quite contrary has been practiced: the Courts of Judicature, wherein was
an equal number of Counselors and Judges of both Religions, for hearing and
determining differences, have been suppressed and quite altered; Attorneys,
Apothecaries, Surgeons, and generally all other mechanic and handycraft
Trades, not permittedto gain or eat their bread in quiet. But which is most
doleful of all to consider, the Ministers of the Gospel are forbidden to preach
the word of God, many of them slain, imprisoned, and banished, their Churches
pulled down to the ground, and their flock dispersed over the face of the
Earth, into England, Sweden, Italy, Denmark, Germany, etc. as Sheep having no
Shepherd, just as it happened unto their Predecessors, the Albigenses and
Waldenses, for the same cause, above Five hundred Years ago; and the few that
remain in the Land of their Nativity, waiting for the time that their King and
Sovereign, like an other Cyrus, or Charlemain, his Royal and Religious
Ancestor, will give and proclaim deliverance unto the dispersed Tribes, from
their cruel Bondage, and from so great a Famine of the Word: for at present
they many times see their young Infants yield up their innocent Souls, in
carrying them unto places far distant, to receive the Seal of the Covenant of
Baptism; others yielding up their Spirits without the Benefit or Help of their
Spiritual Guide's consolation at the hour of Death; besides many other great
Miseries which they daily suffer in Body, Soul, and Estate: So that the
Parisian Maacssre was a kindness, being compared with the present usage which
the Protestants of France do receive by the diligence of Romish Emissaries, and
from their own unkind Countrymen; for that gave them a speedy deliverance from
all miseries, whereas they are now, as it were, held on the Rack, and made
suffer a thousand Deaths, before they are freed from the Burden of one
miserable Life.

When our Neighbors and Brethrens Houses are burning, and all in a Flame, for
the same common Faith and Reformation, all Christians that have any sense of
Religion and Piety, have great reason to unite their Prayers unto the God of
Heaven, That he would be pleased to avert his just Judgments from falling upon
us for our great Impieties, and preserve our Church and Nation from the sad
calamities which have ruined so many Christian Families in France, etc. and
which threaten the like usage unto the rest of the Reformed World.

I own, it is the singular Blessing of God, and by the Liberality of the great
Encourager of Virtue and Learning, his Grace the Lord Primate and Chancellor of
Ireland, that I am happy this day in addressing my self unto you, almost in the
Words of S. Paul unto Felix, the Roman Governor, in adventuring to speak the
more freely in this matter, because you have been for many years a Righteous
Judge unto this Nation, living so that Envy it self dares not whisper the least
Corruption or sign of fear or favor to Friends or Enemies, and are perfectly
sensible of the verity of these things, which I have only hinted at, to avoid
Prolixity, lest I may be thought to write a Book of Martyrs, rather than an
Epistle Dedicatory.

Our Gentry and Gallants formerly were wont, in great numbers, to flock and
resort unto Montpellier, Montauban, Bergerac, etc. where they freely exchanged
their English Gold for the Nourishment and Recreations they there found, both
for Body and Soul. But now it may too truly be said of those places in
particular, and of other whole Provinces in general, That the Ark of God, their
Glory, is departed from them: and they, as the Asiatick Churches, are
overspread with thick and dark Clouds of Profaneness, Atheism, Ignorance, and
Superstition; so that those who travel that way, may justly fear it will be to
their damage both in Body and Soul. What was the pleasant and beautiful
Jerusalem, when the Christians were sent out of it unto Pella, and other
places? And what is France, but an Aceldama, now that the Protestants are
expelled, contrary to the proceedings of the wise and valiant Dealings of Lewis
the Twelfth, who before he would ruin his Subjects for Religion, sent
Commissaries, and not Dragoons, into the several parts of his Dominions, to be
justly informed of the truth of matters, who, upon the Report made unto him by
his Commissaries, swore a great Oath in presence of his Officers and
Counselors of State, That the Protestants were the best Subjects he had in his
Kingdom, and thenceforward commanded that they should not be molested in Body
or Estate. And it is well known that the present King has much better knowledge
and experience of his Protestant Subjects Loyalty, than that great Prince had
occasion to know: so that it is hoped the sinister Councils of a Plotting
Jesuitical Faction will not always prevail, to the Ruin of so many faithful
good Subjects, and of so flourishing a Kingdom.

I have presumed here to present unto you an Epitome of the chiefest
revolutions which have occurred upon this tremendous Article of Christian
Religion, in the Eastern and Western Churches, from the Apostles days unto the
last Age, wherein the truth of the chiefest matters negotiated by Emperors,
Kings, Councils, Popes, Prelates, and the eminentest Doctors of the Church, in
the several Centuries, are retrieved, and recited with as great integrity and
moderation aspossible can be.

I have endeavored to accommodate my self unto the Author's sense and terms,
as near as I could; and if any passage seems to vary from the Doctrine of the
Church of England, (which I do not observe through the whole Book) I hope to
find a favorable Censure, being only a Translator and not the Author. If the
Work be duly weighed, it will not stand in need of much recommendation for the
buying and reading of it: such generous WINE needs no Bush; all is Loyal and
Orthodox here; it recommends it self unto all sorts of Persons that desire to
see the weightiest matters of Religion interwoven with the pleasant light and
truth of the purest History of all Ages, whereby Faith, as well as Men's Reason,
is improved and confirmed, to the eternal silencing of that common question of
the Gentlemen of the Roman Persuasion unto Protestants, in asking, Where their
Religion was before Luther and Calvin? Here are Depths where Elephants may
swim, the learned and curious may find sweetness and satisfaction; also the
weakest Lamb, the pious and devout Soul, may wade without fear, and go away
plunged and pleased in pleasure and delight. And how could I better expose this
Sacred Treasure of Ecclesiastical Antiquity, unto public view, than by
recommending my weak endeavors herein unto your favorable acceptance and
Patronage, having received the first design of coming to light near the famous
Mansion of your worthy Progenitors, where for several years I spent some of the
pleasantest days of all my life; wherein I freely confess, as God's Glory and
the good of his Church was chiefly designed by me in the main, so also I
thought fit to express my Gratitude unto the great Family of the Windhams in
particular, a Family known to be truly Noble and Great in the number of its
flourishing Branches, as well as in Riches, Honor, and approved Loyalty unto
their King and Country; the true happiness and lasting prosperity whereof,
shall ever be sincerely wished and desired by,

Honored Sir, Your most obedient humble Servant, Jos. Walker.

THE Author's Preface Translated from the FRENCH.
THE Controversies about Religion being a kind of War, or if you will a sort of
Lawsuit, wherein both Parties plead their Cause with some heat; it seems to me
very difficult to write, and not let fall some words that may favor the
interest of that side for which we are concerned, because the flesh corrupts
the acts of the Understanding, and the old Man never fails to vitiate the
purity of the thoughts of the new. I do not here speak of those angry Writers,
who in all their Works, do show an unlimited passion for the Cause which they
defend, and meditate nothing but disparaging their Adversaries, to make their
own Party triumph by the Calumnies which they cast upon the others. I speak of
mild and peaceable Spirits, who write with moderation; who, nevertheless, do it
not always so successfully, but they let drop some things which all do not
approve of, because their ever remains frailty in man, and the innocence of the
second Adam, has not a complete victory over the first. What I say, is
particularly verified in examining the Tradition of the Church, upon the
Articles of our Faith; for both the Roman Catholics and the Protestants,
pretending that it is favorable to their Cause, each allege out of the holy
Fathers, to establish their Belief and Religion. This consideration makes me
think that the surest way, and most edifying means for Christians, would be
plainly to produce what has been from time to time received and believed in
the Church upon the points in Controversy; and Historically without dispute to
represent the sentiments of our Ancestors, upon all the Articles which are to
be examined. This is what I have endeavored to do upon the matter of the
Eucharist, which is, and will be always (if God prevent it not by his grace) a
stone of stumbling, and a means which the Devil will never fail to use, to keep
up amongst Christians that unhappy strife wherewith they are so pleased, but
which ought to draw tears of blood from those good Souls that are sensibly
touched for the glory of God, and that without ceasing by their prayers desire
that he will give unto all, the grace to keep the unity of the spirit in the
bond of peace. The better to succeed in my design, and to represent the
Sacrament at large, I have divided my Work into three Parts: In the first, I
examine the outward Form of Celebration; I prove that Bread and Wine have
always been the matter of the Sacrament amongst Christians. I hint at the
mixture of Water with the Wine in the holy Cup; and I endeavor to discover the
Original, as well as the Mystery which the ancient Doctors of the Church since
S. Cyprian, have sought for in this mixture. I mention sundry Sects of
Heretics, whereof some have changed the matter of the Sacrament, others have
corrupted the Celebration; and lastly, others have quite rejected it, not
suffering that it should be celebrated at all. I omit not what S. Ignatius said
of certain Heretics who condemned the celebration, nor the Heresy of one
called Tanchelin, who also denied it, but through another Principle; I make
some mention of the Slanders which the Jews and others, cast upon Christians by
reason of the Sacrament; And I treat of the difference betwixt the Greek and
Latin Churches, about the using of levened and unlevened Bread. Then I consider
whence the Bread and Wine of the Sacrament was taken, what was the fashion of
the Bread, with the innovations and changes which have thereupon happened. From
thence I proceed to the consideration of the place of Consecration, of the
matter of the Chalices and Patins, that is to say, the Vessels which were used
in this holy action; this consideration is followed with an inquiry of the
Language wherein Consecration was made, and wherein all the Service was
generally performed; and from this Inquiry, I proceed to the Examination of
Ceremonies, and of the Form of Consecration; I mean, the words of Consecration,
to know whether the ancient Church did consecrate by Prayers, Blessings, and
giving of Thanks, or by these words, This is my Body, as is now the practice of
the Latin Church. Then I treat of the Oblation or the Form of the Sacrifice,
and I show the Reasons and Motives which obliged the holy Fathers to give to
the Eucharist the name of Oblation and Sacrifice: I annex unto the
consideration of the Oblation, that of the Elevation, and of the Fraction; and
I show at what time the Latins began to lift up the Host, to warn the people to
adore it: moreover, I examine the Distribution and Communion, and in the first
place, the Time, the Place, and the Posture of the Communicant, the Persons who
distributed, those who communicated, with the words of the one and the other,
and then of the Thing distributed, treating at large the Question of the
Communion under both kinds. I also show, that for several Ages, Communicants
received the Eucharist with their hand; that they were permitted to carry it
unto their Houses, and to carry it along with them in their Journeys and
Travels; and that the ancient Christians were so little scrupulous in this
matter, that sometimes they sent the Sacrament unto the Sick by Lay persons,
Men, Women, Acolytes, and young Boys; and not only so, but they made Plasters
of it, they buried it with the Dead. In some Churches they burnt the remainder
of the Sacrament, and in others, they caused it to be eaten by little Infants.
Sometimes they took consecrated Wine and mixed it with Ink, then they dipped
their Pen in these mixed Liquors, the more to confirm the Acts they intended to
sign. In the Second Part, I describe the History of the Doctrine of the Holy
Fathers, upon this weighty Article, beginning with the reflections they have
made upon the words of Institution, and upon the interpretation they have given
of these words, This is my Body; and after these Reflections, I represent a
great number of Testimonies, wherein they call the Eucharist, Bread and Wine,
in the very act of communicating; they affirm it is Bread which is broken, that
it is Corn, Wheat, the fruit of the Vine, Fruits of the Earth, and like terms:
They positively say, That it is Bread and Wine; Bread, wherewith our Bodies are
nourished, the matter whereof passes through the natural accidents of our
common Food, Bread which is consumed in the celebration of the Sacrament. They
affirm, that the Bread and the Cup, which we receive at the Lord's Table, are
things inanimate; that the substance of Bread and Wine remain after
Consecration: and because: one is found amongst them that much varies from this
language, I represent unto the Reader what some have said to reconcile this
Author with others who have expressed themselves otherwise than he has done.
Then re-assuming the thread of my History, I make appear, that these same
Doctors have believed, that participating of the Eucharist, broke the fast, and
that they have spoken of what is received in the Communion, as of a thing
whereof one received a little, a morsel, a piece, a small portion. And having
seen what they believed, and what they said of the things which we receive in
the Eucharist, I inquire what they taught of the Use, the Office, and Employ of
the sacred Symbols: And they tell us, that the Eucharist is the Sacrament, the
Sign, the Figure, the Type, the Antitype, the Symbol, the Image, the
Similitude, and the resemblance of the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ. And the
better to instruct us in the nature and force of these expressions, they will
have us make these two observations, First, that when they speak of the
Eucharist as of a Sign, a Figure, an Image, it is in opposition to the reality,
which they consider as absent. The other is, that they constantly hold, that
the Image and the Figure cannot be that whereof they are the Image and Figure.
And indeed, not to leave their Doctrine exposed unto the strokes of Calumny,
they declare, that if the Eucharist be a Figure, and an Image, it is not a bare
Figure, nor an Image without operation; but a Figure, an Image, and a Sacrament
replenished with all the virtue and all the efficacy of the Body and Blood of
our blessed Savior, clothed, if it may be so said, with the Majesty of his
person, and accompanied in the lawful Celebration with all the fruits, and with
all the benefits of his death and Sufferings. But because the same Fathers who
affirm that the Eucharist is Bread and Wine, and who say, that it is the Sign,
the Symbol, the Figure, and the Sacrament of the Body and Blood of our Savior,
do say also, That it is his Body and his Blood, that it passes and is turned
into his Body and Blood; I have not omitted to report the explications which
they give us thereupon, and to show which of those sorts of expressions they
have limited; for by this means it is easy to comprehend their words, and
intentions. Having ended the Examination of their Doctrine, I have applied my
self unto the search and inquiry of its consequence, to know if they believed
the eating of the Flesh of Jesus Christ, with the mouth of the body, the eating
of the same Flesh by the wicked, as well as by the righteous, and the presence
of the Lord upon Earth, as to his Humanity, and how they understood the
following Maxims, whether a Body can be in several places at the same time;
whether it can subsist invisibly after the manner of a Spirit, without
occupying any space; whether what has been done long since, can still be done
every day; whether the Cause can be later than the Effect; whether that which
contains, ought not to be greater than that which is contained; whether
Accidents can exist without their Subject; whether the Senses may be deceived
in the report they make of sensible Objects, when there is no defect in the
Organ, or in the medium, or situation of the Object; whether a Body ought to be
visible, and palpable, and whether it ought to have its parts so distinguished
the one from the other, that each part ought to answer the respective part of
place; whether there may be penetration of dimensions; whether one may dwell in
himself; whether a Body may be all entirely in one of its parts; and whether
whatsoever is seen and touched, and falls under sense, be a Body. And to the
end nothing be wanting to establish the Doctrine of the Fathers in the point of
the Eucharist, I add unto direct proofs, a great many indirect proofs, taken
from their words and actions, whence are drawn several inductions, which
contribute very much to show what were their sentiments of this Article of our
Faith. Then I represent the Alterations and changes happened in the ancient
expressions and Doctrine, the contests of the Ninth Age, whereunto if I mistake
not, I have given much light by certain considerations, which show as clear as
the light, which of the two Opinions had the better, that of Paschasius, or
that of his Adversaries. The History of the Tenth Age, shall be represented in
such a manner I hope, as will not be displeasing unto the candid Reader, seeing
it will inform him that in that Age, which I consider neither as an Age of
Darkness, nor of Light, but participating of both, wherein things passed
otherwise than has been hitherto believed. I treat exactly of what passed in
the Eleventh Century, in regard of Berengarius, and his Followers; in regard of
the Albigenses, and Waldenses, in the Twelfth and Thirteenth Centuries; of
Wicklif, and the Lollards in England; in the Fourteenth Age, of the Taborites
in Bohemia; in the Fifteenth, and until the separation of the Protestants, with
some Observations which I make from Age to Age, upon the Greek Church. And in
the last Part, wherein I treat of the Worship, I examine the preparations which
precede the Celebration; I inquire the time wherein Christians began to
introduce in the exercise of their Religion, the use of Incense and Candles,
especially at the Celebration of the Sacrament. Unto this practice, I add that
of the sign of the Cross, and also of material Crosses; the consideration of
holy Vestments, and of those particularly appointed for this holy Ceremony, not
forgetting that of Flowers, which were used in form of Coronets, or otherwise,
in honor of the Eucharist. I make one Chapter of the dispositions requisite
for a Communicant in respect of God, and of Jesus Christ; and another, of those
which he ought to have in regard of the Sacrament; which ingageth me to speak
something of Auricular Confession, and to inquire whether the Holy Fathers have
required it as a disposition absolutely necessary unto a lawful Communion: And
I conclude the whole Work with the question of the Adoration of the Sacrament,
which I treat of with some care and exactness, to the end, the Reader might see
what has been the Belief and practice of the ancient Church on so important a
point as this is, and when the first Decrees were made for worshipping the Host.

I know very well there can be nothing of testimony, be it never so clear; but
the subtilty of men will find means to elude, and this is it which has
rendered, and will render the disputes of Religion immortal, many of those who
handle them, seeking more their own, than Gods glory, and examining the
passages of the Ancients, with the prejudices they have been before
prepossessed with. Thence it is, that beholding them in a bad light, they can
never rightly understand what was the true Belief of the Church upon the
Controversies wherewith it has been agitated so many years. Nevertheless,
there is nothing we should more endeavor, than to represent, and discover the
naked truth; not caring that men should triumph over us, so that truth might
triumph over us all. It is with this design, that I have undertaken to discover
sincerely what Christians have believed in past Ages, and the Article of the
Eucharist, which seems to me, one of the most essential, and which causes the
greatest division amongst Christians in the West.

But to the end that none may be mistaken in the explication of the testimonies
of the holy Fathers, and not swerve from their Intentions, I will propose some
means, which seem not to me improper, and the practice whereof may be of great
use unto all such as desire to be instructed in what they believed. In the
first place, their Works ought to be read without any prejudice, I speak of
their genuine, not forged, Works; for when one is preoccupy'd in favor of an
Opinion, and sets about reading them, one shall find, what is not intended
therein, prejudice so darkning the understanding, that many times the shadow is
taken for the substance; and a fallacious appearance, for the truth, because
that prejudice predominates, and makes men incapable of rightly judging what
they read; the Idea of the opinion which prepossesseth us, so filling the
faculty of the Understanding, that it can receive no other impression until we
dismiss these prejudices. Wherefore the first thing to be done when we set
about reading the Monuments, which we still enjoy, of Ecclesiastical Antiquity,
is well to examine our selves, to see if we be free from all sorts of
preoccupation. For, provided we bring unto this study nothing of our own, but
attention, and a sincere desire of knowing the truth, we shall gather Fruits
full of consolation and joy, and we shall doubtless discover, what has been
the belief of those ancient Doctors upon the point which we examine. Secondly,
great heed must be taken not to separate what God has joined together, I mean,
the nature, and the matter of the Symbols, from their efficacy, and from their
virtue, in their lawful use: for then these things are inseparable, although
they be different one from another; for the nature of Bread and Wine is one
thing, and the grace and virtue which the Consecration adds unto their
nature, is another thing: and therefore it is, that the holy Fathers spoke not
so honorably of the Sacrament, when they consider the substance of the
Symbols, as when they regard their efficacy and virtue. And indeed, when they
have a design to represent this efficacy, they make use of the loftiest and
most magnificent expressions, to raise the Dignity of this Mystery, and to
make us conceive a grand Idea of it; and certainly it is with great reason,
because it is a thing very worthy our admiration, and which I may say does
surpass our understanding, that Christ Jesus should accompany his Sacraments
with so great a power, that he should cleanse our Souls with a few drops of
Water, and that he should nourish them with a few crumbs of Bread, and a few
drops of Wine, but after a manner so Noble, so Heavenly, and so Divine, that
all we can do is, to feel the fruits and advantages, without conceiving the
manner, or how it is effected: And therein is seen that magnificence of the
Works of God, Tertul. de Baptis. c. 2.
which is promised in the effect; whereof Tertullian speaks, and which he
opposes unto the simplicity of these same Works, which appears in the Action;
and in respect of which Simplicity, the Fathers have expressed themselves, in
terms more humble, and not so lofty, agreeable unto the nature of Symbols. This
second means shall be followed by a third, which is not the least considerable;
and for the understanding whereof, it is necessary to observe, that the Holy
Fathers have used two sorts of expressions in speaking of the Eucharist: by the
one, they affirm, that the Sacrament is Bread and Wine; and by the other, they
say, it is the Body and Blood of Christ: These two sorts of expressions taken
literally, cannot agree together, nor be both true in relation to one and the
same Subject. For if the Eucharist be properly the Body of Jesus Christ, it is
not properly Bread; and if it be properly Bread, it cannot be understood to be
properly the Body of Jesus Christ. Nevertheless the Fathers who have said, that
the Eucharist is Bread, have also said that it is the Body of Jesus Christ; how
shall we then do, to give a right sense unto expressions so different, and
which in appearance are so inconsistent? That which we should do, is maturely
to consider what these Holy Doctors have said for explanation of their meaning;
and that cannot better be done, than by diligently searching their Works; that
of the two sorts of expressions which they have used, they have restrained the
one, without giving any limitation unto the other: for in equity it must be
granted that those which they have limited, ought not to be explained according
to their intention, without the restrictions which they have used; and that on
the contrary the others which have received no limitation should be understood
simply and absolutely, and in the proper terms wherein they have expressed
them; and to say the truth, had they intended that these two so different
expressions should have been understood in the same manner, wherefore should
they have taken so much care and pains to limit and restrain the one, and never
heed to take the least care in restraining or sweetning the others? Such
different proceedings in regard of these kinds of expressions, does it not
plainly declare that they intended that they should be differently understood,
and that there should be given unto those which they have restrained, a
Figurative and Metaphorical Sense? and unto those which were not restrained, a
proper and litteral Sense? that is to say, that the former should be taken for
Figurative Speeches, and the latter for proper expressions, and without any
Figure. If then they have restrained and limited the expressions which do
affirm that the Eucharist is Bread and Wine, and if they have not limited those
which affirm that it is the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ, it must be
concluded, that those which declare that the Sacrament is Bread and Wine, are
improper and figurative Speeches; and that the others which say that it is the
Body and Blood of our Lord, are proper and literal expressions. But if on the
other side, they have taken exact care to restrain the propositions which say,
That the Eucharist is the Body of Jesus Christ without adding any limitation
unto the others which asserted that it is Bread, it must be necessarily
inferred, that when they said that the Eucharist is the Body of our Lord, they
spoke improperly and figuratively; and on the contrary, that they spoke
literally and properly, when they affirmed that it is Bread and Wine. Now the
Reader will perceive in perusing this Treatise, what manner of speaking these
Holy Doctors have used herein; for it is enough for me here to propose unto him
the means of right understanding them.

The fourth rule to be observed for the right understanding their testimonies,
is not to make them clash one against another, nor to imbroil them in
contradictions: for it must be supposed, that they were prudent and judicious
enough not to contradict themselves, and to keep themselves from a reproach
which would have been cast on them, had that befaln them. There are two things
in their works relating to the matter we treat of, which should be carefully
distinguished, but in such sort as to take them always in good Sense; I mean
the ground of their Doctrine, and its consequences. And indeed the Doctrine of
the Holy Fathers having had its consequences, as the greatest number of
Doctrines have had, it is evident that of two explications which may be given
unto it, there is but one that is true; that which shall make a contradiction
betwixt the Doctrine and its consequences, and the consequences and the
Doctrine, is false, and contrary to their Intention; whereas that, that
reconciles both, is lawful and genuine: for their Doctrine must be considered
with its consequences, as a Body, whereof all the parts should have a
dependence, the one to the other, and all tend to the same end, as so many
lines to the center. I have examined a great many of these consequences in this
History, to the end that those who read it, may judge if they agree with the
foundation of the Doctrine, and if the Doctrine and its consequences; do favor
the substantial change for if the consequences favor this change, it will be a
great presumption that the Doctrine does not disfavour it, although it should
not so positively establish it, as the Latins have done. But also if all these
consequences are directly opposite unto the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, it
will be a manifest proof, that the ground of the Doctrine is no less opposite
unto it, and that the Ancients have not received this Doctrine into the Object
of their Faith, and that they made it not an Article of their Belief. This
fourth rule shall be strengthened with a fifth, which appears no less important
unto me, and which only demands, that doubtful and uncertain passages ought to
be explained by certain passages, and the obscure by the clear and manifest
ones. This is a Maxim of Tertullian's which I Will not allege in this place,
because it is alleged in the Body of the Work: but after all, there is nothing
more just and reasonable. It often befalls most Authors to deliver themselves
more happily at one time than at another, though they treat of the same
Subject; it happens unto some through neglect, or not having well digested
their thoughts, it being impossible to express themselves clearly on a Subject,
if the mind have only confused notions of it; others do so for reason, which
may here be said particularly of the Fathers of the Church, when they treat of
the Sacraments, principally of that of the Eucharist; for there were certain
Times and Places when they explained not themselves so clearly as at other
times, although they never said any thing contrary to their Sentiments, the
discipline of their times not suffering them to do otherwise. But however the
matter happened, it seems very just and equal when the mind of an Author would be
known upon a matter which he has treated in diverse Places, in some places
clearer than at others, to have recourse unto those Places wherein he has most
clearly explained himself, and by those to interpret the others wherein he
expressed himself more obscurely, either through inadvertency, or for reason
more darkly and ambiguously; this kind of proceeding is natural unto all
Mankind, and reason shows it is the safest way can be taken in these occasions.
I will not fear to say that it is the only means to terminate the Disputes and
Controversies of Religion, because, they all arising from the several
interpretations given unto passages of the Holy Scriptures, and of those of the
ancient Doctors of the Church, they might be easily reconciled if Men would
agree that the most clear and intelligible should serve as a Commentary unto
the more difficult and obscure. Unto all these rules I will add a sixth, which
shall be the last. The Fathers being on this occasion to be considered as
witnesses examined, to learn of them what was the belief of the ancient Church
touching the Sacrament, there is no question to be made but that the greater
number ought to be preferred before the less, and that the lesser number ought
to submit unto the greater, things being otherwise alike; I mean both the one
and the other being of equal Authority, and their Testimony alike worthy of
belief: for instance, if eight or ten amongst them should unanimously depose,
that the substance of the Bread and Wine of the Sacrament is abolished by the
Consecration, and that there remain only the accidents and appearance, which
subsist miraculously without any Subject; and that there was but one, that said
to the contrary: It is not to be doubted but the testimony of the Ten, ought to
be preferred before one single Person; because every one of the Ten is as
credible in his particular, as he that is alone of his own Opinion, and that
there is much more likelihood that one single Person may be mistaken in
relating the belief of the Church, than ten Persons that agree in their
Testimonies. But by the same reason, if Ten be found that testify that the
substance of Bread and Wine remains after Consecration; and that on the
contrary, one single Person shall say, it is changed into the substance of the
Body and Blood of Jesus Christ: we are obliged to confess, that the belief for
the which the ten Persons do declare, has been the true Belief of the ancient
Church; and that the sentiments of this single Person, is a particular Opinion
which ought to be rejected, or at the least, if possible, endeavor to recover
him unto the general Opinion believed amongst the Christians of his time, by
giving unto his words a more mild Explication, and the most favorable
Construction that may be. I think no Body can reasonably condemn the Means
which I have proposed, the practice whereof may conduce very much to the right
understanding of the Holy Fathers, provided we observe them sincerely, and no
other end be proposed in explaining their Testimonies, but what I have had in
reporting them in this Treatise, that is, a love of the Truth, Tertul. de
Virgin. veland. c. 1.
Against which no prescription can be made, neither by length of time, by the
credit of Persons, nor by the Privileges of Countries. To conclude, the Reader
may be pleased to take notice, that if in this History I have spoken of the
Country of the Abassins as of the Kingdom of Prester John, it was to
accomnodate my self with the vulgar Opinion, without making exact inquiry what
it is, and without troubling my self at this time, to reconcile Historians and
Travelers that have written diversely of it.

THE TABLE OF CHAPTERS.
PART I.
Containing the outward form of Celebration.
CHAP. I. WHerein is treated of the Matter of the Sacrament. Page 1 CHAP. II.
Wherein is mention made of diverse sorts of Heretics, as far only as may
suffice to clear the Point in Question. p. 7 CHAP. III. Progress of
Considerations of the Matter of the Sacrament, wherein is examined what is said
by S. Ignatius of certain Heretics that rejected the Sacrament; the Heresy of
one Tanchelin, who also rejected it, but by another principle; the reproaches
of Jews, and other Enemies, and the difference betwixt the Greek and Latin
Churches, about leavened and unleavened Bread. p. 22 CHAP. IV. Wherein is
showed, whence the Bread and Wine of the Sacrament was had, and what was the
form of the Bread, with the innovations and changes which thereupon succeeded.
p. 30. CHAP. V. Of the Consecration of the Bread and Wine of the Sacrament, and
first of the place where they were Consecrated, and of the Matter of Chalices
and Patins. p. 39 CHAP. VI. Of the Language wherein Consecration, and generally
of all the Service. p. 54 CHAP. VII. Of the Ceremonies and form of
Consecration. p. 65 CHAP. VIII. Of the Oblation or form of the Sacrifice. p. 81
CHAP. IX. Of the Elevation, and breaking the Bread. p. 101 CHAP. X. Of the
Distribution, and of the Communion; and first of the Time, the Place, and
Posture of Communicants. p. 110 CHAP. XI. Of him that distributes the
Sacrament, and of him that communicates, with the words both of the one and the
other p. 121 CHAP. XII. Of the thing Distributed and Received. p. 131 CHAP.
XIII. The Eucharist received with the Hand. p. 150 CHAP. XIV. Of the liberty of
carrying the Eucharist home, after having taken it in the Church, and of
carrying it in Journeys, and Voyages. p. 160 CHAP. XV. The Eucharist s^nt unto
the absent, and the Sick; unto whom it was sometimes sent by Lay-persons, Men,
Women, Children, etc. p. 164 CHAP. XVI. Diverse Uses, and diverse Customs
touching the Eucharist. p. 169
PART II.
Containing the Doctrine of the Holy Fathers.
CHAP. I. REflections made by the Holy Fathers upon the Institution of the
Sacrament. p. 187 CHAP. II. What the ^^thers believed of the things we receive
in the Sacrament, and wh^^ they said of them. p. 199 CHAP. III. Of the use, and
office of the Bread and Wine of the Sacrament. p. 213 CHAP. IV. Consequences of
the Doctrine of the Holy Fathers. p. 231 CHAP. V. Continuation of the
Consequences of the Doctrine of the Holy Fathers. p. 246 CHAP. VI. Other proofs
of the Doctrine of the Holy Fathers, with the Inferences drawn by Protestants
from them. p. 265 CHAP. VII. Continuation of the Proofs of the Doctrine of the
Holy Fathers, and of the Inductions of Protestants. p. 277 CHAP. VIII. Proofs
of the Doctrine of the Holy Fathers, drawn by Protestants from some practices
of the Ancient Church. p. 291 CHAP. IX. Other Proofs drawn from the silence of
Pagans, and of certain things objected against them by the Holy Fathers. p. 298
CHAP. X. The last Proof drawn from what passed in regard of Heretics, either
of their silence, or of the Fathers dispute against them. p. 308 CHAP. XI. Of
the change made in the Expressions, or the History of the Seventh Century. p.
361 CHAP. XII. Wherein is Examined what ensued in the Eighth Century. p. 365
CHAP. XIII. Containing the History of the Ninth Century. p. 385 CHAP. XIV.
Continuation of the Ninth Century, wherein is treated of the Dignities and
Promotions of Heribold. p. 4^5 CHAP. XV. Continuation of the History of the
Ninth Century, wherein is examined the silence of Pope Nicholas the First, and
Adrian the Second with two Observations touching the Greek Church. p. 430 CHAP.
XVI. Of the State of the Tenth Century. p. 439 CHAP. XVII. Of what passed in
the Eleventh Century. p. 450 CHAP. XVIII. Continuation of the History of the
Eucharist, or the state of the Twelfth and Thirteenth Centuries. p. 465 CHAP.
XIX. The History of the Fourteenth and Fifteenth Centuries, p. 497
PART III.
Wherein is treated of the worshipping the Sacrament.
CHAP. I. OF the Preparations which go before the Celebration. p. 521 CHAP. II.
Of Dispositions necessary for the Communion; and first, of the Motions of the
believing Soul, in regard of God, and of Jesus Christ. p. 541 CHAP. III. Of the
motions and dispositions of the Receiver, in regard of the Sacrament. p. 548
CHAP. IV. Wherein the Question of Adoration is examined. p. 556
THE HISTORY OF THE EUCHARIST.
VINCENTIUS Lerinensis has left us for a Maxim above M C. years ago, Vincent.
In common.
That great heed must be taken to retain in the Catholic Church what has been
believed every where, always, and by all; This Maxim appears so just and
reasonable, that Christians should make no difficulty to submit unto it,
however divided they be, otherwise, in matters of Religion; and although the
Author was not wholly without blame, seeing there are some which think that he
fought under the Ensigns of the demi Pelagians, that he was very opposite unto
St. Austins Doctrine touching Predestination, and that it was against him that
St. Prosper did write, in answering the Objections which go under the name of
Vincentius. Nevertheless I do not judge that any fault is to be found in his
Maxim, nor that any difficulty ought to be made in receiving it, seeing that
St. Austin himself, whose name and memory shall ever be in veneration amongst
good Men, has written something to the same purpose before Vincentius
Lerinensis. Aug. l. 4. de bapt. c. 24. t. 7.
It is very justly supposed (says he) that what the Catholic Church believes,
and has not been instituted by Councils, but has been always believed, is
derived only from Apostolical Authority. Undertaking then to treat Historically
of the Eucharist, and by Gods assistante to show what has been believed in all
Ages in the Church, touching this so important point of our Salvation, there is
a necessity that we should look back unto Jesus Christ the Author of this
august Sacrament, and the true beginning of the Antiquity we are to inquire
into; for as the blessed Martyr St. Cyprian said, If Jesus Christ only ought to
be heard, Cyprian. Ep. 63. ad Caecil.
we should not regard what some before us have thought fit to be done, but what
Jesus Christ who is before all, has first done: for we ought not to follow the
customs of Men, but the truth of God. To know what he has said and done in the
institution of this Mystery, the Evangelists and St. Paul must be consulted,
who tell us, that our Savior having finished the solemnity of the ancient
Passover, and intending to proceed unto the institution of the New; I mean of
the Eucharist, to leave unto the Church an Illustrious Monument of his great
Love and Charity* he took Bread, and having given thanks unto his Father over
the Bread, that is to say, having blessed and consecrated it, he brake it into
morsels, and gave it unto his Disciples, saying, Take, eat; also he took the
Cup wherein was Wine, and having blessed it, as he had done the Bread, he gave
it unto them, saying these words, Drink ye all of it; that in distributing the
Bread, he said unto them, That it was his Body give^ or broken for them; and
giving them the Cup he said, That i^ wa^ his Blood, or the New Testament in his
Blood, shed for many for the remission of Sins, and that he would drink no more
of that fruit of the Vine, until he drank it new in the Kingdom of his Father;
commanding them expressly to celebrate this Divine Sacrament until his coming
from Heaven, to show in the Celebration of it, the remembrance of his Person
and sufferings; whereunto St. Paul does add the preparations which Communicants
ought to bring unto the Holy Table, for fear lest this mystery which is
intended unto the Salvation and consolation of Men, should turn unto their
judgment and condemnation, if they partake thereof unworthily. But because the
actions of Jesus Christ do prescribe unto us, if I may so speak, the manner how
we should celebrate this holy Mystery, that his words instruct us what we ought
to believe, and that the preparations which St. Paul requires of us, contain in
effect, all the motions of a faithful Soul that disposes it self to partake
thereof; motions which, as I conceive, are again contained, either in whole or
in part in the commemoration which our Savior has recommended to us; we have
thought fit to follow this Divine pattern, and thereupon to erect the platform
and Economy of our work. For besides that in so doing, we shall imitate as
much as possible may be, the Example of our Savior Jesus Christ, which ought
to be our Law and guide; we shall also ease the memory of the Readers, we shall
facilitate the understanding of those things we have to say, and we shall lead
them safely, by the way which in all likelihood is best and plainest, unto the
clear and distinct knowledge of the constant and universal tradition of the
Christian Church upon this Article of our Faith. To this purpose we will divide
our Treatise into three Parts; the first shall treat of the exterior Worship
of the Sacrament, and generally of what concerns it, and of what is founded as
well on the actions of Jesus Christ celebrating, as of the blessed Apostles
communicating. The second shall contain the Doctrine of the holy Fathers, the
true tradition of the Church, which derives its Original and Authority of what
our Savior said unto his Disciples, that the Bread which he gave them, was his
Body broken, and the Cup his Blood shed, and in that he commanded them to
celebrate this Sacrament in remembrance of him and of his death. And lastly,
the third shall examine the Worship, I mean the dispositions which ought to
precede the Communion, the motions of the Soul of the Communicant, whether it
be in regard of God and of Jesus Christ, or in regard of the Sacrament; in a
word, all things which do relate unto it. And in each of these three Parts, we
will observe, with the help of our blessed Savior, all the exactness and
sincerity that can be, in showing the Innovations and changes that have
thereupon ensued.

THE LIFE OF Monsieur L'ARROQUE.
IT is with very great displeasure that I insert in my first Essay of this
nature, an Elogie, which nevertheless will render it very acceptable; I had
much rather have wanted so good a Subject of Recommendation to my first
undertaking, than to have obtained it by suffering so great a loss: But seeing
Death will not be subject unto our desires, let us acquit our selves according
to the various conjunctures, whether they be pleasing or not.

Monsieur L'ARROQVE departed this Life at Roven, the 31 of January 1684, Aged
65 years, born at Lairac, a Town not far from Again in Guien, his Father and
Mother dying almost at the same time, left him very young, under the Conduct of
his Relations, and which is the common Fate of Scholars, without much Wealth;
but his great love for Learning comforted him in the midst of all his Troubles:
Having made some progress therein under several Masters, he advanced the same
considerably in the Academy of Montauban, and having applied himself unto the
study of Divinity under Messieurs Charles, and Garrisoles, eminent Professors,
who also had at the same time the famous Monsieur Claud to be their Pupil, in a
short time he there made so great a progress in his studies, that he was judged
worthy of the Ministry: He was accordingly admitted betimes, and by the Synod
of Guyen, sent unto a little Church, called Poujols: He had scarce been there
one year, but the Gentlemen of the Church of Rome opposed his Ministry, which
obliged him to make a Journey to Paris: He there became accquainted with
Messieurs Le Faucheur, and Mestrezat; who from that very time prophesi'd very
advantagiously of him. He preached at Charanton with great Success, and was so
well approved by the late lady Duchess of Tremouile, that she desired he might
be settled at the Church of Vitry in Britany, where she commonly made her
residence. For several reasons he consented unto the demands of this Princess,
and went to Vitry, where he lived 26 years, so confined unto his Closet, that
he therein spent 14 or 15 hours each day.

The world soon became sensible of his great industry, by a Treatise which
Monsieur L'ARROQVE published against a Minister, who having changed his
Religion, caused to be Printed the motives which induced him thereunto. By this
Answer it was seen the Author had already attained great knowledge in
Antiquity, joined with a very solid and clear way of reasoning, which was ever
the character of the late Monsieur L'ARROQVES Genius. Some years after, scil.
in the year 1665, he made a very learned Answer unto the Book of the Office of
the holy Sacrament, written by the Gentlmen of Port Royal, wherein he showed
unto those Illustrious Friars, that they had alleged and translated the
passages of Ancient Fathers, either very negligently, or very falsely. His
History of the EVCHARIST (which may well be termed his Masterpiece) appeared
four years after, and did fully manifest the merits of this Excellent Person.
Having composed so many Learned Volums, the Protestants of Paris, looked upon
him as a Subject very worthy of their choice, and resolved to establish him in
the midst of them; this honest design had been accomplished, had not his
credit, and adhering unto the Interests of two Illustrious Persons, whose names
are sufficiently known, incited some envious Busy Jesuits.
Persons to prepossess the King with prejudice against him. By this means they
obtained an Injunction of not proceeding to this nomination. The Marquess de
Ruvigny appeared at Court in this affair, and engaged himself unto the King for
Monsiuer L'ARROQVES Zeal and Fidelity in his Majesty's Service. The King (who
is naturally inclined to goodness) thereupon answered the Marquess de Ruvigny
the Deputy General, that some went about to give him other impressions of
Monsieur L'ARROQVE, but seeing he would be Caution for the party accused, he
would permit this Minister to Exercise his profession in any other place,
excepting Paris.

A business of this moment made as great noise as could be imagined, but did
not prejudice Monsieur L'ARROQVE, as much as his Enemies could have wished; for
soon after he was sought unto by several considerable Churches, but he accepted
of none, but the proposal which was made unto him by that of Saumur. The Church
and the Academy were then vacant, both of a Minister and of a Professor in
Divinity; he was offered both, but whether it was through modesty, or that he
desired not to vary from his former kind of Study, much different from that to
be performed by a Professor in Divinity, he only accepted the former. As he was
preparing to enter upon it, the Intendant of the Province appeared against it,
for what reason is not known. The Consistory of the Church of Saumur used such
Arguments to remove this Opposition, that in fine it was removed. Nevertheless
Monsieur L'ARROQVE thought it not convenient to accept the offer, being so
advised by Monsieur Conrart, for whom he had a singular kindness, who
represented unto him, that the Intendant would always bear him a grudge, and
that therefore it would not be safe to be under his power.

The Counsel of this incomparable Friend induced Monsieur L'ARROQVE to incline
unto other offers, made unto him at that time from diverse places. The Church of
Montauban, that of Bourdeaux, and that of Roven desired to have him for their
Minister; he preferred the latter before the two others, by the advice of
Friends, he accordingly went to Roven, there to Exercise his Ministry, and
there 'twas that improving the rare Talents that God had endowed him with, he
labored until his Death in the conversion of Souls, and in explaining the holy
Scriptures with indefatigable diligence and Industry. Roven was a place very
convenient for such a person, for it is a City abounding with great wits, and
well furnished with good Libraries: He there acquired a great reputation
amongst the learned Men, even of the Contrary party; And the Illustrious
Monsieur Bigot, at whose House they Assemble once a week, and entertain curious
and learned discourse, was very well pleased to have Monsieur L'ARROQVE of the
number, who also went unto their Assembly, where his profound Knowledge in
Ecclesiastical History, was much admired and esteemed by them all.

A little after his coming to Roven, Monsieur David, so well known amongst the
learned for his great Literature, and by his contests with Messieurs de Marca,
Justel, and de Launay, carped at him about one of the two Latin Dissertations
which he published in the year 1670. and dedicated unto Monsieur d'Amproux,
Councellor in the Parliament of Paris, whose Wit, Probity and Learning are
esteemed by all who know him. Monsieur L'ARROQVE had refuted the Opinion of
Father Petau, touching the time of the Birth and Condemnation of the History of
Photin. His Reasons appeared very solid unto a great many, but Monsieur David,
who otherways was well satisfied Father Petau's Epoch was wrong, fancied that
Monsieur L'ARROQVE had not sufficiently refuted it, therefore took occasion to
write against him, which was the cause of Monsieur L'ARROQVES reply, which he
dedicated unto Monsieur Conrart, an intimate Friend to them both.

Since which time this learned Minister has published diverse excellent
Treatises on several Subjects. He wrote one, entitled, Considerations upon the
Nature of the Church; Another much larger, wherein he shows the conformity of
the Discipline of the Protestants of France, with that of the Primitive Church.
Another in Latin, in defense of the Sentiments of Monsieur Daille touching St
Ignatius his Letters, and the Apostolical Constitutions, against Messieurs
Pearson, and Beverige, two famous English Doctors. They have writ a second time
in defense of their Opinion, and he had designed a Reply, as has been seen by
a Manuscript Copy found near finished amongst his Papers, but at the request of
some persons favoring Episcopacy, he did not finish his Answer. The last work
he published is an Answer unto a Treatise of the Bishop of Meaux, of the
Communion under both kinds; although his name was not to it, yet it was judged
to be his; it was known by the manner in which it was written, clear, free from
digressions and superfluous Ornaments, and full of solid remarks drawn from the
profoundest Antiquity.

But how great an Idea soever the printed Works of the late Monsieur L'ARROQVE
gives us of the greatness and Exactness of his Wisdom, it may be termed but
small, in comparison of what would have been seen if God had been pleased to
have spared him to finish what he had begun; he being esteemed one of the
fittest men of France to compose an Ecclesiastical History, all his Friends
entreated him to set about it, and accordingly he labored effectually therein
with all diligence; He intended to have published one Volume every year, and to
have joined thereunto sundry dissertations, which would equally have
demonstrated his sincerity and his learning; He had carried on his work but
unto the middle of the fourth Century, which is the only thing the public will
not lose of so vast and rich a Structure. There was also found amongst his
Papers a very exact Treatise of the Regale, wherein he proves, that the Kings
of France since Clovis, had this Right over all the Cathedral Churches in their
Kingdom. This with some other small Tracts, which this Illustrious person had
finished before his Death, may make a complete Volume; Monsieur L'ARROQVE the
worthy Son of such a Father, will be careful of communicating them unto the
World.

But he confines not himself only thereunto, he promises also an Exact
Collection of all the Dissertations which he has found in the History of the
first 350 years of the Church, and he intends to publish them in Latin, for the
benefit of Strangers. Every body will be glad to hear this News, especially if
we add somewhat touching the particulars of this Collection. Therefore I now
give notice that therein will be seen, Dissertations 1. Upon the thundering
Legion, where shall be shown, that what has been said of it, is very
uncertain. 2. Upon the original of shaving of Priests. 3. De Orariis. 4. Of the
manner that the Clergy saluted the People, which shall serve to explain this
passage of St. Cyprian, in regard of Aurelius, whom he designed to ordain
Reader, Dominico interim legit nobis, id est, auspicatus est pacem, dicit,
dedicat lectionem, which Mr Rigaut did not understand, no more than Mr Lombert,
who followed the Sentiment of Mr Rigaut, in the fair and exact Translation,
which he has given us of this Father. 5. Upon the Letter of the Council of
Antioch, which condemned Paul of Samosatia. 6. Upon the Tenth persecution,
which shall be found more exactly described than in all the former Histories,
because Monsieur L'ARROQVE has borrowed great helps from Lactantius his
Treatise de Mortibus Persecutorum, published of late by Mr Baluze. 7. De
Sacerdotibus secundi Ordinis, and Archidiaconis. 8. De Ordinibus ex quibus
Episcopi sumebantur. 9. De Epistolis Tractoriis. 10. De Natura veteris
Ecclesiae. 11. De Energumenis, etc. -- 12. De Paenitentibus eorumque gradibus.
13. De Antiquo ritu dimittendi ab Ecclesia, Catechumenos, Energumenos, and
paenitentes. 14. De dupliti Catechumenorum genere. 15. De tempore quo obtinere
caepit in Ecclesia orientali haec loquendi formula, EPISCOPVS DEI GRATIA, ET
SEEDS APOSTOLICAE. 16. De pluralitate beneficiorum, ut vulgo loquuntur. 17. De
Nudipedalibus. As he from whom we expect these pieces of Ecclesiastical
History, is endowed with much wit and learning, it needs not be feared that
they will in his hands lose any thing of their luster and beauty.

All we have hitherto said, refers unto the Wisdom of Monsieur L'ARROQVE, which
indeed is a very vast and spacious Field; but should we speak of the qualities
of his Soul, we should have much more matter to insist on. He had a Soul so
sincere as is scarcely to be found in this Age; he without envy beheld the
merits of other learned persons, and esteemed their good qualities; he was a
great and strict observer of Discipline, and contented not himself to declaim
in the Pulpit against Vice in general, but persecuted it in all places, running
the hazard of creating himself Enemies, by the security of his life; he
preached by example and discovered a true Christian Constancy in all the
troubles of his life; he discharged his Duty with so much exactness, that he
would never discontinue performing his Function during an Ague which held him
ten Months, after his being called to Saumur; I say he would neither
discontinue the Duties of his Ministry, nor those of his studies, although the
Physicians told him, that a distemper which often had fits of 36 hours would
not be removed, if he did not give himself some repose. The Troubles of the
Churches of France these last years, were incomparably more grievous unto him,
than any particular Afflictions unto his own Family could have been, and should
these Misfortunes continue, what Cicero said of another, may be said of him; Ii
rempublicam casus sequuti sunt, ut mihi non erepta L. Crasso a Diis
immortalibus vita, sed donata mors esse videatur.

THE HISTORY OF THE EUCHARIST.
PART I. Containing the exterior Form of Celebration.
CHAP. I.
Wherein is treated of the Matter of the Sacrament.

THE first thing that presents it self in the Celebration of the Eucharist, is
the matter of the Sacrament, that is to say, the Bread and Wine; for three of
the Evangelists and St. Paul testify that Jesus Christ took Bread, and a Cup
wherein there was Wine, and that he called the Wine, the fruit of the Vine: All
the Holy Fathers unanimously avouch the same, all the Liturgies which are come
to our hands depose the same, seeing we find these two Elements employed in
this mystery; and the form of Celebration proposed unto us by St. Justin
Martyr, the Author of the Apostolical Constitutions, St. Cyril of Jerusalem in
his Mystagogicks, the pretended Denis the Arcopagite in his Hierarchy, and
generally all those which have writ on this subject, suffer us not to doubt of
it, as neither does the defense, which the Fathers and Councils have made, of
offering any thing else but Bread and Wine in celebrating the Sacrament. Also
all Christians generally agree herein; therefore it would be superfluous to
stand to prove it, seeing the thing is clear, and it is granted by all the
World, and all Christian Societies are agreed on this Subject. It will only be
necessary to consider that Jesus Christ, which is the Wisdom of the Eternal
Father, and who never did any thing but with a Wisdom and Conduct worthy of
himself, did not choose Bread and Wine to make them Symbols of his body and
blood, but that he was thereunto induced for considerable Reasons.

Nevertheless I will not now stand to examine the Reasons which obliged him to
make this choice, I refer that unto Divines, whose drift it is to inquire into
this matter; it will serve our turn to say, that our Savior having a design by
means of his Sacraments, to raise up the minds of Christians unto the
consideration of the comforts they find in his blessed Communion; he made
choice of Elements which had some likeness and relation unto those things which
they were to signify and represent: as for Instance, When he instituted the
Sacrament of Baptism, which is the Sacrament whereby we are born into his
Church, he made choice of water to be the sign and symbol of it; because it is
proper to represent the virtue of his Blood and of his Spirit for the purifying
of our souls: for as water has the quality of cleansing our bodies from all
uncleanness; so also the Blood and Spirit of Jesus Christ, have the virtue, the
force, and efficacy of washing and purifying our souls from all filthiness and
impurities; therefore it is, that the Apostle calls Baptism the washing of
Regeneration, ^it 3.
that is, of our New Birth; and for that reason it is that he says elsewhere,
Ephesians. 5.
that Christ has cleansed the Church by the washing of water by the Word; in
like manner when he instituted the Eucharist, which is another Sacrament of his
Covenant whereby he gives unto us life, after having given us our being, he
chose Bread and Wine to represent unto us the virtue of his Sacrifice and of
his Death, and which is the food of our souls: For as Bread and Wine are food
very proper for nourishing the body, and for preserving this mortal and
perishing life; even so his Body broken, and his Blood poured out, do divinely
feed and nourish our souls, and do admirably preserve this heavenly and
Spiritual life, whereof we enjoy even here below, some fore-tastes and
firstfruits, the accomplishment whereof we shall one day receive to our comfort
in Heaven. And it is in regard of this wonderful effect, John 6.
that his Flesh is meat indeed, and his Blood is drink indeed; and that those
who eat this Flesh, and drink this Blood, have life everlasting; and that they
shall be raised unto glory and immortality in the last day. Nevertheless, it
must be granted, that the relation and resemblance which the Bread and Wine may
naturally have with the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ, is a general,
uncertain, and undetermined resemblance, and which of it self is not sufficient
to make them Sacraments of this Divine Body, and of this precious Blood. It is
necessary that the Benediction and Consecration confer upon them this quality,
and invest them with this dignity, which they cannot have by Nature; and that
setting them apart from the profane and common uses, which they have in
Nature, it should apply them unto a Religious and Divine use in Grace.
Nevertheless it may be affirmed, that this likeness and relation which they
have by Nature with the Body and Blood of this Divine Savior, were, as it may
be said, the first ground and the first motive of the choice which our Savior
was pleased to make of them; for what St. Austin said in one of his Letters,
may well be applied unto this matter: Aug. Ep. 23. ad Bonif.
That if the Sacraments had not some resemblance with the things whereof they
are Sacraments, they would be no Sacraments. The Holy Fathers confirm this
resemblance, some in the composition of Bread and Wine, and say, That the Bread
is called the Body, because it is made of several grains, and the Wine the
Blood, because it is gathered from sundry grapes. This is the Notion of Comm.
in Matthew. c. 26.
Theophilus of Antioch, of Ep. 76.
St. Cyprian, and of some others: Others ground it in the Effects, and say,
That the Bread is called the Body of Jesus Christ, because it does nourish and
strengthen the body; and that the Wine is called his Blood, because it
increases blood in the body, and rejoiceth the heart. This is the Reason given
by St. Lib. l. deoffie. Eccl^s. c. 18.
Isidore Archbishop of Sevil, Comm in Marc. 14.
Bid, Lib. (...) In^^^ cleric. c. 31.
Rabanus, and Comm. in Matthew. 26.
Christian Drutmer, and I make no question but when Jesus Christ chose Bread
and Wine to make them Sacraments and Types of his Body and Blood, he had regard
unto the Effects which they produced.

And seeing the four Divine Writers which have related in their sacred books
the history of the Institution of the Sacrament, have not mentioned whether the
Wine which our Savior used in instituting and celebrating the Sacrament, was
pure, or mixed; the ancient Christians made no scruple to mingle water with the
Wine in the Communion. The Jewish Rituals, as a learned Buxt^^f. (...) hist. S.
(...). 20.
person, and extremely well versed in the knowledge of the Uses and Customs of
that Nation, observes, left it unto the free will and choice of every person in
celebrating the Passover, to use pure Wine, or Wine mixed with water; so that
our blessed Savior accommodating himself as much as he could in the
Celebration of his Sacrament, with what was practiced in the celebrating the
Jews Passover, it seems to me impossible, considering the silence of the
Evangelists and of S. Paul, to determine whether the Wine employed in the
celebrating of his Sacrament, was mixed with water or not: Nevertheless it is
most certain that the Ancients believed there was water mingled with the Wine,
and that it was upon this persuasion that they established the custom of so
doing; a very ancient practice, seeing that St. Justin Martyr, who wrote about
fifty two years after the death of St. John, does expressly mention it: for in
showing the manner of celebrating the Sacrament in his time, Just. Martyr
Apolog. 2 or rather 1.
he observes positively that there was presented unto the Pastor, Bread, and a
Cup with Wine mingled with Water; that after he had blessed and consecrated
them, all those which were there present received of the Bread, the Wine, and
the Water, which had been consecrated. Indeed as the first Christians sought
not so many mysteries as those which came after, I mean that they troubled not
themselves in seeking out of Mysteries in most things relating to Religion, so
they satisfied themselves with the innocent practice of this custom, and
religiously to observe this use, with much simplicity; but about one hundred
years after St. Justin had writ what is above expressed, they bethought
themselves of seeking a mystery in this mingling of water with the Wine: The
first, if I mistake not, that pleased himself to discover a Mystical
signification in the Wine and Water in the holy Cup, and of the mingling the
one with the other was the glorious Martyr S. Cyprian, who would that the Wine
should represent the Blood of Jesus Christ, the Water should show the believing
people, and that the mingling the one with the other, should show the
indissoluble union which there is betwixt Christ and Believers; Cyprian ^p. 63.
The faithful people (says he) is understood by the Water, and the Blood of
Jesus Christ is denoted by the Wine; and when the Water is mingled with the
Wine in the Cup, the People are united unto Jesus Christ, and the body of the
faithful are incorporated in him, in whom they believed: and this mixture of
water and wine in the Cup of the Lord, is such, that those things cannot be any
more separated; whence it follows, that nothing can separate the Church from
the Communion of Jesus Christ, that is to say, the Believers which are in the
Church, and do persevere faithfully and firmly in what they believed, nor
hinder but this indivisible Love shall subsist. Therefore it is not permitted
in consecrating the Cup of Our Lord, to offer Wine alone, or Water alone; for
if only Wine were offered, it might be said that the Blood was separate from
the people; and if only Water were offered, it might be said the people were
absent from Christ; but when they are mingled and inseparably joined together,
then is effected the Spiritual and Heavenly Sacrament. St. Cyprian was followed
by the Can. 2.
third Council of Braga in the year 675, by De offic. Eccles. lib. 1. cap. 18.
Isidore, by In Marc. 14.
Bid, by De Corp. and lang. Dom.
Bertram or Ratramne. But in fine, the Holy Fathers have thought this mixture
so Essential unto the Holy Sacrament, that the sixth Ecumenical Council
assembled in the year 691, reckon it amongst the Heresies of the Armenians,
that they celebrated the Eucharist with pure Wine, because they justified
themselves in this practice by the Authority of St. Chrysostom. The Fathers
explain the passage of this holy Doctor, whereof the Armenians made use to
authorize the practice of their Churches, and having explained it, they make
this Decree: Council. Trullan. Can. 32.
If any Bishop or other Priest does not follow the Order left by the Apostles,
and if they mingle not Water with the Wine to offer the spotless Sacrifice, let
him be deposed, because he declares the mystery imperfectly, and by that means
introduces a change in the Traditions. But notwithstanding all that, the
Armenians desisted not to persevere in this practice, and always to celebrate
the Sacrament with pure Wine, until the year 1439. that they sent their
Deputies unto the Council of Florence under Pope Eugenius the IVth. but they
arrived not until after the departure of the Greeks, as appears by the History
of that Council, transmitted unto us by Sylvester Sguropulus a great Prelate of
the Church of Constantinople, which was present at all that there happened:
Nevertheless in the direction given unto those Deputies on the behalf of the
said Pope Eugenius, but in the name of the Council as if it had still been
Assembled, which might have been so in regard of the Latins, but not of the
Greeks, who were gone home; in this Instruction I say, The Armenians were
enjoined to conform themselves unto all the other Christians, To. 8. Council. p.
866.
and to mingle a little Water with the Wine in the oblation of the Cup: but
there is no great likelihood that this Decree was much regarded in this
Christian Communion, seeing we find by their Liturgies that they continued in
the Custom of not mingling Water with the Wine in the holy Cup. Apud Cassand in
Lit. C. 12.
But besides this Mystical signification which the Holy Fathers have discovered
of this mingling Water with the Wine of the Eucharist, I find they have used it
to represent the Water and Blood which issued out of the pierced side of Jesus
Christ at his passion, and when he was on the Cross; Council. Trull. Can. 32.
It is the Doctrine of the Eastern Council before mentioned, and which was
Assembled in the Hall of the Imperial Palace at Constantinople. As for St.
Athanasius he resembles this mixture unto the Union of the Eternal Word with
the human Nature; Athan. in Psalm. 74. apud Combesis auct. Bibl. Pat. t. 2. pa.
435.
The mystical Cup of the Communion, says he, was given, mingled with Water,
because the pure Wine does signify the Divine Nature which is unmixed, and in
that it is tempered with Water, it intimates the Union which is betwixt us. And
there is no question to be made but these Holy Doctors pleased themselves in
searching out these Mystical significations not only in one of the Symbols of
the Sacrament, but also in the other. In fine, as they discovered Mysteries in
mixing Water with the Wine, practiced by the Ancient Church, so they also
discovered other Mysteries in making the Bread: for they believed that the
Bread of the Eucharist being a Body composed of sundry grains, represented very
well the Body of the Church composed of sundry believers united into one
Society: It is also the Doctrine of S. Cyprian; Cyprian. Ep. 76. vide 63.
When (says he) the Lord called his Body, Bread, composed of sundry grains of
Wheat, he would denote the believing people which he bore, in as much as it is
but one people; and when he termed his Blood, the Wine, which is made of
several Clusters of Grapes pressed together, and reduced to one, he again
signified the same faithful People, composed of sundry Persons in one and the
same Body. It is the frequent Doctrine of Sermon. ad Infant. tract. 26. in Joan.
and Sermon. 83. de diverse.
S. Augustine, and generally of all the Holy Fathers, of Com. in Matthew.
Theophilus of Antioch, of Hom. 24. in 1 Cor.
S. Chrysostom, of De Off Eccles. lib. 1. c. 18.
Isidore of Sevil, of Com. in 1 Cor. 10.
Bid, of De Reb. Eccles. c. 16.
Walafridus Strabo, of De Instit. Cler. lib. 1. c. 31.
Rabanus Archbishop of Mayence, and of many others: but alas, at the same time
that these Holy Doctors pleased themselves in finding out all these Mystical
Significations wherein they took so much delight; the Devil, who is always
vigilant to disturb the peace of the Church, and who always finds occasions to
worry it, failed not to raise her up Enemies, even from her Infancy, and to
spew out from his dark Dungeon sundry sorts of Sects and Heretics, totake
occasion either to slander the Innocence of her Mysteries by the Gnostics, or
to corrupt their purity by the Montanists and Pepusians, if what some have
written be true; or to gainsay their Utility, by the Ascodrupites, or to make
them pass for dreams and delusions, by the Marcosians, or to render them
odious, by the Ophites, or to change the matter, either by adding of some
strange things, as the Artotyrites, or by taking away the Essentials, as the
Hydroparastates, or Aquarians; and this is what we intend to examine in the
following Chapter.

CHAP. II.
Wherein is discoursed of sundry sorts of Sects and Heresies, only so as may be
sufficient to give light unto the present Subject.

THE first Heretics which the Devil stirred up to trouble the Church upon the
matter of the Sacraments, were the Gnostics, that is, such as assumed to
themselves that proud and insolent Title, to persuade the ignorant People that
they were possessed with great Wisdom, and that they were able to dive into the
knowledge of the most obscure and difficult Mysteries: some derive their
Original from the Nicolaitans; others say they had for their Leader an eminent
Heretic called Carpocrates: but from what Original soever they came, it cannot
be doubted, but it was very pernicious, seeing it produced so cursed an
offspring; certainly this fountain was very corrupt, seeing the streams were
so infectious; and the Root of this cursed Tree was very venomous, seeing the
Branches produced no less than the bitter Fruit of mortal Poison; an infamous
brood as ever was, whose Mysteries abounded with Abomination and Horror;
therefore were they also called Borborites or Borborians, to denote their
filthiness and vileness: these miserable wretches suffered themselves to be
swayed by their own corrupt desires, and being Slaves unto their passions and
disordered Lusts, they polluted themselves frequently with Women, which were in
common amongst them; and coveting nothing more than this filthy practice, they
were blindly led on by their wicked concupiscence, and without any restraint
wallowed in the most brutish Actions, the very thoughts whereof fills me with
amazement and horror: But what is most dreadful and strange in the conduct of
these Organs of the Evil Spirit, is, that they acted their greatest
abominations in their Assemblies, and in the Places where they were accustomed
to meet to exercise their Diabolical Religion. S. Epiphanius, who more exactly
than any other of the Ancients relates unto us all that passed in the
abominable mysteries of these Wretches, is ashamed to write, and were it not in
some sort necessary to be published to render them odious unto all the World,
he would have forborne to have related the Brutalities and Filthinesses which
they were not ashamed to commit. As for my own particular, although I have
learned from S. Paul that all things are pu^e unto the pure, yet I will forbear
reciting all the Impurities which were acted in the Assemblies of these
milerable Creatures, which cannot be read without horror; and on this occasion
I had rather imitate the modesty of S. Cyrill of Jerusalem, than the liberty of
S. Epiphanius; that is, be as wary in writing these abominable Mysteries, as S.
Cyrill was in Preaching, when he was absolutely necessitated to say something
of them. Nevertheless those who desire to see the particularities of what
passed in the Celebration, Epiphan. hares. 26.
which these miserable Wretches pretended to make in the Eucharist, need only
read what S. Epiphanius has writ in the Heresy of the Gnostics, whilst I
shall only mark, that when any of the Women, which they had debaucht, were with
Child, they used means to make her miscarry, and discharge her burden when
they listed: then would they take the Infant and pound it in a Mortar with
Honey, Pepper, and other Aromatic drugs; after which, this Fraternity of Swine
and Dogs being assembled, each of them would take of this Infant so pounded,
and would eat of it; which done, they would make their Prayers unto God, and
esteemed this Ceremony for a perfect and complete Sacrament: And because these
abominable Heretics assumed the name of Christians, they were the cause that
Pagans and Infidels imputed unto the whole Christian Church these horrible
impieties, and it was the end which Satan proposed in raising up these
execrable Wretches. ^useb hist. Eccles. l. 4. c. 7.
The Devil (says Eusebius) making use of these instruments, has in the first
place east into Hell like so many slaves, those whom they had seduced; then he
gave unto the Gentiles, professed Enemies of our Religion, a large and ample
Subject and Matter to scandalize and speak evil of the Gospel; in as much as
this Infamy, which took its Original from the Gnostics, was imputed unto all
the Christians to disgrace them. He also observes that it was from thence the
false rumors were raised and spread abroad of their unlawful Copulations,
wherewith they were asperst, of Brethren with Sisters, and Children with their
own Mothers, as also of these barbarous and inhumane Feasts, where the flesh of
some little innocent Infant was served up as meat and nourishment. Epiph. ub.
sup.
S. Epiphanius has also observed that it was a device of the Devil to slander
the purity of the Christian Religion, and to stop the progress of the Gospel of
the Son of God; Orig. cor tra Cells l. 2. and l. 2. in Romans Baron. ad an. 120. ^
125, 126, 129. Cyrill. Hieros. Catech. 16.
it is also unto the abominable Mysteries of the Gnostics, that Origin imputes
the cause of those same Infamous reports; and Cardinal Baronius in his
Ecclesiastical Annals, refers them unto the same cause, and confesses they
were their Rise and Original. S. Cyrill of Jerusalem in his Catechisms derives
these reproaches against Christians, and those calumnies wherewith they asperst
their Holy Profession, not from the Mysteries of the Gnostics as others did,
but from those of the Montanists; which nevertheless cannot be, because S.
Justin Martyr, who lived before Montanus, makes mention of it: Nevertheless S.
Cyrill imputing something of that kind unto the Montanists, we shall be obliged
to say something thereof, when we shall have done with the Gnostics; in the
mean while I shall say two things, First, That several of the Holy Fathers have
in their Writings hinted these false reports, which were spread abroad to the
disgrace of Christians, but without touching the cause that produced them; as
Justin Martyr, and Athenagoras in their Apologies, Tatian against the Greeks,
Theophilus of Antioch in his Books to Autolycus, Tertullian in his Treatise to
the Nations, and in his Apologetick; Minutius Felix in his Octavius. The Second
thing is, that although several have spoke of the Gnostics besides S.
Epiphanius, as S. Iraeneus, Philastrius Bishop of Bresse, S. Austin and
Theodoret, and that the three last have mentioned their abominable Mysteries;
Nevertheless because S. Epiphanius has done it more exactly than any of them,
and that he has particularly observed all things that were practiced in those
wicked Assemblies, we have followed what he has written of them. But because
some of the Fathers have said that the Montanists and Pepusians practiced
something very like the abominations of the Gnostics, it will be necessary,
after having treated of the Mysteries of the one, to examine and treat of the
Mysteries and Eucharist of the others. Montanus was an Arch-Heretick, born in a
Village called Ardaba in a part of Myssia bordering upon Phrygia, and not being
able to satisfy his Ambition, which made him aspire unto the chiefest power in
the place of his Birth, he suffered himself to be corrupted with the
inspirations of the Devil, and as if he had been possessed with a Prophetic
Spirit; he undertook to reveal things to come, and chose for his Companions
Priscilla and Maximilla, which he made pass for Prophetesses: Some say, that he
called himself the Paraclete; others say, that he taught that it was in him the
promise was to be accomplished, which Jesus Christ made of sending his Spirit
after his Ascension into Heaven, and not upon the Apostles, as the Gospel does
testify: S. Epiphanius and others say that he differed nothing from the
Catholics and the Orthodox as to matter of Doctrine, but only as to
Discipline, which he established more strict and austere than other Christians.
This severity was so taking with Tertullian, that he suffered himself to be
surprised, and was so obstinate, that although he was one of the greatest Wits
and learned Men of his time, yet he called the Catholics mere Libertines,
Sensual and Carnal; but in fine, he left great Numbers of Sectaries and
Followers, which, from him, were called Montanists; Cataphrygians, from
Phrygia, where they made their chiefest residence; and Pepusians, from a little
Village of that Country called Pepusia, but by them called Jerusalem, to make
it the more famous, and to raise the Dignity and Credit of it; and it is unto
these Followers of Montanus, that several have imputed the like Mysteries of
the abominable Gnostics. Philast. de Haeres. l. 4. Bibl. Pat. p. 13.
Philastrius in his Catalogue of Heresies charge them with Celebrating the
Mystery of the Cynicks, and the execrable impiety which is committed in
murdering a little. Infant, whose Blood they mingled (as he says) in their
Passover and in their Sacrifice. Isid. Pelus. l. 1. Ep. 242. Cyrill Hierosol.
Carech. 16. p. 178.
S. Isidore of Damieta mentions somewhat in his Letters; but it is nothing in
respect of what S. Cyrill of Jerusalem reports in his Catechisms: This Montanus
(says he) being distracted and out of his wits, had the impudence to say that
he was the Holy Ghost, he that was a miserable, a vile, wretched Man, and full
of all mann^r of impiety and wickedness, which it is sufficient to intimate by
some signs, ethrough respect, which is to be had unto some Women here present;
he strangled young Children, and cut them in pieces to make them serve as
abominable Food, under a pretense of Mysteries celebrated amongst them, (that
is, amongst the Montanists) therefore during the late persecutions, the
Gentiles imagined we did the same things, because the Montanists assumed the
name of Christians, but falsely. Apparently, nothing can be said more formal,
nor more positively on this Subject: nevertheless I find S. Austin comes
nothing short of S. Cyrill, and that he speaks as full as he, only saving that
he does not expressly mention the killing of a young Child: these are his words,
It is reported that they have pernicious Sacraments, August de haeres. 26.
for it is said they make their Sacrament with the blood of a little Infant of
a year old, which they make to issue from all parts of the Body, by pricking it
all over; and mingling this Blood with Flower, they make Bread of it, and if
the Child dye, they esteem it a Martyr; but if it recover and live, it is
esteemed amongst them as a great Priest or Sacrificer. Then distinguishing the
Pepusians from the Cavaphrygians and Montanists, he says, they do like the
others in their Eucharist; so that after so many witnesses, should not one
absolutely acquiesce, in all likelihood one should be reputed a self-willed
person: Nevertheless I would desire the Reader a little to suspend his
Judgment, for if I mistake not, Theodoret does not fully agree to this matter,
at least he observes that when the Montanists were taxed with the thing, they
denied it, and looked on this accusation as an imposture, and grievous calumny;
and I cannot tell but in such like occasions, the Declaration of the Party
ought to be believed rather than the Accusations, which many times have no
other ground, but a popular Report and Fame, which every one knows relate
things false as well as true. Theodore^. haeret. sab. ^. 3. c. 2.
As to their mysteries (says Theodoret) some do relate things which they do
not own, which they deny and agree not unto, but they call this accusaetion a
false calumny: and to say the truth, not one of the Ancients which was
contemporary with Montanus, not one of those which opposed his Heresy when it
first appeared in the World, with the predictions of his Prophetesses, having
imputed any such thing unto this Sect, I cannot easily imagine they were guilty
of the abominations of the Gnostics, which were laid to their charge,
especially when I consider that Eusebius in his Ecclesiastical History, making
mention of many that were filled with a zeal for the glory of God, writ very
earnestly against the extravagancies of this pretended Paraclete, and of his
Prophetesses, and has preseved some fragments of their Works, Apud Eusebius.
hist. l. 5. c. 18.
without any mention therein of these abominable Mysteries: there is no great
likelihood that Apollonius who in Eusebius reproacheth this Montanus, That he
established Laws touching Fasts, and for dissolving of Marriages, would have
spared him on a matter, which alone would have rendered him odious and execrable
unto all the World: nor that Tertullian, whom a too ridgid piety precipitated
into the Sect of this false Paraclete, would have embraced such a Sect, wherein
such execrable Mysteries were celebrated: nor lastly, that the Ancients which
lamented his misfortune, and his contending for the defense of the Discipline
of his Montanus, would have passed over in silence so considerable a
circumstance, which was able to startle and cover with eternal Infamy, all the
Followers of this hypocritical Impostor. Yet I would not be thought to reject
or despise the testimony of the Ancients, whose testimonies we have heard; I
would only follow the distinction which S. Epiphanius has made of the
Montanists and Cataphrygians, from the Quintilians, Epiph. haer. 48. Extr.
the Priscillianists and the Pepusians, unto whom he seems to join the
Tascodrugites; for he acquits the former from the crime of Infant-killing, and
only imputes unto the others the celebrating of the Sacrament with the blood of
a little Child; for by this means, it appears that they may be compared both
together, or we at least the better judge of the matter in question. But the
Devil rested not there; for having declared a mortal hatred against Mankind,
especially against Christians, because the establishing of the Kingdom of Jesus
Christ, whom they adore, is the utter subversion of his, he uses his greatest
force and cunning, skill and power, to effect the wicked devices which he
plotteth against them, laying many snares and traps at once, to the end that if
he fail in the one, he may not in the other. By the Gnostics and the Pepusians
he endeavored to disgrace the holiness of their Discipline, and to vilify
their most sacred and Religious Mysteries; other stratagems he made Use of to
oppose their Utility, and to destroy the necessity of their use and
Celebration. There were Heretics called Ascodrutes or Ascodrupites, who
pretending to greater degrees of purity, and to calumniate the Creator of the
World, taught that all visible things were the production of Ignorance and
Passion, and that Divine Mysteries which are the Symbols and Images of
invisible things, ought not to be celebrated by things visible, nor incorporeal
by things visible and corporeal; and that there is nothing in the whole compass
of the Redemption but is purely Spiritual: therefore they did neither celebrate
Baptism nor the Lords Supper, the two Sacraments which our Savior instituted
to convey his Blessings unto us. But let us hear Theodoret who plainly
describes them unto us; These Persons say, Theoder. haret. fab. l. 1. c. 10.
The Divine Mysteries ought not to be celebrated, which are the Symbols of
invisible things, with things visible; nor to represent incorcoporeal things,
by things which are corporeal and sensible; that the complete redemption is
nothing else but a true apprehension and knowledge of what it is; that all
visible things, which are the effect of ignorance and passion, are made void by
Knowledge: therefore the redemption must be also Spiritual. He also adds, That
they did not baptize those which turned unto their Sect, and that the Sacrament
of Baptism was not celebrated amongst them; for they termed Redemption the
knowledge of all things. Some think that these Ascodrupites are the same with
those which S. Epiphanius calls Tascodrugites, Epiph. haer. 48.
giving also the meaning of this name which was given them, because praying
they put the forefinger in their Nose as a mark of sadness and voluntary
equity, and that in their Language, Tascus, signified a perch, and Drugus, the
Nose; but in that behalf they are to be accquitted of the crime which was
imputed unto the Pepusians, with whom Epiphanius was wont to join them, that
is, of celebrating the Eucharist with the blood of an Infant; S. Epiphanius
does not positively affirm it of them, he only says that this cruelty was
committed either amongst them, or amongst the Pepusians: so that this
wickedness is not likely to have been acted amongst the Tascodrugites, if it be
true that they were the same with Theodoret's Ascodrupites; seeing they
rejected the Celebration of the Eucharist. And whereas S. Epiphanius seems to
make them all one with the Pepusians, that makes nothing against what Theodoret
relates unto us of his Ascodrupites; the rather, because, exactly considering
the words of Epiphanius, there is nothing which obliges us to join the
Tascodrugites with the Pepusians in the execrable Subject now in hand, seeing
he speaks of them severally, although in effect he reports not of the
Tascodrugites, what Theodoret says of the Ascodrupites. But what induces me
to think that the Tascodrugites and Ascodrupites were but one Sect, wherein the
Sacraments were not celebrated, is a certain kind of Dialogue of Timothy,
Priest or Bishop of Constantinople; (for this is not the place of clearing a
question which makes nothing to our Subject.) In the little Treatise which
Father Combefis a Dominican has left us in Greek and Latin, much larger than
it is in the Library of the Fathers, but in Latin only; he treats of the manner
of receiving Heretics into the Catholic Church, and reducing them into three
Orders: he will have the former to be admitted by Baptizing them; those of the
Second, by Anointing them; and those of the Third sort, by making them only to
Anathematise their Heresy. In the first sort he ranges the Tascodrugites, unto
whom in effect he imputes part of what Theodoret relates unto us of the
Ascodrupites, as the laying aside Baptism, Apud combef. Auct. Bib. Par. t. 2.
p. 450.
one of the Symbols which they condemned, saying, That there ought not to be
made upon Earth, Images and Figures of things Heavenly and Invisible, nor may
we represent Spiritual things by corporeal things. I only observe, that this
Timothy who wrote after Theodoret, is in all likelihood mistaken when he says
that the Tascodrugites rejected all Divine Knowledge; for on the contrary, they
made our entire Redemption to consist, by the report of Theodoret, in the
Knowledge of all things. As of all the Emissaries the Devil makes use of, and
of all the Agents he imploys to do his work in seducing Mankind, there are
scarce any more at his beck, nor more ready to execute his commands, than
Sorcerers, South-sayers, Inchanters, and such as use Witchcrafts and Magic, so
it is not to be wondered, if to disturb the Church in its Infancy in the
celebrating its Sacraments, he made use of these kinds of Instruments and
wicked Agents: for he made use of one Mark, whereof the Ascodrupites were as it
were a Limb and Branch; this wretch amongst many other impieties which he spued
out, exercised the Magic Art, and by means of his Delusions and Witchcrafts,
he seduced many ignorant Persons, which suffered themselves to be blinded by
his Enchantments: Tertullian relates it in his Book of Prescriptions against
Heretics; Philastrius in his Catologue of Heresies; also S. Austin and
Theodoret: This latter has also recited some of his Enchantments and
Witchcrafts: S. Epiphanius treats at large of the Heresy of the Marcosians or
Marcites, which were so called after his Name; but because our design does not
require that we should examine all the Impieties and Dreams of these Heretics,
but only what they did in celebrating the Eucharist, and that S. Epiphanius
has taken from S. Irenaeus what he reports, let us inform our selves of this
latter, which was so famous in our France, as well for his Piety and Learning,
as also for having written so vigorously against all those Enemies of growing
Christianity. This Doctor having said that this Mark was well skilled in
Magic, by means whereof he seduced much people, both Men and Women, he
instances in several proofs of his delusions, and particularly what he did in
celebrating the Sacrament. Iren. adv. Haere^^ l. 1. c. 9.
He made show (says he) of consecrating Cups full of Wine; and enlarging on
the words of Consecration and Prayer, he made them appear red and of a Purple
color, to the end to make them believe that Grace (it was one of the
Divinities which he had invented or borrowed from the Schole of Valentine) made
to come down from the highest Heaven, his blood into the Cup, by means of
invocation, and that those present earnestly desiring to drink of the Cup, to
the end that the same Grace, which this Sorcerer invoked, might also come into
them; then giving unto the Women, of those Cups full of Wine, he commanded them
to give thanks in his presence; and when they had done, he himself presents
another Cup much larger than that which was presented by the simple Woman which
he seduced; he pours out of the lesser Cup, which the Woman had consecrated,
into that brought by himself, and which is much larger, saying these words;
That Grace which is before all things, and that is not to be expressed nor
conceived, may fill your inward Man, and increase his knowledge in you, sowing
the grain of Mustard Seed in good ground: and in saying these things, S.
Irenaeus adds; troubling the Spirit of this poor Creature, he seems to do
things that are miraculous, when he so fills the greater Cup with what is in
the lesser Cup, that the liquor raises it self above the brims, in doing
whereof he destroyed sundry Persons by seducing of them. Therefore the same S.
Irenaeus supposed he had some familiar Spirit by whose inspirations he seemed
to prophecy, and caused all those Women to prophecy which he thought worthy
to participate of his Grace: But that nothing may be wanting unto the History
of what these miserable wretches practiced in celebrating their Mysteries, we
will call to our aid S. Epiphanius, who although he borrows from S. Irenaeus
most part of what he says, yet marks one particular circumstance worthy of
consideration, which is, that in this Sect of Marcites, Epiph. haeres. 34. init.
or Marcosians, there were prepared three Chalices of Crystal glass, which were
filled with White Wine, and that after Mark 's enchantment, which was esteemed
a Prayer, or giving Thanks, they were presently changed, the one became red as
Blood, the second of a Purple color, and the third Blue: And it is very
probable he made use of Glass Chalices, which was a thing frequent amongst the
Catholics of his time, and that he filled them with White Wine, to give the
greater likelihood and probability unto his Impostures and Witchcrafts, which
only tended to the deluding those miserable Women which he seduced, and with
whom he satisfied the disordered passions of his filthy lusts: for as our S.
Hilary has excellently well observed, It often is seen, Hilar. in frag. 23.
Iren (...) 1. Cap. 18. Epiph. haeres. 34.
that after a multitude of vices has prevailed over the love of God, there
evidently springs up the folly of corrupt knowledge. And as to what S.
Irenaeus, and after him Epiphanius, has written, that the Followers of Mark
were of the same Sentiment, which Theodoret attributes unto the Ascodrupites,
it must be understood only of those Ascodrupites, which were, as we have said,
a branch of the Marcostans; also S. Irenaeus does not impute this belief unto
all the Followers of this Impostor, but only unto some of them, that is unto
the Ascodrupites, according to the explication given us by Theodoret, who in
all likelihood had learned of S. Irenaeus, or of Epiphanius, what he has said,
as S. Epiphanius had collected it out of S. Irenaeus. Ever since God put enmity
betwixt the seed of the Woman and the seed of the Serpent, because the Devil
made use of this unhappy Instrument to seduce and ruin our first Parents,
Mankind have generally an aversion against Serpents; I speak of the generality
of men; for if some are to be found otherwise inclined, yet it is an exception
which does not destroy the general rule: therefore it is that the Devil, who is
not ignorant of it, has thought that one of the most effectual means that he
could invent to disparage and make odious the Mysteries of the Christians, was
to persuade some of those which made an outward profession of Christianity, to
adore Serpents, and to make use of them for the Consecration of their
detestable Mysteries; his design was not wholly ineffectual, seeing he found
some that were so blind and wretched, as to follow his cursed Inspirations, in
rendering unto the Serpent a worship and service diabolically religious. From
hence it was they were called by the name of Ophites, as who should say, the
Disciples or worshippers of the Serpent, which by the report of Tertullian they
preferred before Jesus Christ, Tertul. de praescript. Cap. 47.
as having given unto mankind the Knowledge of good and Evil. They taught that
Moses having understood the power and Majesty of them, made one of brass, and
that all those that beheld it, were made whole; that Jesus Christ himself in
the Gospel imitated the power of the holy Serpent, in saying, as Moses lifted
up the Serpent in the Wilderness, so also shall the Son of Man be lifted up;
and several other things which are to be found in the Works of those which have
written of Heresies, especially in S. Epiphanius, Theodoret, and S. Austin,
this last saying, they affirmed that the Serpent which deceived Adam and Eve,
was Jesus Christ: but what makes properly for the Subject we treat of, and
whereto all the Ancients agree, is, that they bred up a Serpent or Snake, which
they tamed, and made to come out of the hollow place where he lay, at the time
that they intended to celebrate their ridiculous and wicked Eucharist; and that
by Sorcery they made it come upon the Table where they celebrated, to the end
it should lick their Oblations, and that it should roll and twist it self round
about them; after which they broke them, and it became their Eucharist,
sanctified by the Serpent Christ. Thus it is related by S. Austin; but because
S. Epiphanius speaks yet more distinctly, August. haeres. 17. Epiph. haeres. 37.
it will not be amiss here to insert what he says of it. They nourish a
Serpent, says he, in a Den or Cave, and about the time that they intend to
celebrate their mysteries, they present Bread at the entrance of his Cave, and
set other Bread upon the Table; then they call the Serpent, and having opened
the place wherein he is kept, he comes forward, and being come, according to
their folly, he gets upon the Table, and rolls himself amongst the loaves,
which they believe, and take to be a perfect Sacrifice. Thence also is it (he
adds) as I have been informed, that they not only break the loaves amongst
which the Serpent had rolled, and that they distribute it amongst those which
are present, who receive it, but also that every one salutes the Serpent, and
kisses him with their mouth; whether it were that he was so made tame by
Witchcraft and Enchantments, or that by some other operation of the Devil, this
Beast kisseth them to their destruction. Now they adore this Serpent and call
it Prayer or Consecration, which was done on the Table, when he rolled and
twisted himself about the loaves, which had been offered: they say also that
they offer by him a Hymn unto the heavenly Father, and so they accomplish their
mysteries.

S. Paul speaking of the wisdom of God, Ephesians. 3.
says, That it is wonderful in diverse manners: we may say on the contrary,
that the malice of the Devil works also diversely, and that he exercises an
infinite number of Slights and Artifices; therefore S. John in his Revelations,
Rev. 2.
speaks of the depths of Satan, to show that he is a spring and Fountain of
wiles and subtilties, and a bottomless Pit of frauds and deceits: Hitherto we
have seen it in the great variety of Heretics which he stirred up, to disturb
the Church in the enjoyment of the Ordinances, I mean of her Sacraments, which
are as the sacred Channels, whereby God conveys his graces unto her; but being
still afraid not to succeed in his design, and of not effecting his malicious
purposes, he makes use of several means, and tries several ways to surprise
the Church, and to obtain some victory over her Children; it is by this
principle of Malice and Envy, that he inspired some others with the design of
changing the matter of the Eucharist, either by adding things unfit, and which
our Savior had not chosen to make his Sacrament; or by cutting off those
things which he had chosen, and which are not to be laid aside without
destroying its Essence and Nature: the former were certain Heretics of Phrygia
or of Galatia, who instead of making use of Bread and Wine in celebrating this
Mystery, as our Savior had appointed, and the Church had always practiced,
they made use of Bread and Cheese; from whence they were called Artotyrites,
from a name that contained both the things which they offered, and with which
they celebrated their Eucharist. They were called Artotyrites (says
Epiphanius) because they offered Bread and Cheese in their Mysteries, Epiph.
haeres. 49. August. haeres. 28.
and that they so celebrated them. S. Austin adds, that they said, That men
formerly did celebrate the Oblations of Fruits of the Earth and of Sheep. In
Spain in the VII. Century there were some that instead of offering Bread and
Wine in the Celebration of the Sacrament, offered Bread and Milk, which the
Council of Braga, assembled Anno 675. condemned as a Rebellion against the
Institution and Example of Jesus Christ.

But if those offered strange file unto God, as Nadab and Abihu did; See here
others which had the temerity and boldness not to offer unto him what he
required, that is, the Bread and Wine of the Eucharist, because instead of Wine
they used Water in celebrating their Mysteries, thereby depriving him of a part
of what he commanded to be offered; almost like the Sons of Old Ely, that stole
part of the Sacrifices offered unto God under the Law; such were the
Encratites, which are descended, as the Ancients believe, from one Tatian, who
was Disciple unto Justin Martyr; this man during the life of his excellent
Master, continued in the right way of the truth of the Gospel, but after his
death he departed from the simplicity which is in Jesus Christ, being deceived
by the wiles of the Devil: And although Epiphanius makes a difference betwixt
the Tatianites and the Encratites, yet he owneth that these latter derived
their Original from Tatian as well as the former, only he thinks they added
something unto the Heresy of the Tatianites: but in fine, these Encratites had
an aversion against Marriage, the flesh of Beasts, and Wine, as if they were
things evil in themselves, and in their Nature; and from thence it was that
they were called Encratites: But because upon this principle of hating Wine as
an evil thing, they made use of fair Water in the Celebration of the Sacrament,
they were called by the name of Aquarians or Hydroparastates: in fine, all the
Ancients which have treated of this Heresy, witness with one accord, that they
offered Water instead of Wine in their Mysteries, and that it was with Water
that they celebrated them, which made Epiphanius say, That their Mysteries were
not Mysteries, Epiph. haeres. 47.
but that they were made falsely in imitation of true ones; and that our Savior
would reprove them for it at the last day, because he said, I will drink no
more of the fruit of the Vine; and a long time before him, Clem. Alex. Paedag.
l. 2. cap. 2.
Clement of Alexandria opposed these same Heretics by the example of Jesus
Christ, which used Wine both at his common meals, and in his Eucharist; and
having proved both the one and the other, he adds, Let these things be firmly
rooted in our minds, against those which are called Encratites. Chrysostom. hom.
83. in Matthew.
S. Chrysostom also presses this example of Jesus Christ against the same
Heretics, and says, that in as much as our Savior used Wine both in the
Celebration of his Sacrament, and after his Resurrection, at a common Table, It
was to pluck up by the roots this pernicious Heresy. As for S. Cyprian Bishop
of Carthage, and glorious Martyr of Jesus Christ, he disputes in his small
Treatise of the Sacrament of the Cup, which is his 63. Epistle unto Cecilius,
against some Christians of his time, which used only Water in the celebrating
of the Eucharist, and for that reason may be called Aquarians. But methinks it
is evident enough in all his Treatise, that these latter Aquarians were very
different from the former; for the former were wretched and wicked Heretics,
which detested and abominated Wine as a wicked Creature and an evil production;
but as for those spoken of by S. Cyprian, they had doubtless other sentiments;
and indeed he neither calls them Enemies nor Heretics; the former did
celebrate their Mystery with Water, because they abominated Wine; but these did
so for two reasons much different from the Encratites, Cyprian Ep. ^ 3.
the first proceeded from the ignorance and simplicity of some of their
Teachers, Some (says S. Cyprian in the beginning of his Treatise) either
through ignorance or simplicity do not what Christ did, when they consecrate
the Cup of our Lord, and distribute it unto the people; and toward the end, If
any of our Predecessors have not observed or practiced either through ignorance
or folly, what the Lord commanded us to do both by his precepts and example;
Id. ibid.
the Lord by his goodness may pardon his ignorance, but as for us, we cannot be
pardoned, being informed and taught as we have been by the Lord, to offer a Cup
with Wine, as our blessed Savior offered. Therefore in another part of his
Epistle, he says, that he cannot sufficiently admire whence the custom should
come: Id. ibid.
That in some places was offered Water in the Cup of our Lord, contrary to the
Evangelical and Apostolical discipline, forasmuch as Water alone cannot
represent the blood of Christ. The second motive which caused those Christians
to do so, was the fear of persecution, they feared that in their Assemblies,
which they made early in the morning, should they have used Wine in the
Eucharist, the smell of the liquor might discover them, and thereby might have
exposed them unto the persecutions which Heathens made against Christians. All
the discipline (says S. Cyprian) of Religion and of the truth is wholly
overthrown, Id. ibid.
if what was commanded, spiritually and faithfully be not observed, if happily
some be not afraid that it should be known that they participated of the blood
of Jesus Christ by the scent of the Wine which they received in the
Morning-Oblations: and to the end it should not be thought that in these
Morning-Assemblies they abstained offering Wine, or drinking it through
aversion, as if it were an evil and abominable thing, they made use of it in
the Evening-Assemblies, because not being obliged at that season to be present
amongst the Unbelievers, they feared not to be discovered by that means to be
Christians, and for persons that came from receiving the Sacrament, as they
thought they might have cause to believe, if they had employed Wine in the
celebration of the Sacrament in the Assemblies which met before day; besides
that there were none Fasting at night, so that the scent of Wine could not so
particularly be discerned at that season. Id. ibid.
Thus much St. Cyprian would intimate by these words, Is it that any one can
deceive himself with this thought? that is, that he shall imitate the example
of Jesus Christ, if he celebrate the Sacrament at Supper-time with the Cup
mingled with Wine, though in the morning he offers but Water only. This holy
Doctor condemns this practice, and with great reason, seeing it was from a
fleshly and carnal motion, which fearing the Cross and Sufferings, suggested
such thoughts and counsels into weak and timorous Christians, which considered
not that in acting after that manner they followed the Inspirations of the
Devil, which commonly sets on men in their weakest part, and never slips any
occasion to seize their hearts, and to destroy them, to render them companions
of his pains and torments. See here another instance to the same purpose; The
Devil not content to stir up the Eucratites in the second Century, to change
the Essence of the Sacrament by using of Water instead of Wine, which they had
in aversion, and not content in the third with the simplicity, timidity, and
weakness of some Catholic Christians, and Orthodox in the main, to give some
attempt against this Sacrament of our Salvation; he began anew in the fifth
Century to surprise others through a pretext of sobriety: for as sometimes men
pass to vice by the way of virtue, so it fell out that this pretext was made
use of to deceive men, and to plunge them in Error. This also he did in respect
of those of whom Gennadius, Priest and not Bishop of Marsellis, as Pope Adrian
styles him, does speak; for he makes mention of certain persons, Genna^. l de
Dogm. Eccles. c. 75.
That under pretense of sobriety, would not celebrate the Eucharist with Wine,
but with Water only. All the attempts of this Enemy of the Salvation of
Mankind, have proved vain in this regard: God has not suffered him to prevail
in this matter over his Church; for all Christian Communions have faithfully
retained the use of Bread and Wine in the Celebration of the Sacrament,
insomuch as even in those Countries where Wine does not grow, they endeavor to
imitate the best they can the other Christians, who live in those Climates
which abound with it: For instance, the Christians of St. Thomas, in the
Indies, where there is no Wine, use dry Grapes, brought from Mecha and Ormus,
and steep them a whole night in Water; next day they press them, and with the
Liquor that comes out they celebrate the Eucharist instead of Wine. Ramusio.
vol. 1. p. 313. and several others also.
The Abassins also do in like manner, as Francis Alvarez, in his Voyage into
Ethiopia, does testify.

But upon this matter of the Wine of the Eucharist, it may not be altogether
needless to consider what was the Sentiment of Antiquity touching the two Cups
mentioned by St. Luke, which were distributed by our Savior unto his
Disciples, as is alleged by St. Luke in his Gospel, observing also that it was
in giving the former that he said, I will drink no more of the Fruit of the
Vine, which he mentions not to be spoken by our Savior in distributing the
latter. Now seeing that St. Fulgentius, Bishop of Rusp in Africa, has
collected the several judgments of those which preceded or were his
contemporaries, what we find in his Writings shall suffice, and I hope the
Reader will not be displeased to satisfy his curiosity on this matter:
Fulgent. ad ^^rrand. Diacon de quinque quast c ^5.
Some persons (says he) would have this passage of the Gospel understood, viz.
That the Lord gave not two Cups; but rather they affirm that he said so by way
of anticipation, and that there was indeed but one sole Cup; of which first
there is mention made that it should be divided, and then that it should be
given to the Disciples to drink of it: Others there be that affirm, That there
were two Cups distributed; but which opinion soever of them is followed, the
sense of the one and the other is no way contrary to the true Faith. Those
which think our Savior gave two Cups, say that it was done mystically, and
that by the former Cup he would prefigure his Passion, and by the second, that
of his followers: Others again have said that the two Cups did represent what
had been commanded under the old Testament, viz. that whosoever had not
celebrated the Passover of the first Month in eating a Lamb, should do it the
second Month in eating a Kid. As for me, (adds St. Fulgentius) it seems there
is here discovered another Mystery, which accords very well with the Christian
Faith, viz. that both in the one and the other Cup, ought to be understood both
the Old and New Testaments, especially seeing the Truth it self has so plainly
declared it unto us, that there remains no doubt of it unto those which search
the truth: For the Lord himself called the New Testament the Cup which he gave
us to drink; and afterward, Ibid. c. 38.
in this part of the Gospel whereof we now dispute, we are not permitted to
understand any thing else but what we are taught by our Saviors own words, who
says, This Cup is the New Testament in my Blood; and according to this rule,
whereby the Cup is termed the New Testament, is very justly to be understood
the Old Testament in the Cup which he gave first: The same Lord then which gave
unto his Disciples both Testaments, gave also both Cups; therefore at the same
Supper he eat of the Jewish Passover, which was to be offered, and distributed
the Sacrament of his Body and Blood, which was to be instituted for the
Salvation of Believers; he eat the Passover of the Jews, whereby Jesus Christ
was promised to come unto our Passover, which he became, when sacrificed
himself. In fine, consider what the Evangelist St. Luke relates that he said
unto his Disciples; for he says thus, When the hour was come, he sat down at
the Table, and the twelve Apostles with him, and he said unto them, With desire
have I desired to eat this Passover with you before I suffer: he eat therefore
the Passover, by which he was represented to suffer, before he suffered
voluntarily for us; there is also in the words of our Savior something which
ought diligently to be considered by Believers, and wherein may be perceived a
difference betwixt both Testaments; for St. Luke thus speaks of the Cup which
he first mentioned, And having taken the Cup, he gave Thanks, and said, Take ye
it, and divide it amongst you; but speaking afterward of the Bread and the
Cup, he says, And having taken the Bread, he gave Thanks, and broke it, and
gave it unto them, saying, This is my Body which is given for you, do this in
remembrance of me. Also he gave them the Cup after Supper, saying, This Cup is
the New Testament in my Blood which is shed for you Of all the opinions or
diverse Interpretations cited by St. Fulgentius, I find his own the most
reasonable, because in effect St. Luke has mentioned two several Cups, the
Paschal Cup, and the Eucharistical Cup; the former being a Sign and Seal of the
first Covenant, and the latter the Sign and Seal of the new Covenant. If this
Evangelist has not taken notice of our Saviors saying of the Eucharistical
Cup, I will drink no more of the Fruit of the Vine, but only in speaking of the
Paschal Cup, it is in the first place because he considered our Saviors whole
action to be but one Supper, at the end whereof he instituted the Sacrament of
the Eucharist; so that it is as if he should have made our Savior say, After
this Supper, and my now sitting at Table with you, I will drink no more of the
Fruit of the Vine. Secondly, That although Jesus Christ might have said so of
the two Cups, the Paschal and Eucharistical; yet nevertheless S. Luke, seeing
the two other Evangelists had not observed it of the Paschal, he contented
himself to observe it of the Paschal, and not of the Eucharistick, the
Evangelists being accustomed to supply in this manner the omissions one of
another; I mean, that the one observes some things the others had omitted, that
it might not be thought they had all written of design and by consent.

CHAP. III.
Continuation of the considerations of the matter of the Eucharist, wherein is
examined what S. Ignatius says of certain Heretics which rejected the
Sacrament; the Heresy of one named Tanchelin who also rejected it, but upon
another Principle; the reproaches of Jews and other Enemies, and the difference
betwixt the Greek and Latin Churches about Bread leavened or unleavened.

SAint Ignatius was a Disciple of the Apostles, and particularly of St. John,
Bishop and Pastor of the Church of Antioch, and moreover a glorious Martyr of
Jesus Christ; for he suffered Martyrdom at Rome the first of February, Anno
107. or 109. in the Eleventh Year of the Emperor Trajan; and if the Epistles
which go in his name, were truly his, it were not to be questioned, but that
toward the end of the first age of Christianity, or at farthest the beginning
of the second, there were Heretics which rejected the use of the Sacrament.
When I mention his Epistles, I speak not generally of all those which go in his
name, but only of the seven most ancient, seeing it is above 1300 years since
Eusebius saw them; and after Eusebius, they were cited by some of the Fathers
of the Church; because it is of these seven that the moderate persons, both
Roman Catholics and Protestants, seem to make greatest difficulty, I mean the
Protestants that admit them as legitimate; for I find several that question
them all, and that cannot persuade themselves that they were the genuine Issue
of that Illustrious Martyr, as Messieurs de Saumaise, Blondel, Aubertin,
Daille; this latter having also examined in a particular Treatise, all the
marks of forgery that he could discover in these Epistles. I freely confess my
self to be in this Error if it be an Error, and that of a long time, I have
therein observed several things which suffered me not to believe that S.
Ignatius had writ them; but as this is not the place to show it, and that
besides it has been performed by others, it shall suffice to consider what he
has said of these Heretics; Ignat. Ep. ad Smyrn.
They abstain (says he) from the Eucharist and from Prayer, because they
believe not the Eucharist to be the flesh of our Lord Jesus Christ, which
suffered for our sins, and which the Father raised up by his goodness. It is a
long time since Theodoret cited this passage; but instead of these words, they
abstained from the Eucharist and Prayer, he used these, they admitted not
Sacraments nor Oblations, I think the word Oblations is more significant than
that of Prayer, for there is nothing more frivolous, than to represent unto us
those Heretics as abstaining from Prayer, because they owned not the Eucharist
to be the flesh of Jesus Christ; and I see no connection betwixt these two
things, nor that they have any dependence the one upon the other, unless some
will say, that they did not mean generally all manner of Prayer, but only that
whereby the Symbols of the Sacrament were consecrated, and which many think was
the Lords Prayer, which they suppose the Apostles used for the consecrating
this Mystery: and therefore it is probable, that the Fathers called it the
Mystical Prayer, and that it was not permitted unto the Catechumeni to repeat
it, because not having yet received holy Baptism, they could not, as they
supposed, call God Father, nor participate of the Sacrament whereunto they were
admitted immediately after Baptism: but in fine, these very words make me
suspect the truth of the Epistle; it might be, and I Will not deny but that
toward the end of the third Century there might be Heretics which did so, and
that he who forged the Epistle of S. Ignatius living at that time, and opposing
these Enemies of Christianity, has expressly observed it, not considering, as
it often happens to that sort of men, that it was not so in the time of this
glorious Martyr, under whose name he would cover himself. I farther confess
that if those Heretics which I suppose to be the Docetes and Putatives, that
is, those which denied the Incarnation of Jesus Christ, and which only allowed
him an imaginary Body, a fantome and shadow of a Body: I say, I grant, that had
they acted according to their Hypothesis, they would not have allowed of the
Eucharist, seeing they could not allow it without ruining their abominable
Doctrine, by an infallible consequence. But this is not the place to consider
what they ought to have done, but what they did: now it is most certain that in
the time of the true S. Ignatius, none of these Heretics denied the Eucharist,
for none of the Ancients have observed it; which they would not have omitted to
do, as well those which have treated of Heresies, as those which have written
particularly against the Heretics whereof we now treat, The first which
refused to celebrate the Sacrament, were as we have been informed by the Holy
Fathers, the Ascodrupites, which were a Limb of the Impostor Mark, and Mark an
unhappy Branch of Valentine, which Valentine began not to appear till thirty
years after the death of S. Ignatius; and as for those concerned in the Epistle
which we examine, how could they abstain from the Eucharist in the time of our
glorious Martyr, seeing they abstained not from it a hundred years after?
Tertul. advers. Marc. l. 1. c. 14.
For Tertullian does formally tellus, that Marcion which was one of the chief
of these Heretics, persisted in the use of the Sacrament, seeing he declares
that the God of Marcion, shows his Body by the Bread: otherwise the Orthodox
could not have drawn from the Sacrament any advantage against them for the
truth of his Body, and for the incarnation of Jesus Christ: for when one
disputes with another, they must dispute upon common principles, and which are
acknowled on both sides. I should think then, and to end the consideration of
this matter, that these Heretics which opposed not so much the Sacrament of
the Eucharist, Lib. 1. de Euchar. c. 1.. ne auth.
as the mystery of the incarnation of Christ, as Cardinal Bellarmin has well
observed, taking notice of the neglect of their Predecessors, and seeing they
admitted the use of the Sacrament, they gave the Catholics strong Arms to
contradict them, they abstained from celebrating it as the Ascodrupites had
done a long while before them, although upon another account; but besides these
two sorts of Heretics, both which, the one after the other, rejected the
celebrating of the Sacrament of the Eucharist, although upon different
principles, we shall see in the XII. Century a new Heretic that toward
Flanders, and especially in Brabant where he spread abroad his Heresy and the
poison of his pernicious Doctrine (it was one called Tanchelin) who having a
design to ruin the Sacrament of the Eucharist, and to forbid the use of it unto
all those which he could seduce, did so well by his cunning, and by the help of
the evil Spirit under whom he had enrolled himself, that he persuaded the
people of Antwerp, (a great and populous City) that the participation of the
Eucharist was not necessary unto Salvation; wherefore they continued several
years without communicating, as the Continuator of Sigebert does inform us.
Supplem. Chron. Sigeb. ad an. 1124.
We shall not now say any more, because that upon another Subject we shall be
forced to enlarge upon this History, which plainly shows that the Devil does
not cease from time to time to make his Attempts against this great mystery of
Christian Religion, knowing very well that it is one of the most precious
pledges of our blessed Jesus; a Divine and efficacious seal of his gracious
Covenant, and an illustrious Memorial of his Sacrifice and Death, wherein we
find immortality and life. Wherefore having armed Heretics to combat this
Divine Sacrament, some after one manner, some after another, he stirred up the
Jews and others to take occasion from the Sacrament, to reproach Christians;
some to say, that they had reduced all the Service of their Religion unto an
Oblation of Bread, or at least that they had invented a new Oblation: others
that they were worshippers of Ceres and Bacchus, and that they religiously
adored those imaginary Deities. In fine, Rabbi Benjamin, in S. Isidore of
Damieta, Isid. Pelus. l. 1. Ep. 401.
urges this accusation against Christians, That they had invented a new and
strange Oblation, in consecrating Bread unto God, whereas the Law established
Sacrifices in the Blood; which S. Isidore does not deny, but only says unto
this Jew, That he ought not to be ignorant, That the Law it self consecrated
the Shewbread. And others reproach the Orthodox, in S. Austin, That they
served Ceres and Bacchus, August contra Faust. l. 20. c. 13.
under pretense of the Bread and Wine of the Eucharist: whereunto this holy
Father only replies, That although this be Bread and Wine, yet they do nothing
refer unto those Heathen Idols.

It may be collected from a certain place in Tertullian, that the Pagans did
calumniate Christians, for that they celebrated their Mysteries with Bread
steept in the Blood of a young Child, a calumny occasioned, in all likelihood,
by the abominations of the Gnostics; for I am not certain whether in
Tertullian's time there were of those Pepusians which, as S. Austin does
report, made the Bread of their Eucharist with the Blood of a Child of a year
old, which they drew from the body of the innocent Infant, by pricking it all
over with a Needle, or some such sharp Instrument. Tertul. l. 2. ad Uxor. c. 5.
But see here what Tertullian writes unto his Wife, touching one that had an
unbelieving Husband, The Husband shall not know what you eat in secret before
all other meat; and if he knows it is Bread, will not he conclude that it is that
there is so much stir about? Upon which words the late Mr. Rigaut makes this
observation in his Notes upon Tertullian; When you take the Eucharist, which
you keep in your house, shall he not know of it? Will not he diligently inform
himself what it is you eat in private, before all other meat? and if he knows
it is Bread, will not he presently say in himself, That it is that Bread which
was said to be steept in the Blood of a little Child; which Calumny at that
time much troubled the Christians? I said expressly that it seems it might be
thus gathered from the words of this learned African; for I would not
positively affirm this Induction to be absolutely necessary, especially when I
consider that Tert^llian himself represents unto us the unbelieving Husband
suspecting the Christian Wife to go about to poison him: Id. ibid.
Will he (says he) suffer these things without sighing, and without being in
doubt whether it be Bread or Poison. Therefore I leave the Reader at his
liberty to incline unto which side he please.

But because a Kingdom divided against it self cannot stand, as our Savior
says in the Gospel, and that nothing is more pernicious unto a State than
civil and intestine Wars, there is no question to be made but the Devil thought
considerably to advance his design, when he, as it were, armed and stirred up
the Greek Church against the Latin Church, touching the nature and quality of
the Bread of the Eucharist; the Greeks affirming, That it was Leavened, and the
Latins on the contrary contending for the use of Unleavened Bread. It must be
granted the Greeks were mistaken in affirming that Jesus Christ celebrated the
Eucharist with Leavened Bread; for it is certain that when he did celebrate it,
there was no Leaven at all suffered to be kept amongst the people of Israel.
Thence it is that the holy Scripture calls those days The days of unleavened
Bread: What likelihood was there then that our Savior should use Leavened
Bread in his Sacrament, seeing there was none in all Judea, and that the Jews
were not permitted to have any? But it also must be confessed that the Latins
were not wholly without Blame, to be so self-willed or obstinate in employing
unleavened Bread in their Eucharist, under a pretense that Jesus Christ used it
in his, making a general Rule of a particular Occasion, which ought not in
reason to be insisted upon: For inasmuch as our Savior used unleavened Bread,
it was through the custom of the time, which suffered him not to have any
other, seeing there was no other in the whole Country: But in the main, the
design of the Son of God being to give us, in the Symboles of his Sacrament, a
Figure of the virtue and efficacy of his Body broken, and of his Blood shed for
the nourishment of our Souls, by the relation they have unto the virtue of
these two Elements for the nourishing our Bodies; it is very evident that he
would have the same Bread used to make his Eucharist, and the same Wine, which
were commonly used for the preserving of life; so that if there were any
Christian Nation found, which used Bread without Leven for their ordinary Food,
there is no question to be made, but they may be permitted to use it for the
celebration of the Sacrament, and that they ought to make use of it: But in all
Countries where Leavened Bread is used for the feeding of Men, no other should
be sought after for the Sacrament. If the Bread be the Sacrament of the Body of
Christ, it is not so as leavened or unleavened, but only as it is Bread, fit to
nourish us, and as broken to represent unto us the painful Death of our Savior
upon the Cross; therefore it is that it ought to be used according to the
diversity of the places where one resides. I say that no other Bread should be
used in the Celebration of the Eucharist, but the same Bread which is eaten for
our common Food; and when I say that the Latins are not wholly without blame,
in so scrupuloully observing the use of unleavened Bread, I do not regard it
simply, but in respect of what has been practiced some Ages past: for they
used leavened Bread in their Sacrament a great while, as other Christian
Communions did; the Bread and Wine of the Eucharist being taken from the
Offerings which Christians offered upon the Table in the Church at the usual
times that they assembled unto the Communion, as we shall make appear in the
Fourth Chapter, which will plainly evidence, That these Offerings were of the
very same kind of Bread, as that which was used in the ordinary actions of
Life; and if in process of time, there ensued any alteration, it was not in
respect of the nature or quality of Bread: as if that of common use was
leavened, and that of the Eucharist unleavened, seeing it was but one and the
same sort of Bread; all the difference consisted, first, in that the Bread of
the Eucharist was to be of a round form; secondly, about the seventh Century
they began to prepare it expressly and on purpose for the celebrating of the
Sacrament, as appears by the sixth Canon of the sixteenth Council of Toledo,
assembled Anno 693. which we will cite at large in the following Chapter, by
some words of Cardinal Humbert, T. 4. Bibl. pa^. part. 2. p. 212. l. 3 c. 33.
t. 4. Spicil.
which wrote in the Eleventh Century, and of the ancient customs of the
Monastry of Cluny, written in the same Century, whereto there were many
Ceremonies multiplied for the preparing the Bread of the Sacrament, whereas
there was none at all at first, because it was not made of set purpose, but
with the common Bread; and even when it was begun to be made of purpose, we do
not find there was any great Ceremony used about it: In fine, it was thought
good in process of time, to make upon the Bread the sign of the Cross, unto
which Custom Father Sirmond does apply the third Canon of the second Council of
Tours, Sirmond de Azymo, c.4.
assembled Anno 567. and the first of the fifth Council of Arles, held in the
year 554. although to my seeming, there is nothing very clear in these two
Canons for authorizing this Custom. Also the same Sirmond does confess in the
same place, That the Interpretation which he gives unto the Council of Tours,
which is the plainest of the two alleged by him, is not allowed by all; and
indeed it is not very likely that the Christians of the West which began not to
prepare the Bread of the Sacrament separately from ordinary Bread until about
the seventh or eighth Century, should have marked it before that time with the
sign of the Cross: But so it is for certain, that the use of leavened Bread in
the Eucharist continued still in the Latin Church in the time of Gregory the
first, Vit. Greg. l. 2. c. 41.
as the History of that Woman does import, who admired that this Pope should
call the Body of the Lord a Loaf, which she knew very well she had made with
her own hands. And this custom continued not only in Gregory's time, but also a
good part of the Ninth Century, at which time a great difference having broke
out betwixt the Greek and Latin Churches, we do not find that, amongst sundry
reproaches, and some of them either very light, or it may be unjust, made by
the Greeks against the Latins, that they have in any manner touched the
question of leavened or unleavened Bread; which they would not have omitted, if
the Latins had used unleavened Bread in their Eucharist, as they failed not to
condemn this practice in the Eleventh Century, at which time this contention
was managed with greater heat on both sides: a manifest sign that the Latin
Church did not begin to use unleavened Bread in the celebration of her
Sacrament, but in that space of time which passed betwixt the Ninth and the
Eleventh Century. Sirmond de Azymo.
Father Sirmond has at large justified this truth, and after his manner
confirmed it with such clear and strong reasons, and particularly those
abovementioned, that nothing can be added unto what he has said, having very
solidly refuted what Cardinal Baronius alleged against it, and shown that Hugo
Tuscus and Rupert de Duitz were deceived when they imagined, as well as
Baronius, that the Latin Church had always used unleavened Bread in the
Eucharist. Hist Council. Florent. Sguropuli. Sect. 10. c. 1. p. 278.
In the Council of Florance, held under Pope Eugenius the Fourth, where was
made, by Interest of State and Policy, a seeming accord betwixt the Greek and
Latin Churches, it was concluded, as to what concerned leavened or unleavened
Bread, That each Church should retain its own custom, viz. That the Eastern
Church should make their Eucharist with leavened Bread, and the Western with
unleavened Bread, so that the one should not be obliged to follow the use and
custom of the other. Raban. de instit. Cleric. l. 1. c. 14.
Nevertheless I cannot pass by what Rabanus, Archbishop of Mayence, wrote in
the Ninth Century, That unleavened Bread should be sanctified, and Wine mingled
with Water, to make the Sacrament of the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ, which
he proves by the authority of the Book of Leviticus, and by the Example of
Jesus Christ, which used unleavened Bread in the Institution of his Sacrament:
But it must either be said, That this Opinion was a particular Opinion of his
own, or that he intended only it should be so used the Thursday before Easter,
exactly to imitate the practice of our Savior; or in fine, what I believe to
be more probable, That this custom began to be introduced into the Diocese of
that Prelate; if it were not safer to say, That this long Observation of
unleavened Bread was added unto Rabanus his works, which I dare not affirm, not
being on the place to compare the Printed Copies with the Manuscripts.

CHAP. IV.
Wherein is showed from whence were taken the Bread and Wine of the Eucharist,
and what was the form of the Bread, with the innovations and changes which
ensued thereupon.

IT is not sufficient to show that Bread and Wine have always been the matter
of the Sacrament of the Eucharist amongst Christians, excepting some few
Heretics which had changed it, others that had miserably altered and corrupted
the Celebration; and in fine, others which had wholly rejected it, though upon
several motives and different Principles: Neither is it sufficient to have
hinted at the reproaches which were made against Christians upon account of the
Bread and Wine in this Divine Sacrament, and to have examined the great
controversy which armed (if it may be so said) the Greek Church against the
Latin Church, in the XI. Century, touching the Nature and quality of the Bread
of the Sacrament, to know whether it should be Leavened or Unleavened. To the
end nothing should be wanting unto this consideration, we must endeavor to
find out from whence was taken the Bread and Wine, employed by Christians in
the celebration of their Sacrament. I make no question but they proceeded from
the liberality of Believers, who being inflamed in those happy times, with the
divine fire of Charity, which the Ancients term, The mother and root of all
Riches, the death of Sin, the life of Virtue, and the way which leads unto
Paradise; they cheerfully with their Goods relieved the necessities of the
Church, whereof they were Members, and in the Communion of which the Lord was
pleased by his grace to settle them, to make them partakers of his great
Salvation. S. Luke gives us so clear and full a representation in the second
Chapter of the Acts of the Apostles, that it cannot be thought of without
admiration, and at the same time, without lamenting and deploring the dullness
and coldness of these last times, wherein is too plainly seen the
accomplishment of the words of our Savior who foretold, That iniquity should
abound, and the love of many should wax cold. But at the beginning of Christian
Religion, as this charity was in its greatest beauty, the whole Church offered
unto God upon the Table every Lords day, or on the days when they Assembled to
participate of this Sacrament of their Salvation, and of there Union, their
Oblations for the support of their Spiritual Guides or Ministers, for the
relief of their Poor, and for the other Necessities of the whole Church; and
out of these Offerings there was taken as much Bread and Wine as was needful
for the holy Communion; a custom which if I mistake not, began to be practiced
in the days of the Apostles: for S. Clement one of their Disciples, Clement.
Epist ad Cor. p. 53.
speaks of it as of a matter already established, in that excellent Letter
which he wrote unto the Church of Corinth in the name of that of Rome, whereof
he was one of the Pastors. Those (says he) which make their oblations at the
time appointed, are agreeable and blessed; for obeying the command of God, they
do not sin. Just Mart. Apolog. 1. p. 60.
And Justin Martyr in his first Apology for the Christians (it is commonly
called the second) shows that in his time, the Food which was offered unto
God by Believers with Prayers and Thanksgiving to be eaten, and to relieve the
Poor, were called Oblations; and toward the conclusion of that excellent work
he says, That after Prayers and the kiss of Charity, there was presented unto
the Pastor, Bread, and a Cup mingled with Wine and Water; and that he having
received these things, rendered praise and thanks unto God the Father of all, in
the name of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.

And there also he distinguishes the Prayers of the Minister for the
Consecration of the Eucharist, from the action of the people presenting him the
Bread and Wine, which action he calls Oblation: which he repeats again
afterward. Cypr de operib. and Eleemos.
S. Cyprian also mentions these Oblations, but under the name of Sacrifices,
when he reproacheth a rich and covetous Widow, That she came into the Assembly
(or unto the Sacrament) of the Lord, without an Oblation; and that she took
part of the Sacrifice which the Poor had offered. Hieron. in ^erem. c. 11. and
in Ezech. c. 18. Innoc. ad D^cent. c. 3. Ambros. in. P^al. 118.
In like manner S. Jerome, and Pope Innocent the first, inform us, that in their
time the Deacon did publicly repeat in the Church the names of those which
offered. S. Ambrose Bishop of Milain in the argument upon the 118. Psalm, and
according to the Hebrews the 119. teaches us, that he that would communicate
after having received holy Baptism, was obliged to offer his present or gift at
the Altar: in the Constitutions which commonly go under the Apostles names,
Conslit. Apost. l. 8. s. 10.
Prayers are made for them which offered Sacrifices and the first fruits, to
the end God would render them an hundred fold; and there is to be seen in the
same piece, several rules touching those Oblations; Sozom. hist. Eccles. l. 6.
c. 15. Hist. Eccles. l. 5. c. 17. Aug. Ep. 122.
Sozomen observes in his Church History, that the Emperor Valens came to
Church, offered the gift upon the Table. Theodoret reports the same of the
Emperor Theodosius. And S. Austin speaking of two Christian Women Captives who
deploring their misery, said, amongst other things, that in the place where
they were, They could neither carry their Oblations unto the Altar of God, nor
find any Priest unto whom to present it. Id. Sermon. 215. de temp. if it were his.
And elsewhere recommending unto his flock the use and practice of these
Oblations: Offer (says he) the Oblations which are consecrated at the Altar;
that man that is able to offer and does not, ought to blush for shame, if he
communicates of the offering of another. And because the charity of Christians
decayed by little and little, and their zeal insensibly failing and loosing
daily some of its ardour and strength, these Oblations were not so numerous as
they were wont to be, every one easily dispensing with himself in not offering
at the Table of the Lord as they were accustomed to do; the Councils were
obliged by their Canons and decrees to kindle the fire of this zeal which was
almost extinguished; whereunto tended that of the second Council of Mascon
Assembled Anno 585, Council. Matisc. 2. can 4.
which ordains that all the people should offer every Lords day the Oblation of
Bread and Wine; and that of the Council of Mayence, Anno 813. Which requires
that Christian people should continually be put in mind to make the Oblations;
Con. Mogunt. an. 813. can. 44. Capitul. 858. c. 53. t. 3. Council. Gall.
which is also repeated in the fifth Book of the Capitularies of Charlemain
Chap. 94. It was also one of the instructions which Herard Archbishop of Tours
gave unto his Priests Anno 858. that they should exhort the people to offer
their Oblations to God, and also in many other parts of the writings of the
Ancients. I know not whether that Woman mentioned by John the Deacon in the
life of Gregory the first needed those exhortations of presenting her offering
unto God, or whether she did it of her own free will, and by that ardent zeal
which inspired the primitive Christians with such commendable sentiments of
pity and charity; Vita Gregor. 1. l. 2. c. 41.
but in fine he writes, That a certain Woman did offer unto Gregory as he
celebrated the solemnity of the Mass, the usual Oblations; and that afterward
Gregory said in giving her the Sacrament, The body of our Lord preserve your
Soul; she smiled, in that he called the loaf of Bread which she made her self,
the body of Christ: And forasmuch as for the most part none were admitted unto
the participation of the Eucharist, but those which presented their Oblations,
there is a very great number of Canons in the Councils which prescribe, to whom
the Oblations were to be distributed, and to whom not; but it is not necessary
to allege more proofs of this Ancient custom, seeing the matter admits of no
difficulty.

Nevertheless, this is not all that we intend to observe: every one may easily
judge by what has been hitherto said, that what was offered for the
celebration of the Sacrament, was Bread and Wine; but it may be all the world
do not know, that they were not the only things which were offered at first:
for the charitable Oblations of Believers being appointed not only for the
Celebration of the Sacrament, but also for the support of the Ministers and
Pastors, for relief of the Poor, and generally for the necessity of the
Church; it cannot be questioned as I suppose, that besides the Bread and Wine,
of which was taken what was convenient for the Sacrament, there were also other
things offered; and if we should make any question of it, the directions which
we shall allege, will soon remove this doubt and scruple. In fine, the
Pastors of Christian Churches having in time thought convenient to set apart
the Oblation of Bread and Wine for the Celebration of the Eucharist, from all
the other Oblations made by Believers, they absolutely prohibited that any
thing else should be offered for the celebration of the Sacrament but Bread and
Wine: in pursuance whereof the third Canon, attributed to the Apostles, does
reprove and censure those who offered Honey, Can. 3. Apost. and can. 4.
Milk, Birds, Beasts or Roots upon the Altar; and in the fourth it allows of
offering Oil for the lights, and incense for the times of Oblation. But to
prove what has been said, by a better authority, recourse must be had unto
more Authentic Monuments, and to such as bear not the marks of Forgery, as
these Canons do. The first of these Monuments which presents it self unto our
sight, is the third Council of Carthage, assembled Anno 397. for in one of its
Canons which is the 37. of the Code of the Church of Africa, it makes this
Decree, That in the Sacraments, Council. Carthag. 3. can. 24.
(or as Martin de Braga reads it in his Collection) that in the Sanctuary
nothing else be offered but the body and blood of our Lord, as our Savior has
taught; that is to say, Bread, and Wine mingled with Water: and to distinguish
this Oblation which related unto the Eucharist, from the others offered by the
faithful people, the Council adds, As for the first fruits, whether it be
Honey, or Milk, let them be offered after the usual manner, upon some solemn
day for the mystery of Infants; and if these things, especially the Milk, be
offered at the Altar, yet let them receive their particular blessing, to
distinguish them from the consecration of the Body and Blood of our Lord; and
as to first fruits, that nothing be offered but Grapes and Wheat. Martin Bishop
of Braga in his Collection of Canons, has expressed in these words, that of
the Council of Carthage; There ought nothing to be offered in the Sanctuary,
Collect can. c. 55.
but the Bread and Wine which are blessed in Type or in Figure, of Jesus
Christ. And the fourth Council of Orleans Anno 541. makes this decree, That
none presume to offer in the Oblation of the holy Cup ought else but the fruit
of the Vine mingled with Water; Council. Aurel. 4 c 4.
it is what is repeated in the VIII. Canon of the Synod of Auxerre Anno. 578.
The third Council of Braga in Gallicia assembled the year 675. going about to
reform some Abuses crept into Spain, touching this Oblation, made this Decree,
which Gratian and others ignorantly allege as a fragment of a Letter of Pope
Julius unto the Egyptians. Council. 3. Bracar. c. 1. al. 2.
We have been informed that certain Persons puffed up with a Schismatical
ambition, do offer Milk instead of Wine at the Holy Offertory contrary to the
command of God, and contrary to the institution of the Apostles: and that there
be others which do not offer at the Sacrament of the Cup of our Lord, the Wine
pressed out, but they communicate the people with Grapes which have been
offered: and having alleged against this abuse, the Authority and Example of
Jesus Christ, these Fathers add, That they should therefore forbear offering
Milk at the Sacrifice, because the manifest and evident Example of the
Evangelical truth has appeared, the which permits only that Bread and Wine
should be offered. This was also the method of the VI. Ecumenical, Council
when it transcribes in the 32. Canon, that which has been above alleged of
the Synod of Carthage, and in transcribing they appropriate it unto themselves,
and make it their own. But if any ask the reason of this proceeding of the
Fathers, I mean wherefore they thought fit to distinguish the Oblation of the
Bread and Wine of the Eucharist from all other things, which in all likelihood
were promiscuously offered at the same time with these things, because these
kinds of charitable Oblations had not for their scope the celebration of the
Sacrament only: I answer, that by reason of the silence of Ancient Writers, it
is very difficult to answer distinctly this question; yet I will nevertheless
thereupon offer my conjectures: I say then in the first place, I suppose the
Fathers have thus done in honor and respect unto the Sacrament, imagining that
it was very just and reasonable that this Bread and Wine which by consecration
were to be made the efficacious and Divine Symbols of the Body and blood of
Jesus Christ, should not be offered conjunctly with other things which indeed
were to be applied unto pious uses, but less noble and considerable; and
methinks the Fathers of the Council of Carthage give us sufficient ground to
conclude so from their Decree. Secondly, I think that having made this
distinction, they provided some other way for the maintenance of Churchmen,
and for the relief of the Poor; and so there being nothing else wanting but for
the Sacrament, the holy Fathers judged fit to limit the Oblations only to the
species of Bread and Wine, the two only things necessary for the celebration of
the Divine Mystery. Whereunto possibly it might be added, that by this wise
conduct they would prevent a growing superstition; the multitude being but too
much inclined to abuse the most innocent ceremonies, being always sensual and
carnal, they might imagine that the Oblations made at the Altar, being called
First Fruits, were of the same kind with the first fruits of the Law, whereof
the Oblation sanctified the whole Lump; so that the Fruits of the Earth might
not be lawfully used until the first fruits had been first offered unto God
upon the holy Table, as if, without this Sanctification, the use had been
unlawful: I cannot see but it may be so inferred from the words of Theodoret,
who speaking of the Oblation which the Church makes of the Symbols of the Body
and Blood of the Lord, says, That it sanctifies the whole Lump by the
first fruits. Theod. in Psalm 109.
And what renders this conjecture the more probable, is, what S. Austin
observed, Aug. de Civit. Del, l. 8. c. ult.
That many amongst the Christians carried sundry sorts of meat unto the
Monuments of Martyrs, and after Prayers they carried them to their Houses, ate
of them, and gave Alms, with an opinion that they were sanctified by the merits
of the Martyrs.

But now it is high time to enquire what was the form of the Bread which was
offered for the Celebration of the Eucharist. The Apostle S. Paul says in the
tenth Chapter of the first to the Corinthians, That we are all partakers of one
Bread: This makes me think that they offered upon the holy Table a Loaf,
greater or less, according to the number of Communicants; the unity of this
Loaf representing the unity of the Mystical Body of Christ: and this Loaf was
broken into pieces, to give a share unto each Communicant. The Author of the
Letter unto the Philadelphians, under the name of St. Ignatius, gives us no
leave to doubt of it; for we therein read these words, There is one only Bread
broke unto all: Ign. ad Philad. Id. ad Ephesians.
and in that to the Ephesians, he speaks after this sort, of breaking one only
Loaf. Durandus has well observed it in his Rational, above 300 years ago: They
offered (says he) a great Loaf, which served them all: Durand. Bat. l. 4. c.
53. ^^ 3
It is said the Greeks still observe the same Custom; which is very true, and
also several Christian Communions observe it at this present time; that is,
that they proportion the Bread of the Eucharist unto the number of
Communicants, whether they offer them whole upon the Table of the Church, as it
is supposed to be the practice at this day amongst the Abassins, or whether it
be divided into pieces or parcels before they are offered. Epiph. in Anch.
Greg. 1. Dial. l. 4. c. 55.
These Loaves were of a round form, as S. Epiphanus tells us, and were like
Loaves or Cakes; therefore in the Dialogues of Gregory the first, they are
called Crowns: for he makes mention of a Priest that carried to a certain
person two Crowns of Oblations; therefore a certain Interpreter of the Roman
Order in Cassander has this observation, Apud Cassan. in Liturg. p. 60.
That although it appeared that the form and measure of Oblations did anciently
depend on the Zeal and Devotion of each particular person, yet we may gather
from the works of St. Gregory some marks of this custom. And having produced
what has been above alleged of the Fourth Book of his Dialogues, he adds,
These Crowns were like those which Christians were wont to offer unto God at
that time, for themselves, and for theirs. Then again (says he) it appears of
what bigness and form the Oblations of Sacrificers ought to be, which they are
bound to make of a bandful of Flower, and in form of a Crown, which is to offer
a Loaf of Bread. Such were the Oblations which were found in the Grave of S.
Othmar, in the Eighth Century, when Solomon Bishop of Constance opened it; V^t.
O hmar. apud Sur. An. ^20. 16. Nov.
for it is said, That there were found under his head certain pieces of Bread of
a round form, which are commonly called Oblations. At this time, many would
call them Wafers, but then they were still called Oblations; and there is no
question to be made, but those Loaves were, for their greatness and bigness,
proportioned unto the number of Believers which were to Communicate. This
custom was so well settled, that it is not to be found in the Books of the
Ancients, that there befell any alteration until the end of the Seventh
Century, that some Priests in Spain bethought themselves of raising into a
round form a little Crust of bread, which they had prepared for their own use,
the which they employed in making their Sacrament. But the Sixteenth Council of
Toledo, assembled Anno 693. provided against this disorder and abuse, by the
Sixth Canon which contains this excellent Rule; Council. 16. Tolet c. 6.
It is come unto the knowledge of our Assembly, that in some part of Spain,
certain Priests, either through ignorance, or impudent temerity, do not offer
upon the Lord's Table Loaves of Bread fitted and prepared on purpose, but as
each one is thereto inclined by necessity, or carried by inclination, they
raise hastily and in a round form little Crusts of Bread, intended for their
particular use, and offer them at the Altar, with Water and Wine, for an holy
Oblation: and thereupon having alleged the Texts of three Evangelists, and of
St. Paul, the Council does thus determine; In fine, what we can collect, is,
That taking a whole Loaf, he brake it, and blessed it, and gave it by Parcels
unto each of his Disciples, to show us to do the like for time to come, and
without doubt to signify that each morsel is Bread, but that all Bread is not
a Morsel; whence it is that he says in the following words, pointing at him
that was to betray him, Unto whom I shall give the Sop, he it is; therefore
seeing the words of our Redeemer show that he took a whole Loaf, and not a
morsel, and that he gave it by parcels unto his Disciples, in breaking it after
having blessed it; and also seeing the Apostle St. Paul mentions that he took
Bread and broke it, giving Thanks, etc. is it not to teach us that we should
take a whole Loaf, and set it upon the Lords Table to be Blessed, and not a
piece of Bread, seeing that our Lord did not so? for if man be careful with
affection to employ all the diligence he can possible for preserving his Life,
how much more care and exactness ought he to show for the purity which ought to
be observed in the service of God? therefore desiring to set bounds unto this
temerity or ignorance, we have with a full consent thought fit that the Bread
set upon the Table of the Lord, to be sanctified by the Ministerial
Benediction, should be an entire clean and whole Loaf prepared for that
purpose. Afterward the Fathers do recommend the use of midling Oblations,
intending, as I conjecture, that the quantity of Bread should be proportioned
to the number of Communicants, to the end that what remains, say they, may the
better be kept; or if it be eaten, that it should not incommode the Stomach by
its quantity and weight, and that it may appear that it is intended rather to
feed the Soul than the Body. It may therefore easily be conceived that these
midling Oblations, mentioned by the Council of Toledo, are so called in
reference to the number of Communicants which were to participate of the holy
Sacrament, unto whom the Bread offered for the Communion was to be
proportioned, and that they should not be made too big, fearing lest it should
be thought that more regard was had unto the matter of the Sacrament than unto
the Virtue, and to feeding the Body by digestion, than to strengthening the
Soul by Heavenly and Spiritual Nourishment. Yet, nevertheless this Decree be
very good for the time wherein it was made, and does clearly justify what we
have said touching the nature and form of the Bread which Christians were
accustomed to use in the celebration of the Eucharist, I cannot find that there
happened any other alteration, until at last in the Eleventh Century they began
in some Churches in the West to change the form and quality of the Bread which
had been always used in this Sacrament, using instead of it little Hosts, like
Wafers, round and white, and very thin and slender: Whereof the Interpreter of
the Roman Order, who lived toward the end of the Eleventh Century, of whom we
have already spoke, makes great complaints, Apud Cassand in Li^turg. p. 61.
not enduring this great innovation. The quantity (says he) of a handful is
the least of all measures to make Bread of, which quantity is very justly
appointed unto those which sacrificed for the Ministry of the Altar; and if
there is not to be found in all the Old nor the New Testament a smaller measure
than a handful, and if nothing ought to be done within the Temple of the Lord,
nor out of it, without order and measure, these despicable little Oblations
seem no way unto me fit for Jesus Christ and the Church, because they be
without measure, and without reason, Cassander, who had seen the Book, and who
relates several passages in his Liturgies, adds, This Author, otherwise pious,
prudent, Ibid. p. 62.
and very well versed in the Traditions of the Church, says thereupon several
other things; it appears that he had much ado to suffer, that in his time in
some Churches, the Oblations of Bread, which by an ancient custom of the Church
were offered by the faithful people upon the Lords Table, for the use of the
Sacrifice, were reduced unto the form of a Crown-Piece, and a slight slender
substance, much different from the form of true Bread; therefore it is that by
contempt they call them slender Wafers made in the form of pieces of Money,
which we call Crowns; they attribute unto them an imaginary shadowy lightness,
and affirm they do not deserve the name of Bread, they are so thin; and that by
reason of them, Divine Service, and the Religion of Ecclesiastical Offices,
does receive in all respects very great Damage, and inveighs against them in
sundry other sharp and harsh expressions, all which things I have not thought
fit here to recite. But whatever this learned Interpreter of the Roman Order
could say or do, he could not hinder but that the use of these Wafers was
established in the whole extent of the Latin Church; and that also some other
Christians, who hold no Communion with the Latin Church, have held and retained
it amongst them, although in other things they declare themselves to be
contrary unto her, both in Doctrine and Worship: But yet things rested not
there; for instead of Bread in the Eucharist, offered by Believers, or at
least, Flower, whereof it was made, they obliged the people to offer pieces of
Money, as Honorius of Autun (who lived in the Twelfth or Thirteenth Centuries)
does inform us: his words deserve to be here inserted; Honor. Augustodun. in
gem. anim. c. 66.
It is said, that anciently the Priest received Flower from each house or
Family, which is still practiced by the Greeks, and that they made thereof the
Bread of the Lord, which they offered for the People, and distributed it
amongst them, after it was consecrated; for all those which offered Flower
assisted at Mass, and it was said for them in the Canon; of all those which are
here present which offer unto thee this Sacrifice of praise; but after the
Church was increased in number, and decreased in holiness, it was decreed by
reason of carnal Men, that those that could, should communicate every Lords
day, or every third Sunday, or on great Festival days, or three times a year;
and by reason of the Peoples seldom communicating, it was not needful to make
so great a Loaf, it was ordered, that it should be made in the form of a piece
of Money, and that the People should offer pieces of Money instead of Meal;
which is to this time practiced in the whole Communion of the Church of Rome. I
have enlarged upon this custom, and have made no difficulty to examine it from
first to last; because that the change happened in this custom, seems to me of
greater importance than many imagine; for men are not usually inclined unto the
changes of this Nature, without some weighty reasons; it must needs be that
those which have changed the form, the consistence, and the quality of the
Eucharist, have been thereunto induced for some great design: there be some
which think that the motive (there soon following it such change in the
Doctrine) was nothing else but a design to remove and banish from the mind and
thoughts of Communicants, that that, which was received by the hand at the
Lords Table, and was put into the mouth, was Bread; to which purpose, say they,
these Wafers were very fit, which were presented unto them, or rather were put
into their Mouths, seeing they have neither the form nor Figure of true Bread,
and that never any People or Nation in the World, used this kind of food; and
what does the more confirm them in this belief is, that this change happened not
as they suppose until after the condemnation of Berengar (viz.) toward the
end of the XI. Century. But as these conjectures do not much concern us, so I
leave unto the Reader to determine whether they are to be admitted or not; and
proceed to the examination of the Consecration of the Symbols.

CHAP. V.
Of the Consecration of the Bread and Wine of the Eucharist, and first of the
place where they were Consecrated, and of the matter of Chalices and Patins.

AFTER Jesus Christ had taken the Bread and the Cup, the Evangelists observe
that he gave thanks, that is, that he Blessed and Consecrated them; the Church
that imitated him in the first Action, has also done the like in the second,
although in process of time she has added diverse Ceremonies which were not
therein at first: but because the Consecration contains several things, as the
place where it is done, the matter of Chalices and Patins, the Language, the
Ceremonies, and the Form of Consecrating, that is to say, the Consecrating
Liturgy; these things must be examined in Order, to avoid obscurity and
confusion. In this Chapter I design to treat of the Place of Consecration, and
of the Matter of Chalices. As to the Place, it is to be considered either
generally or particularly: in the former sense it was the place where
Christians assembled together for the worship of Almighty God, wherein they
performed their exercise of Piety and Devotion, and wherein for a long time
they eat altogether: for in the same place wherein they made their Agapae, and
where they took these Love Feasts, they also did celebrate the Sacrament; and
indeed all generally agree, that the Primitive Christians did frequently eat in
common, every one contributing as they were able, unto these Feasts, unto which
the Poor had as free access as the Rich, although they were not able to join
their portion unto their Brethren. S. Paul explains himself clearly, 1 Cor 11.
when he says unto the Believers of Corinth; When you meet together, this is
not to eat the Supper of the Lord; for each one hastes to eat his own Supper,
and one is hungry, and another is drunken, What have you not houses to eat and
to drink in? or do you despise the house of God, and shame them which have not?
It is also granted that the Eucharist was celebrated at the same Times and
Places where the Christians made these meals together; and therefore it is the
Apostle speaks of eating the Supper of the Lord, backing the censure which he
pronounced against the Corinthians by reason of disorders and excesses which
they committed in these Feasts of Charity, with the History of the Institution
of the Sacrament, which he recites at large; an undoubted proof that this
Sacrament was celebrated in the Time, and at the Places where Believers did eat
together. S. Luke makes it appear evidently, when speaking of the first
Christians of the Church of Jerusalem, Acts 2.42.
he says, That they all did persevere in the Doctrine and Communion of the
Apostles, verse 46.
and in breaking Bread, and of Prayers; and afterward, That they daily went
unto the Temple, and breaking Bread from house to house, they eat their Bread
with joy and singleness of heart: and in the same Book he farther observes,
Act. 20.7.
That the first day of the week, that is, the Lords day, the Disciples met
together to break Bread: S. Peter speaks of this Feast when he says unto the
Believers, 2 Pet. 2.13.
to whom he wrote his Second Epistle, That Seducers and Hypocrites were blots
and stains, which took pleasure in unrighteousness, feasting together with you.
S. Jude, whose Epistle is only an abridgment of S. Peter's, speaks so plainly,
that he leaves us not the least cause of doubt, Jude 12.
saying of these same persons, That they are spots in the Christian Feasts of
Charity; it is in S. Judes Language, in the Agapae: this word Agape, which was
very famous in this sense in the Ancient Church, signifying properly in our
Language, Love or Dilection; the practice of these Agapae continued a long
while amongst Christians, and Tertullian who lived toward the end of the II.
Century and the beginning of the III. gives us an agreeable description of it:
Tertul. Apolog. cap. 39.
Our Supper (says he) shows what it is, by the name which it bears; it is
called by a name which signifies Love, amongst the Greeks; we comfort the Poor
by this refreshment, we sit not down to Table till after Prayers, we eat to
suffice hunger, and drink what Decency and Purity will allow; we there take our
Meals, but like Persons which consider that they must again return unto the
Worship and service of God during the whole night; we there discourse with one
another, but so, as knowing that God hears them which discourse; after
washing our hands, and that lights are brought, those that are present are
desired to assist in singing some Hymn unto God, as every one is able to do;
either out of the Holy Scriptures, or out of his own mind: it is observed from
thence how he has drank; and in fine, the Feast is ended with Prayer, as it
was begun. It is true, Tertullian does not speak of the Celebration of the
Sacrament in all this Discourse, but it may suffice that he gives it
sufficiently to be understood, that they attended the Service of God in the
same places where Christians made their Agapae: for it may easily be gathered
that they did there celebrate the Eucharist, as often as they held these
Feasts. To know precisely how often the Feasts of Charity were joined to the
Celebration of the Sacrament, is what is not easily done; it will not be so
hard to show how long they continued these Agapae and common Feasts in the
places where they assembled for the service of God, and where by consequence,
they celebrated the Eucharist. For I find that this was practiced toward the
end of the IV. Century; but because there were great abuses crept into these
Feasts, the Council of Laodicea assembled about the year of our Lord 360. was
constrained to forbid the use of them in the Temples and Churches; You must
forbear (says he) making the Agapae in the Temples, Council. Laodic. cap. 28.
or of setting up Tables, and eating in the house of God. It appears by what
has been said, that for the most part, the place where the Eucharist was
celebrated and consecrated, was the place where Believers met together to serve
God, and where for a long time they made their Feasts of Charity, even at the
same time that they celebrated the Sacrament. It is true those places were very
different according to the diversity of states and conditions wherein the
Church of Christ was; at the first beginning of Christianity, they assembled in
private houses, sometimes in one place, sometimes in another; in private and
obscure places to be sheltered, as well from the rage of the Jews, as the fury
of the Gentiles: therefore it was that they assembled before day, and in the
night time; and they continued so to do for a long time, whilst the Church was
harrassed with Persecutions, and because that sometimes they assembled together
at the Tombs of Martyrs, they also there celebrated the Eucharist; at least the
Pontifical Book observes in the life of Felix the first, toward the end of the
III. Century, that this Pope decreed, That Masses should be celebrated upon the
Sepulchers of Martyrs; which by the Emperor Constantine is called a Sacrifice
of Thanksgiving, in his discourse unto the Assembly of Saints, or to the Church
of God; because in celebrating the Sacrament, thanks were given unto God for
the Victories of Martyrs, as S. Austin speaks, who makes mention of this same
custom in the last Chapter of the VIII. Book De Civit. Dei. Yet it must not be
imagined, but that during these sad and troublesome times, they had some fixed
places destinated for their Exercises; for there were sufficient intermissions,
during the which they built, certain little Houses joining to their
Churchyards, which were places distant from the sight of Men, where by
consequence they assembled with greater safety. The Ecclesiastical History of
Eusebius does testify so much, and in several places mentions those places
where Christians were wont to assemble; observing that before the persecution
of Dioclesian, they had some intermissions under certain Emperors, during
which they atempted some better and larger Buildings, than those which they had
before. But God would humble his Church, which went about to lose amongst
Lilies, the beauty which she had acquired amongst Thorns: he stirred up this
cruel Emperor, who, by the first Edict he made to be published against
Christians the 19. year of his Reign, commanded to be demolished and destroyed
to the ground their Oratories and Churches, which continued until Constantine
embraced the Christian Religion. For then the Church breathing quietly under a
Prince which cherisht her, and gratified her in all that could be desired;
Christians were seen striving who could surpass each other in building
magnificent and beautiful Churches and Temples, which were so many illustrious
Monuments of the Rest and Plenty which they enjoyed under the first Christian
Emperor.

Having considered the Places wherein Christians assembled themselves but by
relation unto the Celebration of the Sacrament, I have not amply treated the
Question of Temples or Churches; and I have so done the rather, because an
occasion of examining it more at large may in some short time offer it self. I
only say that it was in the IV. Century that they began to be consecrated, but
after a manner entirely different from that at this time used amongst the
Latins; and that it was about the same time prohibitions were made of
celebrating the Sacrament only in consecrated places. This general
consideration of the place where Christians assembled, and where they
celebrated their Sacrament, may give us some light to design the particular
place where the Consecration was made: whilst they assembled in private
houses, there is no question to be made, but that they placed in some
convenient place in the Chamber, a Table whereupon they did consecrate the
Bread and Wine of the Eucharist, and where they distributed the holy Communion
unto Believers: the example of Jesus Christ served them instead of a Law, for
he celebrated his Eucharist in the same place where he had eaten the paschal
Lamb, there he consecrated and distributed it, neither the Evangelists nor S.
Paul having said any thing that may make us think otherwise. Moreover, the
Roman Catholics and the Protestants confess, that the Corinthians did
celebrate the Eucharist in the same place where they made their Love Feasts;
and if there be any contests, I do not say betwixt Communion and Communion, but
betwixt particular Doctors in each of both Communions; it is not in regard of
the place, but in respect of the time, to wit, whether the Sacrament was
celebrated before the Agapae, or afterward, which does not relate to the
Subject we now treat of: seeing then that the Corinthians made their Feasts of
Charity, and made altogether these Feasts upon Tables, or at least on things
that served to that purpose, methinks it cannot be at all questioned, but that
they did celebrate and also consecrate their Eucharist upon the same Table,
seeing they did celebrate it in the same place and at the same time where they
did eat together. S. Justin Martyr in the Account of this Sacrament which he
has left us, has not mentioned the place where this Consecration was made:
but to consider the innocence of those times, and the manner of consecrating
the Symbols which he represents unto us, one cannot but conclude, but that it
was upon a Table that they consecrated them, after that the people had
presented them unto the Passover, as he says; the word [Supper] used by S.
Paul, directed them unto this use and practice, as well as the example of Jesus
Christ: Origin. l. 20. c. 2.
For as S. Isidore of Sevill says, It is called a Supper from the Communion of
those which eat; Chrysostom. t. 5. homil. 21.
whereunto also does amount what S. Chrysostom observed before him. That the
Apostle calls the Supper of the Lord that, of which all, that are invited, do
participate in common, and with love. For those expressions do import a Holy
and Divine repast, common unto all the faithful, and which requires a Table to
take it, and to eat of it altogether: when therefore Christians had places
destinated for the exercise of their holy Religion, it is evident there was a
certain place where this Eucharistical Table was placed, there to consecrate
this august Sacrament, and there to distribute it unto all the faithful
Communicants. And when under Constantine the Great, the Temples of Christians
began to be Stately and Magnificent, there was a particular place called the
Sanctuary, where the mystical Table was set, whereupon Consecration was made.
In Minutius Felix, the Infidel demands, Min. Fell. in Octav.
Wherefore Christians have no Altars? and the Christian answers thus, whereby
he confesses they have none; Do you think that we hide what we do adore,
because we have no Temples nor Altars? Orig. contr. Cells. l. 8. p 389. ult.
Edit.
The Philosopher Celsus gives them the same reproach in Origin, saying, that
they would not erect Altars. Which Origin does not gainsay, but says only,
That every one of them has his Soul and thought for an Altar, from whence do
ascend truly and intelligibly, the perfumes of a sweet smell, that is, prayers
from a pure conscience. Christians nevertheless did not omit to celebrate and
participate of the Sacrament; it must needs follow then that it was upon a
Table. Nevertheless it is certain there is nothing more frequent in the
writings of the Fathers than the name of Altar, to design the place of
Consecration and of celebrating the Eucharist; yet I judge that the first place
of Antiquity where the Altar is mentioned, is (if my memory fail me not) in the
Book of Prayer made by Tertullian. Tertul. de Orat. c. ult.
Your Station (says he) will be more solemn, if you stand-upright at the Altar
of God. Since which time the Ancient Doctors have frequently used that manner
of Speech; and as they frequently spoke of the Altar, so they commonly spoke of
the Table: and I verily believe whosoever would collect the expressions of
Table and Altar, which are to be found in the writings of the Ancients, to
denote the place where the Consecration of the Eucharist was made, might
compose a complete Volume of them: so that there being nothing more frequent in
the Monuments of Ecclesiastical Antiquity than the terms of Altar and of Table,
to signify one and the same thing; it were to tire the Readers patience, to
allege proofs of so evident a truth, and which is owned by all: for I do not
find that the Protestants deny unto the Roman Catholics, that the Fathers have
often called the holy Table an Altar; and in truth they cannot without
renouncing all sincerity and modesty: neither do I find that the Roman
Catholics do deny unto the Protestants, but that the same Fathers do often
make mention of the Eucharistical Table, the Divine Table, the Holy Table, and
the Mystical Table; neither can they, without a manifest contradiction against
an infinite number of passages of Antiquity, that are scarcely to be numbered in
the writings of S. Chrysostom, and S. Austin; and if any desire to satisfy
their curiosity thereupon, they may consult of the former, Oration 19. and 20.
to the people of Antioch, that of Anger, of the Baptism of Jesus Christ, that
of the birth of our Savior, and the 17. Homily upon the Epistle to the
Hebrews; and of the other, the 59th. Epistle and first Book and 20. Chap. of
Merits and of the Remission of Sins, the 26. Treatise upon S. John; to which
may be joined S. Athanasius in his Epistle to the Hermits, and in that which he
writ unto the Orthodox; S. Gregory Nazianzen's Orations, 2, 4, 17, 19, 20, 23,
28. and 40. and at the end of his first Poem, and in his Iambicks 11. and 15.
S. Ambrose upon the 9. of S. Luke; Hilary Deacon, upon the 10. and 11. Chapters
of the first to the Corinthians; S. Basil, Ep. 72. Synesius, Epistle 67.
Socrates in his Ecclesiastical History Lib. 1. c. 20, 25. and Sozomen Lib. 6.
c. 29. and Lib. 8. Cap. 7. and many others wherein the same expressions are to
be found. But this is not yet all, these Altars or these Eucharistical Tables
were made of wood, which seems to imply that as yet in the IV. Century, what
the Fathers called Altars, were no other than Tables, whereunto they gave
improperly the name of Altars. S. Optatus Bishop of Milevis who lived in that
Age, does formally say that the Altars were of Wood; for describing the rage of
the Donatists, he reproaches them, That they had broken, torn, and carried them
away; Opta^. l. 6. page 94.
that they had warmed Water with the pieces of these. Altars; that in some
places the great quantity of Wood moved them to break them, and that in other
places the want of Wood made them break them; in other places partly for shame
they caused them to be taken away: and a little afterward, Who of the
Believers (says he) knows not that in celebrating the Mysteries, the Table is
covered with a linen cloth. Aug. li^. 3. contra Cres^. cap. 43.
S. Austin makes mention of a Catholic Bishop who was killed by these
barbarous and inhuman Schismatics with the Wood or pieces of an Altar which
they had broken. S. Athanasius does expressly observe in his Letter unto the
Mourners, Page 847. Ep. 67.
That the Sacramental Table was of Wood: And Synesius seems to teach us the
same thing, when he represents unto us this Table as to be born from one place
to another; also the first Canon which commands Altars of stone only to be
consecrated, is, to the best of my remembrance, the 26. Canon of a private
Council of Epaume, assembled Anno 517. Oration. in Bapt Christ Hom. 20 in 2.
Cor.
although before this Decree Gregory of Nyssen and S. Chrysostom make mention
of Altars of stone. Secondly I observe that the Eucharistical Table was not
made exactly in the form of an Altar, but rather in the form of a Table where
one eats and takes his usual Meals; for men grown to full Age and Stature might
lie along under these Tables, which is impossible to do under an Altar, after
the manner that they are erected. The Historian Socrates writes that Alexander
Bishop of Constantinople did pray with tears, lying along upon his face under
the Holy Table; and Zozomen, S^crea^. l. i. ^. l. 1. c. 25. Sozom (...) l 8. c
7.
that the Eunuch Eutropius, seeking a safe Sanctuary in the Church, lay down
under the Communion Table: it was the same course that Maximinian a Catholic
Bishop of Bagaia took to preserve himself from the Cruelty of the Donatists,
which S. Austin tells us was slain by those cruel persons, which slew him with
the pieces of the Altar, August. l. 3. contra Crose. c. 43.
under which he lay. Moreover, it must be considered that when the Ancients do
speak of an Altar, they do not mean the thing whereon the Eucharist was
celebrated, and which they promiscuously called Table and Altar, they meant
sometimes the place where the Holy Table was set, whereupon the Consecration
was made, and the whole Celebration of the Sacrament. It is in this sense it is
taken in Socrates, Lib. 1. C. 20. and 25* in some places of Gregory Nazianzen,
in the Canons 19. and 44. of the Council of Laodicea, and the 69. of the
Council of Trullo, and elsewhere; and that place was, as has been said, called
the Sanctuary, and was separated from the rest of the Temple by Curtains:
Theodor. hist. Eccl. lib. 1. c. 31. Synes. Ep. 67.
whence it is that Theodoret, speaking of the Temple of Jerusalem, says, That
it was beautified with Curtains or Royal Tapestries; this is in all likelihood
what is intended by Synesius, Bishop of Ptolemais, by the mystical Veil, if he
did not thereby mean the Linen Cloth wherewith in some places they covered the
Bread of the Sacrament. And to the end that the place where the holy Table
stood, should not be accessible and alike common unto all persons, Hist. Eccl.
l. 10. c. 4.
it was compassed in with wooden Rails, as is observed by Eusebius in the
description of the Church of Tire, and as it appears by sundry other passages
of the Ancients. In fine, we learn by the Writings of the Ancients, That there
was but one Altar, or one Table, in each Temple and Church. Eusebius, Bishop of
Caesarea, representing the Beauty and magnificent Building of the Temple of
Tire, which Paulin, Bishop of the place, caused to be built, and descending to
particularise what was most curious and rare in it, he observes amongst other
things, That there was but one sole Altar in it, Id. l. 10. c. 4.
and seeks in the unity of this Altar, and its situation in the middle of the
Church, an image or representation of the Soul of Paulin its Pastor, of whom
he speaks as of its most holy place. Chrysostom. hom. 7. in Romans Id. ^om. 18. 2
Cor. Hier. Ep. 2. Id. in cap. 3. Amos.
St. Chrysostom speaks plainly of the Altar of the Temple where he lived, as
having but one; and elsewhere he takes occasion to exhort his hearers unto
unity, because there is but one Baptism, one only Table, and one Baptismal
Fountain. St. Hierom also speaks of the Altar of the Church in the singular
number, as being but one; and elsewhere he says, That the Church has but one
Altar, which he could not have said, if there had been indeed several in one
Church. This is also what Socrates would intimate, Soerat. hist. l. 5. c. 21.
when observing that the Church of Antioch was contrived after a manner very
different from other Churches, Athan. ad Solit.
he gives this reason, That the Altar therein stood to the West, and not to the
East. St. Athanasius, making mention of the plundering of the eminentest Church
of Alexandria, speaks of the holy Table in the Singular Number, even as of the
Episcopal Chair; whereby he gives it plainly to be understood that there was
but one Table, or one Altar, as there was but one Chair. It is also the
Language of Peter his Successor; Apud Theod. l. 4. c. 20.
for describing the Outrages which the Pagans committed in the Church of
Theonas at Alexandria, he speaks of the Altar of this Church, as being but one.
In like manner the Priests, Libel. prec. p. 64. and 79.
Marcellini and Faustin, representing in their request unto the Emperors, the
ruin of two Temples, one in Spain, the other in Egypt, mention but one Altar
in each Church. Whereunto may be added that the Author of the Letter to the
Philadelphians, under the name of St. Ignatius, writes, Ignat. Ep. ad Philad.
That there is but one Altar in each Church, as there is but one Bishop; and he
speaks of it as of a thing known to every body, and which admits of no
difficulty. Agobard, Archbishop of Lions, writing against Amalarius in the
Ninth Century, speaks of one sole Altar in each Church. If then the Fathers
sometimes speak of Altars in the Plural number, of necessity they must then
intend or mean several Churches, or that it must be an indefinite proposition,
and not to be applied unto any particular place. This custom of one Table or
one Altar in each Church has been retained even until our days amongst the
greatest Christian Communions, excepting the Latins; as amongst the Greeks,
which admit but of one Altar in a Church, Goar in Eucholog. p. 16. Sigism. Baro
de rebus Moscov. Lib. itin. Aeth. c. 11.
as Goar observes in his Notes upon the Euchologie or Ritual of that Nation;
nor amongst the Moscovites, by the relation of Sigismond, in his Memoirs of
Muscovia; and amongst the Abassins, which are in Prester John's Country, as
appears by the relation of Francis Alvarez, an Eyewitness. The Pontifical
Book, which is improperly attributed unto Pope Damasus, never speaks but of one
Altar in the Singular, in all the Lives of Popes, until Adrian the First, who
lived toward the end of the Eighth Age: for in his life there is mention made
of the great Altar, to distinguish it from other Altars which might be in the
same Church, which is also observed in the Lives of several Popes who held the
Chair after Adrian; whereas before there was mention made but of one Altar,
which shows that by the Thirteen Altars, which, by the relation of Gregory
the First, had been erected by Palladius, Bishop of Xaintus, must not be
understood Altars or Sacramental Tables, properly so called, but Tombs of
Martyrs, which by corruption of Speech were called Altars or Tables, as appears
by Optatus, Bishop of Milevis in Numidia, as is confessed by Monsieur de
Laubespine, late Bishop of Orleans, in his Notes upon this Author. For if
Optatus made no scruple so to call the Tombs of the false Martyrs of the
Donatists, whereof he treats in that place; much less would he have feared, if
occasion had presented, to attribute this name unto those of Catholic Martyrs,
because the Sacrament was there from time to time celebrated: But in fine,
since Adrian the First, that is to say, since the eighth Century, and probably
since the end of the seventh, Capit. Dom. Car. M. c. 6. 1.2. Coneil. Gal. and
Capit. Car. M. etc. append. 1. ad l. 4. c. 7.
they began in such a manner to multiply Altars in Churches, that the Emperor
Charlemain, Contemporary with Pope Adrian, was forced to prohibit, in his
Capitularies, the too great number of Altars. But to the end nothing may be
wanting unto the Question of Altars, the Reader may take notice, if he please,
That movable Altars were not introduced amongst Christians, but since the
eleventh Century; and also it would be very difficult precisely to determine in
what Age, since the eleventh Century, they began to be used. That which some
allege of Ives of Chartres, who died in the twelfth Century, not regarding, as
I suppose, the use of these kinds of Altars, whatever may be, Hist. Relig c. 20.
it sufficiently appears that they were unknown in the fifth Century, because
Theodoret made use of the hands of his Deacons, Philost. l. 2. c. 14.
instead of an Altar, to celebrate the Sacrament in the Cell of Maris; and
before him, the Martyr Lucian made use of his Breast. Niceph. Caldist. l. 8. c.
31.


It may be inferred from what has been said, That the ancient Christians did
not believe, as the Latins do at this time, That an Altar was absolutely
necessary for the Celebration of the Sacrament, much less a consecrated Altar.
In fine, the three first Ages did not practice the consecrating of Altars,
which the Latins at this time believe so necessary, that without it the
Celebration there performed is unlawful; but it was otherwise at the beginning*
Add. 9. Nove^b. lect. 4.
Therefore there is to be read in the Roman Breviary, That it is said that
Silvester ( who was Pope in the Year 314) was the first that instituted the
Ceremonies observed by the Roman Church in the consecrating of Churches and
Altars. And I do not find that there is any mention of this Consecration made
in the Writers of the fourth and fifth Ages; Orat. in Chr. bapt. t. 3.
for that whereof mention is made by Gregory of Nyssen, does not import any
Ceremony, nor any form of Consecration, but only a bare application unto a
Religious use, which draws a Blessing of God by the Celebration of the
Sacrament; whereunto amounts also what is said by St. Chrysostom in some of his
Homilies, Hom 20. in 2 Cor.
That the Altar is by nature a Stone, but it becomes holy when it receives the
Body of Jesus Christ. The first unsuspected place of Antiquity, wherein there
is mention made of the consecration of Altars, is the Council of Agde, in the
year 506. for it prescribes this Rule, ^^ath. Conc. ^ 14.
It has seemed good unto the Council, that the Altars should be consecrated,
not only by the Unction of Chrisme, but also by the Priestly Benediction. ^. 26.
The Council of Epaum^, Anno 517. only speaks of the Unction of Chrisme. In
the ninth Century they added Water unto the Chrisme, and the Odor of Incense,
as we read in Raba^us, de instit. Cler. l. 2. c. 45. de reb. Eccl. c. 9.
and in Walafridus Strabo, who refer unto the Council of Agde the first
Institution of the Consecration and Benediction of Altars. But men rested not
there; they augmented by degrees the ceremonies of this Consecration, until at
length they had reduced them unto the form they are now in amongst the Latins,
and which may be seen represented at large in the second part of the Roman
Pontifical, in the Title of consecrating of Churches. Unto this mysterious
Consecration the Latins add the consecrating of three Table-cloths, of several
fashions, wherewith they cover their Altars, and of a kind of a Vail of several
colors, according to the quality of the day, wherewith they are wont to cover
it, as may be read in the Roman Missal: On Holy-Thursday they keep it uncovered
until Saturday. As for the ancient Christians, they contented themselves in
spreading upon their Communion Table, at the time of celebrating the Sacrament,
a clean Table-cloth, for decency sake, which is also practiced by the
Protestants.

And as there was but one Altar, or one mystical Table in each Church, so also
the Eucharist was celebrated but once a day, which also is the present practice
in those three spacious Christian Communions above mentioned, as the same
Authors testify, whom we have alleged as Witnesses: Id. cap 84.
Alvarez observing further that the Abassins found fault with the Mass of the
Romanists, for not administering the Communion unto all that assisted.
Cassander, Cassand. in liturg. c. 26.
in his Liturgies, has observed, That in the Mass or Eucharist of the
Armenians, all did communicate; which does show, if I mistake not, that this
custom was very ancient, seeing this People, who are fallen into ignorance, and
multiply the number of Ceremonies, rather than lessen them, have been careful
faithfully to preserve it. And we find by a Letter of Leo the First, Bishop of
Rome, writing unto Dioscorus, Bishop of Alexandria, That in his time, viz. in
the fifth Century, the Sacrament was not celebrated but once a day in each
Church, if it were not that the numbers of people were so great, that the
Church could not contain them, which happened upon great Festivals; in that
case he advises Dioscorus to do at Alexandria as they did at Foam, that is, to
re-iterate the Celebration of the Sacrament as often as the Church should be
filled with a new Assembly: Leo. 1. Ep. 81. c. 2.
When any great Festival (says he) makes the Assembly more numerous, and that
there meets together so great a number of Believers, that one Church cannot
contain them, there is no question to be made, but the Oblation of the
Sacrifice must be renewed, fearing lest that if only the former should be
admitted unto this Worship, the rest should seem to be excluded: whereas it is
a thing very just and reasonable to offer another Sacrifice at each time that
the Church is filled with the presence of a new Assembly; for if in keeping the
custom of one only Mass, those only which came first should be admitted to
offer the Sacrifice, of necessity, some part of the people must be hindered
from their Devotion. Behold then the custom and practice of celebrating the
Eucharist but once a day in each Church, in the fifth Century, both in East and
West, at Rome and at Alexandria, excepting only such occasions as have been
mentioned, wherein it was permitted, and could scarce be avoided, to do
otherwise than contrary to the usual custom; it is said, That Pope Deodat gave
first this permission, because it is reported in his life in the Pontifical
Book, Apud Cassan. in Liturg. c. 35.
That he instituted a second Mass amongst the Clergy; upon which words,
Verbetanus has this observation, Because that at that time there was but one
Mass sung in the Church, as the Greeks do, which the ancients thought best for
edification. I think both the unity of one Altar, and the celebration of one
Sacrament in one Church upon one day, may be gathered from the Lausiack History
of Palladius, who wrote in the fifth Century; for he makes mention of a great
Church, which was in the Mount of Nitria, where there were eight Priests to
conduct it, Pallad. Hist. Lausiac. c. 6.
and observes, That whilst the chiefest of them lived, neither of the others
could consecrate, nor censure, Apud Cassian. in Litur. c. 35.
nor preach. St. Francis, writing unto the Priests of his Order, conjures them,
Not to celebrate Mass, but once a day in the places they shall dwell in, after
the example of the Church of Rome; and if there be several Priests in the same
place, that but one of them do celebrate, Goar in Euch. p. ^6.
and the rest content themselves in hearing him. Goar, upon the Euchologie of
the Greeks, says, That for this cause there was not formerly, at Rome, nor at
Paris, nor in all the East, but one Priest to each Church, but that Churches
were frequent, that the people might satisfy the motions of their Piety and
Devotion; Apud Cassan. uo^ supra.
and Cochleus, writing against Musculus, a Protestant, confesses, That within
400 years, Altars have exceedingly multiplied.

But having sought for the place of consecrating the Eucharist, let us consider
the matter of Chalices and Patins, the two sorts of vessels used both for the
Consecration and distribution; as for the Bread of the Sacrament it is put upon
a Dish or Plate on a Linencloth, and because this Bread after Consecration is
called the Body of Jesus Christ, this linen on which it is laid, is called the
cloth of the Body; there be some which call it Palla, either for that it covers
the sacred mystery, or because it serves for a Vesture or Covering unto the
Typical Body of Jesus Christ upon the Holy Table. Optar. l 6. p. 98.
Optatus reproacheth the Donatists that they had taken away these Body Clothes,
and these Linens, and that they had washed them as if they had been dirty; and
Victor, Vict. Vitens. de persec. Afric. l. 1.
not of Vtica, as he is commonly called, but of Vita, complains that Proculus,
Executioner of the cruelties of Gensericus King of the Vandales, against
Catholics, That he had made Shirts and Drawers of them; this Body-cloth was to
be of very fine Linen, and not of Silk, Raban de instit. cleric. l. 1. c. 33.
nor of Purple, nor of any colored stuff, as Rabanus Archbishop of Mayence
reports, which refers this ordinance unto Pope Silvester, others refer it unto
Pope Eusebius. Venerable Bede, Beda in c. 15. Marc.
speaking of the action of Joseph of Arimathea, who having obtained of Pilate
the Body of Christ, carried him in a sheet, and makes this reflection, Thence
is taken the custom of the Church of celebrating the Sacrifice of the Altar,
not upon Silk or colored stuff, but upon Linen, as the Body of our Lord was
buried in a clean Linen Sheet. Which he attributes unto Silvester as well as
Rabanus, Isid. Pelus. l. 1. Ep. 123.
from whence S. Isidore of Damieta says, This clean Linen which is spead at
the Celebration of the Divine gifts is the Ministry of Joseph of Arimathea; for
as he buried the Body of Jesus, having wrapped it in a Sheet, so also we
consecrate the Shewbread upon a Linen, or Table-Cloth. Some write that in
Italy and in Germany they use two Corporals of fine Linen, whereas in France
there was but one. Radulph. Tungrens. de can. observant. propos. ult.
But as for Chalices they were not at all times nor in all places of one and
the same matter: whilst the Church was in an afflicted and low condition, it
is very probable they used Chalices made of ordinary matter, and small price;
but when riches flowed in upon it in Constantine's time, there is no question
but metal of greater value was chosen to make their Chalices; but of greater
and less price, according to the substance and stock of each Church: but at
first in sundry places they were made of Glass or of Wood, as will appear; and
to speak the truth, if at Rome in the beginning of the III. Century they used
Glass Chalices, it is very probable they did so in many other places. Now that
they used such at Rome at that time may be gathered from some passages of
Tertullian; for answering an argument which the Catholics drew from a picture
they had in their Chalices, and which represented the good Shepherd carrying the
lost Sheep upon his back; Put in practice (says he,) the very Pictures of your
Chalices; Tertul. de pudic. c. 7. Ibid. c. 10
and to mark that these Chalices were Glass, he opposes unto this Painting,
The writing of the Shepherd which cannot be blotted out. Exuperius Bishop of
Toulouse toward the end of the IV. Century and at the beginning of the V. made
use of no other Chalices but of Glass. S. Jerome who presses him very much,
Hieron. ep. 4. extr.
says amongst other things of him, That nothing is richer than him, which
carries the Body of our Lord in a little wicker Basket, and his blood in a
Glass. In the VI. Century, Cyprian, not the famous Bishop of Carthage which was
dead three hundred years before, but another Cyprian a French Man, Vi^ (...)
Arel.
Author of the life of Caesarius Bishop of Arles who died toward the middle of
the VI. Century, observing as an action worthy of commendation, that he
redeemed a great many Slaves with the Gold and Silver of the Church, saying
that a great many praised him for so doing but would not follow his example, he
adds, The blood of Christ is it not in a Glass? And although this Author says
there were many who would not imitate him in an Action which they could not but
commend; yet I cannot be persuaded, but that there were to be found other good
Bishops, who considering, as Exuperius of Toulouse, and S. Caesarius of Arles,
that the riches of the Church are the Patrimony of the Poor, did in suffering
and calamitous times, employ all the Gold and Silver of their Churches, either
to sustain their Poor or redeem Captives, and that they had rather make use of
Chalices of Glass, as those did, than to be wanting in this necessary duty of
Christian charity. Greg. 1. dialog. l. 1. c. 7.
In the Dialogues of Gregory the first, there is mention of one Donatus who by
his Prayers mended a Glass Chalice which had been broke; but let us hear what
Cardinal Baronius says upon this Subject: Baron. Martyr Romans 7. Agust.
The Chalices of Glass and Plates or Patins of Glass were anciently made use of
in Livine Service, there is mention made of Plates of Glass in the Pontifical
in the life of Pope Zephyrin, of a Glass Chalice in the 4th. Epistle of S.
Jerome to Rusticus, speaking of S. Exuperius Bishop of Toulouse, and also our
French Cyprian in the life of Caesarius Bishop of Arles who flourished in the
time of Theodorick King of Italy. Is not (says he) the Blood of Christ kept in
a Glass: for it seems that Glass Chalices have been used ever since the
Apostles days: whence it is that Mark the Heretic who lived presently after
their days, to imitate the Catholic Church, using a Glass Chalice in his
divine Service betwitched the people with certain impostures, and by Sorcery
making the Wine which looked white in the Glass, to turn Red by his slights, so
that the Wine seemed to be changed into Blood; but in the Council of Rheems
held under Charles the great, Glass Chalices were forbidden and that very
reasonably, because of the danger there was in that brittle stuff; you have
thereupon the Canon, ut Calix de Consecrat. distinct. 1. as also the Chalices
of wood are forbidden in the Canon, Vasa in quibus, in the same distinction.
Binius relates almost the very same thing upon the life of Pope Zephyrin. What
Baronius says of the prohibiting of Glass Chalices in the Reign of Charlemain,
T. 1. Council. p. 96.
in one of the Councils of Rheems, he takes from the Canonist Gratian, whose
authority is not always to be allowed, no more than the other Collectors of
Canons; for as Monsieur de Launoy a Doctor of Sorbon has judiciously observed
in his Treatise of the times, anciently appointed for administering holy
Baptism, Cap. 9. p. 184.
The Ancient Collectors do change and cut off from the Canons of Councils what
things they suppose either to be abolished and useless, or different from the
customs of their times. They have (says he) fitted the Ancient Canons to the
discipline of their own times. Ibid.
And Cardinal Bellarmine in his Treatise of Ecclesiastical Writers, In Great. ad
an. 1145.
says in particular of Gratian, That he had not well chosen the Authors from
whence he had gathered his Decrees; and he instances in some examples which he
pretends to be so many mistakes in the Author, and indeed to return to the
prohibition of Glass Chalicesby a Council of Rheems, we find no such matter, if
my memory fail not, in any of the Councils held under Charlemain, although we
have a great number of them: as for Wooden Chalices, we have at this time the
Canon whence Gratian took it, it is the 18. of the council of Trybur assembled
Anno 895. Tom. 7. Council. p. 151.
That for the future no Priest dare presume in any wise to consecrate in
Chalices of Wood, the Sacrament of the Body and Blood of our Lord. But the
Council does observe in the same Canon that Boniface Bishop of Mayence, being
asked if it were lawful to consecrate the Sacraments in Vessels of Wood, he
made this answer, Heretofore Golden Priests made use of Wooden Chalices, and
now on the contrary, Wooden Priests do use Golden Chalices. But it is plainly
evident by what has been said, that Chalices of Glass and of Wood were used in
the Church for the space of eight or nine hundred years; and what is said of
Chalices may also be said of Plates or Patins, whereupon we have said was put
the Bread of the Sacrament; they were at least broad round Vessels a little
hollow, which cannot be resembled to any thing better than Dishes, which were
greater or less according to the number of Communicants. The Latin Church does
not suffer Consecration to be made in any thing but a Gold or Silver Chalice,
or at least of Pewter, and a Council of Albi assembled Anno. 1254 commanded all
Churches whose Rents amounted yearly unto fifteen livres French Money, to have
a Silver Chalice. T. 2. Sp^cil. c. 12. p. 638.
I deny not but in the four first Ages of Christianity, several Churches had
Silver Chalices, and it may be also of Gold, such as whereof in all likelihood
those were, spoken of by Optatus Bishop of Milevis, Optat. l. 6. p. 94.
when he reproacheth the Donatists, that they broke them, and gathering up the
pieces, they melted them into lumps, and sold it; but this makes nothing
against the simplicity of others, who contented themselves with Glass Chalices:
for instance that of Toulouse in the time of S. Exuperius, no body ever
condemning this simplicity, there were several that much commended it, the
Ancient Christians never having been blamed for consecrating and administering
the Sacrament in Glass Chalices.

CHAP. VI.
Of the Language used at Consecration, and wherein Service was generally
performed.

HAving considered the place of Consecration, and the Vessels used about this
Ceremony, the order which we proposed to follow, requires that in this Chapter
we treat of the Language which was used in the Celebration of the Sacrament,
and generally in the whole Divine Service. When Jesus Christ consecrated and
blessed the Bread and Wine, it was in the Language of the Country which he
spoke always during his living in the Flesh, and during the course of his
Ministry; otherwise he could not have been understood of the People, whom he
intended to instruct and bring unto his Knowledge and Communion. And this
Language was not pure Hebrew after the return of the Babylonish Captivity, as
it was before, at the time of our Saviors coming into the World, but was a
corrupt Hebrew, and altered and mixed with Chaldee, and Syriack; especially the
latter: so that the Jewish Language at that time was composed as much of
Syriack as of the Hebrew. It was then in that Language which was composed of
two Languages, that our Savior consecrated and celebrated his Eucharist,
having even retained some expressions which the Father of the Family was wont
to use amongst the Jews at the time of celebrating the Passover. The Apostles
did religiously follow the example of their Master who bestowed not upon them
the gift of Tongues merely for converting the World, but also that they might
preach the Gospel, administer the Sacraments, and in a word exercise all the
other functions of their Divine and glorious Ministry, in the Language of each
Nation and People where his Providence should send them; this is so evident a
truth, that there is no Christian never so little reasonable but will believe
it; but if any the least doubt rests upon him in this matter, I doubt not but
he will overcome it easily, if he takes the pains to read what the Apostle has
left written of this Doctrine in the 14. Chap. of the 1. Epistle to the
Corinthians, as all the ancient Commentators, Greek and Latin, St. Chrysostom,
Theodoret, the Greek chain of Oecumenius, Theophylact, Hilary a Deacon of Rome,
Pelagius, Primasius, Sedulius; Secondly the Translation of the Holy Bible into
all Languages shows very clearly, that every People and Nation desired to serve
God in their own Language; S. Chrysostom in his Homilies upon S. John; Homil.
2. in Joan. Graec.
The Syrians (says he) the Egyptians, the Indians, the Persians, the
Ethiopians, and a great number of other Nations have translated into their
Language, the Doctrines by him introduced, he speaks of S. John, and those
Barbarous Men have begun to Philosophise: Hom. 3.
and upon the 2 Epistle of the Thessalonians, These things have been spoken in
Hebrew, in Latin, or in any other Tongue? are they not declared in Greek,
because it was the Vulgar Tongue; Theodoret upon the 14 Chap. In. cap 14. 1 ad
Cor.
of the 1 to the Corinthians says, It has been given to Preachers by reason
of the Diversities of men's Languages, that those sent unto the Indians should
carry unto them the predication of the word in their own Language, and also
conversing with Persians, the Seythians, the Romans, the Egyptians, they should
preach unto them in their own Language the Evangelical Doctrine; it would have
been in vain for those who preached at Corinth to have used the Language of the
Scythians, Persians, or Egyptians, because the Corinthians could not have
understood them. And in his Therapeutick or manner of healing the affections of
the Greeks; Sermon. 5. t. 4. p. 555.
We do plainly and evidently show unto you the force and vigor of the
Prophetical and Evangelical Doctrine; for all parts of the World under the Sun
are filled with the fame of it, See Cass^od. on Psalm 44.
and the Hebrew Tongue was not only translated into Greek, but also into that
of the Romans, the Egyptians, the Persians, the Indians, Armenians, Scythians,
and Sarmatians; and in a word, into all Languages used throughout the world
unto this day. And a great while before Chrysostom and Theodoret, Cap. 17.
Eusebius said in his Oration on the praise of Constantine, That the authority
of the Books of the holy Scriptures was so great, that having been translated
throughout the World, into the Languages of all Nations, as well Greeks as
Barbarians, all Nations, learned them diligently, and believed that what they
contained, were Divine Oracles. And in his Evangelical Demonstration, Lib. 3.
The Gospel (says he,) was in a very short space preached throughout the whole
world, and the Barbarians and the Greeks received in their Characters or
Letters, and in their own Languages, the things which are written of Jesus
Christ. According whereunto we find by the Acts of the Martyr Procopius, which
Monsieur de Valois has inserted in his Notes upon Eusebius his Ecclesiastical
History, that they were so accustomed to read the Holy Scriptures in the
Christian Assemblies in the Language of the Country, that if they read them in
another Tongue, they presently expounded them by an Interpreter in the Language
understood by the People; and the Martyr Procopius performed this office of
Interpreter at Scythopolis in Palestine, interpreting the holy Scriptures into
the Language of the Country, which was Syriack, if they were read in Greek,
which the people did not understand. And S. Jerome, does he not say in his
Preface to the four Evangelists, Ad Damas. praefat. 122. t. 3 p. 698.
That the Holy Scriptures were translated into several Languages. August^in. de
doctr. Christ. l. 2. c 5.
S. Austin; From thence it is, that the holy Scriptures which are a remedy of
so many troubles in men's minds, having begun to be published in a Language
which might be so conveniently spread over the face of the Earth, were
manifested unto all Nations for their Salvation, being spread far and wide, by
means of the diverse Tongues of Interpreters. As in the Gothic, by Vlphilas
Bishop of the Goths under the Emperor Constance, as Socrates does testify in
his Ecclesiastical History; the Tripartite History; Isidore of Sevil in his
History of the Goths, and sundry others: whereunto probably Salvian had regard
when he said in his fifth Book of Gods Providence, That although those amongst
barbarous Nations, seem in their Books, to have the holy Scriptures less
altered and less strange, yet they have them not but corrupted, by the
Tradition of their Ancient Masters. In the Armenian Tongue by Chrysostom at the
beginning of the fifth Century, as many do believe; and we do find Theodoret to
affirm, that in his time the Armenians had a Translation of the Holy Scriptures
in their Language; now Theodoret flourished about 40 years after the death of
the great Chrysostom. Into that of the Dalmatians by S. Jerome who dyed in the
year of our Lord 420. In the Arabic Tongue Anno. 717. by John Archbishop of
Sevil in Spain. In Saxon by King Alfred who reigned in England in the VIII.
Century, as is affirmed by those who have transferred unto us Bede's
Ecclesiastical History in Anglo-Saxon, and in Latin, in the Preface to the
Reader; and Bid himself translated the Gospel of S. John into the vulgar
Tongue, as is to be seen in his life, partly written by himself, and partly by
one of his Disciples. Into the Slavonian Tongue by Methodius in the IX.
Century. And I do not think that ever any body amongst the Christians ever
thought of condemning this wise conduct of the Church until the year 1228 that
a certain Council of Toulouse, Tom. 2. Spicil. c. 4. p. ^ 24.
assembled against the Albigenses and Waldenses made this Decree; We also
forbid to give unto the Lay People permission to have the Books of the Old and
of the New Testament, except that probably some for devotion sake desire to
have the Psalter or the Breviary for the Divine Service, or the blessed Virgins
Prayer Book, neither are they to have these Books in the Vulgar Tongue. But
this Decree did not hinder but that James de Voragine Translated the Bible into
Italian about the year 1290. Nicholas Orem into French under Charles the fifth
called the wise Son of King John, and Father of Charles the sixth, and at the
beginning of the XV. Century an anonymous Author made an Apology in England for
the Translation of the Holy Scriptures into the Language of the Country; D^
Christian. Eccl. succes. p. 81.
as is related by Usher Archbishop of Armagh and Primate of Ireland. At this
time (says that Author) our Bishops burn the Law of God, because it has been
translated into our Mother Tongue. But in fine, the Council of Trent, Session
the fourth Anno. 1546. does sufficiently give to understand that they tacitly
condemn all the Translations of the Holy Scriptures in the Vulgar Languages,
allowing only the Latin Translation. It is true, say the Protestants, that
whilst the use of the Latin Tongue subsisted in the West, and that that
Language was common and frequent unto the Nations of the Western Empire, there
were a great many Latin Translations of the Bible; but when the use of that
Language ceased, it was necessary to translate it into other Languages for the
edification of the people, and Nations which there inhabited, as it had been
translated elsewhere into Greek, and Syriack, and generally into all Languages
used by all the Nations in the World. Now it is very difficult, say they, to
imagine, that care could be taken to make all these Versions in the Vulgar
Tongues, if at the same time the people had been obliged to serve God in an
unknown Tongue. Besides, may a man say, I would desire to know wherefore the
Holy Fathers have so frequently and carefully recommended the reading of the
Scriptures unto the people, if it had not been translated into their Language?
It is credible, yea certain, that the exhortations which are to be found in the
works of S. Jerome and S. Chrysostom, only for injoining the reading of them,
would make a just Volume; and what need so many exhortations to read it, but
only that by so doing, People might learn to serve God after a right manner?

But we must make a stricter inquiry into the Celebration of the Eucharist, and
the whole Divine Service, to know more particularly if it were performed, as
has been said, in a Language understood by the People: All men will agree, if
I mistake not, that Prayers, Invocation, and giving praises unto God, are the
essential parts of the Worship and Service of God; now Origin in his excellent
work against Celsus, does formally declare, that every Nation did praise and
pray unto God in their own Language. Lib. 8. ult. Edit. p. 402.
The Christians (says he, answering unto an objection of Celsus) even in their
Prayers, do not make use of the names attributed unto God in the Holy
Scriptures, but the Greeks make use of Greek words, the Romans of Roman words,
each one praying unto God in their own Language, and celebrate his praise as
they are able; and the glory of all Languages does hearken unto those which
pray unto him in what Language soever it be, as easily understanding those
which pray so differently unto him, as if it were, as may be said, all one
voice. For the Great God is not like those which have but one Language
committed unto them, whether Greek or Barbarian, and are ignorant of all
others, and care not for those which speak in other Languages. Thence also is
it that S. Gaudentius Bishop of Bress exhorts his Neophytes, Tract. 4. t. 2.
Bibl. Pat. p. 20. Regul. brevior. q. ^78. t. 2.
to attend diligently with him unto Prayer; S. Basil making this demand to
himself, How the Spirit of any one should pray, and that his understanding
should receive no fruit, he thus answers; That is said of those which made
Prayers in an unknown Tongue with regard to those which heard them: for the
Apostle says, if I pray in an unknown Tongue, I pray in the Spirit, or by the
Spirit, but my understanding profits not; for when the words of Prayer are
not known by those which are present, then the understanding of him which
prays, is without fruit, no body being the better for it: but when those
which are present understand a prayer which may be profitable for the hearers,
then he who prays has the benefit of the progress of those which profit by
the prayer; it is the same at all times when the word of God is proposed, for
it is written, that it might be profitable to the edifying of Faith. De
Catechis. rudib. c. 9. t. 4.
S. Austin, Care must be taken to warn those which come from Schools, that
being clothed with Christian humility, they should learn not to despise those
which endeavor rather to shun evil actions than words, etc. by so doing they
will not jeer, if by chance they perceive that some Bishops or Ministers of the
Church use some Barbarisms or Soloecisms in praying to God, or that they be not
aware, or understand not the words they pronounce, and that they deliver
confusedly; not but that these things should be amended, to the end the people
might say Amen, unto what they plainly understand. But because it may be
tolerated in those which have learned, that blessings are given by Prayers in
the Church, as one does bless in the public place with the sound of the voice.
De divin. offic. l. 1. c. 10.
Isidore of Sevil, The reading of the word of God, is of no small profit unto
those which hearken unto it; therefore when one sings, all must sing; and when
one prays, all must pray; when one reads, let all hearken. It is the same thing
in keeping silence, for although some one supply at reading, let him be cuntent
to worship God; and having made the sign of the Cross, let him hearken
attentively; there is a time to pray when all do pray, to pray in private there
is also a time; do not lose the reading under pretext of prayer, because one
cannot always have the opportunity of reading, whereas one may pray when they
will; therefore the Deacon with a loud voice commands silence, to the end that
whether we sing or read, unity may be kept by all, and that what is preached
unto all, may equally be heard by all. Lib. 3. c. 9.
Amalarius treating of Divine offices, The prayer of the Priest is called by
the one and the other name, that is by the name of Blessing, and by the name of
Prayer; the Apostle says of blessing, if thou bless in the spirit, how shall
the ignorant know to say Amen, seeing he knows not what thou say? S.
Ambrose calls this Benediction a prayer, saying, for the ignorant hearing what
he understands not, knows not the scope of the prayer, and says not, Amen,
that is, so be it, to the end the benediction should be confirmed; for the
confirmation of the prayer is completed by those which say Amen. Cassander in
his Liturgies, cites these words out of an ancient Manuscript of the Roman
order, Cap. 36.
of the Ordination of Readers; The benediction of Readers: O Lord Holy Father,
O eternal omnipotent God, be pleased to bless these thy servants. N.N. to
perform the office of Readers, to the end that being diligent in reading, they
may be fit to declare the word of Life, and to instruct the people in things to
be understood by the distinction of the Spirit and of the Voice. And the Roman
Pontifical, Imprinted at Venice, Anno 1582. speaking of the Ordination of
Readers, Pontif. Romans p. 8.
The Reader must read what he does preach, and that he sing the Lessons, etc.
Study therefore to pronounce distinctly and clearly, without Lying, or any
fraud, the Words of God, that is to say, the holy Lessons for the Instruction
and Edification of Believers, to the end that the verity of Divine Lessons may
not be corrupted, through your negligence, to the prejudice of those who hear
and believe with the heart what you read with the mouth, to the end you may
teach your Hearers, both by your word and example.

Now let us come to the Celebration of the Eucharist, to see also if it was not
done in a Language understood by the Communicants. In the first place, all the
ancient Liturgies are full of the Answers of the people, who could not have
answered if they had not understood what the Priest said in officiating, and in
celebrating; and the thing is so evident, that there is no need to produce many
Proofs of it, there is no need but to look into the Liturgies, which we have, to
see if the people do not therein often speak: for instance, St. Cyprian informs
us, and all the Liturgies after him, That the people were prepared unto the
Communion by this warning, Lift up your hearts; and the people answered, We
lift them up unto thee, O Lord. From thence it was that Gregory of Nazianzen
said of Nonna, his Mother, in his 13th Oration, That her voice was never heard
in the holy Assemblies, excepting at the necessary and mystical words.
Secondly, Tertullian, Cornelius, Bishop of Rome, St. Cyrill of Jerusalem, and
several others, do teach, That the Communicants answered Amen in receiving the
Sacrament, therefore of necessity it must needs be, that they spoke to them in
a Language which was understood by them. In the third place, it was anciently
the custom amongst Christians, that when the Pastor had made an end of the
Prayer, wherewith he consecrated the Eucharist, all the people, joining their
Vows, were wont to say with a loud voice, Amen, that is to say, So be it, So be
it done; an evident sign that the Prayer of him who consecrated, was understood
by them; This is what may be seen in Justin Martyr's second Apology, whose
Testimony shall suffice in so evident a matter: to add another, which not only
justifies the Language to be understood of the people in the Celebration of the
Eucharist, but also in the Administration of Baptism. It is of Denis of
Alexandria, in a Letter which he wrote unto Sixtus, Bishop of Rome, wherein he
speaks of one of the Brethren who was present with others at the Assemblies of
the Church, and who was supposed of a long time to have been a Believer, that
is to say, to have been Baptized; Apud Eusebius. hist. Eccles. l. 7. c. 9.
he says then of him, That he had assisted at the Baptism of those which had
of late been Baptized, and that he had heard their Questions and their Answers:
afterward, speaking of the Eucharist, He had (says he) often heard the
Prayers, and answered Amen with the rest. And I am apt to believe that St. Paul
alluded unto this custom when he says in the fourteenth Chapter of the first
Epistle to the Corinthians, In Cap. 14.1. ad Cori^^h.
If you bless with the Spirit, how shall the Ignorant say Amen unto your
Prayers? for he knows not what you say. And I find that the Deacon Hilary, in
St. Ambrose his Works; does judge that the Apostle does there hint at some
amongst the Jews, who, to make themselves the more considerable, sometimes used
the Syriack Tongue, and oftener the Hebrew, in Sermons, and at the Oblations,
in presence of the Greeks.

Venerable Bede observes in his Ecclesiastical History, That the unity of the
Faith was kept in England in five Languages, by five several Nations, the
English, Britans, Scotch, that is, Irish, the Picts, and the Latins. And what
he says of the unity of the Faith, ought, if I mistake not, to be understood
also of the unity of Worship in essential things: for as each of those Nations
retained the unity of the Faith in their own Language, which was very different
from each other, so they had the service and Worship in their own Language. The
Reader may take notice if he please, That Bid departed this Life about the
middle of the Eighth Century; and if from the Eighth we pass to the Ninth
Century, we shall find the Sclavonians celebrating Divine Service in their
Mother Tongue, which was allowed them by the Pope at the request of one Cyrill,
who had been instrumental in their Conversion. Aeneas Sylvius, afterward Pope,
under the name of Pius the second, thus relates it in his History of Bohemia;
Hist Bohem. c. 13.
It is said that Cyrill, being at Rome, desired the Pope that he might be
suffered to say Divine Service in the Sclavonian Tongue, unto those of that
Nation, whom he had Baptized, that is to say, Converted; That as the matter was
debated in the Sacred College, where there were several that opposed it, there
was a voice-heard, as it were sent from Heaven, saying, Let all Flesh praise
the Lord, and every Tongue confess his Name: upon which Cyrill was granted his
request. It is said that this Cyril is the same who in the Sclavonian Language
is called Chiuppil, That he lived about the Year 860. and that in the Days of
Michael the Third, Emperor of the East, and of Pope Nicolas the First; he, with
Methodius, Converted unto the Faith of Jesus Christ the Mingrelians, the
Circassians, and the Gazarites, and afterward several of the Sclavonians;
therefore in the Roman Martyrology is celebrated the day of his Birth, as was
anciently said amongst Christians, that is, of the Death of Cyrill and
Methodius in the same day, which is the ninth of March, whence it is also that
Pope John the Eighth wrote several Letters unto this Methodius, Companion unto
Cyrill, and one of the Apostles of the Sclavonians, according to the Language
of those times; and we find by the 247th Letter of this Pope, written Anno 879.
unto Sphentopulcher, Prince of the Country, That Methodius had been sent by
this Prince unto John the Eighth, who returned him back unto him, to execute
the Function of Archbishop, with power to celebrate Mass and Divine Service in
the Sclavonian Tongue. We have just cause to commend (says this Pope, Tom. 7.
Council part. 1. Ep. 247. p. 91.
writing unto Sphentopulcher) the Sclavonian Characters, invented by a certain
Philosopher, called Constantine, whereby the Praises of God are published
abroad, and we command, That in that same Language be recited the Sermons and
Works of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ; for we are warned by Divine
Authority to praise the Lord, not only in three Languages, but also in all;
which Authority enjoins us this Commandment when it says, All Nations praise
the Lord, and all People bless his name; and the Apostles, being filled with
the Holy Ghost, spoke forth in all Languages the wonderful things of God:
Thence also it is that St. Paul, that Heavenly Trumpet, publishes this
Warning, Let every Tongue confess that our Lord Jesus is the Christ, to the
Glory of the Father: Touching which Languages also he instructs us fully and
plainly in the 14th Chapter of the first Epistle to the Corinthians, how we are
to edify the Church in speaking several Languages; and certainly it does in no
way prejudice the Faith or Doctrine, to sing Masses in the Sclavonian Tongue,
or to read the holy Gospel, or Divine Lessons of the Old and New Testament,
well translated and interpreted, or to say or sing all the other Offices;
because he who made the three principal Languages, the Hebrew, Greek, and
Latin, is the same which has also created all other Languages for his Praise
and Glory. However we appoint that in all Churches under your inspection, for
the greater Honor, the Gospel be read in Latin: and because it is translated
into Sclavonian, that it be read to the People, who understand not Latin, as it
is practiced in some Churches. It were to be wished, say the Protestants, that
the Christians of the Roman Communion would make serious reflection upon these
words of Pope John the Eighth, and that then they would consult the Decree of
Innocent the Third, at the Council of Lateran, assembled in the year of our
Lord 1215. T. 7. Council. Pa^r. part. 2. Can. 9. p. 8^9.
Because that in most places, in the same City, and in the same Diocese, there
be people of diverse Languages mingled together, having under one Faith
different Ceremonies and Customs; we expressly enjoin the Bishops of those
Cities and Dioceses to provide for them persons fit to celebrate Divine
Offices, according to the different Ceremonies and Languages, and to administer
the Sacraments of the Church, instructing them by their words, and by Example.
Cardinal Cajetan, who lived in Luther's time, has left in his Opuscula,
Opuscul. t. 3. tract. 15. art. 8.
That it were better for the edification of the Church, tha^ public Service
and Prayers, which are made in presence of the People, should be made in the
Church, rather in the vulgar than in the Latin Tongue; and being blamed for it
by some, he answered, That he grounded what he had said, upon the 14th Chapter
of the first to the Corinthians. De offic. pii viri. p 865.
George Cassander, who lived and dyed in the Roman Church, wished that it might
have been so practiced: Methinks, (says he) it were much to be desired, that
according to the Apostles command, and the custom of the ancient Church, some
heed were to be taken of the People in the public Prayers of the Church, in
the Psalms and Lessons which are used in their behalf, and that the common
People should not always be kept strangers from the knowledge of Prayers and
Divine Service. The words of St. Paul are clear, That one cannot understand
what is said, if it be not said in a known Tongue, and that he that by his
ignorance understands not what is said, cannot say Amen unto the Prayers of
another: Ibid. p. 866.
And having alleged the words of Aeneas Sylvius, and those of Cajetan, he
adds, Unto those, who have the conduct and Government of the Church at this
time, it were no hard matter to establish and settle these and the like things,
according to the pure and ancient practice of the Church, if the minds of some
persons were not seized with a vain and foolish fear, and if they were not kept
back by a vain Superstition; nevertheless unless this be done, I do not see
that there is any great hope of an assured agreement and union in the Church,
nor that the Seeds of Schisms and Divisions will ever be rooted out; and I
cannot conceive how those persons unto whom the oversight of the Church is
committed, shall escape rendering an account of the Rents and Divisions in the
Church, which they have neglected, and whereof they have not been careful,
according to their duty, to prevent the growing Schisms and Heresies. He
repeats almost the same things in the consultation, addressed unto the
Emperors, Ferdinand I. and Maximilian II. where he says, Page 995.
amongst other things, That 'twas requisite, Priests should so say Mass, that
the People may reap some benefit by it; and not to be barely busied about an
outward show. This was also the Testimony of Erasmus which is cited in the
Margin of Cassander's Book, just by the words first alleged: D^ modo orandi.
It were, says he, much to be desired that the whole Divine Service were said
in a Language understood by all the People, as it was wont to be practiced in
ancient times, and that all things were so plainly and so distinctly spoken,
that those which hearkened, might understand them. Queen Katherine de Medicis
desired of the Pope by her Letters dated Anno. 1561. the use of the Language
understood stood by the people, for the Celebration of the Sacrament, as is
reported by the President De Thou, in his History. Lib. 28.


We may add unto all that has been spoken, the practice of the most
considerable Christian Communions, which at this time do celebrate Divine
Service in the Vulgar Tongue understood by the People, viz. the Abassins
throughout Prester John's Country; the Moscovites and Russians, the Armenians,
as is testified by the Friar Alvarez, the Baron Sigismund, James de Vitry, and
several others; the Liburnians, the Illyrians or Sclavonians, as is observed by
Aventine, and John Baptista Palate. Citizen of Rome, in his Treatise of the
manner of Writing. Besides which, all the Protestants in all parts, whose
numbers in Europe does not fall much short of the Roman Catholics. As for the
Greek Church which is of a vast extent; it is most certain they celebrate
Divine Service in pure Greek, and not in the vulgar Greek now spoken, which
has much degenerated from the Ancient Greek; but thereunto two things are
replied: first that the Corruption happened unto the Language of the Greeks under
the Tyranny of the Turks, is arrived but of late days; so that before that
time, the Greek Church celebrated all their Divine Service in a Language
understood by the People. Secondly that how great soever this Corruption is, it
could not hinder but the Greeks in the decay of their Language which arrived by
little and little, and by degrees, but that they were instructed from Father to
Son in the understanding of the ancient Liturgies of St. Basil and of St.
Chrysostom, which they make use of; and that by that means notwithstanding the
alteration befaln their Language, they understand the things therein expressed.
Therefore the people make at this present the same Answers which they did
heretofore; the 123. Constitution of the Emperor Jovinian who lived in the VI.
Century may take place in this matter of the Language understood by the people
in Divine Service; for he commands that they should with a loud voice repeat
the Prayers made in the Celebration of the Eucharist, and in the administration
of Baptism, to the end the people might understand it, and grounds his Decree
upon what St. Paul says in the fourteenth Chapter of the first Epistle to the
Corinthians. But, in fine, if any now demand the reason wherefore the Latin
Church which could and ought to celebrate Divine Service in the Latin Tongue
during the time that Language was commonly used amongst the People in the West,
and wherefore they should obstinately persist in doing it in the same Language,
although for several Ages it has been of no use amongst these Nations,
excepting in the Schools; and wherefore they Anathematise in the Council of
Trent, those which say, Sess. 22. cap. 9.
That the Mass ought to be celebrated only in the vulgar Tongue: I answer, that
I pretend not to answer this question of my self, but shall only say that there
are several which believe she has so done, that the people should not perceive
and take notice of several passages in the Mass which do not, as they say,
agree with their Faith and Belief; but as it is for the Reader to judge of
these matters, and not for me, so I will conclude this consideration with the
words of John Belet in his Sum of Divine Offices; Apud Cassan. in liturg. c.
36.
In the primitive Church, says he, it was forbidden to speak in diverse
Languages, unless there was some one present that could interpret: for what
would it avail to speak, if one did not understand? thence also came the good
and wholesome custom observed a long while in the Church in sundry places, that
after the Gospel was pronounced literally, it was expounded unto the people in
the vulgar Tongue; but what must be done in our days, where it is very rare to
find any that read, or attend, or understand it; which see, which act, or be
careful? Does it not appear now that what the Prophet said, is accomplished,
The Priest shall be like one of the People? It seems then 'twere better to hold
ones peace than sing, and be silent than dance.

CHAP. VII.
Of the Ceremonies, and of the manner of Consecration.

JESUS Christ celebrated his Sacrament with so much simplicity and so few
Ceremonies according to the Nature of his Gospel, which is wholly Spiritual,
that there is none appears besides the action by which he took the Bread, and
that by which he blessed and consecrated it; immediately after having taken
Bread, he gave thanks and blessed it, to make it the Sacrament of his Body.
Just. Mart. Apol. 2. vel. 1.
St. Justin Martyr represents unto us at large all that was practiced in his
time, that is, about the middle of the second Century, in the Celebration of
this venerable Sacrament; but there are no other Ceremonies appear in
consecrating it, but only that after the Minister had ended his Sermon and then
prayed, and that the Believers when Prayer was ended saluted each other, there
was presented unto him Bread and a Cup wherein was Wine mingled with Water,
which he having taken, he blessed and praised God, and gave thanks that he was
counted worthy to partake of those things. In the Liturgy of the pretended
Denis the Areopagite, Den. Areop. hierarch. Eccles. c. 3.
some of the Deacons and Ministers with the Priests set the Holy Bread upon the
Altar, and the Cup of Blessing; then he that officiates does pray, Give the
Blessing unto all that are present wishing them Peace; then having washed his
hands, he consecrates the Mysteries by Blessings and Praises; In that which is
in one of the Books of Constitutions called Apostolical, (although they be
neither of the Apostles nor of St. Clement their Disciple,) the Deacons, as in
that of the pretended Denis, bring the Elements (viz.) the Bread and Wine unto
the Altar, where the Bishop is with two Priests, one at each side, and also two
Deacons at the ends of the Altar with little Fanns to drive away Flies, and
other little insects, fearing lest any should fall into the Cup; after which
the Bishop having blessed the people, and warned them to lift their hearts on
high, the people answering, We lift them up unto the Lord; he makes a pretty
long discourse, praising God, and exalting the wonders of his Works, concluding
by reciting the sufferings and death of Jesus Christ, and of the History of the
Institution of the Sacrament; then he consecrates, and by a prayer which he
addresses unto God, whereof we shall take occasion to speak when we consider
the form of Consecration, or the Consecrating Liturgy. In the Liturgies
attributed unto St. James, St. Mark, St. Peter, St. Basil, St. Chrysostom, and
unto diverse others, almost the same thing is to be seen; and if there be any
alteration either for diversity, or the number of Ceremonies, it is so
inconsiderable and of little moment, that it deserves not our pains to examine;
It will be necessary to consider that in that which bears the name of St.
James, although it cannot be his, the Priest makes this Prayer, at the time the
Elements are set upon the Altar or the Holy Table, Liturg. St. Jacob.
to be blessed and consecrated; O Lord our God which have sent the Bread from
Heaven, the food of all the World, Jesus our Lord, Savior, Redeemer and
Benefactor, to bless and sanctify us; bless we beseech thee this Oblation, and
receive it upon thy Heavenly Altar: remember O Lord, thou which art full of
love toward mankind, those who offer, and for whom they have offered, and keep
us pure and immaculate in this Holy Celebration of thy divine Mysteries,
because thy great and glorious name, O Father, Son, and Holy Ghost is glorified
and praised now and for ever. Amen. And in that attributed unto St. Mark, but
not his, the Priest praying in the same time, but in terms something different;
Liturg. St. Marc.
O Lord, Holy, Almighty and terrible, which dwell in the Holy Places,
sanctify us and make us worthy of this Holy Priesthood, and grant that we may
minister at thy holy Altar with a good conscience cleanse our hearts from all
impurity, drive out of us all reprobate sense, sanctify our Souls and Spirit,
and give us grace with fear to practice the Worship of our Fathers, to give us
the light of thy countenance at all times, for it is thou which sanctifiest, and
blessest all things and we offer unto thee Praise and Thanksgiving. As for the
Greeks they carried the Elements, that is to say, the Bread and Wine of the
Sacrament, from the Table of Proposition, as they call it, unto the Altar or
unto the Communion Table, where they are to be consecrated, with so great Pomp,
Solemnity and Ceremony, that the ignorant people dazzled with the Ceremonies,
forbear not to give unto these Elements before they are consecrated, such an
honor as does not belong unto them. Cabasil. in Liturg. expos. c. 24.
Cabasilas Archbishop of Thessalonica, who wrote in the XIV. Century, complains
of it in the Explication which he makes of their Liturgy, and says, those
which unadvisedly do so, do confound the Elements which are sanctified, with
those which are not, and that from this confusion proceeds the honor which
they give unto the Bread and Wine before Consecration, which this Archbishop
does condemn. But in fine, the Elements being so brought and laid upon the Holy
Table to be consecrated, these same Liturgies inform us, that he that
officiates, after having recited all the History of the Institution of the
Sacrament, desires of God that he would send upon this Bread and Wine which
were offered unto him, his Holy Spirit, to make them the Body and Blood of
Jesus Christ; and because the Author of the Apostolical Constitutions, which
were not written until the end of the third Century, or the beginning of the
fourth, does very clearly represent the manner of this Consecration, we will
begin with him, to show how this consecrating Liturgy was couched; for after
having ended the recital of the History of the Eucharist by these words,
Constitut. Apostol. l. 8. cap. 12.
Do this in remembrance of me, for as often as ye eat this Bread, and drink
this Cup, ye show the Lords death till he come: He goes on, Therefore setting
before us his Passion, his Death, and Resurrection, his ascension into Heaven,
and his second coming, which will be when he comes with power and glory to
judge the quick and the dead, and to reward everyone after their works; We
effer unto thee O our King and our God according so thy Commandment, this Bread
and this Cup, in giving thee thanks by him, because thou have made us worthy to
stand in thy presence to execute this Ministry; and we beseech thee O God, who
stand in need of nothing, that thou would favorably behold these gifts
which are presented before thee, and that thou would therein do thy good
pleasure for the honor of thy Christ, and that thou would send thy Holy
Spirit upon this Sacrifice, the witness of the passion of the Lord Jesus, to
make this Bread the Body of thy Christ, and this Cup his Blood; to the end that
those which partake of them may be confirmed in piety, obtain remission of
sins, may be delivered from the temptations of the Devil, filled with the Holy
Ghost, made worthy of thy Christ, and of everlasting life when thou, O Lord
most mighty, shall be reconciled unto them. In the Liturgy of St. James it is
said, O Lord send thine Holy Spirit upon us, Liturg Jacob.
and upon these sacred Elements which are offered, to the end that coming upon
them, he may sanctify this Bread and this Cup by his Holy, good, and glorious
presence, and that he would make the Bread the sacred Body of thy Christ, and
the Cup his precious Blood. In that of S. Mark, We beseech thee O God, lover of
mankind, Liturg. Marc.
to send down thy Holy Spirit upon us and upon these Loaves and these Chalices,
to sanctify and to consecrate them, and to make this Bread the Body of Christ,
and this Cup the Blood of the New Testament of Jesus Christ our Lord, our God,
our Savior, and our Sovereign King. And so in those of St. Basil, St.
Chrysostom, and generally in all, excepting the Latin Liturgy at this time
used: I say in that of the present time; for I cannot deny but that it was
otherwise anciently, and that in all appearance they cut off from this Liturgy,
I mean from the Canon of the Mass, the Prayers which followed; as in the other
Liturgies, the words of Institution, by the which Prayers, Christians were wont
to consecrate the Divine Symbols, even in the West, during the space of a
thousand years. And to the end this truth should be made manifest, this
question must be thoroughly examined, to wit, whether the Ancients did
consecrate by Prayers and Invocations, and by thanksgivings, or otherwise.

Jesus Christ the absolute Master of the Christian Religion, did consecrate his
Sacrament by Prayers, Blessing and Thanksgiving, as the Divine Writers do
testify, making use of two expressions; the one of which signifying, giving of
Thanks; and the other to Bless, as to their Etymology, but as to their sense
and meaning they signify one and the same thing. The reason whereof may be,
that it was the manner of the Jews to conceive their Prayers, in terms of
Praise and Blessing; the first Christians which made the example of Christ,
their Law and Rule, intended not to consecrate any otherwise than he himself
had done: therefore Justin Martyr speaks of Prayers which the Pastor made
after having received the Bread and Wine mingled with Water which was presented
unto him; Just. Martyr. Apolog. 2.
he calls the Bread and Wine of the Eucharist in the Act of Communion, The
Bread and Wine whereon Prayers were made, and says expressly, That this food is
consecrated by Prayer. Iren. l. 4. c. 34.
St. Irenaeus says the same, for he also calls it, The Bread upon which
Prayers have been made, the Bread which has received invocation, and that by
this means cease to be common Bread; and says, that we sanctify the
Creature. This is also the Language of Tertullian writing against Marcion,
Tertul. advers. Marc. l. 1. c. 23.
for he observes, that if Jesus Christ had not been the Son of the Creator, as
this Heretic denied, he would not have given thanks unto another God upon a
Creature that had been none of his. Strom. l. 1. and paedag. l. 2. c. 2
It is unto Prayer and Thanksgiving that Clemens of Alexandria refers the
Consecration of the Eucharist of our Lord; Origin. contr. Cells. l. 8. and in
Matthew. c. 15.
therefore Origin calls the Bread of the Sacrament, the Symbol of Prayer, and
that he says, that it is made a sacred and sanctified Body by Prayer. St.
Cyrill of Jerusalem in his Mystagogical Catechisms, The Bread and Wine of the
Eucharist before the Invocation of the adorable Trinity, is but common Bread
and common Wine, but Prayer being ended, the Bread is the Body of Christ, and
the Wine the Blood of Christ. Lib. 4.
Juvencus a Priest of Spain, in his Evangelical History which he composed in
Latin verse; Having, says he, devoutly prayed. Basil. de Sp. Sancto c. 27. t.
2. p. 351.
The great St. Basil in his Treatise of the Holy Ghost, Which of the Saints
has left unto us in writing, the words of Invocation, for consecrating the
Bread of the Sacrament, and the Cup of blessing. Gregory of Nyssen his Brother;
In Baptism. Christ. p. 8 22. Orat. Catech. c. 37. p. 536.
The mystical Oil, as also the Wine, are of no great moment before
Consecration, but after the Sanctification of the Holy Spirit, they operate
excellently both the one and the other. And elsewhere. The Bread is sanctified
by the word of God and by Prayer. And elsewhere, Ibid.
The nature of visible things is transelemented by the virtue of the
benediction. St. Ambrose Bishop of Milan, L. 4. de side, c. 5. t. 4.
As often as we take the Sacraments, which by the mystery of holy Prayer are
transfigured into his flesh and blood, we do show the Lords death. Optatus
Bishop of Milevis in Numidia, describing the cruelties and rage of the
Donatists against Catholics, and marking particularly against what they showed
it: What (says he) is more sacrilegious than to break, tear, Lib. 6.
and destroy the Altars of God whereon you your selves have sometimes offered,
etc. where the Almighty God, has been invoked, where the Holy Ghost drawn down
by Prayers, has descended. Paschal. 1. Bibl. Patr. t. 3. p. 87.
Theophilus of Alexandria speaking of Origin: He does not consider (says he)
that the Bread of our Lord and the Holy Cup, are consecrated by Prayer and by
the coming of the Holy Ghost. St. Gaudentius Bishop of Bress in Italy, In Exodus
tract. 2.
When our Savior presented unto the Disciples the consecrated Bread and Wine,
he said, This is my Body; in speaking after this manner, he showed that the
Bread was consecrated before the pronouncing of these words, This is my Body.
Ephrem of Edessa, if the Books published in his name were his; The Lord taking
Bread into his hands, blessed and brake it, De natura Dei curiose nonscrutand^
in type of his immaculate Body, and blessed the Cup in figure of his precious
Blood. St. Chrysostom in his Homilies upon St. Matthew, The Lord gave thanks,
showing us how we should celebrate this Sacrament. Hom. 82. Graec.
And upon the first Epistle to the Corinthians, Hom. 24. in 1 ad Corinth. The
Apostle said, the Cup of Blessing, because holding it in our hands, we offer
unto God Hymns and Praises, and do praise him. S. Jerome in his Letter unto
Evagrius, reproving the pride and vanity of the Deacons which rashly advanced
themselves above the Priests: Who can endure, (says he,) Epist. 83.
that the Ministers of Tables, and of Widows, should raise themselves, being
swelled with pride, above thofe which by prayers do make the Body and blood of
Jesus Christ? And elsewhere he says, That prayer is thereunto necessary. St.
Austin in his Letter unto Paulinus, In Sophon. ^3, Epist. 59.
We mean by prayers, those which we make in celebrating the Sacraments before
we begin to bless what is upon the Lords Table, and by Benedictions those which
are made when they are blessed and sanctified, and broke in pieces to be
distributed. And in the Books of the Trinity, We call that only the Body and
blood of Jesus Christ, Lib. 3. c. 4.
which being taken from the fruits of the Earth is consecrated by prayer. And
elsewhere, writing against the Donatists which rejected the Sacraments
consecrated and administered by Sinners; What then, says he, De Baptism. l. 5.
c. 20.
does God hear an homicide praying either on the Water of Baptism, or on the
Oil, or upon the Eucharist. And in fine, in another place, Sermon. 87. de diverse.
it is not all sorts of Bread that is made the Body of Christ, but that which
receives the blessing of Jesus Christ. S. Cyrill of Alexandria does very
frequently call the Eucharist, Glaphir. in Genes. Exodus Levit. and in Joan.
Eulogy, that is, Blessing, because there is no doubt but that it is consecrated
by Blessing and Prayers. And that blessing is all one, in St. Cyril's sense,
with Sanctification and Consecration, he shows plainly, Contra Anthropomopth.
c. 12.
when he says elsewhere, We believe that the Oblations made in the Churches
are sanctified, blessed, and consecrated by Jesus Christ; Theodoret who was not
always of St. Cyril's mind, yet agrees with him fully in this matter, Dialog. 2.
What do you call the Oblation which is offered before the Invocation of the
Priest? A Food made of such Seeds. And what do you call it after Consecration?
The body of Jesus Christ. St. Prosper or some body else in his name, in his
Treatise of Promises and Predictions; Part. 2. c. 2.
He affirms at his Table, that the Bread is his sacred Body. A fragment of a
Liturgy attributed unto Proclus Bishop of Constantinople, speaking of the
Apostles and their Successors praying over the Bread and Wine; By these
Prayers, (says he) they looked for the coming of the Holy Ghost, to make and
consecrate by his Divine presence, the bread offered, and the Wine mingled with
Water, into the Body it self, or to be the Body of Jesus Christ our Savior.
Victor of Antioch in his Commentary upon St. Mark according to the Greek, In
cap. 14.
It was necessary that those which presented the Bread, should believe that
after Consecration and Prayers it was his Body. The supposed Eusebius of
Emessa, or rather Caesarius Bishop of A^^^s, or some other; for it is very
uncertain whose the Sermon is, the words whereof we intend to cite: They are
consecrated by the invocation of Almighty God; De Pasch. Hom. 5. Lib. 9. p. 405.
and in the same Sermon he attributes it unto sanctification. The
Sanctification (says he) being pronounced, he says, Take and drink. Facundus
of Hermiane, The Lord called his Body and Blood, the Bread which he had
blessed, and the Cup which he gave unto his Disciples. Gregory the first,
Bishop of Rome, Epist. l. 7.
What we say of the Lords Prayer presently after invocation, it is because the
Apostles were wont to consecrate the host of the Oblation, Epist 63.
by that Prayer only. Which some have observed after him, that have written of
Ecclesiastical Offices, as Amalarius, Lib. 4. Cap. 26. Walafridus Strabo, cap.
20: and Berno, cap. 1. Isidore of Sevill, De Eccles. offic. l. 1. c. 15.
St. Peter first of all instituted the order of Prayers, by the which are
consecrated the Sacrifices, offered unto God. And elsewhere, it is called a
Sacrifice, as a holy action, because it is consecrated by mystical Prayer, in
remembrance of the passion which our Lord suffered for us. The Books of
Charlemain touching Images, The Sacrament of the Body and blood of our Lord,
etc. is consecrated by the Priest by the invocation of the name of God. De
Instit. Cler. l. 1. c. 32.
Rabanus Maurus, The Lord first of all consecrated by Prayers, and Thanksgiving
the Sacraments of his Body and Blood, and gave them unto his Disciples, which
his Apostles imitating, practiced afterward, and taught their Successors to do
so likewise; which the whole Church does now practice all the World over. Ibid.
c. 33.
And again, As the Body of Jesus Christ was embalmed with sweet Spices, was
duly put into a new Sepulcher; so in like manner in his Church, his mystical
Body being prepared with the perfumes of Holy Prayer, it is administered in
sacred Vessels, by the Ministry of Priests, Sermon. 11, t. 4. Bibl. Patr. part. 2.
to the end Believers might receive it. Egber^ against the Cathari in the XII.
Century seems also to refer the Consecration unto the Benediction, although his
Doctrine is quite different from that of Rabanus.

Had we no other testimonies but these abovementioned and which are frequently
alleged, they were doubtless sufficient to prove that in the Primitive Church
the Consecration of the Symbols of the Eucharist was performed by Prayers and
giving of Thanks; but because the thing is of great importance, the Reader will
not be displeased if I join the following testimonies unto the former: To begin
with St. Fulgentius who in the Fragments of his Books against Fabian says, Ex
libro 8. p. 202.
You have imagined touching the Prayer by the which at the time of Sacrifice
the Descent of the Holy Ghost is implored, that it would seem to imply that he
is locally present; and a little after, The Holy Spirit does sanctify the
Sacrifice and Baptism, by his Divine Virtue. Macarius Bishop of Antioch in the
eighth Act of the VI. general Council: We, says he, Tom. 5. Council. p. 99. E.
draw near unto the mystical Blessings, and are sanctified, being made
partakers of the holy Body, and of the precious blood of Jesus Christ the
Savior of all. The XVI. Council of Toledo, assembled Anno. 693. says, Can. 6.
t. 5. Council. p. 430. C.
That the Apostle taught us to take a whole loaf, and to put it upon the Table
or Altar to be blessed. And again, Our assembly has appointed by a general
consent, that there should be presented at the Lords Table an entire and good
loaf, to be consecrated by the Ministerial benediction. A Council of
Constantinople composed of 338. Bishops assembled Anno. 754. said, That the
Lord would that the Bread of the Eucharist, Act 6. Council. 2. Niceni. t. 5.
Council. p. 756.
as a true figure or image of his natural Body, being sanctified by the coming
of the Holy Ghost, did become his Divine Body: and would you know how? The
Priest which makes the Oblation, say the Fathers, interposing to make it Holy,
whereas it was common, to wit, by his Prayers, whereby he begs of God the
presence of the Holy Ghost. George Pachimer, In Epist. 9. t. 1. p. 290.
Paraphraser of the pretended Denis the Areopagite, declares, That the
mysteries are consecrated upon the Holy Table by Blessing the Bread and the
Holy Cup. In the ancient Formularies of an uncertain Author published by the
late Monsieur Bignon, C. 8. p. 121. ult. edit.
the Author whereof lived in the days of Louis the Debonnair, we find that this
Prince to honor the Church, ordered, that all those should be set free and at
liberty that were admitted into holy Orders; and (says he) who consecrate by
the intervention of their Prayers, De ordine baptism. tit. 18.
the Body and Blood of our Lord. Theodulph Bishop of Orleans, by the invisible
Consecration of the Holy Ghost. Pope Nicolas the first, writing unto the
Emperor of Constantinople, Tom. 6. Council. p. 489.
attributes the Consecration unto the benediction and Sanctification of the
Holy Ghost. Which words are found cited in the IV. Act of the Council assembled
against Photius, Ibid. p 738.
which the Latins call the VIII. Ecumenical Council. The Council of Cressy
assembled Anno. 858. says, Tom. 3. Conc. Gall. p. 129.
That Consecratton is made by Prayer, and by the sign of the Cross. Charles the
Bald, King of France, and Emperor of the West, writing unto Pope Adrian the
second, complaining of some sharp and bitter words which this Pope used against
him, writes unto him, amongst other things, We cannot think that such words can
proceed out of your mouth, Supplem. Conc. Gal. p. 265.
as make the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ by devout and holy Prayer. Hugh
Maynard, a Benedictine Friar, alleges in his notes upon the Books of the
Sacraments of Gregory the first, two Manuscripts of the Library of Corby, viz
an old explication of the Canon of the Mass, and an ancient Treatise of the
Mass; in both which the Consecration is attributed unto Prayers. In the former
of these Manuscripts are found these words by Maynard's relation, The
Sacrifices are those which are consecrated with Prayers; P. 12. P. 13.
and in the other, Sacrifices, that is, things made holy, because they are
consecrated by mistical Prayer. Which words, as is observed by this learned
Friar, were upon a matter taken out of S. Isidore, lib. 6. Orig. c. 19.
Ratherius, Bishop of Verona in Italy, in the tenth Century, in his Treatise of
the contempt of Canons, Tom. 2. Spicil. p. 183.
first Part. The Oblation, says he, which is to be presented and distributed
unto the People, is consecrated chiefly by the Prayer wherein we say unto God,
Our Father which art in Heaven. Which in all likelihood he borrowed from
Gregory the first. In fine, the whole Greek Church, which is of a vast extent,
has constantly unto this day observed and retained this practice. James Goar,
of the Order of Preaching Friars, who has left us the Euchology or Ritual of
the Greeks, with Notes of a very sound judgment, takes much pains in explaining
the manner of Consecration, practiced by the Greek Church, endeavoring to give
it a sense which may not be contrary to the Latin Church; he cites these words
of the Liturgy which goes under St. Chrysostom's name, (...) p ^7.
We also offer unto thee this reasonable and unbloody Sacrifice, and we beseech
thee that thou would send thy holy Spirit upon us, and upon the Gifts
offered; make this Bread the precious Body of thy Christ. Upon these words, and
particularly upon the last, Goar makes a very long observation; Not. in Euchol.
p. 140, 141. number. 138 139.
in the first place he observes upon these words, send thy holy Spirit, That
there is a very great difference betwixt the new Editions of this Liturgy of
St. Chrysostom's and the ancient Manuscripts; That some of the late Greeks have
from hence drawn some kind of show of support for their ill opinion touching
Consecration. Secondly, upon these words, make this Bread the precious Body of
thy Christ; That Chrysostom, who is the Author of the Liturgy, could not
believe that Consecration was made by Prayers, as some Greeks have vainly
supposed, seeing, says he, he attributes elsewhere unto the words of Christ,
the virtue of changing the Elements, that is, the Bread and Wine, into his Body
and Blood; That nevertheless these Prayers, used by the Greeks, were a Stone of
stumbling, and 'twas by these Prayers, not rightly understood, that Cabasilas,
Simeon of Thessalonica, Mark of Ephesus, Gabriel of Philadelphia, and some
others, have been deceived, and have cast the ignorant into Error; and it is not
to be denied but the most part of the Greeks have written darkly and dubiously,
and that gave way unto Error in minds that were unstedfast; And in fine, has
commended Arcudius and Bessarion, both Greeks Latinized; the latter of which
was present at the Council of Florence, under Eugenius the Fourth, and was
gained by the Latins; and the other wrote a great while afterward of the
agreement betwixt the Latins and the Greeks, touching the matter of the
Sacraments. Goar then having praised them as two persons who by their skill and
pains removed all the difficulties which were found about the words and form of
Consecration, adds, That to the end we should not labor in doing what was
already done; what remains is, that if any farther light can be given unto
other men's labors, we should endeavor to do it by new inventions. But that it
self shows plainly, that the Greeks did consecrate otherwise than the Latins.
Besides, the Reader may easily perceive, both by what we have said, and by the
proceeding of Bessarion, Arcudius, and Goar, what is the manner of the
Consecration of the Symboles amongst the Greeks; it is true that Arcudius used
all his endeavors to conform the opinion of the Greeks unto that of the
Latins, giving, for this purpose, unto the Liturgies which go in the name of
St. Mark, St. Clement, St. James, St. Basil, and St. Chrysostom, L. 3. de
concord. cap. 25. ad 33.
the most favorable construction he could contrive, because they attribute all
the Consecration unto Prayers, and does blame Cabasilas, Mark of Ephesus,
Simeon of Thessalonica, Gabriel of Philadelphia, Samonas, Jeremy, Patriarch of
Constantinople, because they taught that the Consecration of Symboles was made
by Prayers. But this proceeding sufficiently does show that the Greek Church
never owned any other form of Consecration. But to return unto James Goar, In
Euchol. p. 140, 141.
he says one thing which ought not to be past over in silence, which is, That
the Greeks which assisted at the Council of Florence, agreed that it was unto
the words of Jesus Christ that the force and virtue of Consecration ought to be
attributed, and to confirm what he says, he alleges the Answer they made unto
Pope Eugenius, which stuck in suspense, because they added unto the words of
Jesus Christ certain Prayers to demand the Consecration, as if it had not been
otherwise complete: the Answer, I say, which was made him in the behalf of the
whole Nation, by the Bishops of Russia, of Nice, of Trebizond, and of Mitylene,
as we read in the eighth Tome and 25th Session of the Council of Florence, in
which Answer Goar still finds some difficulty. But if the learned Goar had
seen, before publishing his Euchology, the true History of the Council of
Florence, by Sylvester Sguropulus, great Ecclesiastic of the Church of
Constantinople, and one of the five Counselors of the Patriarch, and by
consequence of the chiefest of the Assembly of the Greeks, he would not have
said that the four Bishops abovementioned had answered Pope Eugenius in behalf
of the whole Nation; Hist. Conc. Florent. sect. 10. c. 1. p. 278.
for the truth is, the Greek Emperor having at last agreed with the Latins upon
four Articles, without the knowledge and consent of those of his Nation, except
it were some few that had been gained by the Court of Rome, the Latins demanded
of the Greeks, they should expunge out of their Rituals, and Books of Divine
Service, this third Benediction in celebrating of the unbloody Sacrifice, or in
the invocating of the Holy Ghost, which the Priest is wont to pronounce,
saying, That these words, Take, eat, this is my Body, and drink you all, did
consecrate the Bread and the Cup; and that the Greeks erred very much in using
of Prayers, and invoking the Holy Ghost, after pronouncing the words of our
Lord. Whereupon there were several contests between the Emperor of
Constantinople and the Latins, Ibid. p. 278, 279.
who said unto them, If you would believe, as the great St. Basil and the great
St. Chrysostom taught, thus to consecrate and sanctify the Divine Oblations,
you would find in all the Eastern Churches, above two thousand Liturgies which
thus decide the matter. After which the Historian observes, That soon after, by
order of the Pope and the Emperor, all the Greeks met at the Popes Palace,
excepting Mark of Ephesus, the most zealous of the whole Nation, and that the
Question being again re-assum'd, there were several debates upon it, the Latins
using all their endeavors to make the Greeks embrace their Opinions; and that
the Bishops of Russia and of Nice, in behalf of the latter, proposed a middle
opinion, which pleased neither Party; which obliged the Emperor to command Mark
of Ephesus to set down something in writing touching this Question, which he
did; and he therein showed that the Holy Fathers taught to consecrate the
Divine Oblations; Ibid.
as (says he) all our Priests do consecrate. In the Eighth Chapter of the same
Section, the same Historian, who was always present, writes, That after the
signing of the Decree of the union, the Emperor sent several Greeks unto the
Pope, to see after what manner he was to sign it, and that he commanded them to
hear the discourse which the Bishop of Nice would make; and that he no sooner
began to speak, but Cardinal Julian bid the Protonotary write: and as this
Bishop spoke by order of the Emperor, and drew near the end of his discourse,
he bid him speak touching the mystical Sacrifice, saying, Id. ibid. c. 8. p.
293.
What the Roman Church believes touching the Consecration of Divine Gifts, or
Oblations, we believe also, viz. That the Divine words of our Savior, Take,
eat, This is my Body, drink ye all of this, This is my Blood, are those which
sanctify and consecrate them: herein we agree with you, yet we say also that
the Priest does contribute thereunto, as the Husbandman by his Labor
contributes unto the production of the Fruits of the Earth; but we refer the
whole unto these words of our Savior, and are therein of the same opinion with
you. Let us now hear what the Historian says unto this discourse of the Bishop
of Nice, who spoke so well that he obtained a Cardinals Cap, and was afterward
sufficiently known by the name of Cardinal Bessarion; Ibid. p. 293, 294.
It was (says the Historian) the design and scope of the Cardinal of Nice to
deliver himself in the Eloquence of a great Orator, as if he had spoke in the
name of all, although we knew nothing of it, and that we had not given our
consent unto what he had spoke; for it was all made up of Artifice and cunning;
and the Latins demanded this speech might be inserted in the Decree of the
union, which the Emperor refused absolutely to yield unto: he feared that being
returned unto Constantinople, he should give occasion unto those that had a
mind to talk, that he had overthrown the Divine Liturgy, which the great St.
Basil and the Divine Chrysostom had left, having received it of James the
Brother of the Lord. But the Latins being earnest, and desiring to have our
consent in writing, touching this Article, the Emperor so ordered the matter,
that the Bishop of Nice should repeat these matters before the Pope; some of
our men being also present, as if they had been come from the whole Assembly of
the Greeks, which being written by the Latins, were published in all their
Provinces, which was done by force and surprise, and contrary unto our
knowledge: see here with what sincerity, what advice, liberty and concord
things were carried. It was then after this manner things passed at Florence,
upon the Article of the manner of consecrating of the Eucharist, which makes
good what we have said, That the Greek Church has retained unto this day, the
custom of consecrating by Prayers and Supplications. Let us now, to reassume
our discourse, say, That if some of the ancient Doctors of the Church made the
Consecration of the Symboles depend on the pronouncing of these words, This is
my Body, it is of the number of those which have declared in favor of the
Consecration by Prayer, as for Instance, St. Chrysostom, and some others with
him; and in this case, that they should not jar amongst themselves, it may be
said they have not attributed the Consecration unto these words, This is my
Body, but as unto words declaring what was before befaln: unto the Bread and
Wine of the Eucharist: for it is often said that a thing is done, when it is
declared that it has been done; or it may also be said, That they considered
these words as containing a promise of God, whereby he tacitly accompanies with
his Blessing and his Grace the Prayers which are addressed unto him for the
Consecration of the Sacrament. But if the Fathers who attributed the
Consecration unto these words, This is my Body, are not of the number of those
who have already declared in favor of a Consecration by the virtue of Prayer,
of necessity their thoughts must be interpreted after the manner as has been
said, or freely confess that they have digressed from the common Road, and that
so their testimonies are not to be received nor allowed against so constant and
so universal a tradition. For in these rencounters we ought to follow the
advice given unto us by Vincentius Lerinensis, Common.
If sometimes the different opinion of one, or a few more, that are deceived,
rise up, and thwart the received opinion of all, or of a greater number of
Catholics, the rashness of one, or of a few, ought to be opposed, in the first
place, by the general Decrees of an universal Council, if there be any: in the
second place, if there be none, That the Opinion of several great Doctors be
followed, who agree together: For, as he says a little after, Ibid.
Whatsoever a private person believes more than others, or against others, were
he Doctor, Bishop, Confessor, Martyr, let them be accounted as low opinions,
proper to himself, hidden and private, and let it not be owned to have the
authority of an opinion, commonly, publicly, and generally received. Arcudius,
a Greek Latinized, does not differ much from the thoughts of Vincentius, when
speaking of the manner and form of Consecration, L. 3. de conco^d. c. 31.
he says, It seems indeed there is some discord amongst the holy Fathers, but
those which seem obscure must be explained by those which are clear; join the
lesser number unto the greater, and follow the judgment of the most
considerable, the most learned, and of those which are much of the greatest
number: which words Goar finds much to his liking, In Euchol. p. 140.
saying, That Arcudius gave an advice, which indeed was short, but very
discreet and convenient.

But that nothing might be wanting unto this Observation, and that we may the
better understand the nature of this Consecration, and the great consequence of
it, let us compare the Consecration of Pagans, unto that of Christians, for
many times these sorts of Comparisons do tend very much to the clearing of
matters in question. The Pagans called Consecration a certain Formulary,
whereby their Priests caused the Divinity which they adored, to be present in
his Image; and this Formulary was nothing but certain precise and formal words,
whereby they thought to operate this presence in the Images which were made for
that purpose. Wherefore Tertullian told them in his Apology, These Images are
of the same matter with our Pans and Kettles, Apol. c. 12. Minut. in Oct.
but they change their fate by Consecration: And Minutius Felix, See it is
melted, forged, wrought, and is not yet a God; see it is polished, built,
erected, and is no God; see here, it is beautified, consecrated, invoked, and
then it is God, when Men would have it so, and do dedicate it. Origin in his
Books against Celsus, upon these words of the 95th Psalm, and according to the
Hebrew the 96th. L. 7. p. 378 ult. Edit.
All the Gods of the Nations are but Devils: That appears, says he, by the
Churches, the which, as the more sacred, are said to be inhabited by the
presence of some Divinity, having received into the Temples, at their first
Dedication or Consecration, such Devils, by curious invocations and
Witchcrafts. Arnobius brings in the Pagan answering the Christian after this
manner, You err, and are deceived, L. 6. advers. Gent.
for we do not believe that the Brass, nor the Mass of Gold or Silver, nor the
other matter whereof Images are made, are of themselves Gods and religious
Deities, but we serve and worship these Gods in them, which holy Consecration
does introduce, De vanitat. Idolor.
and which it makes to inhabit in the Images which we caused to be made. And
did not St. Cyprian, say in his time, That these sorts of Spirits do lie hid
under the Statues and consecrated Images? In fine Lactantius, speaking of this
kind of Gods of the Gentiles, Instit. l. 2. c. 4.
says, That when they were made, they felt it not, nor when they are worshipped
they know it not, for they became not sensible by Consecration. But as for the
Sanctification and Consecration of Christians, it consisted only in retrieving
things from a profane and common use, and by applying them unto a holy use, by
desiring of God by their Prayers, That he would sanctify their use and
Employment for his Glory and the Salvation of those who used them lawfully: so
that there being any Question, for instance, of the Water of Baptism, or of the
Bread and Wine of the Sacrament, their Consecration tended only to give them a
quality which they had not before, to employ them unto a Divine and Religious
use, and by praying God to make them Sacraments of his Religion, and that he
would render them efficacious by his holy Spirit in the lawful using of them,
out of which use they were no more but common Bread, Wine, and Water, as they
were before; all the virtue they have, in quality of Signs and Sacraments,
either to sanctify our Souls, or to nourish them, depending upon the Holy and
Religious use unto which they are applied, and on the efficacy of the Spirit
acting at the same time; to the end that they should not only signify, but
also that they should seal in our Souls, and that they should exhibit and
communicate, when they are administered, the things which they signify and
represent. Now let us see if this were the belief of the Holy Fathers of the
Church. In Levit. Hom. 11. p. 100.
Origin upon Levitiecus: There is, born in my house (says he) the Firstling of
a Cow, I am not permitted to put it unto any common use, for it is holy unto
the Lord, and therefore it is called Holy. We know then by this dumb Beast,
Ibid.
how the Law appoints, that what it will have to be Holy, must be set apart for
God only. And in the same place, to sanctify any thing is to devote it unto
God. The great St. Regul. brevior. q 53. p. 642. D. t. 2.
Basil, Sanctification consists in adhering locally and inseparably unto God at
all times, in studying and following what is well pleasing in his fight; for
also in the things offered and consecrated unto God, deficient things are not
accepted; and without impiety and sin, what has been once consecrated unto
God, cannot be converted unto common and human use. St. Austin in his questions
upon Leviticus testifies, that he was of the same Opinion, when he says thus;
When he says the things which the Children of Israel sanctified, L. 3. q. 85.
t. 4. p. 98.
it must be understood, in offering them unto the Priests, and by them unto the
Lord; and this kind of sanctification must be observed, which is made by vow,
and by the Devotion of him who offers. S. Cyrill of Alexandria in his
Commentaries upon Esaias, L. 1. Orat. 6. p. 178.
What is said to be sanctified shall not always partake of sanctification, but
rather it signifies to be consecrated unto the glory of God, as what he says
unto Moses, Sanctify unto me all the firstborn which open the Matrix, all the
Males unto the Lord, L. 7. and 8. in c. 10.34. and Dial. 6. t. 5. part. 1. p.
595.
and in those places, [sanctifie] imports to consecrate. And upon St. John,
What is consecrated unto God is said to be sanctified. And in his Dialogues of
the Trinity, What then, Friend, will not reason constrain us to confess, that
what is said to be sanctified, was not before Holy? for I judge, that is called
unto sanctification which is altered from what it was not, Hom. 14. t. 5. part.
2. p. 187. In Levit. l. 7. c. 27.
when it is sanctified. And in his Paschal Homilies, To sanctify, is to
consecrate and offer some excellent Oblation unto the God of the whole
Universe. Hesychius of Jerusalem, That which is sanctified and offered, begins
to be sanctified, even by being offered; it was not then Holy before. The Friar
Jovius in the Library of the Patriarch Photius, Codic. 222. ex lib. 24, 25.
We say that the place, or the Bread, or the Wine are sanctified, when they are
set apart for God, and that they are not employed about any common use. Even
Thomas Aquinas himself, who although he lived in an Age wherein the Doctrine of
the Eucharist received an alteration and change, yet acknowledged this kind of
Consecration, who nevertheless happily would not have that of the Eucharist to
depend on it. T. 2. q. 81. art. 8. number. 70.
Not only Men, but also the Churches, Vessels, and all other things of this
kind, are said to be sanctified from the very time that they be applied unto
the service of God.

I should here end the examination of the question of Consecration, were I not
obliged to say something of the manner of pronouncing the words of
Consecration. It cannot be doubted, but Jesus Christ pronounced with an audible
voice the words whereby the Latins pretend that he did consecrate, seeing the
Evangelists nor S. Paul do neither of them remark that there was any difference
betwixt the pronouncing of these words, This is my Body, This is my Blood, and
that of all the rest. The Amen which the People answered in the following Ages,
after the Consecration was made, as it appears by Justin Martyr, by Denis of
Alexandria in Eusebius, by Tentullian, by St. Ambrose, by St. Leo, and by
others: This Amen I say does clearly show, that they consecrated with a loud
voice; this also is justified by most of the Liturgies which remain unto us,
where it is expressly observed, that the pronouncing of these words was done
with a loud voice, as in those attributed unto St. Peter, St. Mark, De Observe.
can. t. 10. Bibl. Patr. Not. in Gregor Sar. page 389. Not. 131. in Miss.
Chrysostom. Euchol.
St. Basil, and St. Chrysostom. Raoul de Tongres writes that it was so
practiced even in the Church of Millan, conformable unto the Liturgy of St.
Ambrose, which this Church retained very punctually almost unto these last
times. Hugh Maynard and James Goar do make almost the same observation by
reason of a passage of the Book of them which are initiated, which is in S.
Ambrose: We have upon this Subject a constitution of the Emperor Justinian who
reigned in the V. Century, viz. the 123, wherein he ordains to make the Divine
Oblation; that is to say, as Photius explains it in his Nomocanon, Tit. 3. Can.
1. The Prayers of the holy Communion, not with a low voice, but after such a
manner that the faithful People might understand what is said; a custom which
was still observed in the Latin Church in the IX. Century; for Paschas Radbert
in his Letter unto Frudegard, and Ratran in his Treatise of the Body and blood
of Christ, do observe that the People answered Amen unto the Prayers of the
Canon. Moreover those which in that Age wrote of Divine and Ecclesiastical
offices, as Amalarius, Rabanus, Walafridus, have very exactly observed all that
was practiced in their times in the Celebration of the Eucharist; But they say
not a word of the manner of pronouncing the Sacramental words which the Latins
follow at this time; an evident proof that it was not then received, Miss. Romans
tit. Rit. Celeb. Miss. c. 8.. 5.
as it has been some Ages past: For the Missal commands to pronounce the
consecrating words with a low voice, that is to say, in such a manner that no
body may hear them. The original of so considerable a change had not, as many
conceive, a sufficient foundation; for the Author of Divine Offices (who cloakt
himself under the name of Alcuin who was dead about two hundred years before
this Treatise was composed, Alcuin. de Div. off. tlt. de Celebr. Miss. t. 10.
Bibl. patr.
seeing the learned do not judge it was written before the XI. Century, or at
least until the end of the X. Century; this Author I say) writes, that this
custom of pronouncing with a low voice the words of Consecration proceeded from
a report, That God had punished with sudden death, certain Shepherds that sang
them in the fields; those that have spoke since, followed the same steps, as
Hugh of St. Victor a writer of the XII. Age, John Belet who lived as it is said,
in the same time; Innocent the third, Honorius of Autun, and Durandus de Mende,
who wrote in the XII. and XIII. and Gabriel Biel who composed the Lessons in
the XV. with this difference that some amongst them have added that the Bread
upon which the Shepherds pronounced the Sacramental words, was converted into
flesh, and as for them they were destroyed by fire from Heaven. Nevertheless
they own, as well as Cassander in his Treatise of Liturgies, that before that
time these words were pronounced with a loud voice: Now let the Reader judge if
the Latins had reason for a motive of this Nature to abolish the ancient
custom contrary to what is even unto this day practiced amongst the Greeks,
the Syrians, the Ethiopians, the Armenians, the Muscovites or Russians, which
do all consecrate with a loud voice. I know there have been some Doctors of the
Latin Church, who to render more ancient the custom of consecrating with a low
voice, have had recourse unto the spiritual Meadow of John Moschus who lived in
the VII. Century; Its true he relates two different Histories (at least if they
may be called Histories) which being joined together contain some circumstances
which have a resemblance with what the forged Alcuin has written, and after
him several others: But in the main there is such notable differences betwixt
what the pretended Alcuin has written, and what Moschus does relate, that it is
easiy to perceive that the Latins have grounded their Decree upon the relation
of the former, rather than upon that of the latter, although neither the one
nor the other appears unto judicious persons to be worthy of much credit.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the Oblation, or of the manner of the Sacrifice.

IF Christians had done no more in the Celebration of their Sacrament, than
Jesus Christ had done in his, the Consecration of Symbols had immediately been
followed with the breaking of Bread, and so we should have been obliged to have
treated of the breaking of Bread after having examined the form of
Consecration: but because betwixt the Consecration and the breaking Bread which
immediately followed, they have in process of time brought in the Oblation and
Elevation, before we treat of the Fraction, we must consider these two other
things, the former in this Chapter, and the other in that which next follows.
As our Savior after Prayer and giving Thanks whereby he consecrated the
Sacrament, proceeded unto the breaking of Bread, and distribution, there
appearing nothing in the History of the Institution of any Oblation or
Elevation, betwixt the Consecration and the breaking of the Bread: so the
Apostles who exactly followed his Example and Precepts, certainly failed not to
do what he had done, I mean to proceed unto the breaking the Bread, and the
distribution of it immediately after having blessed and sanctified it; which
simplicity was very pleasing unto those who lived in the following Age. For
Justin Martyr does testify that the Consecration of the Symbols was followed
by the Communion of Believers, which necessarily presupposed the breaking the
Bread, therefore he forbore expressing it at large. But their Successors,
thinking they ought to raise and advance the dignity of this Mystery, and to
elevate the simplicity of it, with diverse Ceremonies, to render it the more
pleasing unto the Jews and Pagans, which they earnestly desired to draw unto
the Communion of the Gospel, and of the knowledge of Jesus Christ; joined unto
the Consecration of Symbols the Oblation which they made unto God after they
had been blessed and sanctified. Oblation, which was a kind of Sacrifice,
taking the word in a large sense, and by consequence an improper sense, they
judged of very great importance to work upon the Jews and Gentiles; because
both the one and the other being accustomed unto outward Sacrifices, were
exceedingly scandalized that the Christians made use of none in their Religion:
This appears by the calumnies which they cast upon those who first undertook to
defend the innocence of Christianity against their reproaches. But the better
to understand the nature of this Oblation, it is to be observed there are three
several sorts to be seen in the Liturgies of Christians: the first, the most
ancient, and that which was only in use in Justin Martyr's time, and
afterward, is the Oblation of Bread and Wine which the faithful made in the
Celebration of the Eucharist, and which the Minister offered unto God by
Prayers, as may be seen in all the Liturgies. That attributed unto St. James
shall serve at this time, because the same in substance is to be found in all
the rest; there the Pastor makes this Prayer unto God: Liturg. S. Jacob.
Cast thine Eyes, O God, upon us, and upon this reasonable service, which we
offer unto thee, and receive them as thou did the Oblations of Abel, the
Sacrifices of Noah, the Priesthoods of Moses and Aaron, the peaceable offerings
of Samuel, the repentance of David, the Incense of Zacharias: to the end that
as thou receivedst from the hand of thine Apostles this true worship, thou also
of thy goodness would receive of us who are sinners, these gifts which we
offer unto thee: Grant that our Oblation may be agreeable, being sanctified by
the Holy Ghost, for the propitiation of our Sins, and of those which the People
have committed through ignorance. This action of the faithful people offering
the Bread and Wine of the Eucharist for the Divine Service, is called not only
Oblation, but also Sacrifice, as we have shown in examining whence the Bread
and Wine of the Eucharist were taken. Cypr. de oper. and Eleemos.
And in fine, St. Cyprian does positively call this Action a Sacrifice in that
place of his formerly alleged. When the Oblations are set upon the Altar, or
upon the Holy Table to be blessed, they are again offered unto God by Prayer,
as has been showed in the foregoing Chapter: but because that in some sort
relates unto this first Oblation whereof we speak, I would seek for the second
in the Oblation made unto God of these same Oblations at the very instant of
time that they are consecrated: for we have seen that the Author of the
Apostolical Constitutions, Constit. Apost. l. 8. c. 12.
at that instant addresses this Prayer unto God: We offer unto thee, O our God
and our King, this Bread and this Cup, giving thee thanks by Jesus Christ,
because thou have counted us worthy to appear in thy sight, and to execute the
Priesthood, and we beseech thee, O God, who have need of nothing, to behold
these Oblations with a favorable eye which are set before thee, that thou
would accept them for the honor of thy Son, and that thou would send the
Holy Ghost upon this Sacrifice, etc. It is very likely they did after this
manner, thinking that Jesus Christ who began the Celebration of his Eucharist
with Prayer, made a kind of Oblation unto God of the Bread and Wine, and showed
at the same time his willingness of sacrificing himself soon after, for the
expiation of the Sins of the World; therefore it is, as I conceive, that they
grounded the Oblation, whereof we treat, wherein they desired of God that he
would sanctify unto them the use of these two things, and that he would by his
blessing make them the efficacious and Divine Sacraments of the Body broken,
and the Blood shed, of his Christ, for the Salvation and consolation of their
Souls. From hence it is that St. Cyprian in one of his Epistles says in sundry
places, that Jesus Christ offered Bread and Wine in the Sacrament; that we
offer Wine, and that Wine ought to be offered in the Cup of the Lord, and not
only so, but that the Lord therein offered himself, having in all likelihood
regard unto the disposition wherein he showed himself to be, of exposing
himself unto death for us, when he instituted the Sacrament and memorial of it.
Cyprian. Ep. 63.
Our Lord (says he) offered himself first unto his Father, and commanded it
should be so done in remembrance of him; so that the Sacrificer which imitates
what Jesus Christ has done, does truly supply the place of Jesus Christ. As
for the third and last of the Oblations which I mentioned to be practiced by
Christians, it was done after the Consecration of the Symbols, after which they
offered them unto God; whereunto relates the warning made unto the People in
the Apostolical Constitutions; Constable. Apost. l. 8. c. 13.
To pray unto God by Jesus Christ for the gift offered unto our Lord, to the
end that he would receive it as an odor of a sweet savor, upon his Heavenly
Altar, through the intercession of Jesus Christ. In the Liturgy of St. James
also, Liturg. S. Jacob.
They pray for the gifts which have been offered and sanctified, to the end God
would accept them, and receiving them upon his Heavenly Altar, as a sweet and
spiritual savor, he would in their stead send his Heavenly grace and the gift
of his Holy Spirit; and a little after they also pray, That because he has
received as an odor of sweet savor, Ibid.
the Oblations and Presents which have been offered, and has been pleased to
sanctify and consecrate them by the grace of his Christ, and the coming of the
Holy Ghost, he would also sanctify their Souls, their Spirits, and Bodies,
etc. in that of St. Chrysostom, We offer unto thee of thy goods; Liturg. Chrysostom.
Germ. Theor. p 403.
or as Germain Patriarch of Constantinople explains it, We offer unto thee the
Antitypes? It is true, that considering the manner of the Greeks consecrating,
this Oblation should immediately precede the Prayer whereby they pretend to
consecrate; but if the Latins are considered, this Oblation is not made unto
God, until after the Consecration be ended. But there is seen in this Liturgy,
for the Oblation whereof we treat, the same as in that of St. James. In fine,
in all the Liturgies which we have, although they be not all made by the
Authors in whose names they pass, the Oblation which is made unto God after the
consecrating Liturgy of the Latins, is an Oblation (as is expressly said) of
Bread and Wine, of Gifts and Fruits of the Earth. But of all the Liturgies
there is none that better informs us of the nature of this Oblation than that
which is used by the Latin Church, which thus speaks unto God; Missa Can.
We offer unto thy glorious Majesty, of thy Gifts, and of thy Presents, a holy
and immaculate Host, the Holy Bread of Life, and the Cup of Eternal health;
upon which things we beseech thee to look with a favorable and propitious Eye,
and to accept them, as thou were pleased to accept the Presents of thy
righteous Son Abel, and the Sacrifice of our Patriarch Abraham, and the Holy
Sacrifice, the immaculate Host, which thy Sovereign high Priest Melchisedeck
offered unto thee; we humbly beseech thee, O Almighty Lord God, to command that
these things might be carried by thy Holy Angel, upon thy high Altar, into the
presence of thy Divine Majesty. And a little after, continuing the like
discourse, they say unto God, By the which Jesus Christ, O Lord, thou have made
all these things for us, thou sanctifiest, blessest, and bestowest them upon
us. From whence it is that the Holy Fathers meditating upon this latter
Oblation, and considering that the Bread and Wine was the matter of it, they
spoke, as near as I can guess, of the Sacrifice of the Christian Church, as of
a Sacrifice of Bread and Wine, and although they have not all expressed
themselves after one manner, yet nevertheless their expressions however they
seem to differ in words, yet tend to the same sense, and contain one and the
same Doctrine: some instead of saying that there is offered Bread and Wine unto
God, have said, that there were offered unto him the first fruits of his
Creatures, (that is to say) things which he gives us for our nourishment; Iren.
l. 4. c. 32.
so it is that St. Irenaeus expressed himself when he said, That the new
Oblation of the New Testament which the Church offers unto God throughout all
the World, is an Oblation of the first-fruit of his gifts, that is, of the Food
which he has given us; Ibid.
or as he says afterward, of the first fruits of his Creatures, which he
explains afterward, by Bread and by Wine, which are Creatures of this World.
Others have spoken positively of Bread and Wine, Just. Martyr. dial. cum Tryph.
p. 260. Macar. Hom. 27.
as St. Justin Martyr, who makes the Sacrifices of Christians offered in all
places in the Sacrament, to consist of Bread and Wine. St. Macarius an ancient
Anchorite was of the same mind, when he observed that the primitive Believers,
knew not that Bread and Wine was offered in the Church to be the Antitype or
the Figure of the flesh and Blood of our Lord. l. 1. ep 401.
Thence it is that St. Isidore of Damietta confesses unto Rabbi Benjamin, That
the Oblation of Christians is an Oblation of Bread: Fulgent. ad Pet. de side c.
19.
That St. Fulgentius says, That the Catholic Church does not cease to offer
unto God throughout the world a Sacrifice of Bread and Wine. That venerable Bede one of the greatest lights of the Church of England, in the VIII. Bed. in
Psalm. 133. t. 8. Id. de tabern. l. 2. c. 2. t. 4.
Century, taught, That our Lord had changed the Sacrifices of the Law, into
Sacrifices of Bread and Wine: and that whereas the Ancients celebrated the
Sacrament of the passion of our Lord in the flesh and blood of Sacrifices, we
celebrate it in the Oblation of Bread and Wine. That the Author of the
Commentary of the Epistle to the Hebrews attributed unto Primasius, but which
is of Haimon of Halberstad, or of Remy of Auxerre, and by consequence at least
of the IX. Century, declares, In c. 5. ad Hebr.
That the Lord left unto his Church these two gifts, Bread and Wine, to offer
them in remembrance of him: Amalar. praesat. 2. l. de offic. and l. 3. cap. 25.
And that Amalarius Fortunatus seeks a Sacrament of Jesus Christ in the person
of the Priest, offering Bread, Wine, and Water; and that he says, that the
Sacrificer recommends unto God the Father, that which was offered in stead of
Jesus Christ. That others not contented to speak of an Oblation of Bread and
Wine, have added the quality of this Bread and Wine, saying that they were
Sacraments of the Body and blood of Jesus Christ. The Author of the Commentary
upon Genesis attributed unto Eucherius Bishop of Lions, thus expresses his
thoughts; Eucher. in Genes. l. 2. c. 18.
It has been commanded (says he) that Christians should offer in Sacrifice,
not the bodies of Beasts, as Aaron did, but the Oblation of Bread and Wine,
that is to say, the Sacrament of his body and blood. Words which are yet seen
in St. Isidore Archbishop of Sevill, Isidor. Hisp. in Genesis c. 12.
and which show that where any of the Fathers instead of these words, that is
to say, the Sacrament of his body and blood; have said, that is to say, his
Body and Blood; as St. Cyprian, and the Commentary upon the Epistle to the
Hebrews under the name of Primasius, it must of necessity be taken in the sense
of St. Eucherius and St. Isidore; otherwise they would be made to clash amongst
themselves, and those would be made to seem Enemies, whose Doctrine differed
not from one another: as will evidently appear if the passages of the one are
compared with the others; and if the terms and expressions of the latter are
carefully heeded, with what went before and follows after. It is also by the
same Principle that the same St. Isidore says elsewhere, Idem de Allegor Idem
de voc. c. 26.
That the Sacrament of the Body and blood of Christ, that is to say, the
Oblation of Bread and Wine, is offered all the world over, and that Christians
do not now offer Jewish Sacrifices, such as the Sacrificer Aaron offered, but
such as were offered by Melchizedeck King of Salem, that is to say, Bread and
Wine; which is the most venerable Sacrament of the Body and blood of Christ.
Theodor. in Psalm. 109, Heb. 10.
As for the famous Theodoret, it is true that he speaks not of the Oblation of
Bread and Wine, but yet he sufficiently explains himself, when he says, That
the Church offers the Symbols of the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ,
sanctifying the whole lump by the first fruits. Others in fine, have showed
their belief on this point, in saying, that Jesus Christ offered, and that we
offer in the Eucharist, the same things Melchisedeck offered. It is what
Clement of Alexandria meant by these words, That Melchisedeck presented Bread
and Wine; Clem. Alex. Stromat. l. 4 p. 539. Cyprian. Ep. 63.
a Food sanctified in Type of the Sacrament. And S. Cyprian, when he said, That
our Lord offered unto God the Father, the same Sacrifice which Melchisedeck had
done, that is, Bread and Wine, to wit, his Body and Blood. For as he says
again, not to leave the least doubt in the mind of the Reader; Ibid.
We see prefigured in the High Priest Melchisedeck, the Sacrament of the
Sacrifice of our Lord; as the Divine Scripture testifies, when it says, and
Melchisedeck King of Salem brought Bread and Wine. Thence it is, that he
observes in the same little Treatise, some lines after the words before
mentioned; Ibid.
That the Lord accomplishing and perfecting the Image of his Sacrifice, offered
Bread, and the Cup mixed with Water. And Eusebius Bishop of Caesarea, does not
he say, Eusebius. demonst. l. 5. c. 3.
That Jesus Christ does at present accomplish by his Servants, as Melchisedeck
did, all the Sacrifice that there is to be performed amongst men; that Jesus
Christ first of all, and then all his Ministers, do by Bread and Wine declare
and show the Mysteries of his precious Body and Blood; and that Melchisedeck
having foreseen these things by the Spirit of God, made use before of the types
of future things, the Scripture witnessing that he brought out Bread and Wine?
It was also, if I mistake not, the meaning of S. Ambrose, when going to prove
that the Sacraments of the Church, were ancienter than those of the Synagogue,
Ambros. l. de init. c. 8. t. 4. p. 349. Chrysostom. in Psalm. 109.
he says, That Abraham which was before Moses, received the Sacraments of
Melchisedeck. Wherefore (says S. Chrysostom) said he, After the Order of
Melchisedeck? because of the Sacraments; for he offered unto Abraham Bread and
Wine. And therefore it is, that the Author of the imperfect work upon S.
Matthew, Hom. 19.
amongst his works, defines the Christian man, by him which offers the
Sacrifice of Bread and Wine. Hieron. Ep. 126.
S. Jerome in one of his Letters touching Melchisedeck, follows the Opinion of
several ancient Doctors who preceded him, and who had said, That Melchisedeck
did not offer Sacrifices of flesh and blood, but that he consecrated the
Sacrament of Jesus Christ with Bread and Wine, Id. advers. Jovin. l. 2.
which is a pure and spotless Sacrifice. And elsewhere he says, That our
Savior offered in type of his Blood, not Water, but Wine. S. Austin was of no
other mind, when he taught in diverse parts of his Writings; August. Ep. 95. Id.
l. de 83. q. q. 61. t. 4. Id de Civit. Dei. l. 16. c 22.
for example, when he said, That Melchisedeck foreshewed the Sacrament of our
Lord, to represent his eternal Priesthood; that we now see offered throughout
the whole World in the Church of Jesus Christ, that which Mechisedeck offered
unto God. That when Abraham was blessed by Melchisedeck, the Sacrifice now
offered unto God by Christians throughout the whole World, was first of all
shown; that to eat Bread in the New Testament, is the Sacrifice of Christians;
and that in all places is offered the Priesthood of Jesus Christ, which
Melchisedeck brought when he blessed Abraham; let those who read, Ib. l. 17 c.
5. Ib. c. 17. Id contr. advers. leg. l. 1. c. 20. Isid. Pelus l. 1. Ep. 431.
Arnob. in Psalm. 109.
know what Melchisedeck brought when he blessed Abraham, and that if they be
already partakers of it, they may see that such a Sacrifice is now offered unto
God throughout the World. It is in substance what is said by S. Isidore of
Damietta, That Melchisedeck executing the Priesthood with Bread and Wine, by
them signified the type of Divine Mysteries. And Arnobius the younger, That our
Savior by the Mystery of Bread and Wine, was made a Priest for ever, after the
order of Melchisedeck, who alone amongst the Priests, offered Bread and Wine.
Hesyc. in Levit. l. 6. c. 23. Cassiod. in Psalm. 109.
And Hesychius Priest of Jerusalem, That the oblation of the Mystical
Melchisedeck, is accomplished in Bread and Wine. And Cassiodorus, That the
Institution of Melchisedeck who offered Bread and Wine, is celebrated
throughout the World, in the distribution of the Sacraments. And the supposed
Eusebius of Emissa, in one of his Easter Sermons, That Melchisedeck, did
foreshew by the oblation of Bread and Wine, the Sacrifice of Jesus Christ. It
is also the opinion of the Author of the Commentary of the Epistle to the
Hebrews in the Works of S. Ambrose, In cap. 5. ad Hebr.
and which some have imagined to be of Remy of Auxerr, but which indeed are of
Anselm Archbishop of Canterbury, who lived at the end of the Eleventh, and
beginning of the Twelfth Century; of Theophylact in the Eleventh Century; of
Oecumenius about the same time, both of them upon the fifth Chapter of the
Epistle to the Hebrews; and in fine, of Nicetas, who said in the Twelfth
Century, in the Confession of Faith made for those which were converted from
Mahometism, unto the Religion of Jesus Christ, T. 12. Bibl. Patr. p. 532.
That it is Bread and Wine, which is spiritually sacrified by Christians, and
which they do receive in the Divine Sacraments. See then three several
Oblations practiced by several of the ancient Christians in the Celebration of
their Sacrament; and which have all three given unto this Sacrament the name of
Sacrifice, and which the Holy Fathers have called a Sacrifice of Bread and
Wine, considering particularly that Oblation which is made unto God of the
Symbols after their Consecration, and after the change which may thereunto
happen after the sanctification: and this Tradition has been so constant, so
uniform, and so universal, that it may be said, That it has been believed by
all, at all times, and in all places; which be the three signs that Vincentius
Lerinensis desired may be admitted, in receiving all Catholic and Orthodox
Doctrine.

But besides the reasons which moved the holy Fathers to call the Sacrament a
Sacrifice, there be several others, which it is necessary to examine, that it
might evidently appear what was the nature and form of this Sacrifice amongst
them. And first, I find that they considered the Eucharist as a memorial of the
Sacrifice of the Cross; and because for the most part, memorials do take their
name from the thing whereof they be memorials, they have made no difficulty to
call it a Sacrifice, as indeed this name may very fitly be given unto it; and
not only the name of a Sacrifice; but even of a true Propitiatory Sacrifice,
because it is the memorial of one that is truly such: It is in this prospect
they have called it the Passion; Cyprian Ep. 63.
the Sacrifice which we offer, says S. Cyprian, is the passion of our Lord:
But this is to be observed, that we make mention of the Passion of our Lord in
all the Sacrifices. Thereby in a manner confounding the death of our Lord, with
the commemoration which we make of it in the Sacrament, by reason of the near
relation which there is betwixt the Memorial, and the thing whereof the
remembrance is renewed. Accordingly Eusebius said, speaking of the Institution
of the Sacrament; Eusebius. l. 1. Them. c. 10.
That Jesus Christ commanded us to offer unto God, instead of the Sacrifice;
the memorial of his Sacrifice. And S. Chrysostom having said, in speaking of
the Oblation of the Sacrament, Chrysostom. Hom. 17. ad Heb.
We always make the same Sacrifice, adds presently by way of correction, But
rather we make the commemoration of the Sacrifice: August. l. 83. quaest. q. 61.
which S. Austin says, is, to celebrate the type of his Sacrifice in
remembrance of his passion. Id. contr. Faust. l. 20. c. 21.
To celebrate the Sacrifice of our Lord by a Sacrament of commemoration: L. 3.
de Trin. c. 4.
And to receive the Bread and Wine of the Eucharist, in remembrance of the
death which he suffered for us. Therefore he observes elsewhere, that although
Jesus Christ was but once offered up, yet nevertheless it may be said, that he
is every day offered, when in the Sacrament, there is made a commemoration of
this Sacrifice. Id. Ep. 23.
Jesus Christ (says he) was once offered in his body, and yet he is offered
unto the people in the Sacrament, not only in the solemnities of Easter, but
also on other days; and he lied not, who being asked, answers, that he is
sacrificed. Theodoret was of the same mind as the others; Theodor. in Ep ad
Heb. c. 8.4.
for making himself this Objection, Wherefore was it that the Priests of the
New Testament make the Mystical Liturgy, (that is to say, the Eucharist) if it
be true that the Priesthood according to the Law was abrogated? and that the
High Priest after the order of Melchisedeck, offered a Sacrifice; and that for
this reason he did it, that we may have no more need of another Sacrifice? see
here how he resolves this difficulty, It is manifest unto those that are
instructed in Divine matters, that we do not offer another Sacrifice, but that
we do or celebrate, the remembrance of that only saving Sacrifice (he means
that of the Cross) for the Lord himself has commanded us, Do this in
remembrance of me; to the end that by contemplating the Figure, we may bring to
our minds what he suffered for us, thereby to inflame our love unto our
Benefactor, and to expect the enjoyment of good things to come. Eulogius
Patriarch of Alexandria, contemporary and friend unto Gregory the First,
followed the others steps, when he said, Eulog. apud Phot. Cod. ult.
That the Sacrament which we celebrate, is not an oblation of diverse
Sacrifices, but the commemoration of the Sacrifice which was once offered. The
same language was used in the Ninth Century, seeing that Bertram or Ratramn
said; That the Oblation which Jesus Christ once offered, Bertram. de corp. and
Sang. Domini.
is every day celebrated by the faithful, but mystically and in remembrance of
his Passion; and that nevertheless it is not falsely said, that the Lord is
sacrificed, or that he suffers in these Mysteries, because they have a
resemblance of this death and passion, whereof they are the representations,
Id. Ibid.
etc. That the Bread and the Cup do represent the memorial of the death of our
Lord, and that they are set upon the Altar in type and memory of his death, to
represent unto our memory, what was formerly done; and that to the end we
thinking of this death, he who has delivered us from death, might make us to
partake of the Divine Oblation. And the Deacon Florus, said he not at the same
time, Flor. in Exposit. Miss.
That the Oblation of this Bread and this Cup, is the commemoration and
annunciation of the death of Jesus Christ, and that the commemoration of the
death of Christ is the showing forth of his love, because he so loved us as to
die for us? If we descend lower, Peter Lombard Master of the Sentences, will
tell us in the Twelfth Century, Lombard. l. 4. sentent. did. 12. litt. g.
That is called a Sacrifice and Oblation which is offered and consecrated by
the Priest, because it is the memorial and representation of the true
Sacrifice; and of the holy immolation which was made upon the Altar of the
Cross. And Thomas Aquinas in the Thirteenth Century; That the Celebration of
the Eucharist, Thom. sunn part. 3. q. 83. part. 1.
is called the immolation of Jesus Christ; because, as S. Austin says unto
Simplicius, the Images are wont to take their name from those things whereof
they be Images; and that the Celebration of this Sacrament, is a certain
representative type of the death of Jesus Christ, which is his true immolation;
therefore the Celebration of this Sacrament is called Immolation.

Secondly, the Eucharist being an act of our duty toward God, and toward his
Son, for the admirable and ineffable benefit of his Death, the ancient Doctors
might also in this regard, call it by the name of Eucharistical Sacrifice, of
Thanksgiving, of Prayer, and of Acknowledgement. This in appearance was the
meaning of St. Chrysostom, when he said, Chrysostom. in Matthew. Hom. 26.
That the venerable Mysteries are called Eucharist, because they are a
commemoration of sundry benefits, and because they dispose us always to render
thanks unto God. And because God is honored with two very different qualities,
one of Creator, the other of Redeemer; we give him thanks, that as Creator, he
gives unto us the Fruits of the Earth, and we then consecrate unto him the
Bread and Wine as the Firstfruits of his Creatures: and that in quality of
Redeemer, he has given unto us the Body and Blood of his Son, and in this
regard we consecrate unto him the Bread and Wine, as Memorials of the bloody
death of our Savior. St. Ireneus observes this use as to the first regard;
Iren. l. 4. cap. 34.
We are obliged (says he) to make our offerings unto God, and that in all
things we should be thankful unto the Creator, but that must be done with pure
affections, and with a sincere Faith, a firm hope, and ardent Charity; in
offering unto him the First fruits of his Creatures, which are his; but it is
only the Church which offers unto God this pure Oblation, presenting unto him,
with Prayers, of the Creatures which he has made. St. Austin (if I be not
deceived) intended to touch the latter regard, when speaking of the Sacrifice
of the Cross, August. l. 20. contr. Faust. cap. 21.
he said, That the flesh and blood of this Sacrifice had been promised before
the coming of Christ by typical Sacrifices of resemblance, that in the passion
of Jesus Christ they were accomplished by the truth it self, and that after his
Ascension they are celebrated by a Sacrament of Commemoration. But Justin
Martyr has joined both together in his Excellent Dialogue against Tryphon;
Jesus Christ (says he) has commanded us to make the Bread of the Sacrament in
Commemoration of the Death which he suffered for those whose Souls have been
purified from all malice, Just. Mart. dialog. contr. Tryph. p. 259, 260.
to the end we should neturm thanks unto God for the Creation of the World, and
the things which are therein for the use of Man: And for that he has delivered
us from the wickedness wherein we lay, having triumphed over Principalities and
Powers by him, who in executing the good pleasure of his will, was pleased to
take upon him a frail Nature. In the third place, the Holy Fathers considering
that the Eucharist serves us now, in the room of Mosaical Sacrifices, being our
outward worship under the dispensation of the Gospel, as the Sacrifices were
the Jewish Service under the Economy of the Law, they have freely called it
Sacrifice; and rightly to understand in what sense they have given it this
Title, in the consideration that it is our Worship and exterior Service, we
must consider, that they often take this word Sacrifice in a very large
extended and improper sense; therefore it is, that they apply it unto all the
acts of Piety and Devotion, and generally unto all things that pertain unto the
worship of our Savior; in which they have followed the style of the Holy
Scriptures, that so speak in many places; David calls the contrite heart, Psalm.
51.
a Sacrifice well pleasing unto Almighty God. The Prophet calls it, Hosea. c.
14. Heb. 13. Philip. 4.
rendering Calves of our lips, which the Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews
explains, The fruit of the Lips, which confessed the name of God. The Apostle
gives the name of Sacrifices, unto the blessing, communication, 1 Peter 2.
and praises of God. St. Peter considers good works, as spiritual sacrifices
agreeable unto God through Jesus Christ; Romans 12. Romans 15. Philip. 2.
and St. Paul, the sanctification of a faithful Christian, as a sacrifice of
his Body; The preaching of the Doctrine of our Lord Jesus Christ, as the
sacrifice of the Gospel, to offer the Gentiles; And elsewhere he fears not to
say, that our Faith is a Sacrifice. 2 Timoth. 4.
And the blood which he was to shed for his blessed Master, a sprinkling which
was to be made upon this Sacrifice; Therefore it is that St. Peter and S. 1
Peter 2. Rev. 1. and. 5.
John call all Believers in general, Sacrificers, according to what had been
prophesied under the Old Testament. The Holy Fathers being accustomed unto the
style of the Scriptures, have also termed Sacrifices, all the works of Piety,
Devotion, Charity, Almsdeeds, Prayer, giving Thanks, and in a word all things
which any way related unto the Worship and Service of Religion; so far as St.
Cyprian says, to sacrifice a Child, Cypr. Ep. 59.
in making it to communicate after Baptism. And in another place, He gives the
name of Sacrifice unto a Present that was sent unto him in his banishment,
because it proceeded from a motive of Charity, and that it was a kind of
contributing toward his maintenance: so Justin Martyr says, Just. Mart.
contr. Tryph. p. 345. Strom. l. 7. p. 717.
That Prayers and Thanksgivings are the only perfect and agreeable sacrifices
wellpleasing unto God. Clement of Alexandria speaks of Prayer, as of a very
good and holy Sacrifice, and says, That the Sacrifice of the Church, is the
words which proceed from devout Souls as by exaltation. And Tertullian does not
he assure, Ad Scap. c. 2.
That the Christians sacrifice unto God for the safety of the Emperor, by pure
prayer only? and that prayer-made by chaste flesh of an innocent Soul, and of a
holy mind, is the fattest and most excellent Sacrifice that God has required?
Does not he also explain the pure Oblation of Malachy, Apol. c. 30.
of Glorification, of Benediction, Praise, Hymns, Contr. Marc. l. 3. c. 22. and
4. c. 1. De pat. c. 13. de jejun. c. 26. de usur. c. 8. Minut. in Oct.
and of Prayer proceeding from a pure heart; and in fine, does he not reckon
amongst the propitiatory Sacrifices and Oblations, Mortifications,
Humiliations, Contritions, Fastings, and strictness of life. Minutius Felix
makes the Sacrifices of the Christian Church to consist in good works, and in
the works of sanctification and holiness, in an upright heart, in a pure
conscience, and in faith unfeigned. It is whereof Origin gives us several
instances in one of his Homilies upon Levitious; and I do not see what other
interpretation can be given unto what is said by the Divine of the ancient
Church, Greg. Naz. orat. 20.
I mean Gregory of Naziunzen when he says, That S. Basil is in Heaven offering
Sacrifices and Praying; explaining the Sacrifices to be Prayers which the
Saints offer unto God in Heaven, and that he says of himself, Id. orat. 42.
That he sacrifices his discourse of Easter, and that when he is in Heaven, he
will there sacrifice unto God upon his Altar, Chrysostom. in Genesis hom. 9.
Sacrifices well pleasing in his sight. It was also the Language of Chrysostom,
who looks upon Prayer as a very great Sacrifice, and a perfect Oblation; Id. in
Mart. hom. 16.
And in one of his Homilies upon St. Matthew, he says, that those who are not
yet initiated, do offer an Oblation and Sacrifice, which is prayer and
Alms-deeds. And St. Ambrose, Ambros. de fug saec. c. 8. t. 1.
That wisdom is a very good Sacrifice; and Faith and Virtue, a good Oblation;
that Prayer it self is a Sacrifice. Id. Ep. 59. Aurel. c. 29. etc. 3. collect.
Mart. Bracar. Conc. Carth. 3. c. 29. in cod 41. Aug. de civit l. 10. c. 4. Ep.
95. Id. Hom. 50. de poenit. t. 10.
Also we find in some Canons of Councils, that the Prayers and Service of
Morning and Evening, are called, Morning and Evening Sacrifices; and that it is
commanded, That if a dead Person is to be recommended in the afternoon, it is
to be by Prayers only, if it be found that those who do it have dined.
According to which St. Austin speaks of Sacrificing unto God a Sacrifice of
Praise and Humility, and says, That we offer unto him Bloody Sacrifices, when
we suffer unto Blood for his Truth. And in one of his Letters he opposes the
Sacrifice of Prayer, offered by Christians, unto the Sacrifices of the Law,
which were offered for the sins of Men. And elsewhere he requires, That every
one, as he is able, do not cease to offer, for the Sins which he commits every
day, the Sacrifice of Almsdeeds, Fasting, Prayers, and Supplications: wherefore
he gives us this definition of the true Sacrifice, having regard, not to its
Essence, but to its end and effect, which is to direct us unto the enjoyment of
Blessedness and Felicity: The true Sacrifice (says he) is every work which we
do, Id. de Civit. l. 10. c. 6.
to be nearer united unto God by a holy Fellowship, viz. by referring him unto
the end of that good which may render us truly happy. It cannot then be thought
strange, that the ancient Doctors of the Church, having given the name of
Sacrifice unto all the Acts of Piety, unto all the Works of Sanctification, and
unto all that we do for the Glory of God, and for his Service, should also
qualify the holy Eucharist with the same Title, seeing that it makes one of
the essential parts of the Worship of Christian Religion, and that it even
comprehends in substance the greatest part of the things relating thereunto,
and whereof it is composed, as Prayers, giving of Thanks, the offering up of
our Goods and our Persons, Repentance, Compunction, Faith, Hope, and Charity;
and to speak in a word, all the Holy and Divine Dispositions which we should
bring unto the holy Table, and without which one cannot worthily partake of
this adorable Mystery of our Salvation.

But because these things which we have touched, and which the Holy Fathers
frequently call Sacrifices, are not nevertheless Sacrifices, properly so
called, to take Sacrifice in its proper and true signification; I observe that
these same Fathers, in answering the Jews and Pagans, who found fault that
there were not in the Christian Religion any true external Sacrifices, as there
were in theirs, agreed with them, That in very truth they had none; but that
instead of those outward and external Sacrifices, which were as it were the
Soul and Essence of the Jews Religion, and of all the Pagans, they had a
worship wholly spiritual, a service Heavenly and wholly Divine; without
touching in this place the silence of all those who in the first Ages of
Christianity undertook the defense of this holy Religion of the Son of God: for
in all their Apologies they spoke not one word of the external Sacrifices of
Christians, though they were not ignorant that it had been the fittest and most
effectual way to have invited the Pagans and Jews unto the Profession of the
Gospel: on the contrary they explain themselves so clearly on this matter, that
it is not to be wondered at, that their Enemies should shun a Religion wherein,
by the confession and owning of those very persons who defended it by the
purity and innocence of their writings, there were no such Sacrifices as those,
whom they desired to convert, did look for and expect: for instance, St Justin
Martry, retorting the calumny of Atheism and Impiety, wherewith the Jews and
Pagans endeavored to slander our holy Religion by reason thereof, is content
to say, Just. Mar. Apol. 2. vel 1. p. 58, 60.
That there are no other Sacrifices to be made but Prayers and giving Thanks,
which sweeten all the other Oblations which we make unto God, to honor him as
we are bound, and according to his Merit. Id. Ep. ad Diogn. p. 495, 496.
And in another part of his Works he rejects the Sacrifices of Jews and Pagans,
but without assigning unto Christians any, which, to speak properly, may be so
called: He also does almost the very same in disputing against Tryphon the Jew,
Id. contr. Tryph. p. 238, 239, 240.
wherein he shows that the Service of God does not consist in their
Sacrifices, and that therefore is the reason Christians do not offer any,
without saying they have others different from theirs; he indeed confesses in
the same Dialogue, That the Christians offer unto God an Oblation well pleasing
in his sight, according to the Prophecy of Malachy, when they do celebrate
their Eucharist of Bread and Wine: And when his Adversary explains these
Oblations and Sacrifices of Malachy, of Prayers and Invocations, which those of
the Jewish Nation who were in Captivity addressed unto our Lord for removing
their Calamity and Misery, St. Justin makes this Answer, Ibid. p. 344, 345.
I fay also, That the Prayers and Thanksgivings of Saints and Believers are the
only Sacrifices perfect and well pleasing unto God, and that they be the only
Sacrifices which Christians have learned to make, even then it self when they
celebrate the Sacrament. It is what he designs by the wet and dry Food, and it
is therein he says that they show forth a commemoration of the Death of the
Lord. Afterward this holy Doctor observes, That in the days of Malachy there
were no Jews scattered abroad over the World; whereas amongst all Nations, and
all Countries of the World, at the time our glorious Martyr wrote; there were
offered unto God the Creator of all things, Prayers and Thanksgivings in the
Name of Christ Jesus; whence it is that he says of Christians in general,
Ibid. p. 314. C.
That they are a Royal Priesthood, offering unto God holy and agreeable
Sacrifices, God not accepting any but of his own Priests. Athenagoras in his
Apology for the Christians, making himself the same objection that Justin
Martyr did, on the behalf of the Enemies of the Gospel of Jesus Christ,
answers no otherwise than he had done; he represents, That God, who made all
things, has no need of Blood, of Odors, Flowers, nor Perfumes; That the great
Sacrifice which he desires, is, That we should know him, That we should be
instructed in the greatness of his power, whereby he has stretched out the
Heavens, gathered the Waters together in the Sea, divided betwixt Light and
Darkness, beautified the Sky with Stars, caused the Earth to increase, created
Beasts, and made Man; That it suffices to lift up pure hands to him, who
stands not in need of any other Oblation, or more splendid Sacrifice:
Athenag. pro Christ. p. 13. Minut. in Octav.
Whereunto he adds, But what need have I to be troubled for Offerings and
Sacrifices, seeing God cares not for them; he requires an unbloody Sacrifice,
a reasonable Service: and when the Pagan asks this Question of the Christian in
Minutius Felix, Wherefore the Christians have no Temples nor Altars, the
Christian answers, Do you think that we do conceal what we worship under a show
that we have no Temples nor Altars; and thereupon he makes this excellent
reflection, worthy of the School of Jesus Christ, That the Sacrifice which
ought to be offered unto God, is a good Soul, a pure Conscience, and Faith
unfeigned; That to live uprightly, do Justice, abstain from Evil, and hinder
his Neighbor from hurt, is to offer a fat Sacrifice. These are our Sacrifices,
Orig. contr. Cells. l. 8. p. 389. ult. Edit.
(says he) this is our Service. The Philosopher Celsus in Origin, reproaching
Christians, that they have no Altars; this learned Man agrees with the Pagan,
and confesses that by consequence they also had no Sacrifice, because there is
a strict relation betwixt a a true Altar and a Sacrifice properly so called:
And in the same Book, Ibid. p. 487.
he opposes unto the Sacrifices offered by the Pagans for the Emperors, the
Prayers which Christians made for the conservation of their persons, the
prosperity of their souls, and the establishing of their Empire; and says,
That by them, they fought like Priests of God; which made Tertullian say, as
was before mentioned, Tertul. Apol. C. 30.
That the fairest and fattest Sacrifice which God requires, is prayer from a
pure heart, an innocent soul, and a holy mind; and that it is that also which
they offer for the preservation of the Emperors. It is of prayer also, that he
explains in the same work, Ibid. c. 39.
this excellent Oblation; and that he says elsewhere, That that is done by
prayer only which God has commanded, Ibid. ad Scap. c. 2. Clem. Alex. Strom.
l. 7. p. 707.
because the Creator of the Universe has no need of Blood and of Incense. And
Clement of Alexandria, does not he make this Declaration? That we do not
sacrifice unto God, who stands in need of nothing; but that we do glorify
him that was sacrificed for us, in sacrificing of our own selves; that we
honor him by prayers; Ibid. p. 717.
that we do justly offer unto him this most excellent and most holy Sacrifice;
Ibid.
that the Altar which we have upon Earth, is the Assembly of those which are
dedicated unto prayer, as if they had but one heart and one mind. Ibid. p. 719.
That the Sacrifice of the Church is the Word, which like sweet Incense
proceeds from devout souls; That the truly sound Altar is the just upright
soul; That not sumptuous Sacrifices should be offered unto God, but such as may
be acceptable unto him; That the Sacrifices of Christians are prayers, praises,
Ibid. p. 728.
the reading the holy Scriptures, Hymns and Psalms, the instructing the
ignorant, and liberality to the Poor. But nothing can be seen clearer and more
positive, than what is said by Arnobius in the beginning of the Fourth Century:
this Christian Orator, having related at the end of his Sixth Book, that the
Pagans were wont to make grievous reproaches against the Christians, and to
call them Atheists, because they did not sacrifice; He thus begins his Seventh
Book, What then, will some say, Arnob. contr. gent. lib. 7. init.
think you that no Sacrifice at all ought to be made? There ought indeed none
to be made (says he) to the end to give you the opinion of your Varro, and not
ours only. Lactantius his Contemporary, and of the same profession, Lactant.
instit, l. 6. c. 25.
having undertaken to treat of a Sacrifice, therein considers two things, The
Gift, and the Sacrifice it self; And he says, That the one and the other ought
to be incorporeal, that is, Spiritual, to be offered unto God, that the
integrity of the soul is the Oblation, that the Praise and Hymn is the
Sacrifice; That if God is invisible, he must then be served with invisible
things. He approves the Maxim of Trismegistus, That the Benediction only is
the Sacrifice of the true God: And thence he concludes, That the highest manner
of serving God, is the praise offered unto him by the mouth of a just man. And
elsewhere he says, That he will show what is the orue Sacrifice of God, and
the truest manner of serving him; And see here how he does it; He says first,
That God does not require of us either Sacrifices or perfumes, or other the
like presents, that for incorporeal (that is, Spiritual Natures) there must be
an incorporeal Sacrifice, (that is to say, Spiritual). And afterward, What is
it then, Id. Epitem^ c. 2.
says he, that God requires of man, but the service of the understanding,
which is pure and holy? for as for the things done with the Fingers, or that
are without the man, they are not a true Sacrifice; the true Sacrifice is, what
proceeds out of the heart, and not what is taken out of the Coffer ^ it is,
what is offered not with the hand, but with the heart; it is the agreeable
Sacrifice which the soul offers of it self. In fine, he concludes, that
righteousness is the only thing which God requires of us, and that it is
therein the service and Sacrifice consists which God desires. Cyril. Alex. l.
10. contr. Julian. t. 6, p. 343.
It will not be unnecessary to join unto these Witnesses, S. Cyril Bishop of
Alexandria, who refutes the Writing published against the Christians by Julian
the Apostate about seventy years before; in which Writing this foul Deserter of
the Truth, taxed them amongst other things, that they approached not unto the
Sacrifices and Oblations of the Altars, and that they did not sacrifice; yet
this wicked wretch was not ignorant of what was practiced in the Worship and
Service of the Church, and therefore this reproach must needs have some show of
truth, otherwise he had exposed himself unto the scorn and contempt of all the
World. And S. Cyril answering in order, unto all that this Apostate had spewed
out against the Religion of Jesus Christ, would not have failed to have cried,
O the Impostor, if the Christians of his time, that is, of the Fifth Century,
had truly sacrificed, and if they had amongst them real Sacrifices. Let us then
see, and without prejudice exactly examine what S. Cyril replied unto this
Wretch's reproach: Ibid. p. 344. B.
He freely confesses that Christians do not sacrifice any more; Because the
types and figures having given place unto the truth, we are commanded to
consecrate unto God Almighty a pure and spiritual service: Ibid. p. 345. B.
Unto fire which formerly came down from Heaven upon the Sacrifices, and which
we have not now, he opposes the Holy Ghost, Ibid. C.
which proceeding from the Father by the Son, comes and illuminates the Church.
Unto Oxen, Sheep, Pigeons, Doves, unto the Fruits, Meal and Oil of the
Israelites, be opposes our spiritual and reasonable Oblations: And explaining
unto us wherein they consist, and their nature and quality; We offer unto God
(says he) an Odor of a sweet savor, all manner of virtue or truth, Faith,
Hope, Charity, Justice, Temperance, Obedience, Humility, a continual Praise,
and Thanksgiving (of the Lord and his works) and all the other virtues; for
this Sacrifice purely Spiritual, agrees well with God, whose Nature is purely
simple and immaterial; the life and actions of a truly good man, are the
perfumes of a reasonable service. And having alleged some passages of the holy
Scriptures to confirm this Doctrine, He concludes as he began, Ibid. p. 346. C.
We sacrifice unto God (says he) Spiritual things, and instead of material
fire, we are filled with the Holy Ghost.

From this same Fountain, proceeds another Doctrine of these first Conducters
of the Christian Churches, which consists in instructing Believers, and
teaching them what had succeeded unto the Sacrifices of the Law. I do not find
after an exact scrutiny, that they allege or insist upon the Sacrament, but
they are contented to oppose unto the Mosaical Sacrifices, either the
Spiritutal Sacrifices which we offer unto God under the Gospel, or the truly
propitiatory Sacrifice of the Cross, or both of them together. In regard of the
former, the Author of the Apostolical Constitutions, Constable. Apost. l. 2. c. 25.
said, That unto the Sacrifices of the Law, succeeded prayers, vows, and giving
of thanks; and that the First fruits, Tithes, and portions, and gifts of those
times, are now changed into the Oblations which the Bishops offer unto God
through Jesus Christ, who died for all. He means, the Oblations of Bread and
Wine which Believers made, and generally all things presented by them unto God,
in behalf of the Christian people. Thence it is, that he says also elsewhere;
Id. l. 6. c. 23.
That instead of Sacrifices which were made by shedding of blood, Jesus Christ
has given to us a reasonable Sacrifice, Mystical and unbloody, which is
celebrated in remembrance of his death, by the Symbols of his Body and Blood:
In which words indeed he makes mention of the Eucharist, but as of a Mystical
and Spiritual Sacrifice, and in the same sense which he said, That our
Sacrifices at present are prayers, and giving of thanks. Origin in all his
Homilies upon Leviticus, does very exactly after his manner, seek for all the
mystical significations of the ancient Sacrifices; but I do not find that he
does once speak of a propitiatory Sacrifice offered every day unto God by
Christians. Origin. Hom. 2. in Levit.
In the second Homily he mentions at large the means which we have under the
Gospel, besides that of holy Baptism, to obtain the remission of our sins; Ib.
Hom. 5.
but amongst all those means, I do not find the Sacrifice of the Eucharist: In
the fifth he shows how the Ministers of the Gospel do make propitiation for the
sins of the people, but he only alleges for that, the instructions and
remonstrances, by the which in converting sinners, God is pleased to become
favorable and propitious unto them; and in the Ninth, Ib. Hem. 9.
he does not apply the duty and functions of the legal Sacrifices, for offering
Sacrifices, but unto Believers, who offer spiritual Sacrifices unto God. Id.
Hom. 17. in Jos.
And in another place, making an antithesis and, comparison of the Jewish
Worship with the Christian, he places the Altar and Sacrificer of the
Christians in the Heavens, without making mention of any other Altar. Zeno of
Verona having asserted, Zeno Veron. Hom. in Psalm. 49.
there were three kinds of Sacrifices, that of the Jews, of the Gentiles, and
of Christians, he understands the Sacrifice of the latter, of that of Malachi,
and expounds it to be a Sacrifice of praise, and of a spiritual Sacrifice of
our own selves. Greg. Nazian. orat. 1.
Sacrifice (says he) unto God a Sacrifice of thanksgiving, and present your
bodies a living Sacrifice well pleasing unto God. Gregory Nazianzen could have
no other meaning, when he affirmed as an undoubted truth that the Sacrifice of
praise, and a contrite heart, is the only Sacrifice which God requires of us.
And S. Ambrose does he not say; That under the Law there were Sacrifices for
sins; but that at present they be Sacrifices of Repentance? Ambros. Ep. 59.
Therefore it is, that the Author of the Commentaries upon the Psalms inserted
in S. Jerome's Works, places no other Sacrifices, Hieron. in Ps. 49.50.9^.
instead of those of the Law, but spiritual Sacrifices, and the Oblation of our
own selves: but there is nothing to be found in the Writings of the Ancients,
neither more excellent, nor richer upon this Subject, than these excellent
words of the admirable S. Chrysostom We have (says he) our Sacrifice in
Heaven, Chrysostom. Hom. 11. in cap. 6. ad Hebr.
our Priest and our Sacrifice; let us offer such Sacrifices as may be offered
in that Sanctuary, not Sheep, and Oxen, not Blood and Fat, as heretofore; all
these things are abolished, and a reasonable service is brought in in their
place; and what is a reasonable service? the things which proceed from the
soul, the things which come from the Mind. God (says he) is a Spirit, and
those who worship him, must worship him in spirit and in truth; things which
have no need of a Body, of Organs, and of place; as modesty, Id. ibid.
temperancee, alms-deeds, long-suffering, patience, and humility. And a little
after he adds, That there be also other Oblations, which are true Sacrifices,
to wit, the bodies of holy Martyrs.

As to the second regard, Origin considering the Sacrifice of the Cross, and
looking upon it as the Body, the fullness and substance of all the typical and
figurative Sacrifices of the Law; he opposes it unto them, as that only which
they did represent, and which was to be the only true Sacrifice of the
Christian Religion: for having observed, Origin in Number. Hom. 17.
That the venom of the Devil is expelled by the Sacrifices offered unto God, he
adds, that whilst the time admitted of it, Sacrifice was opposed against
Sacrifice; but when the true Sacrifice and Lamb without spot, came to take away
the sins of the World, those Sacrifices which were successively offered unto
God, then seemed needless, seeing that by one only Sacrifice, Chrysostom. in
Joan. Hom. 17.
the whole Worship of Devils was destroyed. And S. Chrysostom having said,
That Jesus Christ takes away the sins of the World, without being often
crucified, gives this reason; for (says he) he offered one sole Sacrifice for
sins, but he always cleanses us by this sole Sacrifice. Id. Hom. 13, in c. ^
ad Hebr.
And elsewhere, When you are told that Jesus Christ is a Priest, do not imagine
that he always does the Function; for he did it once, and then sat down and
rested. And thereupon having observed, That standing related unto the
humiliation of our Lord, and that as he continued not a Servant, so also he
continued not a Sacrificer; He thus continues his Discourse, That shows the
greatness of the Sacrifice, because it sufficed, being but One, and having been
offered but once: and a little after, There is no other Sacrifice, one alone
has cleansed us, and without this Sacrifice, says he, Hell fire could not be
avoided. Therefore the Apostle turns these words every way, One Priest, one
Sacrifice; fearing lest some, thinking there were several, should sin boldly,
and without fear. S. Austin was of the same Judgment, Aug. de Trinit. l. 4. c.
13.
seeing he taught, That the Lord washed, abolished, and extinguished by his
Death, which is the sole, only and true Sacrifice offered for us, Id. contr.
advers. leg. l. 1. c. 18.
all manner of sins and offenses, for the which we were justly held under the
Empire of Principalities and Powers, to be tormented for them; that the
Sacrifice of the Cross is the only Sacrifice whereof all the ancient Sacrifices
were but shadows; Idem contr. Faust. l. 20. c. 18.
the sole, only and true Sacrifice by which Jesus Christ shed his blood for us;
that the Sacrifice which David offered, to the end God should forgive the sins
of his people, was but a shadow of that which was for to come, to signify,
that by one only Sacrifice, which had been represented by the types of the Law,
God should spiritually provide for the salvation of his people; for it is Jesus
Christ himself who was given up, says the Apostle, for our sins, and which
rose again for our Justification; hence it is also, that he says, that Christ
our Passover is slain. S. Prosper does not come short of S. Austin, when he
makes this question; Prosp. in Ps. 129.
What else is the Propitiation but the Sacrifice; and what the Sacrifice, but
the death of the Lamb which takes away the sins of the World? The Commentary
upon the Epistle to the Hebrews, attributed to Primasius, but which we have
already noted to be of Haymon of Alberstad, or Remy of Auxerr, does frequently
press the unity of the Sacrifice of the Cross, without telling us that there is
any other, Primas. in c. 5. Hebr. t. 1. Bibl. Pat. Id. inc. 7. extr.
as upon the Fifth Chapter, he seeks in Jesus Christ the accomplishment,
inasmuch as there is but once in all the Scriptures, mention made of the
Sacrifice of Melchisedeck; and he finds it, in that the Lord gave himself once
to be sacrificed for us. And in the same Treatise, speaking of the Sacrifice
which Jesus Christ offered for our sins, he says, That he did it once and no
more; because he dyed once for our sins, Id. in c. 10.
and now dies no more. That the Apostle shows the great value of the Death
of Christ, in that it was but once, and that it suffices to take away the sins
of Believers for ever; That Christ who is our Sacrifice, was not offered a
second time, that it was done once, and is not needful to be done again any
more. In one of the Homilies of Easter, which many attribute unto Caesarius
Bishop of Arles, the Author be he who it will, there makes this reflection,
Caesar. Hom. 5. de Pasch.
speaking of Jesus Christ; Because he intended to remove from our sight the
Body which he had taken, and so place it in Heaven; It was necessary that in
that day, he should consecrate for us, the Sacrament of his Body and Blood, to
the end, that we should honor by the type, that which had been once offered
for the price of our Salvation. But S. Basil, or at least the Author of the
Commentaries upon Isaiah, in his Works, has joined both these regards
together, in Interpreting these words of the first Chapter. What have I to do
with the multitude of your Sacrifices? God (says he) rejected the multitude of
Sacrifices, Basil. in c. 1. Es.
and desires but one, which is, That every one should present himself to God, a
living Sacrifice, which may be well pleasing unto him; offering by a reasonable
Sacrifice, the Sacrifice of Praise: for when the multitude of Legal Sacrifices
were rejected as useless, he accepted in the last times, one only Sacrifice,
which was offered for the expiation of sin, because the Lamb of God took away
the sins of the World, offering himself an Oblation and Sacrifice of a sweet
savor. And a little after, Having declared, that the Sacrifices of the Law are
no longer in force; Id. ibid.
he adds, There is one only Sacrifice, which is Christ, and the mortification
of Saints for love of him; one only sprinkling, (that is to say) the washing of
Regeneration; one Expiation of sin, to wit, the Blood which was shed for the
Redemption of the World. It was also in the same sense, that S. Austin,
(expounding what is said in the Fiftieth Psalm, and according to the Hebrews
the Fifty first, August. in Ps. 50.
Had thou desired Sacrifices, I would have given them;) said, That David
lived in the time when Sacrifices, and Beasts, and burnt Offerings were
presented unto God; and he beheld the times which were for to come. Do not we
behold our selves in those words, those Sacrifices were Figures, which
foreshewed the only saving Sacrifice, neither have we been left destitute of a
Sacrifice which we may offer unto God; which he expounds to be of praises and a
contrite heart. Now of this constant Doctrine of the Fathers, proceeded certain
uses which were Religiously observed in the ancient Church; as to have but one
Only Altar or Eucharistical Table in each Temple, of celebrating the Sacrament
but once a day, unless extraordinary necessity required it, as has been
showed; of obliging Believers to Communicate as often as the Sacrament was
celebrated, as shall be hereafter declared; of never celebrating the Sacrament
without Communicants, as all Liturgies do testify, he that celebrates,
speaking almost ever in the Plural number; And that Oblations were received
only of those that were admitted unto the holy Sacrament, so that the liberty
of presenting his gift, was always followed by Communicating, Council.
Eliberit. c. 28. and Carthag. 4. c. 93, 94. Constit. Apostol. l. 4. c. 5. and
l. 3. c. 8. Epiphan. in Panar. extr. Ambros. Ep. 59, and alibi.
as appears by a great many Canons, which are not necessary to be alleged upon
a matter which is not contested, and which is known unto all that have any
knowledge of Ecclesiastical Antiquity; which proceeding, makes me think those
holy Doctors looked upon the Eucharist, as a Sacrament of Communion only. But
it is time to proceed to the Consideration and Examination of the other parts of
the outward Celebration of the Sacrament.

CHAP. IX.
Of the Elevation and breaking the Bread.

WE have Observed in the beginning of the foregoing Chapter, that although
Jesus Christ had broke the Bread presently after having Blessed and Consecrated
it, without any other Ceremony intervening betwixt the Consecration and
Fraction; nevertheless the ancient Christians in process of time, introduced
some other Ceremonies betwixt these two actions, which were not used at the
beginning. I mean the Oblation of the Symbols and the Elevation. Having then
treated of the former, which is of the Oblation, and discovered by that means,
all the Motives and Reasons which obliged the holy Fathers to give unto the
Eucharist the name of Sacrifice, and how they explained themselves upon the
quality and nature of this Sacrifice: Now we must consider the Elevation, which
followed the Oblation, but not very suddenly. It is most certain, that our
Savior made no Elevation, when he Instituted and Celebrated his first
Sacrament; for none of the Evangelists have made any mention of it; the
Christians which followed in the next immediate Age, practiced no such thing,
as appears by the relation made unto us by S. Justin Martyr, of all that was
practiced in that time, in celebrating this August Sacrament; the Liturgies of
this Divine Mystery, which may be seen in the Constitutions which pass in the
Apostles name, in the Writings of the pretended Denis the Areopagite, and in S.
Cyril of Jerusalem's Mystagogicks, do make no mention of this Elevation: So
that for four or five Ages of Christianity, we do not find that this Ceremony
was practiced. But if we do not find the Elevation of the Eucharist mentioned
in the Liturgies of the four or five first Ages of the Church, we do therein
find another practice very conformable unto the state of the Gospel, and unto
the nature of the Sacrament, I mean the lifting up the mind and heart, as S.
Cyprian does expressly teach us; The Priest, says he, before reciting the Lords
Prayer, by a Preface, does prepare the Spirits of the Faithful, saying, Lift up
your hearts, Cyprian. de. Orat Dom.
that the people being warned, in answering, Unto thee O Lord! should think
only of Jesus Christ. An Advertisement found in all the Liturgies which have
been since made, and also even in that of the Latin Church. As for the
Elevation of the Sacrament, there is some mention made of it in the Liturgy,
which goes in the name of S. Chrysostom, Tab. Chronolog. p. 536, 537.
but cannot be his, as the Learned of both Communions acknowledge; Therefore
those who composed the Office of the holy Sacrament, attribute it unto John the
Second, who was also Bishop of Constantinople, but near 200. years after Saint
Chrysostom, that is, toward the end of the VI. Century. And I do not conceive
that this Elevation appeared before that time; so that if it be to be found in
any Liturgy which bears the name of any ancienter Author, for instance, in
that attributed unto S. James, I scarce make any doubt but it was forged, or at
least altered or corrupted. But it is nothing to know that after the four or
five first Ages of Christianity, they begun in some Churches to use the
Elevation of the Sacrament, if we do not also consider for what end they did
elevate it; that is, either to oblige the people to adore it; or for some other
reason. The first that I can find who explained the cause and reason of this
Elevation, was German Patriarch of Constantinople, in his Theory of
Ecclesiastical things, where he very curiously inquires the mystical reasons of
what was practiced in the Church, and particularly, in the celebration of
Divine Mysteries; a Treatise which most Authors attribute unto German who lived
in the VIII. Century, and some unto another of the same name, who was Patriarch
in the XII. After all, the Author of this Theory, being come unto the Inquiry
of this Elevation, crept into the Church about the VI. Century, does
sufficiently give to understand, that it intended not the adoration of the
Sacrament, but only to represent the Elevation of our Savior upon the Cross,
Germ. Constantinop. in Theor. t. 12. Bibl. Patr. p. 407.
and that was its lawful and genuine use and end. The Elevation of the precious
body (says he) represents unto us the Elevation on the Cross, the Death of our
Lord upon the Cross, and his Resurrection also. As for the Latins, the first
that I remember, who bethought himself of finding out a Mystery in the same
Elevation, was Ives of Chartres, at the end of the XI. Century; but all the
Mystery that he therein found, was no more than had been found by this
Patriarch of Constantinople, near 300. years before him; When the Bread and the
Cup (says he) are lifted up by the Ministry of the Deacon, Ivo Carnens. Ep. de
Sacrif. Miss. t. 2. Bibl. Patr. p. 602.
there is Commemoration made of the lifting up of the Body of Christ upon the
Cross: And as this is the first among the Latins, who in the Elevation of the
Sacrament, has discovered the Mystery of the Elevation of our Lord upon the
Cross, so also is he the first of the Latin Church (if I mistake not) who has
writ of this Elevation; for there is no mention of it, neither in S. Gregory,
nor in S. Isidore of Sevil, who both flourished in the beginning of the VII.
Century; nor in Amalarius Fortunatus, nor in Rabunus, Archbishop of Mayence,
nor in Walafridus Strabo, nor in the pretended Alcuin, Authors partly of the
IX. and partly of the X. Century, although they all of them wrote of Divine
Offices, and endeavored to discover the Mystical significations of all things
practiced in Religion in their times, and especially in the Sacrament; unless
it were Gregrory the first, who only left a Liturgy for the Celebration of the
Sacrament. Its true that at the end of Rabanus his first Book of the
Institution of Clerks, there is seen a Fragment by way of supplement, wherein
mention is made of the Elevation whereof we treat, but against the truth of the
Manuscripts, wherein this Fragment is not to be found, besides what the thing
it self evidently declares, that this Famous Prelate was not the Author of it.
Moreover, the Author, whosoever he was, with German and Ives of Chartres,
refers the Elevation he mentions, unto the Elevation of the Body of Jesus
Christ upon the Cross; The Elevation of the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ by
the Priest, Adject. ad Raban. l. 1. de offic. Bibl. patr. t. 10. p. 586. Hug.
de St. Victor. l. 2. c. 28. de Miss. observat. Bibl. Patr. t. 10. p. 1408.
and by the Deacon, imports (says he) his Elevation on the Cross for the
salvation of the World. Hugh of St. Victor an Author of the XII. Century,
discourses no other wise of this Mystery. The Priest (says he) after the sign
of the Cross, lifts with both hands the Sacrament of the Body and Blood of
Jesus Christ, and a little after lays it down; which signifies the Elevation of
Jesus Christ on the Cross, and his laying down into the Grave; The Learned of
the Communion of Rome agree in all this with the Protestants; and James Goar of
the Order of preaching Friars, in his Notes upon the Ritual of the Greek Church
observes, Goar in Eucholog. p. 146. n. 158.
That it is not certainly known when the lifting up the Host was joined unto
the Consecration in the Latin Church; and rejects the Opinion of Durandus, who
maintained it had never been separated from it; and he proves his by the
silence of the Writers above mentioned, unto whom he joins the Author of the
Micrologue, who lived by every bodies confession, in the XI. Century, and the
Roman Order, which some suppose was writ at the same time: And he says, that
both these speak of the Elevation of the Oblation, Ord. Romans t. 10. Bibl. patr.
p. 15.
which is true as to the Micrologue; but as for the Roman Order, it indeed
makes mention of the Elevation of the Cup by the Deacon; for as for the
Elevation of the Host (that is to say) the consecrated Bread, by the Bishop,
Goar ubi supra.
I find no mention thereof in the whole Book: howsoever Goar gives to be
understood, that the Elevation spoken of by these two Authors, tended not unto
Adoration, when he observes, that it was not joined unto Consecration, but that
it was made at the end of the Canon very near the Lords Prayer. Hugh Maynard,
Hug. Menard. in Sacram. Greg. p. 373, 374, 375.
a Benedictine Friar explains himself so fully in his Notes upon Gregory the
first, in his Book of Sacraments, that nothing more can be said than what he
has written. Now (says he) in the Latin Church, as soon as the Bread and Wine
is consecrated, they are lifted up, that the people there present, might adore
them; which practice I do not judge to be ancient, seeing there is no mention
thereof to be found in our Books of the Sacraments, Printed, nor Written, nor
in Pamelius, nor in the Roman Order, nor in Alcuin, Amalarius, Walafridus,
Rabanus, who have fully explained the Order of the Mass; nor in the Micrologue,
who has also very exactly labored in the same Subject. Afterward this
learned Friar observes, that it is clearer than the Sun at Noon day, if the XV.
Chapter of the Author of the Micrologue be considered, who would not have
failed to have writ of this Ceremony had it been used in his time, (that is in
the XI. Century) because he makes mention of lifting up the Bread and the Cup
together before the Lords Prayer, which also appears more at large in the
twenty third Chapter of the same Treatise; Nevertheless he excepts the
Mozarabick Office, wherein mention is made of two Elevations of the Host, one
of which is made presently after Consecration, and the other after these words,
Let us declare with the Mouth what we believe with the Heart, but at the same
time he says by Parenthesis (if nothing has been added) and to say the truth,
there is great likelihood that it is an addition made since the introducing
into the Latin Church, the custom of lifting up the Host immediately after
Consecration, that it might be adored by the people, seeing there is no mention
of lifting up the Sacrament in the Western Church, before the XI. Century; as
for the Eastern Church he confesses, that they elevated the Sacrament, but
after the Lords Prayer, and some other Prayers, at the very instant of
Communicating, and he proves it by the Liturgies of St. James, St. Chrysostom,
by Anastasius the Sinaite, by George Codin, and by the Author of the life of
St. Basil, attributed unto Amphilochius, but which in all likelihood was not
his, and he observes that the Christians of Ethiopia practice the same
Ceremony, which is quite different from the Elevation of the Latin Church, it
being only done to call the People to the Communion, in saying, Holy things are
for the Saints; and not to have them adore the Eucharist, as amongst the
Latins. Therefore it is, that whereas the Elevation of the Latin Church is
joined immediately after Consecration, which according to their belief,
changing the Bread and Wine into the substance of the Body and blood of Christ,
renders that which that he celebrates holds in his hands, an Object of
Sovereign Adoration, whereunto those which be present are invited by the
elevating the Host presently after it is consecrated. That of the Greek Church
was not done till a good while after Consecration, and as they were ready to
communicate; so that the intent of it was only to call Believers to the
participation of the Sacrament But Maynard rests not there he answers as Goar
does, those which wrest some words of the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy under the
name of Denis the Areopagite, to prove that in his time, there was an Elevation
of the Sacrament joined unto Consecration in the Greek Church, and he very
judiciously observes, that this pretended Denis speaks only of a Ceremony
observed amongst the Greeks, which is, that they kept the Divine Symboles hid
and covered until the very instant of communicating; and that then they were
uncovered to be showed to the people, to have them come to the holy Table in
showing them: and although the Author but now mentioned speaks of this action,
yet there is not to be found any Elevation of the Host presently after
Consecration in any of the Greek Liturgies. I will add unto all this one thing
very considerable, which is, That it appears by the ancient customs of the
Monastery of Cluny, written about the end of the eleventh Century, That even to
that time the Elevation was not practiced in the extent of the Latin Church,
not so much as that at first mentioned by Ives of Chartres, Antiq. consue.
Cluniac. Monast. t. 4. Spicil. Dach. l. 2. c. 30.
which tended only to represent the Elevation of the Body of Jesus Christ upon
the Cross. For in the thirtieth Chapter of the second Book of these customs of
the Congregation of Cluny is exactly, not to say scrupulously, shown all that
was then practiced in this famous Monastery; nevertheless there is not one word
said of the Elevation of the Eucharist, only that it is observed in one place,
That when he that celebrates, says, throughout all Ages, Ibid. p. 143.
etc. the Deacon lifts up the Cup alittle; it may easily be seen, this little
raising the Cup is nothing like the Elevation which we examine, and that it was
a little Ceremony, quite different from what is at present called Elevation.
But if any ask me at what time they began in the Latin Church to turn the
Elevation, made in several parts of the West to represent the Elevation of our
Lord on the Cross, unto the adoration of the Sacrament, practiced after the
Eleventh Century: I affirm, That William Durand, toward the end of the
Thirteenth Century, was the first, as far as I can discover, who referred
Adoration to the Elevation of the Host, in his Rational of Divine Offices; for
amongst several reasons of this Elevation, he alleges this last, Duran. Rat.
Divin. O^lic. l. 4. de p^rt. can. fol. 169. n. 51.
contrary to the constant Doctrine of ancient Interpreters of the Liturgy we
have spoken of: In the fifth place (says he) the Host is lifted up, that the
people might not anticipate the Consecration, but knowing thereby it is made,
and that Christ is come on the Altar, they should how down to the ground with
reverence. It was also in this Thirteenth Century that Honorius the Third, and
Gregory the Ninth, made their Constitutions for adoring the Sacrament after
Elevation, as shall be shown in the third part of this Treatise, where we are
to discourse of the Worship, and by consequence examine the question of
Adoration. In the mean time it is not amiss to observe, that before any
Elevation of the Sacrament was practiced in the West, Berengarius was spoken of
in the World, and his followers were dispersed into all parts in great
abundance; and the Albigenses and Waldenses, which soon followed him, had
separated themselves from the Communion of the Latin Church a great while
before the Adoration of the Host, and the Elevation therewith enjoined: and by
consequence there have always been Christians in the West, who never practiced
Elevation nor Adoration in their Eucharist; not to instance Christian
Communions in the East, and elsewhere, which likewise never practiced it.

After Elevation comes the fraction, which in the Sacrament of Jesus Christ,
and in that of the primitive Christians, immediately followed. For the holy
Writers testify, That the Lord had no sooner blessed the Bread, but he brake
it to distribute it; and because the Hebrews Loaves were flat and spread round,
and something long, like our Cakes and Biskets, and for that reason were easily
broken, without any need of a Knife to cut them, therefore the holy Scripture
still mentions the breaking of Bread, and not cutting Bread; it is therefore
not to be questioned, but the Lord in celebrating his Supper made use of that
sort of Bread; and broke it after the manner of the Jews, to distribute it to
his Disciples. Nevertheless seeing the Apostle St. Paul expressly observes of
the Bread of the Eucharist, that we break it, The Bread which we break, and
that the Lord, explaining this Mystery, says positively of the Bread, That it
is his Body broken for us, he would teach us that this fraction of Bread is
neither superfluous, nor useless, but that it makes part of the Sacrament, and
that it therein represents unto us the sufferings of Jesus Christ, particularly
those of his Cross; it was the signification which Theodoret searched therein
in his Dialogues, Theod. Dial. 3. p. 147.
when he says, O. Remember what the Lord took and broke, and by what name he
called that which he had taken. E. I will speak mystically, by reason of those
which are not initiated; (he means that he will not name the Bread.) After that
he had taken and broke it, and distributed it to his Disciples, he said, This
is my Body which is given for you, or which is broken, according to the
Apostle; and again, This is my Blood of the New Testament, which is shed for
many. O. He makes no mention then of the Divinity in showing the Type of that
Passion? E. Not any. O. But of the Body and Blood? E. It is true. O The body
then was Crucified. And venerable Bede, Bid in Marc. c. 14.
He himself broke the Bread which he presented unto his Disciples, that he
might show the fraction of his Body. Also it is without all doubt that
Christians carefully observed this Ceremony, for they consecrated a Loaf
greater or less, according to the number of Communicants, which was divided
into several Morsels, to be distributed unto each Communicant; all the
Liturgies that are extant, true or false, testify this fraction, and all the
holy Fathers confirm it. Accordingly we read in the life of Pope Sergius, who
held the Chair toward the end of the Seventh Century, That he ordained that at
the breaking the Bread of the Lord, T. 5. Council. p. 407. Extr.
the people and Clergy should sing, Lamb of God, that take away the sins of
the World, Have mercy upon us. Hugh Maynard, whom we mentioned before, has
caused to be Printed, at the end of the Book of Sacraments of St. Gregory, some
ancient Manuscripts, which contain several Liturgies for the Celebration of the
Eucharist; and in all these Liturgies, which are of the Tenth and Eleventh
Centuries, the Fraction which we speak of is therein found. In that of Ratold,
Abbot of Corby, who lived at the end of the Tenth Century, this Prayer is made,
when the Body is broken, O Lord, vouchsafe to send, if it be thy Will, Apperd.
ad lib. Sacram. Greg. p. 265.
thy holy Angel upon this holy and immortal Mystery, to wit, upon thy Body and
Blood; for, O Lord, we break it, and be pleased to bless it, and vouchsafe to
make us fit to handle it with pure hands and senses, and to receive it
worthily. In another of these Manuscripts, toward the year 1079. Ibid. p. 276.
there is also mention made of the division of the Body of our Lord into
several parts: and in fine, in a third, of the year 1032. or thereabouts, it is
observed, That whilst the Bishop is making the Fraction, In Notis, p 24.
he says, Lamb of God, etc. and that the Bread being broken, he bites in
Communicating, in part of the Oblation. There is frequent mention made of this
Fraction in those ancient customs of the Monastery of Cluny abovementioned. L.
1. c. 13. p. 58. and l. 2. c. 30. p. 141. and alibi.
The Interpreter of the Roman Order, who lived toward the end of the Eleventh
Century, observes what we have already alleged of Pope Sergius. And because
there were some who were scrupulous because the Roman Order commanded to break
the Bread of our Lord, he reproaches them by the Authority of the Scriptures,
and of the Fathers: Apud Cassan. in litur. c. 29.
We are informed (says he) that some persons of late times do find and think
strange that the Roman Order enjoins the Bread of our Lord to be broken, as if
they had not read, or that they had forgot what is written in the Gospel, That
Jesus Christ took Bread, That he blessed it and broke it, and gave it to his
Disciples, saying, Take, eat, etc. and what is read in the Acts of the
Apostles, That the Primitive Church continued with one accord in the Doctrine
and Fellowship of the Apostles, and in breaking of Bread, and watched in the
Exercise of Prayer. As for the holy Fathers, he says, That forbearing at this
time to speak of all others who celebrated the Divine Mysteries as they had
been taught by the Apostles and the Evangelists, he contents himself to
instance in the example of that Woman mentioned by Gregory the First in his
Dialogues, who smiled when she heard Gregory call that Loaf of Bread, which she
her self had made, the Body of Christ. It is upon this custom of the breaking
the Bread of the Sacrament that Humbert, Cardinal of Blanch-Selva, grounds the
slander he makes against the Greeks in this same Eleventh Century, in that they
used Oblations which had been before consecrated, during the Lent, because that
obliged them to separate the Benediction and breaking the Bread, from the
distribution of it. And indeed during Lent they did not fully celebrate the
Eucharist, but on Saturday and Sunday, and on that day they kept some of the
consecrated Symboles to Communicate the other days of the Week; and so they
were constrained to do that at several times which our Savior did at once,
when he celebrated his Sacrament. Thereupon Humbert presses his Enemy Nicetas,
Humbert. contr. Nicet. t. 4. Bibl. Pat. part. 2. p. 246. ^id. p. 216. B.
by the Example of the Son of God; We read (says he) that the Lord himself
gave unto his Disciples, not an imperfect, but a perfect commemoration, in
giving unto them the Bread which he had broken, and at the same Instant broken
and distributed; for he not only blessed it, deferring till next day to break
it, neither contented he himself to break it, but he distributed it presently
after having broke it; whence it is that the blessed Martyr Pope Alexander the
Fifth, after St Peter, inserting the Passion of our Lord in the Canon of the
Mass, says not, as often as ye do this, but, as often as ye do these things,
that is to say, that ye bless, that ye break, and that ye distribute, ye do it
in remembrance of him, because each of these three things, the Blessing without
the Distribution, does not perfectly represent the Commemoration of Jesus
Christ, no more than the distribution does without the Benediction and the
Breaking. I say nothing here of the Decretal of Pope Alexander, which is a
forged and a counterfeit piece, as are all the Decretals of the first Popes,
until Siricius: it suffices that until the days of Humbert, and also before,
it was owned to be true, that so its authority might serve to prove the
Ceremony of breaking the Bread as a thing essential in the Celebration of the
Sacrament; also we see that most Christian Communions observe it at this time,
not distributing the holy Bread unto the Communicants until it be broken in
parcels, to give a piece or morsel unto each one. So it is practiced by the
Greeks, the Moscovites, the Russians, and the Abassins; for they make a Loaf of
Bread greater or less, either in breadth or thickness, according to the number
of Communicants; so that having blessed and consecrated it, they break it into
little bits, to distribute it unto those who approach unto the holy Table to
participate of this Holy and Divine Sacrament. From thence it is, as St. Austin
has observed, that in some places they called the Sacrament the Parcels, that
is to say, the Pieces; amongst the Greeks, the Fragments, that is to say, the
Portions and Pieces of the Eucharist broken, and the holy parcels. As for the
Latin Church, this custom of breaking the Bread into little pieces, to be
distributed unto each of the Communicants, was practiced therein until the
Twelfth Century, as we have seen at large: And this manner of speech was so
frequent, that although they have abolished the action which had introduced it,
Sermon. de Azymo, c. 4. extr.
yet they do not forbear at this day to give the name of Particules (that is to
say, little pieces) unto the Hosts which they distribute unto Communicants,
although they give them unto each of them whole, and not broken: But you must
take notice, that before the Latin Church had laid aside the use and custom of
breaking the Bread of the Sacrament, to distribute it unto Believers, there was
a very considerable Separation made from her by Berengarius and his followers,
and the Albigenses and Waldenses and their adherents; whereby this practice and
custom has been still observed, even in the West it self, which is not now
practiced in the extent of the Church of Rome.

CHAP. X.
Of the Distribution, and of the Communion, and first of the Time, the Place,
and Posture of the Communicant.

IN the Celebration of the Sacrament, the breaking of Bread should be followed
by the Distribution; but because the Distribution contains several things under
its compass, as the Time, the Place, the Posture of the Communicant the Persons
which distribute it, those which receive, with the words both of the one and
the other; and in fine, the Things distributed, and received; it is absolutely
necessary to examine them severally, to give the more light unto this part of
the outward form of the Celebration of the Sacrament. Therefore we will rest
satisfied to consider in this Chapter, the Time, the Place, with the Posture,
and Gesture of the Communicant. As for the Time, there is no body can make any
doubt, but that Jesus Christ did institute and celebrate the Sacrament of the
Eucharist after the Supper of the Passover, and at the end of the Supper; the
Evangelists do witness it, and express themselves so fully, as that they give
us not the least cause to doubt of it; which makes me believe, that the
Apostles, and the Churches founded by their Preaching, practiced the same
during life. And to say the truth, it seems to be plainly found in the Eleventh
Chapter of the first Epistle to the Corinthians, that the Belivers of that
Church, did celebrate this Divine Mystery, and participate thereof, after
having eaten altogether; so that the Celebration of the Sacrament, was as it
were the Seal, the Crown, and accomplishment of those Agapes, and Feasts of
Charity; I know that all be not of this Opinion, and I do not intend to censure
those who judge that the Celebration of the Sacrament was performed before the
Agape. I will only say, that it is the Judgment of many Learned men, which they
ground upon the following Reasons, which I am obliged to recite, that the
Reader might judge of their solidity. In the first place it appears, that the
design of these first Christians, was exactly to imitate the Order that was
observed by Jesus Christ; who, as we said, celebrated his Eucharist after
Supper. Secondly, 1 Cor. 11.21.
They pretend that the Apostle gives an evident proof of it, when he says,
That some advances and takes his own supper before, without staying for the
rest; for that could not be if they had begun with the Celebration of the
Sacrament, and ended with the Feast of Charity, it being unlikely, that the
Sacrament would be solemnized before the Assembly was complete, and that all
which were accustomed to be present, were come. In the third place, had it been
practiced otherwise, they think S. Paul should not have had so great cause to
have charged the Corinthians of having received the Bread and the Cup of the
Lord unworthily; nor to command them to examine themselves before they come
unto the Lords Table, because by this reckoning, the disorder he charges them
with, should have happened after the Celebration of the Sacrament, and not
before. So that the Apostle should only have had cause to blame the disorder of
their Feast, without mingling therewith any discourse of the Sacrament; yet
nevertheless, he does the quite contrary; for he insists much more upon the
Sacrament, than upon all the rest; which does evidently show, that these first
Christians assembled for their Feasts of Charity, began this Solemnity by the
common Meal which they made all together, and did end it by the Sacrament of
the Eucharist, whereof they did communicate, after they had ended Supper, after
which the company was dismissed. Unto all these proofs, they add the marks of
that ancient Custom, which remained in the V. Century. Tertullian says in some
of his Works, That the Eucharist was celebrated at supper time; Tertul. de
corona, c. 3.
as Rigaut, and Rhenanus confess upon the place. But although that the practice
of celebrating it also in the Morning, was already very frequent in the Church;
I cannot see how it can be concluded from the words of this Learned African,
that the Celebration was made after the Meal, rather than before, no more than
by what is observed by S. Cyprian about forty years after, for disputing
against those who celebrated the Sacrament in the Morning with Water, and
urging them with the Example of our Lord, who did his with Wine, he said, Cypr.
Ep. 63.
that they happily imagined to be quit, under color, That at Supper, Wine was
offered in the Cup. All that can be inferred from these two passages of
Antiquity, is, That in those times, the Eucharist was celebrated conjointly
with the Agapes, or Feasts of Charity; but in such a manner, that it was also
very frequently celebrated, and most commonly in the Morning, and by
consequence, fasting. Also is it not therein, the marks of the ancient custom
before mentioned are sought; as also in what is said by S. Austin in the
beginning of the V. Century; Aug. Ep. 118. c. 7.
That some were wont to receive the Sacrament after Meal time? but upon one day
of the year only, to wit, Thursday before Easter, Council. Carth. 3. c 29.
as is expressly observed by the Third Council of Carthage, assembled at the
same time, ordering that this Sacrament should always be celebrated fasting,
excepting only the day that our Lord's Supper is celebrated; that is to say,
the day whereon Commemoration is made every year, of the Supper of our Lord,
which is, as every body knows, upon Holy Thursday. But as this Rule would serve
as a Law only in Africa; there were other Churches which used thus, not on that
day precisely, but every week, on Saturday. And indeed two ancient Church
Historians, Socrates and Sozomen, Socr. l. 5. c. 21. and Grac. 22. Sozom. l. 7.
c. 19.
who wrote some years after the death of S. Austir, inform us, That the
Christians of Egypt, those of Thebais, and about Alexandria; in several Cities
and Villages, did celebrate and receive the Sacrament Saturday at Evening,
after having supped together. But for the most part, the Sacrament was
celebrated in the Morning, except it was on station and Fasting days, for then
it was celebrated about Evening; excepting such days, it was celebrated in the
Morning before day in times of persecution, and afterward, at three of the
Clock in the Morning, which answers our nine of the Clock. The Pontifical Book
attributes unto Pope Telesphore, the Institution of celebrating the Sacrament
at nine of the Clock in the Morning, and indeed, there is to be seen in his
life, Lib. Po^. in vi^a Telesph.
and indeed, there is to be seen in his life, That he Ordained, that excepting
on Christmas day, no body should presume to celebrate Mass before the third
hour, that is to say, before nine of the Clock, because our Savior was
Crucified at that time. From thence it is, that the Impostor who forged an
Epistle Decretal in Pope Telesphore's name, borrows what he says: But as Hugh
Maynard has judiciously observed, this Institution could not be so ancient,
Hug. M^m in Sacram. Greg. p. 64.
because says he, during the persecutions, the Christians, Assembled for the
Service of God, and the Celebration of the Sacraments, met for the most part in
the Night, which he proves by the authority of Tertullian, who wrote after the
death of Pope Telesphore, wherein doubtless he has much right: he might also
have added, that the Pontifical Book is a miserable piece, and does not deserve
that any stress should be laid on most things that are therein to be found. It
were much safer to descend unto the Third Council of Orleans, Assembled Anno
538. for the hour of celebrating the Sacrament; for it made this Rule: Council.
Aurel. 3 c. 14.
It must be observed, that in celebrating Masses on the principal Holy days
only, that in Gods name, they be begun to be celebrated at the third hour, to
the end, that the Office being more conveniently ended in time, the Priests may
be present at the Evening Service. The Author of the Apostolical Constitutions,
amongst several hours which he assigns for Prayer, puts the third in the
Morning; Constit. Apost. l. 8 c. 34. Isid. Hispal. l. 1. de Offic. c. 19.
Because (says he) it was at that hour that Pilate gave Sentence against the
Lord. S. Isidore of Sevil, gives this other reason for it, That the Holy Ghost
at that time came down upon Earth, to fulfill the promise which Jesus Christ had
r^^de. But as in those places there is only mention made of Prayer, they cannot
precisely be applied unto the Subject we treat of; we must then seek elsewhere
whether the time of the third hour was so destined unto the Celebration of the
Sacrament, that it might not be celebrated any other hour of the day: and if we
use diligence in this Inquiry, we shall find, that the hours were diverse,
according to the different days The time of Celebrating Mass (says Walafridus
Strabo) is different, Walafr. Srrab de O^^c Eccles. c. 23.
according as the solemnity of Holy days require it, sometimes the Celebration
is ended before Noon, sometimes about the ninth hour, that is, at our three of
the Clock after noon, sometimes in the Evening, and sometimes at Night. John
Belet, cited by Cassander in his Sum of Divine Offices, reduces unto three
times, the proper hours of celebrating the Sacrament, (viz.) at the third,
sixth, and ninth hours; that is, after our manner of reckoning, at nine of the
Clock in the Morning, at twelve, and at three in the Afternoon. Apud Cassand.
in liturg. c. 37.
Holy days (says he) the third hour, and the sixth hour, the Eve of Holy
days, which precede Lent, and Fast-daies, yet not of all, because the
Saturdayes of Fast in Ember Weeks, Mass may be celebrated very late, and the
Saturdayes before Easter and Whitsuntide, it is also said la^e. There Is more
than 1200. years since S. Ambrose has spoke of this diversity of times for
celebrating the Eucharist. Let not (says he) the Meats prepared for us,
Ambros. in Psalm. 118. Sermon 8 t. 2. p. 945.
hinder us from participating of these Heavenly Sacraments, forbear but a
little, the day draws to an end, yet for the most part they come to Church
just at Noon, Hymns are sung, the Oblation is celebrated, that is, the
Eucharist. It is certain, that it so depended on the liberty of the Churches,
that S. Austin observed, That the Thursday before Easter, Aug Ep. 118. c. 4.
in some places by reason of the great numbers of people, the Sacrament was
celebrated Morning and Evening; whereas in other places, it was not wont to be
celebrated but at the Evening. The Second Council of Braga, Assembled Anno 572.
Council. Bracar. 2. c. 9. t 4. Coucil.
speaks of celebrating it at nine or ten of the Clock, And because on Fasting
days, the Sacrament as has been said, could not be celebrated till about
Evening, and that many not over zealous, being overcome with impatience, went
out before the Celebration of the Sacrament, there were Rules made, by which it
was declared, that those people did not fast, if they eat before Evening
Service was ended, and the Sacrament celebrated. But as the thing is of no very
great moment, and that those who have any knowledge of the ancient Church, own
the truth of this circumstance; and that besides, what has been said of the
time and hour of the Celebration of Divine Mysteries, may suffice to satisfy
the Readers curiosity, we will insist no longer upon it, but shall pass unto
the consideration of the place of Celebration.

The Place where the Distribution of the Sacrament was made, was for the most
part the place of meeting or where the Assembly was made; but to consider it
more particularly, it was the place where the Mystical Table stood, unto which
the faithful People drew near to Communicate. Jesus Christ distributed the
Sacrament to his Apostles, at the same Table where he eat the Paschal Lamb with
them, and where he celebrated the whole Ceremony of this ancient Jewish Feast.
In the days of Justin Martyr, it is evident, that after the consecration of the
holy Symbols had been made, those present drew near unto the place where they
had been Consecrated, there to participate of them by the ministry of the
Deacons; but because sometimes afterward, the Clergy were separated from the
People, in a certain place compassed in by a kind of Rail or Balester, the
Council made Decrees and Laws, forbidding the People to go within those Rails.
Which shows, that before those prohibitions, they therein entered to receive
the holy Communion, because the Altar or holy Table, was set in a certain place
which was after called for that reason, the Sanctuary; I think the first rule
made thereupon, is that of the Council of Laodicea about the year of our Lord
360. Council. Laod. c. 19.
for speaking of the Celebration of the Sacrament, It suffers only the
Ministers of the Altar (he means all the Clergy) to draw near and enter into
the place where the Altar was, and there to Communicate. Council. Tol. ^. c. 18.
The fourth Council of Toledo, assembled Anno. 633. has left us this Canon,
After the Lords Prayer, and the joining of the Bread and the Cup, the blessing
shall be given unto the people, and then, in this manner they shall participate
of the Body and Blood of our Lord, the Priest and the Deacon shall communicate
before the Altar, the Clergy in the Quire, and the people without the Quire.
And thence it is, if I mistake not, proceed all the prohibitions, that Women
and other Lay People, should not enter into the close where the Altar, Herard.
in cap. t. c. 24.
and the Sacramental Table was; as when Herard Archbishop of Tours ordered Anno
858. That the Women and Lay Persons should not approach the Altar, it was
probably what Pope Leo the fourth intended when he made this Decree, as is seen
in his life, That whilst the solemnities of the Masses were celebrated, no Lay
Person should presume to stand in the Presbytery, that is to say, Vit. Leon. 4.
t. 6. Council. p. 416. D.
in the Quire, or sit, or enter therein, but only such as are, consecrated, and
appointed to perform Divine Service. The Council in Trullo Anno 691. does
except the Emperor, whom it permits to enter into the Sanctuary, when he would
offer his Oblation unto God, Council. in Trullo. c. 69.
That it is not permitted (say the Fathers) unto any Lay Person to enter into
the Sanctuary; yet we do not pretend, by virtue of a very ancient Tradition, to
include the Emperors Majesty in this prohibition, when h^ desires to present
his Oblations unto the Creator. Balsamon, Patriarch of Antioch, and one of the
most famous Canonists amongst the Greeks, does extend much farther this
privilege granted unto the Emperor; he refutes their Opinion who restrain this
liberty unto the time that the Emperor made his offering at the Holy Table, as
if he had not liberty to enter therein, to offer unto God other acts of
Adoration: Balsam. in can. 69. Trullan.
For my part (says he) I am not of that Opinion; for the Orthodox Emperors
who do make Patriarchs, by Invocation of the Holy Trinity, and which are the
Lords anointed, do without any opposition enter when they please into the
Sanctuary, and approach unto the Altar as often as they will. But the Greeks
having no Emperor of their Religion, groaning for a long time under the
Tyranny of the Turks, there is none amongst the Lay people, which partake of
the privilege which their Monarch and Sovereign enjoyed formerly; therefore
after the Clergy have participated of the Sacrament, to wit, him that
celebrates, either Bishop, or Priest, in the midst of the Altar, the other
Priests round the Altar, and the Deacon behind, but all generally within the
rail of the Sanctuary, the Lay people communicate without; for the doors of
that place being open, the Deacons go out to distribute the Sacrament unto the
People, and the place where the Celebration is made, is a little higher than
the rest of the Quire, as James Goar has observed, an Eye witness, Goar in
Encholog. p. 150. n. 171.
who also observes, that the same was practiced amongst the Latins in S.
Jerome's days, and proves it by these words of this holy Doctor writing against
the ^uciferians, Id. p. 151. n. 179.
It pertains unto the Bishop to handle the Body of our Lord, and from a higher
place, to distribute it unto the people. It is very probable that all those who
make profession of the Religion of the Greeks, as the Muscovites and the
Russians, do observe the same custom: it is also very near the same manner,
which is observed in communicating the people in Prester John's Country,
according to the report of Francis Alvarez a Portugueze, that had traveled in
those Countries many years; for he writes, that the Seculars and Lay folks,
Alvar. de Aethiop. c. 11.
are near the chief door of the place where the Clergy is, and it is there that
both Men and Women receive the Communion.

As for the Posture and Gesture of the Communicant, which is the last
circumstance we intend to examine in this Chapter, it is certain that when the
Lord distributed his Eucharist unto his Disciples, they were almost lying
along, that is, leaning a little one upon another, because that was the manner
of eating at that time amongst the Jews and other Eastern Nations, and that the
Disciples changed not their posture in receiving the Sacrament, but continued
in the same posture they were in during the Supper of the Passover. And because
St. John, the beloved Disciple, leaned on the Body of our Lord Jesus Christ,
the Scripture mentions that he lay on his breast at the Table, or leaned on his
bosom; the Christians of the following Age, drew near and approached unto the
holy Table presently after Consecration, there to receive the sacred Symbols of
their redemption, as may be gathered from Justin Martyr's Liturgy, where we do
not see any Ceremony, nor any kneeling practiced by the Communicants in
participating of this Divine Mystery, only, that going before unto the
Communion, they gave unto each other the kiss of Charity, in token of their
Love and Union, whereof this venerable Sacrament was to be a more strict tie;
and from hence it is, that in all the Liturgies, the faithful are warned to
kiss each other, before they appear at the Lords Table, although this warning
is given in some sooner, in others later, but in all, it is before the
Communion; in those very Liturgies which we have remaining, we do not find any
alteration to have happened in the posture of the Communicant: For after having
showed the Sacrament unto the people, and invited them unto the Communion by
these words, Holy things are for the Holy, each Believer draws near, with the
motions and desires of Piety and Devotion which he ought to have, to partake
worthily of this Divine Sacrament. Denis Bishop of Alexandria gives
sufficiently to understand, Apud Eusebius. hist. l. 7. c. 9.
that in his time (that is in the third Century,) the Communion was received at
the holy Table, standing, and not kneeling, when speaking of a certain Believer
which often appeared at the Lords Table to partake of the Eucharist; for he
uses a term that properly signifies to present himself, and to be there
standing, Vales. in Eusebius. hist. l. 7. c. 9. p. 145.
which gave occasion unto this observation of Mounsier de Valois, The Believers
which were to communicate, drew near the Altar, and there they received from
the Priests hand the Body of Jesus Christ. standing, and not kneeling, as is at
this day practiced. Tertullian had spoke before Denis of this custom of
Communicating standing, in his Book of Prayer, Tertul. de Orat. c. ult.
wherein he speaks of standing at the Altar of God, that is to say at the
Sacrament Table; and St. Chrysostom informs us in one of his Homilies that it
was so practiced even in his time, Chrysostom. t. 1. Hom. 22. de Simult. and ira,
p. 260.
when he exhorts the Communicants, or at least when he observes, That they
presented themselves at the Holy Table, and that they there assisted, standing
on their legs. But because this Sacrament is an Object worthy the respect of a
Christian; because it is the Memorial of the death of his Savior, and at the
same time of his love and charity, a bond of his Communion with him, and an
efficacious means, savingly to apply unto him the holy Fruits of his bitter
death and sufferings St. Cyrill of Jerusalem, Cyrill. Hi^ro^. Mystag. 5.
at the end of the IV. Century, will have his Communicant approach unto the
Holy Table, not with the hand open, and the fingers stretched out, but in
supporting the right hand with the left, that he receive in the hollow of his
hand the Body of Christ, or as he says some lines before, the Antitype of the
Body of Christ, that he takes care not to suffer any crum to fall to the
ground, and that having in this manner Communicated of the Body of Christ, he
draws near unto the Cup, having the Body a little bowed, in way of Adoration or
Veneration, to show the religious respect with which we should participate of
these Holy Mysteries. The VI. Can. 101 t. 5. Council. Goar^ in Euchol. p. 150.
Ecumenical Council ordained something of this kind, to wit, that one should
present himself at the Communion, holding his hands in form of a Cross: which
the Greeks observed a long while after, and their Clergy observe it still at
this day; but as for the people, for some time past, they receive the Bread and
Wine of the Sacrament both together in a spoon; but I do not find that the
people which came to the Communion, were obliged to set themselves in Posture
or Gesture of those which adore, until that in the XIII. Century, the Adoration
of the Sacrament was established in the Latin Church; for this bowing of the
Body, which St. Cyrill desires, is not properly the posture of him who really
does adore; because he which adores, prostrates himself on his knees before the
Object of his Adoration, to show the motions of the profound humility of his
Soul, and his self-denial before him, unto whom, by this action he confesses,
that he is but dust and ashes. But as for St. Cyrill, he only desires a little
inclination of the Body in approaching unto the Mystical Table, to show the
sentiments of veneration and respect which one ought to have for so great a
Sacrament; not to insist upon what the Eastern Council above mentioned was
content to ordain three hundred years after St. Cyrill, that we should go unto
the Communion with the hands in form of a Cross, without mentioning the bowing
of the Body, which St. Cyrill himself does not prescribe unto the Communicant,
but for the reception of the Holy Cup. John Damaseen, who borrowed of St.
Cyrill and of the VI. Council, what he says of the posture of the Communicant
in his time, that is, in the VIII. Century, does not speak a word of this
inclination of the Body, Goar in Enchoi. p. 1^0.
in Goars Notes upon the Ritual of the Greeks. And what yet persuades me that
Believers communicated standing, in the ancient Church, and that this custom
was always practiced in the greatest Christian Communions, excepting the Latin,
which changed this custom in the XIII. Century; is, that besides the Greek
Church, which is of a very large extent, and wherein they Communicate standing,
the Abassins, who also make a very considerable Christian Communion, do no
otherwise receive the Sacrament: Alvar. ubi supr.
During the time the Communion is distributed (says the same Priest Alvarez)
they are all standing. Now it is most certain, that the Christians which are
fallen into ignorance, as for example, the Abassins, and the Greeks, have not
taken away any ancient customs, but rather have added to the number of those
observed by the ancient Church, which is the usual practice of ignorance so to
do; and if the custom of Communicating standing, be still kept in the Eastern
Churches, it may also be affirmed, it was observed in the West, seeing that
before the Latin Church had introduced in its service the Elevation of the
Host, to oblige the people to adore it, and by consequence, before the people
were obliged to receive the Communion kneeling, a considerable Body of
Christians had separated from her, and broke off, which Body retained and
practiced the custom of Communicating standing, as do at this time the
Protestants of Europe, called Calvinists, excepting those of Holland, who
Communicate sitting, and those of England who kneel in receiving the Communion:
but their Doctrine declaring sufficiently what they believe of the Sacrament,
it is easy to see that their kneeling is not addressed unto what they receive
from the hands of the Priest at the Holy Table, but only unto Jesus Christ, who
is in Heaven, and whom they profoundly adore in the Act of the Communion, as
him who has purchased for them this great Salvation, whereof they are about to
Communicate in receiving his Divine Sacrament, and of himself, by means of his
Sacrament, who dyed for their Sins, and is risen again for their justification.
The same may also be said of the Protestants called Lutherans, although their
belief in this point is different from the belief of those in England; for in
that they kneel at receiving the Communion, it is a token of the Adoration
which they give unto Jesus Christ: but it cannot be said without injustice,
that they address this Adoration unto the Sacrament, because they hold and
believe, that it is the substance of Bread and Wine after Consecration; and
farther they do not render this Act of Adoration unto Jesus Christ in virtue of
what they believe of his presence in the Sacrament, because if so, then all
those in the assembly should kneel during the Celebration of the Mystery, and
yet it is only him that Communicates, that kneels in the moment that he
receives the Sacrament. But before I leave this circumstance, it may not
probably be unnecessary to instance some customs that were practiced in the
ancient Church in the act of the Communion: for I find, that Lay persons after
having received the Sacrament at the hands of the Bishop or Pastor, did kiss
it; It is what St. Jorom mentions in his Book against John, Bishop of
Jerusalem; Hieron. Ep. 62
Is there any one that has Communion with you by force? is there any one that
after having stretched out his hand, turns away his face, and that in receiving
the Holy Food gives you a Judas kiss? Monsieur de Valois in his Notes upon
Eusebi^s his History, cites these words of Paul the Deacon, speaking of the
Bishop Fidelis: In not. Val^^ ad Eusebius. p. 134.
Go your way (says he) Communicate, and give us the kiss. It may be thought
that Cornelius Bishop of Rome, makes allusion unto this custom, when speaking
of one of the Bishops, who had given Ordination unto the Schismatic Novatian,
and whom Cornelius had degraded amongst the common people, he says, Apud.
Eusebius hist. l. 6. ^. 43.
We have admitted him, unto the Communion as a Lay person. I farther observe,
that as Believers went unto the Communion, the Deacon often pronounced these
words, Chrysostom ora^ 1. cont. Jud. t. 1. p. 440.
Observe, know, and take notice one of the other, that they should take care
that there were no profane Person, and that no Jew crept in amongst them, to
approach unto the Holy Table. S. Chrysostom informs us so in one of his
Orations against the Jews. I know not whether the Emperor Constantine did not
think of this innocent custom, when he exhorted the guides of Christian
Churches, unto Union and Peace, De vit. Constant. l. 2. c. 71. Ex^r.
and that he said unto them amongst other things, Know ye one another. And it
may be the Heretic Marcion intended the same custom, when having met the
venerable old man St. Polycarp, Pastor of the Church of Smyrna, and glorious
Martyr of Jesus Christ, he said unto him, Know us, as it is recited by St. Apud
Eusebius. hist. l. 4. c. 14.
In^naeus in Eusebius. In the Liturgy which bears S. Chrysostom's name, which
the Greeks make use of, the Deacon fitting himself for the Communion, ^^u^g.
Chrysostom.
asks pardon, and kisseth the hand of him who gives him the Holy Bread. And
James Goar, in his Notes upon this part of the Liturgy writes, that every one
amongst the People setting himself in a readiness to approach unto the
Communion Table, asks pardon of all that are present, saying in the vulgar
Tongue, Goar in Eucholog. p. 149. n. 169.
Christians forgive me, and that those present, answer with a tender love and
charity, God forgive you: he says moreover, that these words are amongst the
Eastern Nations a certain and infallible sign of a sincere and reciprocal Love
and Charity, that if any one should be found so obstinate, as not to grant the
pardon unto him which desires it publicly on this occasion, according to the
custom, they are at that instant, by the authority of the Church, deprived of
the Communion in these Divine Mysteries. It were much to be wished that this
custom were sincerely practiced amongst Christians, and I confess it savours of
the tenderness and love which our Savior requires in his Children; for he will
have them forgive one another, as he has forgiven them. Therefore St.
Chrysostom addressed this excellent Exhortation unto his Flock, Chrysostom. de
prodi^. Jud. t. 5. p. 465.
Let us be mindful of the holy kiss which unites our souls, reconciles Spirits,
and which unites us all into one body; and seeing we are all partakers of one
body, let us all be mingled into one Body; not in mingling our Bodies, but in
strictly uniting our Souls by the bonds of charity: to the end that by so
doing, we may with assurance, enjoy the fruits of the Table which is prepared;
for though we exceed in good works, if we neglect peace and reconciliation, we
shall gather no benefit for our Salvation. And this custom of demanding pardon
before Communicating, is not so particular unto the Nation of the Greeks, but
that I see it practiced amongst the Latins, and even in our France in the XI.
Century: for the ancient customs of the Monastery of Clnny, written in that
Age, testify, L. 2. c. 30. t. 4. Spicileg. p. 145.
That they all demanded forgiveness before they Communicated, and that they
kissed the hand of the Priest.

CHAP. XI.
Of him who administered, and of the Communicant, and of the Words of both of
them.

HAVING treated of the Time and Place of the Communion, and of the Posture and
Gesture of the Communicant; we are obliged to say something of the Persons who
distribute the Sacrament, of them who receive it, and of the Words both of the
one and the other. As for the Persons who distributed it, we find by the Holy
Writers, that as it was Jesus Christ who Blessed and Consecrated his Eucharist,
it was also him that distributed it; for there was none but himself who did the
office and functions of Celebration, the Apostles assisting at this Divine
Ceremony, but as particular Believers, which were to receive at the hands of
their master this precious pledge of their Salvation. A little above a hundred
years after, Christians received the Communion from the hands of the Deacons:
for as soon as the Pastor, or (as St. Justin Martyr speaks,) him that presided
in the assembly, had Blessed and Consecrated the Bread and Wine which had been
presented unto him: Just. Martyr. Apolog. 2.
Those whom we call Deacons (says this Saint) give unto each one that is
present, the Bread, Wine, and Water, which were consecrated. It appears by St.
Cyprian, Cyprian. de Laps. p. 175. ultim. edit.
that about a hundred years after the decease of St. Justin, the Deacons yet
administered the Sacrament, at least the holy Cup: for he speaks only of the
administration of this Symbol, because the Bishop or Priest who did celebrate,
gave the holy Bread unto the Believers; yet this practice was not so well
settled, but that in the IV. Century, the Deacons, who had done nothing unworthy
the degree they held in the Church, had liberty to distribute the Bread and
Wine, as may be gathered from one of the Canons of the Council of Ancyra,
Council. Ancyr. c. 2. Council. Arelat. 1. c. 15.
assembled Anno 314. Nevertheless the Council of Arles, in the same year, did
forbid it by this Canon; Touching Deacons, which we are informed do offer in
sundry places, we have thought good, that it should not be done. Offer, is
their taken for administering, according to the explication of the XV. Canon of
the second Council of the same place, Anno 452. from whence it may be inferred,
that the Deacons might administer the Sacraments in the absence of the Priests.
It seems also that the great Council of Nice, which forbids them to give the
Eucharist unto Priests, Council. Nicaen. 1. c. 18.
or to touch it before the Bishops, does not forbid them to distribute it unto
the people. The Council of Laodicea about the year 360. has a Canon yet more
express, for it is in these terms; Council. Laodic. c. 25.
The Ministers must not give the Bread, neither may they bless the Cup.
Commonly by the Ministers, is meant the Deacons; but I do not judge they are so
to be understood in this place: and indeed in all the Canons of this Council, I
find that these Ministers are distinguished from the Deacons, as being a degree
below them, therefore I make no doubt but by these Ministers, is to be
understood the Subdeacons, which shows, that the Deacons were not comprised in
the prohibition which was made unto these Ministers. Also the IV. Council of
Carthage suffers the Deacons to administer unto the people in case of
necessity, Council. Carthag. 4. c. 38. Ambros. de offic. l. 1. c. 41.
the Sacrament of the Body and Blood of our Lord, even in the presence of the
Priest, but by his order. St. Ambrose speaking of the Deacon and Martyr St.
Lawrence, says, that he distributed the Cup; and St. Leo, in a Sermon where he
treats of his Martyrdom, Sermon. infestiv. Laurent.
and of his Triumph, advances his Dignity, by administering of the Sacraments;
and elsewhere making the Panegyric of St. Vincent, who was also a Deacon and
Levite, In nativit. Vincent. c. 2.
he says, that he administered the Cup of our Lord Jesus unto Believers, for
their Salvation. George Cassander alleges in his Liturgies, these words of a
certain Book which treated of all the Divine Offices, Apud Cassandr. in liturg.
c. 31.
The Deacons are those unto whom it belongs to set in order upon the Holy
Table, the offerings of the people which are to be consecrated, and after the
Consecration, to distribute the Mysteries of the Body and Blood of our Lord,
unto the people. And in the Dialogues of Gregory the First there is mention
made of a certain Deacon who being affrighted at the cruelty of the Pagans,
Gregor. l. in dial. l. 1. c. 7.
as he was administering the Cup unto the people, let it fall to the ground,
whereby it was broken. In Spain, they administered the Bread and Wine in the VI.
Century, as appears by the first Canon of the Council of Ilerda, assembled Anno
524. In the Greek Church, it is the Deacons which administer the Sacrament unto
the people; and amongst the Abassins, the Deacon gives the Bread in little
bits, and the Subdeacon, the other Symbol, in a spoon of Gold, Silver, or of
Wood. But it is needless to insist any longer on a matter so clear, and,
besides, which is not of the greatest moment: therefore it is sufficient to
know, that at the beginning of Christianity the Deacons gave both Symbols unto
the Communicants; that afterward they administered but the Cup only, he which
celebrated, giving the Bread: although this custom was not so soon admitted in
all parts, there being some places, where the Deacons in the IV. Century
distributed the whole Sacrament unto the faithful people; and if in some
Churches they were disturbed in the possession of their Rights, yet
nevertheless, they have commonly enjoyed the privilege of administering the Cup
of our Lord unto Christians, after he that consecrated, had distributed the
holy Bread; and it is they who amongst the Greeks, distribute the Communion
unto the people. In the Kingdom of Prester John, the Deacon gives the Bread,
and the Subdeacon the Wine, as well unto the Clergy as unto the People. But
this is worth the considering, that in diverse parts of the West, Women were
permitted to administer the Sacrament unto the people; and forasmuch as this
abuse, as far as I remember, began in Italy; Gelas. Ep. ^. ad Episc. ^ucan. t.
3. Council. p. 636.
Pope Gelasius was also the first, if I am not mistaken, who endeavored to
prevent it, grievously censuring the Bishops of Lucania, for giving this
liberty to Women, and suffering them to serve at the Altar, Men being only
called unto this Office. But it seems that this censure of Gelasius, had not
all the success as could have been wished, seeing that about 500. Years
afterward, to wit, about the end of the X. Century, Ratherius Bishop of Verona
in Italy, T. 6. Council. p. 431. T. 2. Spicil. p. 261.
in his Synodal Letters unto the Priests of his Diocese, which have passed
until our days, for a Sermon of Pope Leo the Fourth; was forced to forbid
Women to come near the Altar, or touch the Cup of our Lord; because in all
likelihood, they administered it unto Communicants. And it was not only in Italy
this permission was given unto Women, but also in diverse Provinces of France;
whence it is, That the VI. Council Assembled at Paris under Lewis the Debonair,
Anno 829. Council. Paris. 6. l. 1. c. 15.
forbids it in one of its Canons, which is yet to be seen in the seventh Book,
Cap. 134. of the Capitularies of Charles the Great, and of Lewis the Debonair
his Son, a Prohibition which Isaac, Bishop of Langres, Isaac. Ling. can. tit.
5. c. 7. and 11. c. 23.
was constrained to renew some time after.

As for the persons admitted unto the Communion, they were Believers, therefore
the Deacons made the Catechumeni, the Energoumeni, the penitents, and generally
all such as were not initiated in the Mysteries of Christian Religion, to go
out, and those people were not only not suffered to participate of the
Sacrament, but they were not suffered to stay in the Assembly, when it was
celebrated. Indeed, that they were not suffered to assist at the Celebration of
the Sacrament, was not always practiced amongst Christians, seeing that it is
most certain, that in the two first Centuries, and probably a good part of the
third, they hid not their Mysteries, and did not celebrate with the Doors shut,
as appears by the Works of Justin Martyr, which shows plainly, that the
Liturgies which go in the name of S. James, and S. Mark, are forgeries; for
therein is mention of excluding these sorts of persons above mentioned, the
Deacon making them go out before the beginning of Consecrating the Divine
Symbols, which is also to be read in all the other Liturgies; and I shall not
stand to prove this matter, being indisputable, and owned by all the World, the
truth whereof is easily to be seen by such as please to read the Liturgies
which we have remaining, and which by the care taken therein by the Deacons, to
shut out the Catechumeni, the Energoumeni, the penitents, and the uninitiated,
do manifestly show, that they have been made since the third Century, whatever
care the Authors of some of them have taken, to shroud themselves under the
name of some Apostle, or Disciple of the Apostles. And if only Belivers were
obliged to Communicate, this obligation regarded them all in general; for the
Penitents were not thought to be Believers during the time of their penance;
the sins they had committed, and for which they had been censured to undergo
the burden of this penance, having made them fall from this privilege and
happy state; when I speak of Believers, I do not mean only such as were grown
up, and such as were of years of discretion, but also Children. Therefore we
are necessarily engaged to make two Considerations of the persons of
Communicants; the first shall treat of the Communion of Adults, the second,
that of Children. As for the Communion of persons of Age, and years of
discretion, there is no question to be made, but they were all obliged to
Communicate when they were present in the Assemblies where the Sacrament was
Celebrated; and if they neglected, Chrysostom. Hom. 3. in Ep. ad Ephesians.
the Holy Fathers rebuked them with a holy zeal in their Sermons, witness what
S. Chrysostom says, That it is in vain the daily Sacrifice is made; that it is
in vain, that Ministers assist at the Altar, when there is no body present to
receive: And he adds, That it is a boldness and impudence to be present at the
Action, and not to participate. Therefore it is, that elsewhere he considers
the Eucharist as a Meal which ought to be common unto Believers; The Lords
Supper (says he) ought to be common; Id. Hom. 27. in Ep. 1. ad Cor.
for our Lords goods are not for one servant to the exclusion of another, but
for altogether in common. The Apostle therefore calls this Supper of the Lord,
the common Supper; for it is our Lords, therefore you ought not to appropriate
it unto your self, and to exclude and hinder others, but make it common unto
all, us being the Supper of the Lord, and Master of all. These were also the
thoughts of the Author of the Commentaries upon S. Paul's Epistles in S.
Jerome's Works, which he expresses in these words, In c. 11. Ep. 1. ad Cor.
The Supper of the Lord should be common unto all, because he gave the
Sacraments unto all his Disciples alike. But the ancient Doctors were not
content to censure those who did not Communicate being in the Assembly, and to
show them, that the nature of the Sacrament invited them all unto the
Communion; they moreover made Rules and Directions against this abuse; It is,
whereunto tends this Decree of the Council of Antioch, Assembled Anno 341.
Those who enter into the Assembly, Council. Antioch. c. 2.
and do heart he holy Scriptures, and by a disordered liberty, do not join in
prayer with the people, depriving themselves of the participation of the holy
Sacrament, must be put out of the Assembly. And in the Canons commonly called
the Apostles, after the VIII. Canon has condemned and deprived of the
Communion of Divine Mysteries, those amongst the Clergy, who without lawful
cause abstain from the participation of the Sacrament, as being a
stumbling block to the people; the Ninth makes this Decree, Can. 9. Apostol.
All the Believers who enter into the Assembly, and hear the Scriptures read,
but stay not for the prayers, nor receive the holy Sacrament, let them be cast
out, because they are an offense to the Church. Accordingly the Constitutions
called Apostolical, ordain, Constit. Apostol. l. 8. c. 11.
That the Deacon should stand at the Men's Door, and the Subdeacon at the
Women's Door, to hinder that none should go out during the time of Oblation.
Which conduct teaches us, that as before the Comunion the Deacon cried, All
you which are under penance, you which cannot pray, Chrysost^. Hom. 3. in Ephesians.
(that is, with the Believers) go out. So in like manner, he hindered Believers
who were all bound to Communicate, That they should not go out until they had
received the holy Sacrament. It is by this Maxim that the Deceiver, who forged
some Decretals in S. Clement's name, makes him say in the second: Pseudo Clem.
decret. 2. Greg. I. l. Sacram. p. 235.
That Sacrifices should be offered according to the number of the people. S.
Gregory makes the same Decree when he requires, That there be laid on the Altar
as many Oblations as need, for the people; And the first Decretal which falsely
bears the name of Pope Anaclet, commands, Anaclet. decret. 1.
That the Consecration being ended, all those should communicate, that would
not be thrust out of the Church. it was certainly for the same reason that the
Deacon, Greg. I. l. 2. d^al.
as Gregory the First witnesses, said aloud, Let all those which do not
communicate, depart out of the Church; whence it may be concluded, that all
those which remained did communicate. It is also the Instruction given unto us
by the Micrologue, whose Author wrote in the Eleventh Century, after the death
of Gregory the Seventh, who died Anno 1084. and of whom this Writer speaks as a
Man of a good fame, an Epithete, as spoken of one deceased. It is to be
observed (says he) that according to the Ancient Fathers, Microlog^^. 51.
none were to be present at the Divine Mysteries, but such as did communicate,
and it is what the Consecration of the Sacraments do plainly declare; for the
Priest does not pray only for his own Oblation and Communion, but also for that
of others. And although in the time of this Author, that is, in the Eleventh
Century, and before the fervor and zeal of Christians was very much abated, we
do not find that they ever approved to celebrate the Sacrament without
Communicants; on the contrary, the Councils, and those which have written of
Divine Offices, do not own any celebration to be lawful, without there are some
to communicate with the Priest who officiates. In that sense is to be
understood what is said by Walafridus Strabo, Walafr. Strab. de Beb. Eccles. c.
22. Extr.
That in a Lawful Mass, there should be a Priest, one that answers, one that
offers, and one that communicates. And therefore it is, that the Council of
Mayence, Assembled by Charles the Great, Anno 813. made this Decree, We
conceive that no Priest can say Mass alone; for how can he say, The Lord be
with you, or how shall he warn, Lift up your hearts, and many other like
things, there being none present but himself? Which is repeated in the 48th
Canon of the Council of Paris under Lewis the Debonair, Cap. 7.
Anno 829. An Advertisement, That Theodulph Bishop of Orleans gives his
Priests, Anno 797. Cap. 28.
And Herard Archbishop of Tours unto his, Anno 858. The Canonist Gratian,
represents unto us this Institution of Pope Soter in his Decree, Great. de Cons.
Did. 1. c. Soter.
That no Priest dare presume to celebrate Masses, unless there are two persons
present, and that he make a third, because he says in the plural, The Lord be
with you, and Pray for me. Now it appears, that this Doctrine is grounded upon
the prayers of the Liturgies being public, and having for their object, not
one or two Persons only, but all the Faithful in general, who ought to
communicate; also all the Liturgies, Ancient and Modern, and all those who have
commented upon them, give sufficiently to understand, that they have been all
composed, and written in behalf of Communicants, without whom they were so far
from celebrating the Sacrament, that Justin Martyr tells us, That it was sent
unto those who were absent: which shows, they looked upon the Sacrament, as a
Seal and Pledge of the Communion amongst Believers. And therefore I suppose it
is, that the Council of Laodicea, Council. Laodic. c. 58.
forbids it to be celebrated in private Houses; this Divine Sacrament being
appointed in nature of a Sacrament of Communion, for the benefit of all
Christians. Therefore it is, Constit. Apostol. l. 8. c. 13.
that the Author of Apostolical Constitutions, mentioning the Persons who ought
to communicate, and in what manner, he comprehends generally all faithful
Christians, as well Clergy as People, without distinguishing Age, or Sex. John
Cochloeus, writing against Musculus a Protestant, Josse Clicthou, upon the
Canon of the Mass, Apud. Cass. in Liturg.
and Vitus Amerpachius, all three of the Communion of Rome, confess the truth
of this Tradition, which we have established; and the two former confirm it by
the Authority of Pope Calixtus: which practice is at this time observed in
other Christian Communions, and which, I make no doubt, was always observed in
the West, because at the time it ceased in the Latin Church, that is to say, in
the Twelfth Century at soonest, those who went out and departed from her,
observed it very Religiously, never celebrating the Eucharist without
Communicants, until the last separation of Protestants, whose practice also it
is.

Having spoken of the Communion of aged persons, we must treat of that of young
Children, according to the rule which was proposed. St. Cyprian reports the
story of a little Christian Girl, Cypr. de laps. p. 175.
whose Nurse had carried her unto the Pagan Temple, where they made her eat
Bread steept in Wine, both having been consecrated unto Idols, and that
afterward, as her turn came to Communicate in the Christian Church, they had
very much trouble to open the Child's Lips, into whose mouth, with much ado,
they poured a little of the Sacrifice of the Cup, but in vain, Id. Ep. 59.
The Sacrament (says he) not enduring to abide in this polluted Mouth and
Body, and indeed she vomited what they had forced her to take. The same may be
collected from another place in his Works, where he defines, with his Brethren
and fellow Bishops, that nothing hinders the Baptizing of Infants presently
after their Birth, because that for the most part the participation of the
Sacrament followed the reception of Baptism; and to say the truth, it seems
that he explains himself sufficiently, not to leave us the least doubt of it.
In the Apostolical constitution, Constable. Apost. l. 8. c. 13.
Children are counted amongst those who ought to Communicate: this custom then
is very ancient, seeing we find it established in the third Century: but if it
is ancient, it was also of a large extent, this custom having since continued
in all Christian Climats and Countries, and is at this time practiced in all
the Churches of the Greeks, the Russians or Moscovites, the Armenians, and
Ethiopians, and we do not find that those Christian Communions have ever laid
it aside; which does fully prove what we said, That this custom was soon spread
into all parts of the Christian World. But to speak particularly of the Latin
Church, we must, as near as may be, follow the steps of this ancient practice:
and in the first place, I will instance in what has been said by the Jesuit
Maldonat, in his Commentaries upon St. John. Maldon. in c. 6. Joan. v. 53.
I lay apart (says he) the opinion of St. Austin, and of Innocent the First,
which was believed and practiced in the Church six hundred years, That the
Sacrament also was necessary for young Children; at present the thing has been
cleared by the Church, and the practice of several Ages, and by a Decree of the
Council of Trent, that not only it is not necessary for them, Ep. ad Syn. Mil.
apud Aug. Ep. 93.
but that also it is not permitted to give it unto them. And indeed Innocent
the First shows plainly that it was the practice of his time, that is, of the
Fifth Century. As for St. Austin, his constant Doctrine, in a great many
passages of his Works, is, That the Eucharist is necessary unto young Children
for obtaining eternal Life. I shall content my self with two or three passages
of this famous Doctor; Aug. de pec. mer. and rem. l. 1. c 20.
Let us hear (says he) the Lord saying of the Sacrament of the holy Table,
unto which no body approaches as they ought, unless they are first Baptized; If
ye eat not my Flesh, and drink not my Blood, you have no Life in you. What more
do we look for, what can be replied to this, only that obstinacy knits its
Sinews to resist the Force of this evident truth? Else durst any one deny, but
that this Speech concerns little Children, and that they can have life in
themselves, without the participation of this Body and of this Blood? Id. ibid.
24.
And in the same Book, It is with great reason that the Christians of Africa
call Baptism, Salvation, and the Sacrament of the Body of Christ, Life; whence
is that, as I think, but from an ancient and Apostolical Tradition, by which
the Churches of Christ hold for certain, That no body can attain, either unto
the Kingdom of God, or unto Salvation or eternal Life, without Baptism and the
participation of the Supper of our Lord. And writing against Julian the
Pelagian; Id. contr. Jul. l. 2. c. 1. and alibi.
What (says he) would you have me do? Is it that the Lord saying, If ye eat
not my Flesh, etc. I ought to say, That young Children who dye without this
Sacrament, shall have Life? The same thing may be justified by several other
Doctors of the same time; but seeing it is owned by both sides, it would be
needless: It may be only observed that Maldonat set not his bounds right when
he included this use, or rather abuse, in or about the six first Centuries; for
besides that there is mention made of Communicating Infants presently after
Baptism, in Gregory the First his Book of Sacraments, Lib. Sacram. Greg. p.
73.74. Conc. Tol. 11. Can. 11. Vit. Leufr. c. 17. in Chron. Insulae Lirin.
we have a Canon in the Eleventh Council of Toledo, Anno 675. which plainly
commands it. In the beginning of the Eighth Century, the Life of the Abbot
Leufred affords an example of this custom; for we therein read, That Charles
Martel having desired him by his Prayers to restore health unto his Son
Griphon, who was afflicted with a great Fever, amongst several things which he
did, it is observed that he gave unto him the Sacrament of the Body of our Lord.
Charlemain, in a Treatise written by his order, and in his name, does plainly
show that this was still practiced in the West at the end of the Eighth
Century; De Imag. l. 2. c. 27.
for he not only says, That there is no Salvation without participating of the
Eucharist, but he also mentions the Communion of little Children, Capit. l.
1. c. 16. Suppl. Conc. Gal. p. 183. c. 7. Ibid. p. 306. c. 8.
whom he represents unto us, fed and nourished with the Body and Blood of our
Lord: And in his Capitularies he commands, That Priests have always the
Sacrament ready to Communicate Sick Folks, be they old or young, that they may
not dye without Communicating. Gautier, Bishop of Orleans, prescribes the same
unto his Priests, in his Capitularies of the year 869. And Riculfe, Bishop of
Soissons, unto his, in the year 889. proving the necessity of Communicating
Infants, which he will have to be given presently after Baptism, by the same
words whereby S. Austin proves it. The Book of Divine Offices, called the Roman
Order, was written, as some think, at the end of the Eighth Century, or the
beginning of the Ninth; and as others think, in the Eleventh. In that Book this
Decree is to be seen; Ord. Romans t. 10. Bibl. Pat. p. 84.
Care is to be taken that young Children receive no Food after they are
Baptized, and that they should not give them Suck without great necessity,
until they have participated of the Body of Christ. Greg. lib. Sac. p. 73.
Nevertheless in S. Gregory's time it was not forbidden to give them Suck, but
at the end of the Eleventh, and beginning of the Twelfth Centuries this pity
was showed unto these poor Infants; and for the difficulty there was in making
them swallow Bread, they were communicated with the blessed Wine only. Pasch.
2. Ep. 32. t. 7. conc. patr. 1. p. 530.
So it was enjoined by Pope Paschal the Second, who succeeded unto Urban the
Second, Anno 1099. according to Cardinal Bellarmin's computation: and this
custom continued after his death, as Hugh of S. Victor testifies (who lived in
the Twelfth Century) in his Ecclesiastical Books of Ceremonies, Sacraments,
Offices, and Observations; L. 1. c. 20. t. 10. Bibl. Pat. p. 1376.
Unto Children new born (says he) must be administered, with the Priest's
Finger, the Sacrament, in the species of blood, because such in that state do
naturally suck. And he says, It must be so done, according to the first
Institution of the Church: he laments the Ignorance of Priests, who (says he)
retaining the form, and not the thing, give unto them Wine instead of Blood;
which he wished might be abolished, if it could be done without offending the
ignorant. Nevertheless this practice of giving a little Wine unto young
Children after Baptism, continued a long time in diverse parts of the Western
Church, Lindan. Panop l. 4. c. 25.
as appears by the words of Hugh of S. Victor; and some have observed that not
much above one hundred years ago, the same thing was used and practiced in the
Church of Dordrecht in Holland, Apud Arcad. de concord. l. 3. c. 40.
before it embraced the Protestant Reformed Religion. In fine, Simon of
Thessalonica, Cabasilas, Jeremy Patriarch of Constantinople, and Gabriel of
Philadelphia, also defend this necessity of Communicating, not only of persons
of discretion, but also of young Children. This Tradition thus established,
there only rests, to finish this Chapter, to speak something touching the words
of the Distributer, and of the Communicant. When the Lord gave unto the
Disciples the Sacrament of Bread, he said, This is my Body; and in giving them
the Symbol of Wine, This is my Blood, or, this Cup is the New Testament in my
Blood; but we do not find that the Apostles said any thing. In Justin Martyr's
time, Apolog. 2.
the Distributer nor the Communicant said nothing, but the Deacons gave unto
the Believers Bread and Wine which had been consecrated; Serom. l. 1. p. 271.
and it may be collected from Clement of Alexandria that it was so practiced at
the end of the Second Century. Some time after, it was said unto the
Communicants, in giving them the Sacrament, the Body of Christ, the Blood of
Christ; and the Receivers answered, Amen, as may be read in the Apostolical
Constitutions, S. Ambrose, S. Cyril of Jerusalem, S. Austin, and elsewhere; but
it must also be observed that they said unto them, Ye are the Body of Christ,
and that unto these words they answered, Amen, as they had answered in
receiving the Sacrament, as is restified by S. Austin in his Sermon unto the
new Baptized in S. Fulgentius. In the days of Gregory the First, and after,
they said, in distributing the Eucharist, The Body of our Lord Jesus Christ
keep ye unto Life everlasting; The Blood of our Lord Jesus Christ redeem ye
unto Life everlasting. But I do not find that Believers answered so punctually,
Amen; Such Liberty the Church has used in this circumstance of distributing
the Sacrament. Amongst the Greeks they say unto the Communicant, In Euchol. p.
83.
Servant of God, you do Communicate of the holy Body and precious Blood of our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, in remission of Sins, and unto Life everlasting.
But it is time to consider the things which were given unto Believers when they
did participate of the Sacrament, and it is wherein we will employ the
following Chapter.

CHAP. XII.
Of the things distributed and received.

WHat was distributed unto Believers in Communicating, were the things which
had been Blessed and Consecrated, to be made the Sacraments of the Body and
Blood of our Lord. I will not now examine the change which Consecration may
thereunto bring, this not being the place to treat of the Doctrine of the holy
Fathers, which shall appear in the second part of this Treatise: it will
suffice here to enquire if Christians have always participated of both
Symboles, and if they have ever been permitted to Communicate under both kinds,
as is spoken; or under one kind only. As for the Symbol of Bread, it is an
undoubted truth that it has always been given to Believers in all Christian
Communions in the whole world; and there has never been any contest on this
subject, at least in what regards the thing it self, I mean the matter of fact,
not to speak of the difference touching the quality of the Bread which ought to
be used in this Mystery: The greatest difficulty then is to know the practice
of the Church in the species of Wine; we are indispensably forced to treat of
the Communion under both kinds, and to lay before the Readers eyes the practice
of Christians, with the changes and innovations which have therein happened.
Jesus Christ, who distributed the Bread unto his Apostles, gave unto them also
the Cup, and expressly commanded them all to drink of it, as S. Matthew has
written: S. Mark has said that they all drank of it. The Christians
immediately following the Apostles practiced the very same; but because it
would make a whole Volume, to collect the passages of the Ancients to prove the
certainty of this matter, and besides, both Roman Catholics, as well as
Protestants, confess, That Jesus Christ did institute this Sacrament under both
kinds, That the Apostles taught so, and that it was so practiced by the
primitive Church for a long time, as I think it may suffice to prove this
Tradition from age to age by some of the clearest passages, and to follow it
until its abolishing at the Council of Constance, and from that time until the
Council of Trent. Justin Martyr affirms, Apolog. 1.
that in his time, there was distributed Consecrated Bread and Wine unto all
the Communicants. Ep. ad Philadelph.
The pretended Ignatius tells us, of one only Cup distributed unto all; And S.
Irenaeus, disputing against certain Heretics who denied the Resurrection of
the Body; Advers. haer. l. 5. c. 2.
How (says he) do they deny that the Body is capable of the gift of God, which
is life eternal, which is nourished with the Blood and Body of Christ? L. 4. c.
34.
And again, How do they again say, that the Body corrupts (that is to say,
with a final corruption), and that it receives not life; (to wit, in rising
again) being nourished with the Body and Blood of Christ. Hom. 16.
Origin on the Book of Numbers, What is this people which are wont to drink
Blood? the Christian people, the faithful people, follow him who said, If you
eat not my Flesh, and drink not my Blood, you have no life in you; because my
Flesh is Meat indeed, and my Blood is drink indeed. And to show, that he speaks
of the Sacramental Communion, Hom. 14. in Matthew.
he adds; It is said, that we drink the Blood of Jesus Christ, not only in the
Celebration of the Sacraments, but also when we receive his words. And
elsewhere he speaks, of unadvisedly taking the Bread of our Lord and his Cup.
The blessed Martyr S. Cyprian, Ep. 63.
has written a Treatise expressly of the Sacrament of the Cup, as S. Austin
calls it, where he amply proves this Communion which we examine; and in another
place, writing, with his Brethren, unto Cornelius Bishop of Rome, touching the
resolution they had taken to admit into the unity of the Church, those who had
flinched in times of persecution; and speaking of the excellent Motive which
they found in communicating of the Cup to encourage Christians unto Martyrdom;
see here what they said, Ep. 54.
How should we encourage them to shed their blood for the confession of the
name of Jesus, if going to the Combat, we should deny them the Blood of Christ?
Or how should we make them fit to drink the Cup of Martyrdom, if we do not
admit them first to drink in the Church, the Cup of the Lord by the right of
Communication? And in his Treatise of those that had fallen during the
persecution of the Church, he says, P. 175. ult. edit.
That the Deacon presented the Cup unto them who were present, as Justin Martyr
also has taught us. The Councils of Ancyra, Anno 314. Apud Athanas. Apolog. p.
732.
in the second Canon, and that of Neocaesarea the same Year in the XIII. Canon,
inform us also the same thing; as also a Synod of Alexandria, Assembled during
the Persecutions stirred up by the Arrians against S. Athanasius. Thence it is,
that Leo the First, In natal. ejus c. 2. L. 1. contr. Parmen.
speaking in the V. Century of S. Vincent Levite, (that is to say, Deacon and
glorious Martyr) says, That he administered the Cup unto the Christians for
their salvation. Optatus Bishop of Milevis in Numidia, observes the same of
Cecilian, as he was yet but Deacon of the Church of Carthage, and writes also,
that what drew on him the hatred of Lucilla, a powerful and factious Woman, who
by her Riches and Credit, supported the Party of the ^onatists, against
Cecilian, promoted to be a Bishop, was, That Cecilian performing the Office of
a Deacon, pronounced a severe Sentence against her; because in presenting her
the Cup, she kissed the Bone of some dead person or Martyr, before she put her
lips unto the Cup of the Lord. Mystag 5. p. 245. vide p. 244. L. de Baptism. c.
3.
S. Cyril of Jerusalem in his Mystagogicks, Aster having communicated of the
Body of Christ, draw near unto the Cup of his Blood, etc. S. Basil said, the
benefit of the words of the Institution of the Eucharist is, That eating and
drinking, we should always have him in remembrance who Died, and is Risen
again for us; And elsewhere, Ep. 289.
It is a thing good and profitable to communicate daily, and to participate of
the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ; The Liturgies also which go in his name,
may be here alleged, and all the others which are now remaining, from which it
is easy to collect the use and practice of communicating under both kinds. S
Chrysostom in his Homilies upon S. Matthew, Hom. 32. Graec. p. 319. E.
The same Table is offered unto all, the same Drink is given unto all, but not
only the same Liquor, but it is also given unto us all to drink of one, and the
same Cup; for our Father injoining us to love one another, he so ordered it,
that we should drink of the same Cup; And upon S. John, speaking of the Water
and Blood which came out of Christ's side; Hom. 85. Graec.
The Mysteries do from thence take their Original, to the end as often as ye
approach unto the terrible Cup, ye should draw near, as if it were to drink out
of his side it self. And upon the Second to the Corinthians, Hom. 18.
There are certain times, when there is no difference betwixt the Priest and
those over whom he does preside; as when they are to participate of the
terrible Mysteries, for we are all equally admitted there; it is not as under
the old Law, the Priest ate some things, and the people other things, and the
people were not permitted to eat of what the Priest did eat: but now it is
otherwise, for one Body, and one Cup, is offered unto all. S. Austin in his
Questions upon Leviticus, The Lord saying, L. 3. c. 57. t. 4.
If you eat not my Flesh, and drink my Blood, you have no life in you. What was
the reason of so strictly prohibiting the people from the Blood of the
Sacrifices offered for sins, if those Sacrifices did represent the only
Sacrifice, wherein the true and full remission of sins is made? nevertheless,
no person is hindered from taking this Sacrifice for his nourishment, but rather
all those who would be saved, are exhorted to drink it. Leo the First, in his
Lent Sermon speaking of the Manicheans, who, not to appear what they were,
frequented the Assemblies of Believers, and did also participate with them of
their Sacraments: Sermon. ^. c. 5.
To hide (says he) their Infidelity, they have the impudence to assist at our
Mysteries, they so dispose themselves in the Communion of the Sacraments; to
shelter themselves the better, they receive with an unworthy mouth the Body of
Christ, but they absolutely refuse drinking the Blood of our Redemption;
Therefore we give your Holiness notice of it, to the end this kind of men may
be known by these marks, and that such other Sacrilegious Dissimulation has
been discovered, may be marked, and that being forbidden to be present in the
Society of the Saints, they might be expelled by the Priestly Authority. In the
Tenth Action of the Council of Chalcedon, Assembled An. 451. there is a request
of the Priests of the Church of Edessa, against Ibas their Bishop, wherein they
complain of many things, T 3. Council. p. 382. F. ult. edit.
but more especially, That when the Commemoration of Martyrs was made, there
was no Wine given to offer at the Altar, to be Sanctified and distributed unto
the people, except it were a very little, and that bad and muddy, just newly
pressed and made. Pope Gelasius at the end of the V. Century, De consecr. did.
2. Ep. ad Major. and Joan.
in Gratians Decree: We have been informed (says he) that some persons having
only taken part of the holy Body, do refrain the Cup of the holy Blood; which
persons doubtless, it being said, they are hindered by I know not what
Superstition, ought to receive the whole Sacraments, or be quite excluded from
them; because that the dividing of one and the same Mystery, cannot be done
without Sacrilege. Fragm. 28. contr. Fabian. L. 2. de vita sua, c 15. p. 216.
S. Fulgentius said, That we participate of the Body and Blood of Christ, when
we eat of his Bread, and drink of his Cup. S. Eloy Bishop of Noyon in the VII.
Century, requires, That the sick should with Faith and Devotion, receive the
Eucharist of the Body and Blood of Christ. T. 4. Council. p. 503.
The Third Council of Toledo, Assembled Anno 589. in the second Canon, Ordains;
That the peoples heart being purified by Faith, they should draw near to eat
the Body and Blood of Christ. Which the Fourth held in the year of our Lord
633. in the 7. and 8. Canons called, Ibid. p. 584, 587.
To receive the Sacrament of the Body and Blood of Christ. And in the
Eighteenth Canon, it makes this Rule for reforming a certain abuse crept into
the Church, in the celebration of this Sacrament. Some Priests communicate
presently after saying the Lords Prayer, and then give the Blessing unto the
people, which we forbid for the future; but that after the Lords Prayer, and
the conjunction of the Bread and the Cup, the blessing be given the people, and
that then the Sacrament of the Body and Blood of our Lord be received in this
manner, that the Priest and Deacon communicate before the Altar, the Clergy in
the Quire, and the people without the Quire. From which words it appears, That
in Spain in the VII. Century, the Communion of the Laity, did nothing differ
from that of the Priest who Officiated as to the manner, but in respect of the
place only. Also the XI. Council of Toledo, Ib. p. 825.
Assembled Anno 675. in the Eleventh Canon plainly speaks also of the Communion
under both the Symbols of Bread and Wine, when it forgiveth such as being very
sick through weakness, refuse the Eucharist, not through infidelity, But
because they cannot swallow it down, except it be what they drink of the Lords
Cup. Thus far it was the practice of the Church, to administer unto
Communicants both Symbols severally apart; It is true, that at the same time of
this XI. Council of Toledo, some going about to change this wholesome custom, and
to administer the Bread steept in the Consecrated Wine, the Council of Braga in
Gallicia, made a Decree to stop the current of this practice; but before we
allege this new Decree, it must be observed, That the Church by a charitable
condescension, suffered the Eucharist steeped to be given unto very weak and
sick persons, and to young Children, who were of a long time admitted to the
participation of the Sacrament, as has been shown; We have an instance of the
first, in the old Man Serapion, a Penitent, and Bedridden, (for as I perceive
in the Third Century, the Eucharist was administered to no sick folks, but such
as were of the number of the Penitents, and in danger of Death); And we read in
Eusebius, that a Priest of Alexandria following the example of Denis his
Bishop, sent by a young Boy a bit, or little parcel of the Eucharist, Eusebius.
Hist. Eccles. l. 6. c. 44.
commanding that it should be steept, and put into the old Man's mouth, that he
might swallow it. As for young Children it appears, that it may be collected
both from S. Cyprian in his Treatise of those that were fallen and yielded,
during the time of Persecution, Dimid. temp. c. 6.
and of the counterfeit Prosper, in what he has written of Promises and
Predictions, that it was so done to such as were very weak; I say it may seem
to be gathered, for the thing is very dubious in S. Cyprian who teaches us,
that the Communion was given unto little Children, but he does not positively
say, that the Bread was steept in the Wine; the pretended Prosper speaks more
formally. In a word, it is evident, that this kind of Communion was not
practiced but in great necessity, De commun. sub utraque spec. p. 1027.
and also as Cassander has judiciously observed, Those persons who steeped the
Bread in the Wine, did plainly show and declare, how necessary they believed
both Symbols were, to make a lawful Communion.

I say this sort of Communion was not practiced; I mean that the Bread was not
steeped in Wine, but upon great necessity. In fine, Hugh Maynard a learned
Benedictine, speaking of the Council of Clermont under Pope Urban the second,
as it is reported by Cardinal Baronius, he collects, that according to the
intent of the Council, may be given in a Spoon, unto sick Persons ready to dye,
the Body of our Lord steeped in the Blood, that they might swallow it the
easier. And to show that the Eucharist was not so administered, but unto such as
were very weak, he makes mention of a Manuscript of St. Remy of Rheims, Of the
anointing the sick, written toward the end of the X. Century: upon which he
observes, that when the Sacrament was administered unto such as were not extreme
ill, it was said unto them separately, The Body of our Lord Jesus Christ keep
you to life everlasting; the Blood of our Lord Jesus Christ ransom you unto
life everlasting: which words (says he) make a separate and distinct
reception. But as for those who were as 'twere at the point of death, these two
expressions were joined together, saying, The Body and Blood of our Lord Jesus
Christ preserve thy Soul unto everlasting life; because (says he) there was
given unto the sick Person in a Spoon, the Body of the Lord steeped in the holy
Blood. Now to return to the Council of Braga in Gallicia, it was assembled in
the year of our Lord 675. and in the second Canon, which Gratian, Ives of
Chartres, Cassander, and several others mis-alledge, as a Fragment of an
Epistle of Pope Julius to the Egyptians; I say, in the second Canon it reproves
diverse abuses, and amongst others, that of administering the Sacrament steeped;
therefore we will rest satisfied with alleging that which properly relates to
the Subject in hand, T. 4. Council. p. 832.
We are given to understand that some Persons present unto the people, as a
perfect Communion, the Eucharist steeped. And having touched another abuse, and
having proved by the Scriptures, that Milk should not be offered in stead of
Wine in divine Sacrifices, the Fathers add, And whereas they give unto the
people as a perfect Communion the Eucharist steeped, the example of the
Scripture which is alleged, where Jesus Christ recommended his Body and Blood
unto his Apostles, will not admit of it: for it is said, that he bid them take
his Body apart, and his Blood apart. And we do not read that Jesus Christ gave
the steeped Bread unto any but the Disciple, which should be known to be him,
to whom 'twas given, even him that would betray his Master, and not to show the
Institution of the Sacrament. We are then arrived at the end of the VII.
Century, without seeing any other attempt against the Communion under both
kinds separately, but that which was vigorously condemned and censured by the
Council of Braga. Let us continue to give farther proofs of this use. A Council
at Paris assembled Anno 829 under Lewis the Debonnair, it is the VI. which unto
that time was there celebrated; this Council I say, in the first Book, Canon
the 45. condemns an abuse which was crept into certain Provinces, T. 3. Council.
Gall.
Where the Women distributed unto the people (that is in the Churches) the Body
and Blood of our Lord; and in the 47. Canon, it forbids Priests, to celebrate
Masses any where but in consecrated places, unless it be in case of necessity,
To the end the people should not be without the celebration of Masses, and the
participation of the Body and Blood of our Lord. De ord. Bapt. z. c. 18.
Theodulph Bishop of Orleans, in the same Century, speaking of life eternal: To
obtain (says he) this life, we are Baptized, and we eat the flesh of Christ
and do drink his Blood, and afterward, the Church continues the custom of
receiving the Eucharist which was bequeathed unto her by Jesus Christ, that is
when any one is new born by Water and the spirit, (that is to say, is
Baptized), he is nourished with the body of our Lord, and drinks his Blood;
because that immediately after Baptism, T. 7. Spicil. p. 174.
they received the Sacrament. Amalarius Fortunatus; It is to be observed (says
he) that every Sunday in Lent, all the believers, (except such as are
excommunicated) ought to receive the Sacraments of the Body and blood of
Christ. Pope Nicholas the First, in his answer to the Bulgarians, requires, T.
6. Council. p. 619. c. 65.
that the venerable Body of Christ, and his precious Blood, be distinguished
and discerned from other meat, and that the one and the other be received.
Regino, in his Chronicle of the year of our Lord 869. observes that Pope Adrian
the second gave the Sacrament unto King Lothair, after that he had sworn, that
he had dismissed for ever, Waldrad, his Concubine, Regino in Chro. ad an. 869.
and that this Prince received in his hands the Body and Blood of the Lord: and
that it may not be thought it was a privilege belonging to Lothair by reason
of his Kingly Dignity, the Historian says, that Pope Adrian did present the
Communion unto all those which accompanied Lothair, with these words, If you
have not been assisting unto Lothair your Lord and King, in the sin of Adultery
laid to his charge, and if you have no way consented thereunto, and have had no
communication with Waldrad, and others who have been excommunicated by this
Apostolical Chair, the Body and Blood of our Lord Jesus Christ be profitable
unto you for life everlasting. Ratherius, Bishop of Verona in Italy, De
Contempt. can. part. 1. t. 2. Spicileg. p. 182. Ib. p. 262.
toward the end of the X. Century, Let all evil intentions be laid aside, as
well of those which receive, as of those which administer the Body and Blood of
the Lord; in his Synodical unto his Priests, he orders them, to warn Believers
to come four times a year to the Communion of the Body and Blood of Christ; and
in his first Sermon of Easter, P. 309.
Let us (says he) celebrate the Feast, (that is to say) let us eat the flesh
of the Lord, and drink his Blood; And again, Lay aside wickedness, Page 310.
if you will eat the flesh of the Lamb of God, and drink his Blood. And again
speaking of him that had unduly celebrated the precedent Easter, P. 311.
He dared approach to receive the Body and Blood of the Lamb of God. And of him
that had not followed the example of the Saints, P. 313.
How does he presume without sighing and grieving, this day to receive the Body
and Blood of the Lord; And in his second Sermon. P. 320.
Let us with joy receive the Body and Blood of Christ, which was sacrificed for
us; And in the third, Let every one examine himself, to see if the Priest has
said true of him (that is to say) if he has received the Body and Blood of the
Lord, with the unlevened Bread of sincerity and of truth. Ratherius dyed Anno
974. yet it is true, that the practice of administering the Eucharist steeped,
was introduced into some places about the time Ratherius did write; for Hugh
Maynard above mentioned, amongst several Manuscripts he used in his work upon
the Book of Sacraments of Gregory the First, makes use of one under the name of
Ratold, Abbot of Corby, written about the year of our Lord 986. wherein it is
read that the Bishop should give the Communion unto the Subdeacons, In
mingling the Sacrifice, that is to say, in mingling the holy Bread with the
consecrated Wine; for as for the Priests and Deacons, he will have them to
taste with their lips, the Blood in the Cup, the Subdeacon holding it; And
another of John, Bishop of Auranch, whose title is The ancient manner of
celebrating Mass, which he got from an ancient Manuscript of the Priory of
Saluza, of the Prebends of the Order of St. Austin in Normandy, of Vexin near
Vernon. But it appears by the beginning of the Manuscript cited by Maynard,
that this John, Bishop of Auranch, is Author of the piece which he dedicated to
Maurill, Archbishop of Roan, and this John dyed, as the same Maynard in his
Notes observes, P. 277.
in the year 1079. there this is to be read, That the Priest should communicate
not with steeped Bread, but according to the definition of the Council of
Toledo (in all likelihood he means that of Braga, in the year 675.) The Body
apart, and the Blood apart, excepting the people, unto whom he is permitted to
give the Communion with steeped Bread, not by authority, but by great
necessity, for fear of shedding the Blood of Christ: where the Reader may
observe if he please, that the case is, by way of permission; and farther, of a
permission grounded not upon the authority of a Council, but upon the necessity
that is alleged, of the fear or danger of effusion: something of like nature
is to be found in the ancient customs of the Monastery of Cluny, which were
written after the death of the Abbot Odilon, who dyed about the middle of the
XI. Century, but in such a manner, as appears that this custom was peculiar to
the Congregation of Cluny, the other Churches distributing both Symbols
severally: L. 2. c. 30. p. 146. t. 4. spicil.
Vuto all those unto whom he gives the holy Body, (say these ancient customs)
he first wets or steeps it in the Blood; but in the Margent, they make this
observation, Another Manuscript adds, Although this be contrary to the practice
of other Churches, because some of our Novices are such slovens that should
they receive the Blood by it self, they would not fail of being guilty of some
great neglect. Non remaneret.
Which words, Cassander alleged in his Treatise of the Communion under both
kinds; for he saw the Manuscripts before the customs were Printed, as they have
been within this six or seven years past; but it appears by the words above
alleged, that in most Churches, the Bread and Wine of the Sacrament were given
apart and distinct from one another. In the year 1095. Urban the Second held a
Council at Clermont in Auvergna, that made a Decree which is variously
reported; Cardinal Baronius in his Ecclesiastical Annals gives it us in these
terms, T. 11. ad an. 1095.
That no Body presume to Communicate at the Altar without receiving the Body
apart, and also the Blood by it self, unless it be by necessity and with
precaution. This necessity regards the sick abovementioned, and this care, or
precaution, refers in all likelihood, to the danger of spilling, which might
happen more especially at great and festival Communions, by reason of the great
number of people that comunicates; and doubtless it was upon such occasions
that John Bishop of Auranch intended it should be permitted to give the
Sacrament steeped unto the people; if it were not better to refer unto the same
subject (that is to say) unto sick bedridden Persons, both the necessity and
precaution of the Canon in Baronius. In a word, Oderic Vital in his ninth Book
of his Ecclesiastical History upon the year 1095. upon the relation of Maynard
in his Notes upon the same Book of Sacraments of Gregory, thus represents unto
us the Canon, Page 379.
That the Body of the Lord be received separately, and also the Blood of the
Lord; he speaks neither of necessity nor precaution: and without that, the
Canon is clear and intelligible and without any difficulty; it is no easiy
matter to judge in what manner the Council expressed it self, it only can be
said, that it seems to express it self, as Oderic Vital says, if it be
considered in the first place, that 'twas in this Council of Clermont, the
Croysade was granted for recovering the Holy Land. Secondly, that it appears by
a Letter written from Antioch by the Adventurers, four years after the Council,
that is to say, in the year 1099. and directed unto Manasses, Archbishop of
Rheims, that the Christians resolving to make a sally upon those which held
them closely besieged in Antioch, did first Communicate, but under both Symbols
distinctly, These things being heard, T. 7. Spicil. p. 195.
the Christians being purified by cenfessing their sins, and strongly armed by
receiving the Body and Blood of the Lord, and being prepared for the combat,
they marched out of the gate. Unto which may be added, that a little before the
Council of Clermont, most Churches did Communicate, as we have been informed by
the ancient customs of Cluny, under both kinds distinctly. But Paschal the
Second who succeeded unto Urban, Anno 1099. commands both Symbols to be
distributed separately, Pascal. 2. Ep. 32. t. 7. part. 1. p. 130.
except it be unto young Children, and such as are at the point of death; for
unto such, he gives liberty they should be communicated with the holy Wine
only, because they cannot swallow down the Bread. And about the same time the
Micrologue observes, that the Communion with the steeped Sacrament, Cardinal
Humbert against the Greeks. t. 4. Bibl. patr. part 2. p. 217. A. Microlog. c.
18.
is no lawful Communion, and proves it by the authority of the Roman Order. It
appears also that about fifty years before this Council of Clermont, the
steeped Sacrament was not always given unto Persons ready to depart this life,
but the holy Bread, and the sanctified Cup apart; at least nothing hinders but
it may so be gathered from the Chronicle of Fontanella, otherwise St. Wandrill,
in Normandy: for speaking of Gradulph, one of its Abbots, who dyed in the year
1047. C. 8. t. 3. Spicil. p. 268.
it says, That being at the point of death, and having received the Communion
of the Body and Blood of the Lord, he dyed.

Nevertheless, the best and most holy things absolutely degenerate from their
institution, let us see the manner that the Communion with the steeped
Eucharist was introduced and established in several places, but not
universally. We have a Letter of Ernulph, or Arnulph, or if you please of
Arnold, at first a Monk at S. Lueiens of Beauvais, then at Canterbury in
Lanfranck's time, afterward made a Prior by Anselm; a little after, Abbot of
Burk, and at last by Radulph, Bishop of Rose, now Rochester, in England; he
died Anno 1124. T. 2. Spicil. p. 432.
in this Letter which he writes unto one Lambert, who demanded wherefore the
Sacrament was then given steept, seeing our Savior gave the Bread and Wine
distinctly; he approves this new manner of giving the Sacrament, although he
owns that Jesus Christ distributed it otherwise, and he likes it for the danger
of shedding, especially upon Festival days, because of the great numbers of
persons that then use to communicate; also he touches the inconvenience might
happen by reason of men that have long and great Beards, representing, that if
at their Meals, they wet their Whiskars in the Liquor before they receive it in
their mouth, it may be feared, they do the same in the Consecrated Wine, if
they are admitted unto the Sacramental Cup, which he accounts a great crime,
which he charge upon the Communicant, and also him that celebrates: besides,
to strengthen what he says, of the danger of effusion upon solemn Festival
days, when great numbers of Men and Women must be communicated of all sorts,
and conditions; he observes, that he that officiates, will be still in danger
of spilling something out of the Sacred Cup, let him take never so much care
and caution in distributing it, because he often runs the hazard of this
effusion, when he is about to drink of it himself; which cannot be done, as he
tells us, without falling into a great sin, whereof he must be obliged to make
great repentance. From all which he concludes, in favor of the steeped
Sacrament, and praises the wisdom of those who first established this manner
of Communicating with the Bread steept in Wine, saying, That pious men had
prudently directed, that the little portion of the Body should not be given
dry, as our Lord had done, but that it should be distributed unto Believers
steeped in the Blood of our Lord, and that by this means it should happen, that
according to the precept of our Savior, we should eat his Flesh, and drink his
Blood, and that he that feared to sin in so great a matter, might avoid the
danger. And he gives for a reason of this conduct, That we eat dry, and drink
liquid what goes down the throat, after having received it in the mouth, either
together, or separately. And because some considering that Jesus Christ had
given the steept morsel unto Judas, did not approve this manner of distributing
the Sacrament, he says, there is a great deal of difference betwixt the
Eucharist steeped, and the Morsel which our Lord gave the Disciple that
betrayed him, because the actions which have a different occasion, cannot agree
well together: Afterward taking with many others, the Decree of the Council of
Braga, of the year 675. against the steeped Sacrament, for a Decree of Pope
Julius, he says, this Decree is no longer of force with modern persons, and
that the customs of the Church, which surpass all others, as well in reason,
as in authority, has overcome this ancient Constitution, that it should not be
thought strange, because the Decrees of other Popes are changed for the like,
and sometimes upon smaller occasions.

But although this Author of the XII. Century, of whom Cardinal Cusa cites
something in Cassander, in his Liturgies, gives us this form of administering
the Sacrament with steept Bread, as established in his time in the West; it
cannot be said, that it was universally received in all Churches without
exception. In fine, besides what we alleged out of the Micrologue, and of Pope
Paschal, who made his Decree in the XII. Century; Arnold of Bonneval,
contemporary with S. Bernard, in his Sermon of the Supper of the Lord, in S.
Cyprian's Works, shows us sufficiently, that in the same XII. Century wherein
he lived, the use of the Cup was not forbidden the people, when he says, Apud.
Cypr. p. 329. ult. edit. vid. p. 330.
It was under the Doctor Christ Jesus, that this Discipline first of all
appeared in the World, that Christians should drink Blood, whereof the use was
so strictly prohibited by the Authority of the ancient Law; for the Law forbids
eating of Blood, and the Gospel commands to drink it; And again, We drink
Blood, Jesus Christ himself commanding it, being partakers by, and with him of
everlasting life. And at the conclusion of the Treatise, he with several other
Doctors of the Church, who lived before him, in that Believers are partakers of
one Bread, and of one Cup, does search a type of their union, Ibid. p. 33^.
or rather of their Spiritual unity in Christ Jesus, who is the head of this
Divine Body. We also (says he) being made his Body, are tied and bound unto
our head, both by the Sacrament, and by the matter of the Sacrament; and being
members one of another, we mutually render each other the duties of love, we
communicate by charity, we participate with eating one and the same meat, and
drink one and the same drink, which flows and springs from the Spiritual Rock,
which meat and drink is our Lord Jesus Christ. I believe we may join unto
Arnold of Bonneval, Peter de Celles, Abbot of S. Remy of Rheims, who lived at
the end of the XII. Century; for in his Treatise of Cloister Discipline, which
is come to light but within these seven or eight years, he speaks in this
manner; The communication of the Body of Christ, T. 3. Spicil. p. 99.
and of the Blood of Christ poured forth, to wit, of the Lamb without spot,
purifieth us from all guilt, and from all sin. Let us say something more
formal, Peter of Tarantes, Apud. Cassand. de Commun. sub utraque specie, p.
1043.
afterward Pope, under the name of Innocent IV. writes, That the most
considerable, as the Priests and Ministers of the Altar, do receive the
Sacrament under both kinds. William of Montelaudana; in sundry places (says
he) They communicate with the Bread and Wine, (that is to say) with the whole
Sacrament. And Peter de Palude, testifies, that in his time, It was the
practice in several Churches to communicate under the one and the other
species. Richard de Mediavilla, was of the same Judgment with Innocent IV. the
one and the other giving for a reason, that those unto whom they administer the
Communion under both kinds, Know very well how to yield thereunto the greater
reverence and caution. All these, says Cassander, lived about the 1300. year
of our Lord. Wherefore the same Cassander observes in the same place, that
Thomas Aquinas, who defends the use of communicating under one kind, does not
say, that this custom was universally received, but in some Churches only. And
to say the truth, Christians found so much consolation and benefit in
participating of the Cup of their Lord, that when in latter times they began to
tell them of the danger of effusion, to dispose them to the use of
communicating under one kind, there were several Churches, that rather than
they would be deprived of the participation of the sacred Cup, invented certain
little Quills which were fastened unto the Chalices, by means whereof, they
drank the Mystical Blood of our Lord, as Beatus Rhenanus, p. 438.
testifies in his Notes upon Tertullian's Book De Corona Militis; and Cassander
in his Treatise of the Communion under both kinds: p. 1036.
both of them in their time, having seen of these Quills or little Pipes, which
were used for communicating the Laity. Let us descend yet lower, and we shall
find about 35. years before the Council of Constance, an example of the
Communion under both kinds in Rome it self, not indeed of the People, but of
all the Cardinal Deacons; for Urban VI. who began the great Schism which lasted
from the year 1378. until 1428. being Elected Pope at Rome Anno 1378. in the
place of Gregory XI. He solemnly celebrated Mass upon S. Peter 's Altar, in his
Pontifical Habit; wherein all things were performed according to the order of
the Rubric; and in fine, he with his own hands gave the Communion unto all the
Cardinal Deacons, with the precious Body and Blood of Christ; as it was always
the manner of Popes to do; T. 4. p. 306.
Thus it was written unto Lewis Earl of Flanders, Anno 1378. by Pilei^de Prata,
Archbishop of Ravenna, and Cardinal, in one of the Tomes of the collection of
Dom Luke de Achery.

But, as from the distribution of both Symbols separately, in the latter Ages
they came to administer the Bread in the Consecrated Wine; so from the
distributing the Eucharist steeped, by little and little, insensibly in some
Churches of the West, they gave the Communicants only the consecrated Bread, a
custom which in process of time introduced it self almost into all the Western
Churches, until that it was established in the year 1415. upon Saturday, the
15. of June, by this Decree of the Council of Constance. Sess. 13. t. 7.
Council. part. 2. p. 1042.
This present holy general Council of Constance lawfully Assembled by the Holy
Ghost, declares, discerns, and defines, that although Jesus Christ after Supper
instituted and administered unto his Disciples, this venerable Sacrament under
both kinds of Bread and Wine, yet nevertheless the commendable authority of
holy Canons, and the approved custom of the Church has observed, and does
observe, that this Sacrament ought not to be celebrated after Supper, nor to be
received of Believers but fasting, except in case of sickness or some other
necessity, allowed, or admitted by Law, or by the Church: and in like manner,
that although in the Primitive Church, Believers received the Sacrament under
both kinds; yet nevertheless to avoid certain perils, inconveniences, and
scandals, this custom was fitly introduced, that those who officiated should
receive under both kinds, and the Laity under the species of Bread only,
withal that they should firmly believe and nothing doubt, that the entire Body
of Christ, and the Blood, are truly contained, as well under the species of
Bread, as under the species of Wine. Therefore such a custom being reasonably
introduced both by the Church and by the holy Fathers, and that it was a long
while observed, it ought to pass for a Law, which is not allowed to be
rejected, nor changed by every bodies fancy, without the Authority of the
Church. Therefore they are to be judged erroneous, that think it to be
Sacrilegious or unjust to observe this custom, or this Law; and those who
obstinately affirm the contrary of what is above said, ought to be banished as
Heretics, and severely punished by the Diocesans of the places, or their
Officials, or by the Inquisitors of the Heretical evil, in the Kingdoms or
Provinces, where by hazard or on purpose, they have attempted or presumed any
thing against this Decree, according to the lawful Ordinances and Canons which
have been seasonably made against Heretics, and their abettors against the
Catholic Faith. But notwithstanding the severity of this Decree, Cassander
has left us upon Record in his Treatise of the Communion under both kinds
formerly cited, That it is read, that Pope Martin the Fifth, p. 1037,
after the Council of Constance, did practice, in the solemn Office of Easter,
the Precept and Formulary of the Roman Order, in giving the Communion unto the
people under both kinds: The same in the same place relates, as from Thomas
Waldensis, That after the Synod of Constance, the Pope of Rome did not forbear
giving the Communion after the use of Rome (that is to say, under both kinds)
unto the Deacons, the Ministers of the Altar, and unto other persons eminent in
Piety and Worth, as also unto Rectors of places, and considerable Monasteries,
his Brethren, and unto others he thought worthy of so great a Gift. He says
moreover, That Cardinal Cusa, in his Letter written unto the Clergy and learned
Men of Bohemia, Anno 1452. some years after the Council of Basle, declares,
That until very near his time, the Pope, at the Feast of Easter, suffered the
Laity, unto whom he had with his own hands given the Body of the Lord, to
receive the Blood from the hands of the Deacons: And that Nicholas of Palerma,
who assisted at the Council of Basle, says, That the opinion of Doctors is,
That it would not be ill done that the Communicant should also receive the
Blood. This Council of Basle, whereat this Archbishop was present, granted unto
the Bohemians the Communion under both kinds, provided that in all other things
they should conform unto the Church of Rome, and that they would instruct them
to believe, that Jesus Christ was contained wholly under the one and the other
species. All those who are any thing read in the History of those times, know
that those of Bohemia, who differed nothing from the Church of Rome, but only
in the matter of the Communion under both kinds, were called for that reason
Calixtins, different from the true Taborites: but so it is, as it appears by a
Letter from George Pogiebrac, King of Bohemia, that these Calixtins did not
quietly enjoy this Grant; for in this Letter, which was written in the year
1468. and for which we are obliged unto Dom Luke d'Achery, T. 4. Spicileg. p.
413, 414, 415.
a Benedictine Monk, this Prince declares himself plainly to be a Calixtin;
That he was bred up in this manner of Communicating under both kinds; That his
Father, Mother, and Grandmother had so practiced; That the Council of Basle
had granted Liberty of it unto his Subjects, not by way of permission, as the
Church sometimes tolerates Sins, but to the end it should be allowed by the
Authority of our Lord Jesus Christ, and of our holy Mother the Church, his
Spouse; That in all other things he agrees with the Church of Rome; so that it
appears by this apologetical Letter, which he writes unto Matthias King of
Hungary, his Son-in-Law, that he only desired liberty of Communicating under
both kinds, as he had been taught by his Father and Grandfather; and I doubt
not, but a part of this Apology will in convenient time and place, give
sufficient ground for making a clear and certain Judgment of the Belief of the
ancient Taborites, upon the point of the Eucharist. But after all these
changes, happened at sundry times, the Council of Trent in the 21. Session,
being the Fifth under Pope Pius IV. Anno 1562. the 16. of July, after having
spoken of the Authority which the Church has always had in the dispensation
of Sacraments, to change in time, and place, what she thought fit, the
substance still remaining entire: it adds, Sess. 21. c. 2. and 3. de doctr.
That therefore the Holy Mother the Church, being sensible of this wholesome
Authority in the administration of Sacraments, although that at the beginning
of Christian Religion, the use of both kinds was frequent; nevertheless, in
process of time this custom being changed, it was introduced for wise and solid
reasons, to approve this custom of communicating under one kind, and has
commanded it to pass into a Law, which shall not be allowed to be altered or
laid aside at pleasure, without the Authority of the same Church. And in the
following Chapter, which is the Third of Doctrine, It declares moreover, That
though our Redeemer (as it is said) in his last Supper, instituted this
Sacrament under both kinds, and gave it unto his Apostles; Yet it must be
confessed, that Jesus Christ entirely, and the true Sacrament; is received
under one species, and that so, as to what concerns the benefit, such are not
deprived of any grace necessary to salvation, who receive but under one kind.
After all which, the Council makes these three Canons: If any one shall say,
Can. 1.
that by the command of Christ, or for necessity of Salvation, all Believers in
general, and each one in particular, is obliged to receive both kinds of the
holy Sacrament of the Eucharist, let him be Anathema. If any one shall say,
Can. 2.
that the holy Catholic Church was not moved by just causes, and reasons, to
administer the Communion unto the Laity, and Clergy not officiating, under the
species of Bread only, or that she has therein erred, let him be Anathema. If
any body shall deny, that whole Christ, Can. 3.
the Fountain and Author of all Graces, is received under the sole species of
Bread, because as some falsely suggest, he is not received according to
Christ's own Institution under both kinds, let him be accursed. See here
exactly whereunto things amounted in the West. Whereupon some have made these
Reflections; In the first place, that about 300. years before the use of the
Cup was taken away from the people by public Authority; the Albigenses, and
Waldenses, had separated themselves from the Latin Church, to make a Body
apart, which Body has always practiced the Communion under both kinds:
Secondly, that at the time the Council of Constance made her Decree, there was
in Bohemia, besides the Calixtins, who only desired the use of the Cup,
agreeing in all other points with the Church of Rome, the Taborites, so called
from the Mountain Tabor where they had their Assemblies, unto whom some joining
many of the Waldenses, who, according to the testimony of Dubravius, had
sheltered themselves in those parts ever since the XII. Century, and that there
were not only of these Waldenses at that time in Bohemia only, but also that
there were great numbers of them in England, in Provence, the Valleys of
Piedmont, and elsewhere. In the third place, that when the Council of Trent, in
our Fathers days, renewed and confirmed the Decree of Constance, touching the
taking away the Cup from the Laity, and Clergy that did not officiate, yet it
referred unto the Popes disposing and power, to grant it unto those whom he
should think fitting, and upon what conditions he should judge convenient,
without insisting here upon the liberty our Kings have of Communicating under
both kinds. In the fourth place, that since the Decree of the Council of Trent,
an infinite number of persons of that same Communion, earnestly wished, that
the use of the Cup which had been taken away, might be restored unto the
people. Those which be any thing curious, may read what Cassander has written,
a man of the Communion of the Roman Church, and very intelligent in
Ecclesiastical Antiquity; I say, in his Consultation, Art. 22. In his Defense
of the Book touching the Duty of a Devout Man, page 864. and in his Treatise of
the Communion under both kinds; and the demand which Catherine de Medicis,
Queen of France, caused to be made unto the Pope in the behalf of France, Anno
1561. as is related at large by Monsieur de Thou, Hist. Thuan. l. 27.
in his History. In fine, that the practice of all Christians is contrary to
that of the Latins, because they all administer the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper under both kinds, to wit, the Grecians, the Melchites or Assyrians, the
Georgians, Circassians, and Mingrelians, the Muscovites, and Russians, the
Nestorians, the Christians of S. Thomas in the Indies, before they turned to
the Latins, which was but in the last Century heither did they renounce their
belief or worship, to embrace the worship of the Latin Church, till the year
1599. the Jacobites, which are exceeding numerous, the Cophtites, or Christians
in Egypt, the Abassins under Prester John, who is one of the greatest Princes
in the World, the Armenians; and in fine, the Maronites, until that they
submitted themselves unto the Latin Church in Clement VIII. his time. It is
certain, there is some difference in the manner of distributing the Sacrament
under both kinds amongst these Christian Nations; for some of them put the
Bread and Wine both together in a Spoon, as the Muscovites; others administer
the Sacrament steeped, as the Armenians; if we may credit some persons; It is
said, that the Greeks at this time do so, heretofore they distributed both
kinds separately. In effect I see, that all agree that the Greeks give the
Bread steept. Therefore Humbert Cardinal of Blanoh-Selva, writing against the
Calumnies of the Greeks in the XI. Century, said, That they put the Bread and
Wine together, as we said the Muscovites do, who are of the Religion of the
Greeks, taking them in a Spoon, which the Laity do at this time by relation of
Goar, in his Notes upon the E^chology; but the Clergy receive both kinds
separately. As for all the other Christians above mentioned, they Communicate
under both kinds separately, unto whom we may join all the Protestant
Christians; but so it is, that there is not any one Christian Communion in the
whole World, excepting only the Latin, but believe that the use of both Symbols
is necessary unto a lawful Communion, whatever difference there may be amongst
them in the manner of administering of it. Now it is evident by what has been
said, that unto this Communion under both kinds, cannot be opposed that, called
the Communion of the Laity by the Ancients, because that means nothing else, as
the learned on both sides agree, but to communicate with the people, and not
with the Clergy; for instance, when a Clergyman was degraded from his Office
for some great sin, he was reduced to the degree of the common people, amongst
whom he did communicate, and not with the Clergy, which is at this time
practiced amongst the Abyssins, and amongst the Protestants; but that makes
nothing to the communicating under one kind, because the people participated of
both kinds; Nor the peregrine Communion, whereof mention is made, but very
seldom, in the Monuments which remain unto us of Antiquity; for all the certain
knowledge we have of it, by reason of the few places that speak of it, is, that
it regarded strangers who came from some other parts, unto some Church where
they were admitted to receive the Sacrament; but after the manner that 'twas
there celebrated, under both kinds. If this peregrine Communion may not better
be understood of Clergymen which traveled from one Church to another without
Attestations or Certificates, in which case they were civilly received by
reason of their character, but without admitting them unto the Communion of
Divine Mysteries, almost as S. Chrysostom served Ammonius, and Isidorus; which
also administered unto Theophilus Bp. of Alexandria, a pretext for persecuting
S. Chrysostom; Nor that Believers were suffered to carry home unto their
Houses the Bread of the Eucharist, to take it when they pleased: for besides,
that it was an abuse which indeed was tolerated along time in the Church, but
could be no prejudice unto the practice generally received, it may be observed,
that those very persons which carried home with them the Bread of the
Sacrament, did it not in all likelihood until after they had eaten part of it
in the Assembly, and participated of the Cup of the Lord. Nor that there was
given unto sick Folks at the point of Death, the Eucharist steeped, because it
was a thing extraordinary, and that beside it was shown by this practice, that
both Symbols were believed to be necessary, nor that the XI. Council of Toledo,
permits the Cup only to be given unto those who are so weak, that they are not
able to swallow down the consecrated Bread, unto whom Pope Paschal II. joins
young Children, because this sufferance is grounded upon invincible necessity,
as well as that which is practiced by some Protestant Churches, toward those
who have naturally such an aversion for Wine, that it is not in their power to
surmount; in which cases, she dispenses with the participation of the Cup, and
is content to administer the Bread only.

After what has been hitherto spoken of the Communion under both kinds, I
think it will be needless to add any more unto this History, which if I mistake
not, I have written large enough to satisfy the curiosity of those who desire
to be informed of what passed in the ancient Church, in the practice of so
important a matter, as is that of the Communion of the holy Cup; not but that a
great number of other testimonies may be alleged for the establishment of this
Tradition; but when I consider that if the great number of passages does not
prejudice the matter which is examined, yet it proves tedious unto the Reader,
when too large: I shall forbear alleging any more to avoid tiring those who
shall give themselves the trouble of reading this Treatise; and I forbear the
rather, that if they are persons who have any knowledge of Ecclesiastical
Antiquity, they will know of themselves without my help, that there be many
others in the Works of Tertullian, of S. Ambrose, Gaudentius, S. Jerome, S.
Austin, besides those related by Gratian in his Decree of Gregory the First, in
the Roman Order, in the Books of Images, under the name of Charlemaine, in the
Writings of Rabanus of Paschase, of Oecumenius, Theophylact, Fulbert of
Chartres, Humbert of Blanch-Selva, of Lanfranc, Guilmond, Rupert de Duitz,
Alger, S. Bernard, Odo Bishop of Cambray, of Lombard Master of the Sentences,
and elsewhere; as for such as have not applied themselves to the reading the
Holy Fathers, they may sufficiently inform themselves of what I have written,
how Christians have from time to time governed themselves in the matter of
communicating under both kinds. Therefore I shall content my self in touching a
circumstance which I had almost forgotten, and which in all likelihood will not
be displeasing unto any; it concerns a Chalice of Saint Remy Archbishop of
Rheims; this Prelate who was so famous in our France, especially after he had
Baptized Clovis the first of our Kings who embraced the Christian Religion:
this Prelate I say, did Consecrate unto God a Cup to distribute the Communion
unto the people, upon which he caused three Latin Verses to be ingraved, which
are preserved unto our days, although the Chalice is not in being, the Church
of Rheims having been constrained to melt it, and to pay it for their Ransom
unto the Normans, above 700. years ago; and these Verses plainly show, that in
S. Remy's time, that is, toward the end of the V. Century, the people did not
participate of the Bread of the Sacrament only, but also of the Cup of
Benediction: Flodoard cites them in his History of the Church of Rheims, and
I Will make no difficulty of representing them in this History, in the same style
in which they were written; Hauriat hinc populus vitam de sanguine sacro
Flodoard. Histor. Remens. l. 1. c. 10.

Injecto aeternus quem fudit vulnere Christus.
Remigius reddit Domino sua vota Sacerdos.
Now I say to conclude this Chapter, it appears plainly by all that has been
said, that the Christian Church universally practiced the Communion under both
kinds separately, the space of 1000. years; that since that time, they began in
some places in the Latin Church, to administer the Sacrament mixed, or steeped;
from the Eucharist steeped, they came in process of time to distribute the
consecrated Bread only, not in all places, but in some Churches, until that the
Council of Constance, in the Year 1415. commanded by a public Decree, the
Communion to be given under one kind only, which yet was not so generally
obeyed, but that we have produced since that time, examples and instances of a
contrary practice. But in fine, the Council of Trent made its last Essay in the
manner as has been above declared; as for all the other Christian Churches
which hold no commerce with the Latin, they administer the Sacrament under both
Symbols, although it be with some little difference.

CHAP. XIII.
The Eucharist received with the hand.

BUT because it is not sufficient to know the things which were distributed
unto Communicants, if we do not at the same time know the manner they were
received by Believers; I think fit to employ this Chapter in the inquiry of
this Custom and Practice. When Jesus Christ celebrated and instituted his first
Sacrament, he said unto his Disciples, Take; the Greek word used by him in this
place imports, to take with the hand, or receive with the hand what is given;
accordingly the ancient Christians which succeeded the Age of Jesus Christ and
his Apostles did in the very same manner; and it is certain, that all the
Communicants generally received with the hand in the Church, the Sacrament of
the Eucharist; so Tertullian teaches us in his Treatise of Idolatry, where
showing, that it is not lawful for a Christian Workman to make Idols, that is
to say, Images of false Gods, he expresses his anger against any amongst the
Christians, Tertul. de Idol. c. 7.
Who come (says he) from making Idols, to Church, who lifts up unto God the
Father, the hands which are the makers of Idols; Id. de Coron. c. 3.
And in fine which stretches forth those hands to receive the Body of the
Lord, who gave Bodies unto Devils. And elsewhere, We receive the Eucharist from
no other hand but from his who does preside; Id. de Orat. c. 14.
And in his Book of Prayer, Having (says he) received the Body of the Lord and
kept it. Clement of Alexandria, at the end of the Second Century wherein he
lived, teaches us, that there were certain Priests who did not distribute the
Sacrament unto Communicants, but permitted each one that approached unto the
holy Table to take it. Clem. Alex. Strom. l. 1. p. 271. Apud. Cassand. in
Liturg. c. 31.
Some (says he) having divided the Eucharist according to the usual manner,
suffered each one of the people to take part of it. Cardinal Cajetan, was of
opinion, that Jesus Christ did after the same manner, and that the Primitive
Church Religiously followed his example; and it is at this time the manner of
Communicating amongst the Protestants in Holland: yet this is still receiving
the Sacrament with the hand; which was observed in S. Cyprians time, Cyprian.
Ep. 56.
that is to say, in the Third Century, as appears by these words, Let us arm
the right hand with the Spiritual Sword, that it may courageously reject wicked
Sacrifices, being mindful of the Eucharist, and that which receives the Body of
the Lord, might afterward embrace Christ himself, that hand which is to
receive the price of immortal Crowns. So it is that Mr. Rigaut has in his
Notes corrected this passage, by the Manuscript Copies of the Vatican. And
again, Id. de laps. p. 175.
He that is fallen, threatens those which stand; those which are wounded, them
which are not; and the sacrilegious Person is offended at the Priests, because
he does not presently receive the Body of Christ with defiled hands, or that he
drinks not the Blood of the Lord with an impure mouth. And in another Treatise,
where he teaches that the works of the flesh are overcome by means of
patience; Id. de bono patient. p. 226.
Let patience (says he) be strong and well rooted in the heart, that the
sanctified Body and Temple of God, defile not it self by Adultery, and that the
hand, after having received the Eucharist, defile not it self with the Sword
and Bloodshedding. Cornelius, Bishop of Rome, contemporary with St. Cyprian,
also shows plainly that it was so practiced in the Church of Rome, when
writing unto Fabius, Bishop of Antioch, he tells him that Novatian the
Heretic, made those who came unto him to receive the Communion, to swear that
they would be of his party; Apud Eusebius. hist. l. 6. c. 43. Vales.
After he had made the Oblations (says he) and that he had distributed and
given unto every one, part of the Sacrament, he constrained these wretches to
swear unto him, instead of the benediction and Prayers, taking with both his
hands, the hands of him who received, and letting them not loose, till they had
engaged unto him by Oath. We have again in the same Eusebius, another example
of this use and custom about the same time which Cornelius wrote, for we there
find, that Denis Bishop of Alexandria writing unto Sixtus Bishop of Rome,
speaks unto him of a Brother, that is to say, a Believer, who had lived a great
while in the Church after he had entered into its Communion, and forsaken the
Heretics amongst whom he had been Baptized; and amongst many things which he
says, he observes this circumstance, That he presented himself at the holy
Table; Ibid. l. 7. c. 3.
that he had stretched out his hands to receive this holy nourishment; that he
had received it, and that he had been a great while partaker of the Body and
Blood of our Lord Jesus Christ. It was unto this custom doubtless, that Gregory
Nazianzen had respect, when he said of Julian the Apostate, Greg. Nazian. orat.
1. in Jul. p. 70.
He pollutes his hands, to the end there should remain nothing of the unbloody
Sacrifice, whereby we communicate of Jesus Christ, of his sufferings, and of
his Divinity: The Abbot of Billy, one of the Scholiasticks of Gregory,
subscribes thereunto, and observes upon the place, That almost all the
Ancients, after Turtullian, testify, that anciently, the Eucharist was given
into the peoples hand. And in the funeral Oration of Gorgonia his Sister, he
sufficiently teaches the same, when he says, That her hand had hid some of
the Antitypes of the Body and Blood of Id. orat. 11. p. 187.
Jesus Christ. St. Basil his intimate friend, deposes in favor of this same
practice about the end of the V. Century; Basil. Ep. 289. t. 3.
In the Church, (says he) the Priest gives one part, (that is, of the
Sacrament) and he which receives it, keeps it with all freedom, and so bears
it with his own hand to his mouth. St. Cyril of Jerusalem suffers us not to
make any question of it when he speaks of receiving the Body of Jesus Christ in
the hollow of the hand, and that he warns the Communicant, Cyril. Hieros.
Mystag. 5. Ambros. Hex. l. 6. p. 103. t. 1. id. de el. and jejun. c. 10.
Chrysostom. ad Pop. Antioch. Hom. 21. t. 1. p. 266.
That he take care that he lose none of it, and that not a crum of it, fall or
be lost; And St. Ambrose, does he not say, That the hand is that whereby we
receive the heavenly Sacraments? And elsewhere he declares that we receive the
Sacraments at the Altar. St. Chrysostom, who dyed the in beginning of the V.
Century, gives us several proofs of this ancient custom; Consider (says he,)
what you receive with the hand, and be not so inconsiderate as to strike any
Body; and after having honored it with so great a gift, do not dishonor it in
employing it to strike: consider what it is you receive with the hand, and keep
it free from all covetousness, etc. Think that not only you receive it with the
hand, but also that you put it unto the mouth. Id. Hom. de simult. p. 285.
And in the same Tome, See here, I preach, I conjure, I warn with a loud voice,
that he who has an Enemy, should not approach unto the Holy Table, and that he
should not receive the Body of Jesus Christ. Id. in Seraph. p. 891.
And in the third Tome, The Seraphin durst not touch it with his hand, but with
the Tongs; and you, you receive him with the hand. It is unto this time, must
be referred what Sozom^n the Historian has left us upon Record, of the Woman
which being of the Sect of Macedonius, who denied the Divinity of the holy
Ghost, went through complaisance to her Husband, who had quitted this Sect by
the powerful Sermons of St Chrysostom, Sozom. hist. l. 8. c. 5.
unto the Church of the Catholics, and disposed her self to communicate with
them; but he says, That retaining what she had received, she bowed her self as
if she would have prayed, and that at the same instant her maid who was there
with her, gave her privately what she had in her hand, and that she had brought
along with her; but she had it no sooner between her teeth, but it became a
stone. Unto the same purpose may be applied what St. Apud Theodoret. Hist. l.
5. c. 17. Isid. Pelus. l. 5. Ep. ult.
Ambrose said unto the great Theodosius, after the severe vengeance which he
used against the inhabitants of Thessalonica; and St. Isidore of Damiette
reproacheth a Priest called Zosimus, that Believers rather chose to abstain
from the Communion, than receive it from his impure hands. In a Council at
Saragosse in Spain, T. 1. Council. p. 684. Ib. p. 739.
assembled Anno 380. there is a Canon against those who received the Eucharist,
and did not eat it, an Ordinance which is found to be renewed in the fourteenth
Canon of the Council of Toledo in the year four hundred, upon which Canon,
Page. 47.
Garsias Loaysa, a Spaniard, observes, That anciently the Church was wont to
give the Eucharist unto Believers in their hand; and he proves, it by several
testimonies, some whereof we have already cited. The prohibition made by a
Council of Carthage Anno 419. of giving the Eucharist unto dead Bodies, does no
less justify this practice, because the Fathers allege for a reason, that it
is written; Can. 18. in Cod. Afric.
Take, eat; and that dead Bodies can neither take nor eat. St. Austin, who was
present at this Council, intended not to depart from this use; for writing
against the Donatist Petilian, Contra Petil. l. 2. c. 23. t. 7.
he says unto him, When you celebrated the Sacraments, unto whom did you give
the kiss of Charity? into whose hand did you give the Sacrament, and unto whom
at your turn, reached you out the hand to receive it of him that gave it?
Hitherto Communicants received the Eucharist with the naked hand, but in this
V. Century, there began some difference to be made betwixt Men and Women; so
that in some places, the Women were obliged to receive the Sacrament with the
hand indeed, Sermon. 252. de temp. t. 10.
but upon it a clean Linen-cloth. The Men, says St. Austin, when they desire
to communicate, wash their hands, and the Women present clean Cloths, whereon
they receive the Body of Christ. A Diocesan Synod of Auxerr, assembled Anno
578. by Aunacharius the Bishop of that See, calls the Linen-cloth used by the
Women to receive the Sacrament, The Dominical; That each Woman, says the 42.
Canon, T. 1. Council. Gall. Sirmond.
when she communicates, have her Dominical; and if there be any which has it
not, let her not receive until the next Lords day. And in the 36. Canon it made
this Decree, A Woman is not permitted to receive the Sacrament with her naked
hand. But in a word, it was still received with the hand, seeing that a few
years after this Synod of Auxerr, Cautin Bishop of Clermont in Auvergne, says
unto Count Eulalius, by the report of Gregory of Tours, in his History, Hist.
l. 10. c. 8.
Take the part of the Sacrament, and put it into your mouth. Cardinal Baronius
in his Ecclesiastical Annals, attributes unto Maximus, who lived about the year
of our Lord 650. and whom he styles defender of the Catholic verity, against
the Monothelites, the same words but now alleged of St. Austins, or very near
them, Apud Baronium Annal. Eccl. ad an. 57. n. 148.
That all men who desire to communicate, do first wash their hands, to the end
that with a clear understanding and purified conscience, they may receive the
Sacraments of Christ; That the Women also present clean Clothes, whereon they
receive the Body of Christ with a pure understanding and a clear conscience.
Nevertheless the VI. Universal Council assembled Anno 681. made a certain
number of Canons ten years after, that is, in the year 691. in one of which it
expressly prohibits receiving the Sacrament any other way but with the hand
only, and blames all those who employ any thing else for this use; and because
this Canon is none of the worst Monuments of Antiquity, we will make no scruple
of inserting it here at large; Can. 101. T. 5. Council. p. 349.
The Apostle St. Paul does boldly call man created after the image of God, the
Body and Temple of Christ; he then that is above any sensible Creature, has
obtained a Heavenly Dignity by the saving passion, eating or drinking Jesus
Christ, is absolutely disposed and fitted for eternal life, and partaketh of
Divine grace, being sanctified both in Body and Soul. Therefore if any desire
to participate of the immaculate Body, and will present himself at the
Communion in the Assembly, let him put his hands in form of a Cross, and so
draw near and receive the Communion of Love; as for those, who instead of the
hand, make use of Vessels of Gold, or of any other matter, to receive the
Divine Gift, and who therein receive the immaculate Communion, we do by no
means admit them, because they prefer an inanimate thing, and which is
inferior unto them, before the Image of God: if any one therefore be taken
giving the blessed Communion unto such as bring such Vessels, let him be
Excommunicated, with him that brings them.

We are then come unto the end of the VII. Century, wherein the custom of
receiving the Eucharist with the hand continued, without any other alteration,
than what has been mentioned, either with the linen cloths, with which the
Women in the V. Century, were obliged, in some places, to receive the
Communion; at least, if the Sermon above cited in S. Austin's name, be his,
which is not over certain, in which case, we must descend toward the end of
the VI. Century, and besides, not pass the limits of the Diocese of Auxerr; or
of those little Vessels forbidden by the VI. Ecumenical Council, establishing
the ancient use of receiving the Sacrament with the hand only. And I do not see
that the Roman Catholics, Ad an. 57. n. 147, 148.
or the Protestants, do deny it; for Cardinal Baronius in his Annals, the Friar
Combefis in his Augmentation of the Library of the Holy Fathers; Gabriel de
Laubespine Bishop of Orleance, T. 2. p. 1014. L. 1. obser. 16.
a very learned Prelate in the Discipline of the ancient Church, in his
Ecclesiastical Observations; the famous Monsieur Arnold, in his excellent Book
of frequent Communicating; Part. 1. p. 265. P^g. 403. Page 747.
and the Abbot of Billy, upon Gregory Nazianzen's first Oration against Julian
the Apostate; and Garsias Loaysa, upon the 14. Canon of the first Council of
Toledo, in the first Tome of the Councils of the last Edition at Paris; all
those I say, and others also concur herein with the Protestants. It is true,
Baronius and Combesis observe, that this custom continued longer in the Eastern
Church; which I do not judge ought absolutely to be denied: but the better to
follow its traces in the Western Church, it will be requisite further to survey
what remains to be seen in the Latin World. The XI. Council of Toledo, Anno
675. in the Eleventh Canon, does explain the XIV. Council Tolet. 11. can. 11.
Canon of the first Council of the same place, Against those who having
received the Eucharist did not 'eat it. And the XVI. Council in the sixth Canon
Anno 693. Council. Tolet. 16. c^n. 6.
alleging against some Priests who made a little round crust for the
Communion, the example of Jesus Christ, sufficiently gives to understand, that
they intended that example should inviolably be kept: now it declares two
several times, That Jesus Christ having taken a whole Leaf, and broken it in
blessing it, gave it by parcels unto each of his Disciples. Yet I will not
deny, but that I have observed in the Seventh Century, examples of the
Sacrament being put into the mouth of Communicants, but upon occasions that, as
I suppose, are not to be insisted upon. In the Appendix of the fifth Tome of de
Achery's Collection, is seen the life of S. Magnobode Bishop of Angers, which
is supposed to be written by one that lived at that time: and as these sorts of
Lives are full of Miracles, which those should have done whose actions are to
be written; amongst several attributed unto S. Magnobode, there is mention
first made of a certain blind person, that being drawn by the great reputation
of this Bishop, came unto him as he was celebrating Divine Service, desiring
him earnestly and with a loud voice, to restore him his sight; this Prelate
being touched with his complaints, prayed for his recovery, and having ended
the office of the Mass, He put (says the Author) into his mouth, with the
Benediction, Vita Magnob. c. 9. Append. t. 5. Spicileg. p. 137.
the perception of the holy Body. Secondly, there is mention of a young Maid of
Quality at Rome, who being for three years space, exceedingly afflicted with a
most grievous Fever, which all men thought incurable; she with tears desired
to be carried to the man of God, Magnobode, whose Miracles had already been
noised abroad, which her Parents resolved to do, and carried her to Angers,
where they found him at the same Exercise that the blind man above mentioned
had done, whom he restored to sight; so that understanding the cause of so
great a Journey. Ibid. c. 5. p. 141.
He received them courteously, and put into the little Maids mouth the Mystery,
or the Sacrament of the Body of the Lord, which he handled with his holy hands.
It is evident, if I mistake not, that these two occasions were extraordinary,
either if the persons be considered, on whom these two Miraculous Recoveries
were made; or if the exercise wherein they found this Prelate be considered: so
that there can no consequence be drawn, for the practice of putting the
Sacrament in the mouth of Communicants. In the Life of S. Eloy Bishop of Noyon,
which is in the same Tome of Dom Luke de Achery's Collection, and who lived
also in the Seventh Century; it appears, that this Bishop forbids amongst other
things, to sing the Songs of Pagans, and he gives this reason. T. 7. Spi^^ 217.
That it is not just they should proceed out of the mouth of Christians,
wherein is put the Sacrament of Christ. But the Sacrament being there put
either by him that celebrates, or him that communicates; and moreover, the
custom confirmed by the Decree of an universal Council, in the year 691.
requiring Communicants to receive it with the hand, and that they should
themselves put it in their mouth, it cannot be reasonably thought, these words
of S. Eloy make any thing against the commonly received practice. In fine, at
the end of the Seventh Century, it was received with the hand in England, which
then related unto the Latin State, wherein we travel; for venerable Bede tells
us of a certain man called Caedmon, who having passed most of his life as a
Secular, and without holy Orders, at last became a Friar at the request of an
Abbess. This man falling sick, Bed. Hist. Angl. l. 4. c. 24.
and finding his death at hand, desired the Sacrament might be brought, And
having received it in his hand (says the Historian) he asked if they were all
in Charity with him. Since that time there began to appear in the West, but not
suddenly, some alteration in this ancient custom, but without abolishing it
quite; for in the Book of the Roman Order, written as some imagine, in the
Ninth, or the end of the Eighth Century, or as others suppose in the Eleventh,
which I conceive to be the most likely, in the Chapter of the Order of
Procession, if sometimes the Bishop please to celebrate Mass on Holy days,
there it may be seen, that the Priests and Deacons receive the Communion with
the hand, and the Subdeacons with the mouth: Ordo Romans Bibl. Pat. t. 10. p.
10. ult. edit.
That the Priests and Deacons in kissing the Bishop, receive of him with their
hands, the Body of Christ, but the Subdeacons in kissing the Bishops hand, let
them receive from him the Body of Christ in their mouth. And Hugh Maynard, in
his Notes upon the Book of Sacraments of Gregory the Great, alleges something
of this Nature, touching the Priests and Deacons, relating to the Mass of
Illyrica, Page 383.
written, as Maynard conjectures, a little before the beginning of the Eleventh
Century, that is, toward the end of the Tenth; he calls it the Mass of
Illyria, because it was taken out of the Palatinate Library, Page 380.
and published by Matthias Illyricus, a Protestant Lutheran. Of this Mass, this
Benedictine Friar cites these words, Page 390.
Then the Priests and Deacons receiving the Body in their hands, it is said
unto each of the Communicants, Peace be with you. But it must not be imagined,
that this manner of Communicating, was peculiar unto Priests and Deacons, to
the utter exclusion of other Communicants, at least in the Ninth Century; for
we have been informed by Reginon's Chronicle, that in the year 869. Pope Adrian
the Second at Rome it self, gave the Communion unto King Lothair, and that this
Prince received in his hands the Body and Blood of our Lord: Regin. in Chron.
ad an. 869.
which is also to be concluded of all those which attended him, unto whom the
Pope administered the Sacrament. I shall then make no difficulty to believe,
that what the Roman Order speaks of Subdeacons communicating with the mouth,
was done by reason of the solemnity of the day, on these occasions, to
distinguish betwixt the Subdeacons, and the Priests and Deacons, who are
superior unto them; besides, that this distinction began not to be made until
before the Eleventh Century. But in fine, if we enter in the Tenth Century, we
shall find it something divided concerning this custom. Ratherius, Bishop of
Verona, died in the year 974. in what we have resting of his works, there may
be seen the two ways of receiving the Sacrament, with the hand and with the
mouth; in the second Sermon of Easter, he speaks thus, But O sadness! T. 2.
Spicileg. p. 314.
I have seen some slight this Council, and would to God it were not such as
ought to give example unto others, that they continually lay snares to destroy
even him who puts the consecrated Bread in their mouths, saying, The Body of
our Lord Jesus Christ profit you unto eternal life. But in the following page,
see here what he says, Ibid. p. 315.
If they had seriously thought on these things, they would at least have
avoided receiving holy things from the hand of him whom they hated, fearing
lest they should so openly have imitated Judas. And in the third Sermon, he
alleges these words of the seventy seventh, Ibid. p. 316.
and according to the Hebrews, the seventy eighth Psalm, The meat was still in
their mouth, and the anger of God waxed hot against them; And he continues, It
is because Satan who of a long time possessed them by a most wicked and evil
intention, entered into them by an evil operation, after the Morsel, as if they
had heard say by him that gave them the Morsel, What thou do, do quickly.
Ibid. p. 317.
And in the same Sermon, When I gave unto them who were such, the sacred Morsel
with the hand, which they wished cut off. And in the first Sermon of the
Ascension, If before we come to speak of his Judgment, Ibid. p. 325.
we truly accuse our selves, with what neglect and carelessness do we Consecrate
the Bread which we are to distribute or present. Methinks, from all this it may
be concluded, that in the Tenth Century, they began in some places to introduce
the custom of putting the Sacrament in the mouth of Communicants; yet without
blaming the ancient practice which required that it should be received with the
hand, notwithstanding what is alleged by Regino, of a Council of Rouan, in
Cassander, Apud. Cassand. in Liturg. p. 80.
and the President Duranti in one of his Books of the Ceremonies of the
Catholic Church, l. 1. cap. 16. n. 12. In fine, Molanus Doctor and Divine of
Louvain, has made a kind of Martyrology peculiar for the Saints of Flanders,
that is, of the Countries formerly inhabited by the people of Belgia, and upon
the 6th. of June, speaking of Norbert, Founder of the Order of the Premonstre,
he relates this out of Robert du Mont, Continuator of Sigebert's Chronicle of
the Year 1124. which is still to be seen: Supplem. Chron. Sigeb. ad an. 1184.
Natal. Belg. p. 110.
Norbert preaching, the Men and Women being pricked at the heart, brought the
Body of our Lord which, for ten Years and upwards, they had hid in Chests and
corners; from which things, says Molanus, Pontac in his Chronology does
conclude, That Christians at that time, did receive the Body of Christ with
their hand. And in truth, Pontac, who was one of the most Learned men of his
time, had reason so to judge, being necessarily inferred from the words of the
Continuator of Sigebert. Those poor people, of whom he speaks, were seduced by
a certain Heretic called Tanchelin, or as it is in the Edition I have, Tandem,
who had persuaded the Inhabitants of Antwerp, which was a very populous City,
That the participation of the Body of Jesus Christ, was not necessary unto
Salvation; therefore they had hid in certain places, the Body of our Lord,
until such time as they were disabused by Norbert, unto whom both Men and Women
after ten years time, and more, brought what each had hid: but in the main it
appears, that in the Twelfth Century, Communicants received the Sacrament in
their hand; for otherwise, those we speak of, could not have done what has
been mentioned, and I know not whether unto this purpose may not be referred
the fifth Canon of the Council of Toulouse, Assembled in the Year of our Lord
1228. which ordains, T. 2. Spicil. p. 624.
That when any sick person has received from the hand of the Priest the holy
Communion, it should be carefully kept until the day of his death, or of his
recovery, etc. For to take and receive, is an act of the hand, rather than of
the mouth. However it be, we have justified by the Tradition of the Church from
Age to Age, that even in the Western Church, Christians received the Sacrament
with their hand until the Tenth Century, excepting, it may be, some particular
occasion, which cannot prejudice the established Law, and generally received
custom; that in the Tenth Century, they began to introduce in some places the
custom of receiving with the mouth, without condemning the other practice,
which required it to be received with the hand, whereof we have seen examples
in the Twelfth Century, and even in the Thirteenth, which justifies, that the
manner of receiving the Eucharist with the hand was ever practiced in the West,
ever since Christianity had been first established; because that before the
Latin Church had abolished this custom, the Albigenses, and Waldenses, had
separated themselves from its Communion, and carefully practiced it amongst
them, until the time the Protestants separated themselves, who continue to
practice it at this time. As for the Greeks, James Goar, a Friar of the Order
of preaching Friars, observes upon the Euchologie or Ritual of that Nation, In
Euchol. p. 149. n. 170.
That the Priest or Bishop gives the holy Eucharist into the hand, according to
the ancient practice. And he represents the gesture wherein the Clergy set
their hands to communicate, which is almost the same required by S. Cyrill of
Jerusalem, and, 300. years after him, the Council in Trullo; which was common
also unto the people, a long time, as well as to the Clergy: but at present,
says the same Goar in the same place, The Laity receive the Bread and Wine
together in a Spoon.

CHAP. XIV.
Of the Liberty of carrying home the Sacrament after having received it in the
Church, and of carrying of it in Journeys and Voyages.

UNto this ancient custom of receiving the Sacrament with the hand, must be
joined that of carrying it home to their house, and keeping it, after having
received it. De Orat. c. 14.
Tertullian intimates it sufficiently when he speaks of receiving the Body of
our Lord, and keeping it; for although he speaks of keeping it to the end of
the station only, nevertheless it was at every ones free choice to keep it
longer if he pleased, or to carry it home along with him: and in another place
in his Writings, he plainly establishes this custom; for writing unto his
Wife, and informing her of the inconveniences which attend the Marriage of a
Believing Woman unto an Infidel, Lib. 2. ad Ux. c. 5.
he says unto her, The Husband will not know what you eat in private before
any other Meat; and if he know it is Bread, will he not believe that it is that
which is so called? Cypr. de laps. p. 176.
S. Cyprian also teaches the same, when he says, A certain Woman having
endeavored, with her unworthy hands, to open her Chest, where the holy thing
of the Lord was, she was affrighted at the Fire which came out, so that she
durst not touch it; and elsewhere, speaking of him that run to the Theater and
Shows of Pagans; Id. de Spect. p. 292.
Who (says he) runs unto a Show, after having been dismissed, (that is to say,
after the Celebration of Divine Service) and also carries along with him the
Eucharist, according to the usual custom. Gregory of Nazianzen, speaking of a
great Sickness of Gorgonia, Greg. Nazian. orat. 11. p. 187.
his Sister, If her hand (says he) had not hid some part of the Antitypes of
the precious Body and Blood. S. Basil, his intimate friend, tells us that was
first begun during the time of persecution, and that this custom, which still
continued in the Deserts amongst the Friars, and all over Egypt, amongst the
People, was innocent, and deserved no reproof: They were constrained (says he)
during the times of persecution, Basil. Ep. 289. t. 3.
there being no Priest or (...) inister, (that is to say, Deacon) to take the
Communion with their own hands; and it would be superfluous to show that it was
not a thing intolerable, because it was a thing which had been effectually
confirmed by a long custom; for all those who lead a Monastic life in the
Woods, where there is no Priest, having the Eucharist in their House, do
receive it themselves: At Alexandria also, and over all Egypt, each one of the
people has most commonly the Sacrament in their Houses; for the Priest making
at once the Sacrifice, and distributing it, he who receives it whole and entire
at once, and who takes of it daily, ought to believe that he participates
thereof as effectually as if he received it from the Priest's hand; for also in
the Church the Priest gives one Portion, and he that receives it, keeps it with
free liberty, and so with his hand puts it to his mouth; it is then the same
thing, as to the virtue of it, if there be received from the hands of the
Priest one Portion, or several Portions at once. It is collected out of S.
Jerome to have been so practiced at Rome in his time; for in his Apology unto
Pammachius, Hieron. Ep. 50. c. 6.
for the Books which he had writ against Jovinian, he speaks in this manner, I
know at Rome they have this custom, that Believers should daily receive the
Body of Christ: which I neither approve nor condemn, for let every one judge as
be pleases; but I arraign the Consciences of those who Communicate the same day
that they have defiled themselves with Women, and who, according to Persius,
wash themselves at night in the River; wherefore do they not dare to go toward
the Martyrs? why do they not go into the Churches? Is Christ one thing in
private, and another in public? What is not permitted in the Church, is not
permitted at home: I also refer unto this custom what S. Austin says of a
believing Woman, Aug. oper. imperf. cont. Jul. l. 3. c. 164.
That she mada a Plaster of the Eucharist, to put upon her Son's Eyes, who was
naturally blind: It was in all likelihood of the Sacrament which she had kept.
There is in the Tomes of the Councils a Council of Sarragossa, in Spain, of the
380th year of our Lord, Ad An. 57. n. 150.
but which Cardinal Baronius thinks was assembled in the days of Pope Hormisda,
that is, in the beginning of the Sixth Century. In this Council there is a
Canon found against those who having received the Sacrament in the Church, did
not there eat it, T. 4. Conc. p. 684. ult. edit.
If it be proved that any one has not eaten the Sacrament which he received in
the Church, let him be Anathematized for ever; or as Garsias Loaysa has it,
those who receive the Sarrament in the Church, and do not there eat it, let
them be Anathema: yet I would not assure that this Canon was made to abolish
the custom of carrying home the Sacrament, and keeping it; for I find that the
Eleventh Canon of the Council of Toledo, assembled Anno 675. explaining the
Fourteenth Canon of the First Council of the same place, which had ordered the
same which that of Sarragosa had: I find, I say, that this Council speaks
against those who having received the Eucharist, threw it away through
Infidelity. After all, the custom of keeping the Sacrament continued till the
end of the Sixth Century, and happily to the beginning of the Seventh; for John
Moschus, who it is thought lived about that time, C. 79. Bibl. Pat. t. 13. p.
1089. Continuat. Sigeberti.
relates in his Spiritual Field, That a certain believing Servant, having
received the Sacrament on Holy-Thursday, wrapped it in a clean Cloth, and laid
it up in his Cupboard. I know not whether what we have already said of the
Inhabitants of Antwerp, may not be referred hereunto, where that numerous
people did in the Twelfth Century hide the Eucharist in Chests and Holes, for
several years together. And as Christians kept the Sacrament, so they also
carried it with them in their Voyages, as appears by the History of Satyrus,
Ambros. de obitu Satyr. t. 4. p. 315.
Brother to St. Ambrose, for being in great danger in a Storm at Sea, and being
not yet Baptized, he desired one of the Company, who was Baptized, and who had
the Sacrament along with him, to give him part of it, which he giving unto him,
Satyrus took and bound what the Christian had given him of the Sacrament, Greg.
I. Dialog. l. 3. c. 36.
in a Cloth, and tying it about his Neck, he cast himself into the Sea. Gregory
the First, in his Dialogues, testifies almost the same of Maximian, Bishop of
Syracusa, and of his Companions, Sailing in the Adriatic Sea, that is to say,
that being in danger of Shipwreck, they received (says he) the Body and Blood
of the Redeemer. They must needs then carry along with them the Eucharist, and
it must be noted that Maximian was not as yet Bishop, but Abbot of S. Gregory's
Monastery Cardinal Baronius, in his Church-Annals, produces an Example of the
same custom in the Twelfth Century, in the time of Alexander the Third, and
shows that it was practiced in some places. He takes what he reports, from
the Acts of the life of S. Lawrence, Bishop of Dublin, Baron. ad an. 57. n. 151.
whence he cites these words, They discovered that four Priests went along with
a great company of Men, who publicly carried the Eucharist with them, for a
Viaticum, and for a certain Guide of the way, as was then the manner of many to
do I will not here stand to examine if those Acts of the life of S. Lawrence,
Bishop of Dublin, are in their purity: I will only say, That Surius, from whom
this famous Annalist has borrowed what he relates in his Annals, is not wont
to represent unto us, without alterations, those many things which he has
taken the pains to collect, although there is no Forgery in the matter now
mentioned. Arcud. de concord. l. 3. c. 59.


Arcudius, a Greek Romanized, testifies, That the Monks among the Greeks carry
the Eucharist with them in their Voyages. At this time, in the Communion of
Rome, to carry home the Eucharist, De la penit. publ. part. 1. l. 1. c. 7. p.
94.
and keep it, would be an Act punishable (says the learned Petau) and held for
a Profanation of this Sacrament; and I do not see that any one can justly blame
this Severity of the Latin Church, seeing they believe Transubstantiation, and
that what is received at the Lords Table is the adorable Body of the Son of
God, unto which a Sovereign respect is due: the Protestants themselves, who
have not the same belief, would not suffer this abuse; and to say the truth, it
were to expose this august Sacrament unto many indecencies, which must needs
happen, if Communicants should be suffered to carry it home along with them,
and keep it.

CHAP. XV.
The Sacrament sent unto such as were absent, unto the Sick, and that sometimes
by the Laity.

THE Sacrament of the Eucharist being a Sacrament of Communion, not only with
Jesus Christ, but also with Believers, who find in this Divine Mystery a
precious Earnest of the strict and intimate Union which they ought to have
together: the primitive Christians, which were of one Heart and one Soul, never
celebrated the Sacrament, but that they sent it unto such of their Brethren as
could not be present in the Assembly at the time of Consecration; to the end
that by the participation of the same Bread, it might appear they were but one
Body with the rest. St. Justin Martyr teaches so much when he says, That the
Deacon distributes unto every one of those who are present the consecrated
Bread, and Wine mingled with Water, and that they should carry of it unto those
that were absent; and accordingly we read in the Acts of the Martyr St. Just.
Mart. Apol. 1.
Lucian, one of the Priests of the Church of Antioch, who glorified God by
suffering Death in the 311th year of our Lord, and the last of the Persecution
of Dioclesian, That he celebrated the holy Sacrament in Prison, with many other
Christians, who were detained for the Gospel sake, making his Breast serve for
the mystical Table, the posture he was put in by the cruelty of his Persecutors
not admitting him to do otherwise, and that after he had participated himself
of the Sacrament, he sent of it unto those who were absent. I have mentioned
this passage as it is related by Cardinal Baronius in his Annals, Apud Baron.
ad ann. 311.9. S.
although neither Philostorgius, nor Nicephorus of Caliste, which mention this
business, to the best of my remembrance, say any thing of this circumstance,
but only that these Believers did visit him in Prison. Saint Irenaeus in
Eusebius, tells us of a custom whereby the Bishops used to send the Eucharist
unto each other, in token of peace and Communion, not considering the distance
of place, and the Seas over which it was sometimes to pass; This holy man
writing a Letter unto Pope Victor, who had Excommunicated the Churches of Asia,
for celebrating Easter the fourteenth day of March; in this Letter he speaks
thus to the Pope, (...).
The Priests (says he) which have been before you, do send the Sacrament unto
Priests of the Churches that used that custom; And it appears, that was
commonly done at the Feast of Easter, which the Council of Laodicea, prohibited
by one of its Canons; Council. Laod. c. 14.
The holy Sacrament must not be sent unto other Churches at the Feast of
Easter, under the name of Eulogies. But so it is, that I find great difference
betwixt what is said by Justin Martyr, and what is said by Irenaeus; the former
speaks of what was done toward the Members of the same Church, which could
not be present in the Assembly with their Brethren, and unto whom was sent
their share of the Sacrament at the time when it was celebrated in the Church;
and the latter touched what was practiced by the conducters of Christian
Churches one toward another, but not at the very time of the Celebration of
the Sacrament.

But if the Sacrament was sent unto the absent, it was also sent unto sick
Folks; It is true, great care must be taken in distinguishing betwixt sick
Believers, and Penitents: by sick Believers is understood Christians Baptized,
who had preserved the purity of their Baptism, or at least who had not committed
any of those sins which reduced those which were convict, into a state of
Penance: and by Penitents, I mean such as after their Baptism were fallen into
some great Sin, which made them liable unto the orders of the hard and painful
Penance, which was observed in the first Ages of Christianity. As for the
former, I find not, in what remains unto us of the three first Ages of the
Christian Religion, any proof, that the Eucharist was given them at the hour of
Death, this custom not appearing till afterward; what Justin Martyr said, not
properly regarding the Sick, but those that were absent, as is confessed by the
learned Mr. In. c. 24. l. 5.
de Valois in his Notes upon Eusebius his Ecclesiastical History: as for the
latter, I mean the Penitents, as they were excluded out of the Communion of the
Church, this good and tender Mother, feeling her self touched with compassion
toward those of her Children which breathed after reconciliation and peace,
used this charitable condescension for their consolation, that she commanded to
absolve those of this Order, which were in danger of Death, and at the same
time to give them the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, as a seal of this
reconciliation, that they might depart this life full of joy and comfort. So it
was practiced by Denis Bishop of Alexandria in all the extent of his Diocese,
as he testifies in Eusebius, where he says, A^ud. Eusebius. hinor. l. 6. c. 44.
That he had commanded to absolve those which were in danger of Death, if they
desired it, and especially if they had already desired it before their
sickness. There are to be seen in S. Cyprian's Epistles, who lived at the same
time, several the like directions touching those which had fallen during the
time of persecution: but because many were not mindful of desiring
reconciliation with the Church, from whose Communion they had fallen by their
Apostasy, until they were taken with some sickness which endangered their
life; the first Council of Arles assembled Anno 314. Council. Arclar. 1. c. 22.
forbids giving the Sacrament unto such as did so, unless they recovered their
health, and did fruits worthy of repentance: But this it self shows that it was
not refused unto any of those which being fallen, endeavored to rise again by
passing through the degrees of Penance, and that without deferring to the end
of their life, ardently desired to be admitted into the peace of the Church.
The Councils are full of Canons which direct the time and manner of absolving
Penitents, which was inseparable from receiving of the Sacrament, which was
given them as the last Viaticum, to assure them that they were reconciled unto
God in their being so with the Church, which was accustomed to seal this
reconciliation and peace in permitting them to participate of this Divine
Mystery. But if I am demanded, Whether this practice of administering the
Sacrament unto bedridden Penitents, and, after the third Century, unto other sick
Folks at the time of death, does not presuppose that the Eucharist was kept to
the end it might be applied in these hasty necessities? to speak sincerely, I
do not see there was any necessary consequence of one of these things unto the
other; but that also I find no directions thereupon in the first Ages of
Christianity, which makes me believe, they contented themselves then, in
preparing, I mean in Blessing and Consecrating the Bread and Wine to make them
the Body and Blood of the Lord, at such time as there was occasion to
communicate any Bedridden dying persons. To allege, for refutation of the
keeping the Sacrament, what is written in the XI. Century, by Cardinal Humbert
of Blanch-Selva, against the Greeks, who reserved the gifts presanctified in
Lent, were not in my Opinion to argue, but trifle; because it is certain that a
long time before Humbert wrote against Nicetas, the Sacrament was kept in the
Latin Church; it might with more reason be urged against keeping the acrament
that the remainder of the Sacrament was in some Churches burnt, and in others
it was eaten by little Children: but although this last custom continued a long
time in our France, as shall appear in the following. Chapter, nevertheless I
find from the time of Charelemain, that is to say, in the VIII. Century, formal
directions for keeping the Sacrament; Capitul. l. 1. c. 161.
That the Priests (says this Prince in his Capitularies) have always the
Sacrament ready to communicate the Sick, whether Old or Young, to the end they
should not dye without the Sacrament. Since which time, several Ordinances are
seen upon the same Subject; but before that time, I do not remember to have met
with any, which nevertheless I do not say to assure positively that there were
none before the time which I assign; but only to declare that I have not
observed nor found any on the contrary in the Second decretal Epistle, which is
attributed unto St. Clement, Disciple of the Apostles; about the same time, it
is expressly forbidden, Ep. 2. Pseudo-Clem.
To keep till the next day any part of the Sacrament.

But in fine, seeing it ought to be confessed that in the three first
Centuries, the Sacrament was sent unto Bedridden dying Penitents, and afterward
unto Believers, in the same condition, It is requisite to inquire by whom it
was sent, there is no doubt but for the most part they were Clergymen that
carried it unto these sorts of Persons, yet nevertheless in such a manner, that
they made no difficulty to ease themselves sometimes of this care, and to
employ Lay Persons, young Boys, Men and Women, to carry it: in fine, Denis
Bishop of Alexandria, relates in Eusebius the History of a certain Old Man
called Serapion, who having Apostatized in the time of persecution, was
excluded from the Communion of the Church, whereunto he could not be restored,
notwithstanding his earnest entreaties to that purpose: but some time after
being seized with a violent sickness, whereof he dyed, he sent one of his
Daughters Sons for a Priest, who being sick, sent him the Sacrament by the
Child; He gave unto this Youth (says Denis) some, Apud Eusebius. hist. Eccles. l.
6. c. 44.
or a little of the Sacrament, commanding that it should be moistened, and to
put it in the Old Man's mouth, that he might the easier swallow it down; his
grand Child being returned, steeped it, and poured it into the sick Man's mouth,
who having by little and little let it down, presently gave up the Ghost. So
the Martyrology of Ado Bishop of Vienna, that of Bid, and the Roman, Ad. d. 15
Aug. Apud Baron. ad an. 260.. 5.
as also the Acts of the life of Pope Stephen the First, testify, that during
the Persecution of the Emperors Gallian and Valerian, Tharsitius, Acolyth of
the Church of Rome, did carry the Sacraments of the Lords Body; and this custom
need not seem strange unto us, if we consider the liberty which was for a long
time given unto Christians, to carry the Sacrament home with them unto their
houses, and keep it. In the life of Luke the younger, Anchoret, Combef. auct.
Bibl Pat t. 2. Grac. l. p 986. cum 1014.
who lived in the X. Century, and which Father Combefis a Dominican has
published, at least some Copies, part of it; we find this Hermit having
demanded of the Bishop of Corinth how such Persons as he was, that lived
solitarily in the Deserts, might participate of the Sacrament, having no Priest
nor Assemblies made in those places: I say we find, he suffered him and such as
he was, to communicate themselves, although they were Lay Persons, and also
prescribed after what manner they should do it. And Father Combefis in his
Notes observes, Ib. p. 1014.
that the Bishop of Corinth was then in the Bishop of Rome's Diocese; is it to
be thought any difficulty would have been made of intrusting the Sacrament unto
Women, in those places where they were permitted to distribute the Sacraments
in the Churches unto the people, as has been before recited? There is in the
VI. Tome of the Councils, a Homily in the name of Pope Leo the Fourth, T. 6.
Council. p. 431.
who lived in the middle of the IX. Century, where Priests are forbidden to
give the Sacrament unto Lay Persons, Men or Women, to be carried unto the sick.
It cannot then be questioned, but the thing was practiced to that time, and
afterward also; for it is certain, this Sermon is neither Leo the Fourth's, nor
St. Vlrick's, as Gretser imagined; it is nothing else but a Synodical Letter of
Ratherius Bishop of Verona unto his Priests: now this Ratherius died toward
the end of the X. Century. Mr. de Valois in his Notes upon Eusebius, P. 138.
says, That he has lately been so informed: and we cannot doubt of it,
because we have the Book it self by the care and industry of Dom Luke d'Achery,
wherein we find this Decree, That no Body presume to give the Sacrament unto a
Lay Person, T. 2. Spicileg. p. 261.
Man or Woman, to carry it unto the Sick. It must then be necessarily
concluded, that it was so practiced in sundry places, even in Italy and near
Rome, until the end of the X. Century. The same Mr. de Valois observes upon the
words of Denis Bishop of Alexandria above mentioned, P. 138.
That it was so practiced a long time after; And he proves it by the
Prohibition which Ratherius was obliged to give unto his Priests, who without
scruple, committed the Eucharist into Lay Persons hands to be carried unto sick
Folks; but because Ratherius was but a private Bishop, and that his power
reached not beyond his Diocese, nothing hinders but it may be believed, it was
also practiced elsewhere since that time, at least we see the footsteps of that
custom in France, very forward in the IX. T. 3. Council. Gall p. 623.
Century, seeing Hincmar Archbishop of Rheimes does prohibit it in his
Capitularies, in the year. 852.

CHAP. XVI.
Sundry Customs and Practices touching the Sacrament.

AMONGST several customs observed by the ancient Church touching the Eucharist,
I find in the first place, that they made Plasters of it; for St. Austin makes
mention of a Child which being born blind, by reason that the Eyelids were
closed, and thereby deprived of sight, although the Eyes were full within; a
Physician advising to open the Eyelids with an Iron instrument, Aug. Oper.
Imperf. contr. Julian. l. 3. c. 164.
His pious Mother (says he,) would not suffer it; but what the Physician would
have done with his Lancet, she affected with a Plaster made of the Sacrament;
the Child being then five years old or upwards, said that he remembered it very
well.

Secondly, the ancient Christians buried the Sacrament with their Dead. In the
life of S. Basil which is commonly attributed unto Amphilochius Bishop of
Iconia, his Contemporary, for they both flourished toward the end of the
Fourth Century; there is an evident proof of this custom; the truth is, I would
not absolutely engage that Amphilochius was Author of it: on the contrary, I
take it to be forged and false, De Script. in an. 380.
and I find Cardinal Bellarmain of the same Opinion; but it is not only now it
bears the name of Amphilochius, it was attributed unto him a long while since,
although it is not easy precisely to know the time that he was supposed to be
the Author of it. Aeneas, Bishop of Paris, Aen. Paris. t. 7. Spicileg. p. 80.
writing against the Greeks in the Ninth Century, alleges something of this
life, and even what relates unto the custom whereof we seek proofs; but he
says not that it was written by Amphilochius; he only says, that what he does
allege may be read in the life of S. Basil Archbishop of Caesarea, which was
faithfully Translated into Latin, word for word, by one called Eucivmius: we
read then in this life, That St. Basil dividing the Bread into three parts,
took one, Vita. Basil. c. 8. in Vit. Pat. l. 1.
or as Aeneas reads it, that he communicated with great fear, and that he
reserved the other to be buried with him; and that having put the third parcel
upon a Golden Pidgeon, he waved it upon the Altar, or as it is said afterward,
upon the holy Table. A Council of Carthage, assembled in the year 419. Cod.
can. Eccles. Afric. just. 1. c. 18. T. 1. Council. Gall. c. 12.
condemned this practice in one of its Canons, which is the Eighteenth in the
Code of Canons of the Church of Africa; It has been resolved, not to give the
Eucharist unto dead Bodies; for it is written, Take and Eat; now dead Bodies
can neither take nor eat: This custom still continued in our France in the
Sixth Century, seeing that a Diocesan Synod of Auxerr, did prohibit it in the
year 578. Gregory the first, in his Dialogues, relates the History of a young
Youth that was a Friar, and that being gone out of the Monastry to see his
Parents, without the Benediction, dyed the same day that he came home, and
after he had been buried, next day the Body was found cast out of the Grave;
and having again buried it, the same accident happened again: then the Friars
speedily went unto S. Bennet, and prayed him with tears to show favor unto the
deceased Party. Greg. 1. dialog. l. 2.
Unto whom (says Gregory,) the Man of God, with his own hands gave the
Communion of the Body of the Lord, saying, Go and lay this Body of the Lord
with reverence, upon his Breast, and so bury him; which being done, the Earth
received and retained his Body, and cast it out no more. Christians had not
laid aside this practice at the end of the Eighth Century, which obliged the
Sixth Ecumenical Council, in the year 691. to renew the Prohibition of that of
Carthage, all which notwithstanding, hindered not the practice of it, as may be
gathered from the life of St. Othmar in Surius: for Solomon, Bishop of
Constance, having opened his grave above thirty four years after his death,
Vita S. Othmar. apud Surium, an. 720. 16. November. De off. Eccles. Lib. 4. c. 14.
found under his head and about his Breast, certain little bits of Bread of a
round form, which were commonly called Olations, or Wafers, which the Bishop
laid again with much veneration near the holy Body. Amalarius Fortunatus
reports from Bid, that when St. Cuthbert was buried, they put the Eucharist
(Oblata) upon his Breast; And Zonaras and Balsamon observe upon the eighty
third Canon of the Council in Trullo, That until that time they interred the
Eucharist with the Dead; And the latter does even judge that it was so
practiced to drive away Devils, and to conduct the Believer straight unto
Heaven.

In the third place, there were Churches where they burnt all that rested of
the Communion, it was so practiced in the Church of Jerusalem, as Hesychius one
of its Priests does testify, in his Commentaries upon Leviticus; Hesych. in
Levitic. l. 2. c. 8.
in the Church of Constantinople, these remainders of the Sacrament were made
to be eaten by young Scholars sent for on purpose from School, as Evagrius, who
wrote his History at the end of the Sixth Century, does relate; It was (says
he) an ancient custom in the Church of Constantinople, Evagr. hist. l. 4. c. 35.
that when several parcels of the immaculate Body of Christ our God remained,
young Children were sent for from School, unto whom they were given to eat. In
France almost the same thing was practiced, but with a little more Ceremony,
according to the Decree of the Second Council of Mascon, Council. Matis. 2. c.
6. Epist. 2. Clem.
assembled in the year 585. And the Second Decretal attributed unto S. Clement,
commands, that all should be consumed at the very time, without reserving any
part until next day. In Spain, the VI. Council of Toledo, Anno 693. leaves it
unto the Liberty of the Churches, either to keep these remainders, or to eat
them; and because if the loaf of the Communion had been too big for the number
of Communicants of each Church, the remainder, by reason of the too great
quantity, might have oppressed the stomach of those that eat it; the Fathers of
the Council, to prevent this inconvenience, commanded to offer, Midling
Oblations, Council. Tolet. 16. c. 6.
according to the use of the ancient Ecclesiastical practice, the remainders
whereof may be eat without prejudicing the health of them that eat it. But from
Spain we must return into our France, there to see the continuation of this
practice in the Tenth and Eleventh Centuries; and to this end, let us examine
witnesses which Dom Luke d'Achery has given us; those are the ancient customs
of the Monastry of Cluny written at the end of the Eleventh Century, although
that Congregation was founded at the beginning of the Tenth. It appears by
these customs, that there were times wherein they caused to be eaten at the
very instant, in this famous Congregation, all that remained after Communion;
which its true, was not practiced when these customs were written, that is to
say, toward the end of the Eleventh Century, although the Author does confess,
that it was generally practiced in all other Churches. Antiq. consuetud.
Cluniac. monast. l. 1. c. 13. t. 4. Spicil. Dach. p. 58.
Heretofore (says he) so much care was taken, that after all had Communicated,
the Priests themselves, or as it is in the Margent, the Priors, who had brought
whereof to communicate, did with a great deal of precaution and respect, eat
all that did remain, without keeping any part of it till next day; And I do not
know; that any other custom is used generally in all other Churches, the which
is not much here regarded at present, but what remains after the Communion is
kept. We might, it may be, have referred unto this custom, what is said in the
Eighth Book of Apostolical Constitution, chap. 13. and what is mentioned by
Theophilus Bishop of Alexandria, in his Canonical Letter, in the Seventh Canon;
but because these two places may admit of another interpretation, we forbear
citing them, the custom now in question being already sufficiently confirmed.

In the Fourth place, the Ancients made no difficulty sometimes to take
consecrated Wine, and mingle it with Ink, afterward dip their Pens in these
two mingled Liquors, the more authentically to sign what they intended to sign;
thus it was done by Pope Theodorus in the VII. Century, to sign the
condemnation and deposition of Pyrrhus a Monothelite, as is testified by
Theophanes in Baronius; Pyrrhus (says he) having left Rome, Apud Baron, an.
648.. 15.
and being arrived at Ravenna, returned like the Dog unto his Vomit; which Pope
Theodorus understanding, he assembled the whole Church, and went unto the
Sepulcher of the chief of the Apostles, and asking for the holy Cup, he poured
the quickening Blood into the Ink, and so with his own hand, signed the
deposition of Pyrrhus, who had been excommunicated. So it was also done by the
eighth Council of Constantinople, assembled against Photius, In anteact. Synod.
t. 6. Council. p. 896.
in the year 869. For the Bishops subscribed the deposition of Photius, with
Pens dipped not in Ink only, but in the Blood of Christ it self. See here two
remarkable instances which were usually produced to prove this fourth
Observation: but beside these two, we have a third, which is no less
considerable, we are obliged for it to Monsieur de Baluze, and he unto Monsieur
de Masnau, Counselor in the Parliament of Toulouse, because he furnished it
him, having taken it out of an Historian, called Odo Aribert, who relating the
Voyage of Charles the Bald unto Toulouse, in the year 844 observes amongst
other things, that being there, he sent for Bernard Count of Barcelona, under a
pretense of receiving him into his favor, but indeed with a design to kill
him, which he did; but Bernard did not proceed on his Journey till there was a
treaty betwixt Charles and him; Odo Aribert. edit. in not. Baluz. ad Agobard.
p. 129.
And after the peace had been confirmed, and interchangeably signed by the King
and the Count, with the Blood of the Sacrament. To conclude, there may be added
unto all these customs, the practice of the Greek Church, which mingles hot
Water with the Wine of the Sacrament after Consecration, and just at the
instant of Communicating; as we find by their Ritual, by German Patriarch of
Constantinople, Cabasilas, Simon of Thessalonica, Balsamon Patriarch of
Antioch, and several others; and those who desire to see the Mystical reasons
of this mixture, Goar in Eucholog. p. 148. n. 166, 167.
may only read what James Goar has written in his Notes upon the Enchology of
the Nation for we may finish this first part, having exactly inquired (if I
mistake not,) into all things which relate unto the exterior worship of the
Sacrament. But because as the actions of Jesus Celebrating, and those of his
Disciples Communicating, have served as a Model unto this Celebration, although
in process of time inricht with sundry Ceremonies, which were not practiced at
the beginning: So also his words, being the foundation of the Doctrine of the
Holy Fathers, having given the first part of this work unto the outward form of
Celebration, we shall employ the Second, in the examination of the Doctrine;
and it is what we shall set about with Gods permission.

The end of the first Part.
THE HISTORY OF THE EUCHARIST.
PART II. Containing the Doctrine of the Holy Fathers.
THOSE which travel into strange Countries, if they are any thing curious, fail
not taking notice of the Things which they judge most considerable and worthy
their Observation: It is true, all are not alike disposed, some regard only
their own private Satisfaction, and look no farther; but there be others, which
undertaking these long and painful Voyages, make as it were a kind of Journal,
wherein they exactly set down all things which deserve to be known; and being
returned home, they digest and communicate them unto others; who without
stirring out of their Closet, or running any Danger, see what is most curious
and remarkable in all Countries and Parts of the World. And certainly all Men
are obliged unto those Persons, which are so good and charitable, as to expose
themselves unto a thousand Dangers and Inconveniences to inform and instruct
us. This is in some sort the case of those, which undertake to travel into the
Countries of Ecclesiastical Antiquity, which is of a vast extent, having no
other Limits than those of the whole Universe, as well as the Kingdom of Jesus
Christ (unto whom the heavenly Father has given all Nations for his Heritage,
and the Earth for his Possession;) there are in this Country a multitude of
different Climates, very many considerable Rarities, worthy the Curiosity of
Christians: but all which engage in these Voyages, are not of a humor to take
pains for the Public; they keep themselves close and private, and aiming only
at their own particular Satisfaction, they trouble themselves not much for
others; so that were there only such Persons which lanched forth to visit this
large Empire, we should neither be more learned, nor better instructed. But the
Providence of God, which is always vigilant for the good of Mankind, puts it
into the Heart of several to undertake this great Voyage, with a Resolution and
Design of communicating, what they have observed, unto the Public, that it may
serve for the Instruction and Consolation of Christians. It Is true some indeed
discharge their Duty better than others, thereafter as God is pleased to
distribute his Gifts and Graces; but every one should and ought with all
diligence and fidelity to contribute his Endeavors, and improve the Talent
which our Lord has committed unto his trust. This is what I have endeavored
to do hitherto, and which I intend to do for the time to come, if it be not
with all the Delight and Ornament the Reader could wish, at least it shall be
with all the Sincerity which can be expected from one, who believes to have
well bestowed his Labor and Pains, if his Endeavors would create in the Minds
of Christians, divided by various Opinions in Religion, more tender
Inclinations of Love and Charity, and greater Desires unto Peace and Concord.
We have already seen all that relates unto the outward Form of the Celebration
of the Sacrament, with the Alterations thereunto happened in succession of time:
now we must endeavor to discover what has been believed of this Mystery in
this large and spacious Country; but to do it the more orderly, and to show
with more ease and clearness the History of the Innovations which have happened
as well in the Expressions, as in the Doctrine, we will extend our Proofs; as
to the Expressions, but unto the seventh and eighth Centuries, at which time
they suffered some Attempt; and as to the Doctrine, unto the ninth, supposing
it received some Alteration in the beginning of that Age.

CHAP. I.
The Reflections made by the Fathers upon the Words of the Institution of the
Sacrament.

THE holy Fathers had so great a Love for Jesus Christ, and Veneration for all
his Institutions, that they took a singular pleasure in meditating upon this
great Mystery, and in making diverse Reflections upon this divine Institution.
Our Lord said of the Bread which he had taken, which he blessed, and which he
broke, That it was his Body; and of the Wine, that it was his Blood. The
ancient Doctors of the Church considering this Expression of the Son of God,
have declared with a common Consent, and as it were united Suffrages, that
Jesus Christ called the Bread and Wine, his Body and his Blood: Our Lord, said
St. Irenaeus, Iren. l. 5. c. 2. Tatian. tom. 7. Bibl. Patr.
has assured that the Bread was his Body. Tatian in his Harmony upon the
Evangelists says: That he testified that the Bread, and the Cup of Wine, were
his Body and Blood. Tertullian, Tertul. l. 5. contr. Jud. c. 11. and l. 5.
Carm. cont. Marc. Origin. in Matthew. Hom. 35. Cyprian. Ep. 75. ad Magn.
That he called the Bread his Body, and that he said of the Bread, and of the
Fruit of the Vine, This is my Body, and my Blood poured out. Origin in one of
his Homilies upon St. Matthew: That he confessed the Bread was his Body. And
the blessed Martyr St. Cyprian: That he called his Body, the Bread which was
made of the collection of several Grains. The Author of the Commentaries upon
the Evangelists, which go in the Name of Theophilus of Antioch, though it is not
certain whether they be his, for all they are attributed unto him in the
Library of the Fathers, this Author, I say, has expressed his thoughts almost
as St. Cyprian had done, saying: That Jesus Christ called his Body, Theophil.
Antioch. in Matthew.
the Bread which is made of the collection of diverse Grains; and his Blood, the
Wine which is pressed out of several Grapes: and this he says in explaining
the Words of the Institution of the Sacrament, This is my Body, this is the Cup
of my Blood. Eusebius Bishop of Cesarea in Palestin, had no other meaning I
think, when he said: Eusebius. Them. lib. 8.
That the Lord commanded to make use of Bread for the Symbol of his Body. Nor
St. Cyrill of Jerusalem in these Words: Cyrill. Hie of. Mystag. 4.
Our Lord spoke and said of the Bread, This is my Body. Nor the Poet Juvencus,
when he declares: Juvenc. l. 4. de Evang. Hist.
That our Savior giving the Bread unto his Disciples, taught them, that he
gave them his Body. Nor in fine an unknown Author in the Works of St.
Athanasius, which says: De Dict. and Interp. Parab. 9.72.
That our Lord called the Mystical Wine his Blood. St. Epiphanius hindered by
the Scruple which the Fathers made of calling the Symbols of the Eucharist
Bread and Wine, contented himself to intimate unto us, that Jesus Christ did
assimilate his Body unto a Subject round as to its Form, Epiphan. in Anchor.
and without sense as to its Power, having no manner of resemblance unto the
incarnate Image, nor with the proportion of Members. Gaudent. tract. 2. in Exodus
St. Gaudentius observes, that our Lord, in giving the consecrated Bread and
Wine unto the Disciples, said: This is my Body, this is my Blood. It is also
the Observation of the Author of the Apostolical Constitutions, who makes
Christ say of the Bread which he broke, Constable. Apost. lib. 8. c. 12.
and gave unto his Disciples, This is the Mystery of the New Testament, Take,
eat, this is my Body. St. Chrysostom is no less clear: Chrysostom. in 1 Co. Hom.
24. Hieron. cp. 4 ad Hidib. 92.
What is the Bread? says he, it is the Body of Jesus Christ. St. Jerome also
follows the same way, seeing he assures, That the Bread which our Lord broke,
and gave unto his Disciples, was his Body, and the Cup, his Blood; and that he
proves it by these Words, This is my Body. St. Austin in the Sermon unto the
new baptized, August. apud Fulgen. de Baptis. Aeth. cap. vet. Cyril. l. 12. in
Joar. 20.26, 27.
says expressly: That the Bread is the Body of Christ, and the Cup is the Blood
of Christ. St. Cyrill of Alexandria was doubtless of the same mind, for in his
Commentary upon St. John he makes Christ say, Of the Bread which he broke and
distributed, this is my Body which is given for you in Remission of Sins. We
may descend lower, and carry further the Proof of this first Reflection, were
we not prevented by the Rule which we prescribed, and of the Resolution taken,
of avoiding, as much as possible may be, the repeating of the same Testimonies.
It shall then suffice to inform the Reader, that it is a certain Truth owned by
all Men, both Protestants and Roman Catholics, that when there is a Dispute of
two Subjects of a different Nature, it cannot properly be said that the one is
the other; when therefore these sorts of Propositions meet in Discourse, of
necessity recours must be had unto the Figure, or Metaphor.

What the Fathers have deposed is considerable; yet I do not think it
sufficient, nor that it is all which they have to say unto us. If we examine
anew these faithful Witnesses, I doubt not but they will speak again, and that
they will inform us of other Truths besides them abovementioned; and that they
will not leave us ignorant how they understood the Words of the Institution of
this angust Sacrament. Those which have diligently applied themselves to the
reading of Ecclesiastical Antiquity, have doubtless found by Experience, that
sometimes one must travel very far, and search many large Volumes, before one
finds what he looks for; and I look upon these dry and barren Places to be like
Wildernesses and sad unpleasant Deserts, which Travelers are sometimes forced
to pass over with much difficulty and trouble: but they have also observed,
that sometimes are found without difficulty, in the Works of the Ancient
Fathers, places so rich and abundant, that I use to liken them unto those fat
and fertile Soils, which always answer the Husbandman's expectation, and which
with Interest restore the pains he with some little cost bestowed upon them. We
may in the number of these latter sort place those Passages, where they have
pleased themselves in meditating of the Mystery of the holy Sacrament: for not
content to have told us that its divine Author called the Bread and Wine, his
Body and Blood, I find them ready to tell us, that they were his Body broken,
and his Blood poured out; and that as for them, they always considered him at
that moment, not as sitting upon his Throne in Heaven, but as hanging upon the
Cross on Mount Calvary, expiating the Sins of Mankind, and for the Redemption
of the World. This was in all likelihood what St. Cyprian intended, when he
said, Cypr. ep. 63.
That the Sacrifice which we offer is the Death of our Lord. And what St.
Gregory of Nyss, when he testifies, That the Body of the Sacrifice is not fit
to be eat, if it be animated, Greg Nys. in Resur. Dom. Orat. 1. August. Psalm.
11. Hom. 2. Id. Quaest. super Evang. l. 2. 38. page 152. tom. 4. Id. in Psalm.
110.
that i^, if it be living. Thence it is that St. Austin speaking of the
Disciples of Jesus Christ, says: That they suffered the same which those
things did which they eat: and he gives this Reason, that the Lord gave them
his Supper, he gave them his Passion. And again, That now the Gentiles all the
World over do very religiously receive the sweetness of the Sufferings of our
Lord in the Sacraments of his Body and Blood; and that we are fed with the
Cross of our Lord, because we eat his Body. Id. de Doctr. Christ. l 3 c. 16
He also makes the eating of the Lord's Body consist in communicating of his
Death, and in profitably representing unto our Memories, that his Flesh was
broken and crucified for us. St. Chrysostom always represents Christ as dead in
the Sacrament: Chrysost^ Hom. 51. in Math.
Jesus Christ represented himself sacrificed. Homil. 83.
The Mystery, that is to say the Sacrament, is the Passion and the Cross. And
upon the Acts of the holy Apostles: Hom. 2.
Whilst, says he, this Death is celebrated, etc. then is declared a tremendous
Sacrament, which is, that God has given himself for the World. And upon the
Epistle to the Romans: Hom. 8.
Adore upon this Table whereof we are all Partakers, Jesus Christ, which was
crucified for us. And upon the Epistle to the Ephesians: Hom. 3.
Whilst the Sacrifice is carnied out, and that the Lamb Christ Jesus our Lord
is slain. Hom. 14.
And upon the Epistle to the Hebrews: Our Lord Jesus Christ is stretched out
stain. And unto the People of Antioch: What do you, O Man? Tom. 1. Hom. 15.
you swear by the holy Table where Jesus Christ lies slain. And in the third
Book of Priesthood: When you see our Lord sacrificed and dead, Tom. 4. l. 3. de
Sacerdot.
the Priest sacrificing and praying, and all those which are present died red
with this precious Blood. And in the Homily of the Treason of Judas: Tom. 5. p.
464.
Have respect for the matter or subject of the Oblation, to Jesus Christ who is
held forth slain. And upon the Name of Churchyard: Ida. 5. p 486. C
We shall toward Evening see him which like a Lamb was crucified, killed,
slain. And again: You forsake him seeing him put to death. And in fine, in the
Homily touching the Eucharist, Id t. 5 page 569 A B.
in the Dedication, or of Penance: O wonderful! you are not afraid, the
Mystical Table being made ready, the Lamb of God being slain for you, etc. and
the pure Blood being powered out of the Side into the Cup for your
Sanctification. We will add unto all this, Hesychius Priest of Jerusalem, who
speak after this manner: Hes. chapter in Le l. 1 c. 2.
God made the Flesh of Jesus Christ; which was not fit to be eaten before his
Death, I say, he made it fit to be our Food after his Death: for who is it that
desired to eat the Flesh of God? if he had not been crucified, we should not
eat the Sacrifice of his Body; but now we eat the Flesh in taking the Memorial
of his Passion. Id l. 2. c. 6.
And again: The Cross has made eatable by Men the Flesh of our Lord, which was
nailed upon it: for if it had not been set upon the Cross, we should not have
communicated of the Body of Christ. This was also, Theodor. t. 3. ep. 130.
I suppose, Theodoret's Meaning, when he said: Our Lord himself promised to
give for the Ransom of the World, not an invisible Nature, but his Body: The
Bread, says he, which I will give, is my Flesh, which I will give for the Life
of the World. And in the Distribution of the divine Mysteries, in taking the
Symbol he said, This is my Body which is given for you: or as the Apostle
says, which is broken. And also in giving the divine Mysteries, after he had
broken the Symbol, and that he had divided it, he adds, This is my Body, which
is broken for you in Remission of Sins: And again, This is my Blood, which is
shed for many for the Remission of Sins. Id. ep. 145. p. 1026. A Tom 4. Dial.
1. Cyril. Hierof. Myslag. 5.
And elsewhere he calls the Eucharist, The Type of the Passion of our Savior.
St. Cyril of Jerusalem considering before him what was done in his Time in the
Celebration of the Sacrament, says among other Things, that we therein offer
unto God, Jesus Christ dead for our Sins: that is to say, in as much as we pray
him to accept in our discharge, the Death which he suffered for us, and in our
room and stead. And St. Fulgentius some time after Theodoret, in one of the
Fragments of the ten Books he wrote against Fabian the Arrian, having repeated
the Words of Institution of the Sacrament, as St. Paul relates them, he adds:
That the Sacrifice is offered to show the Lord's Death, ex lib 8. Fragm 28
and to make a Commemoration of him, which laid down his Life for us. Amalarius
Fortunatus spoke the same Language in the IX. Century, as shall be showed in
its place. In the mean while it is necessary to observe, that all Christians
confess, that Jesus Christ cannot be in the Sacrament as dead, but Typically,
and Mystically; because he really dies no more.

But because our Savior said, after having distributed the Cup to the
Disciples, I will drink no more of this Fruit of the Vine, until the Day that I
shall drink it new with you in my Father's Kingdom, I find the holy Fathers
have taken notice of this Circumstance, se^ing they have been pleased to
declare unto us, that Jesus Christ did call that the Fruit of the Vine, that
is, Wine, which he drank or gave unto his Disciples to drink in the Celebration
of this divine Mystery. This is, as I conceive, what Clement of Alexandria
would intimate in these Words: Clem. Alex. Paedag. l 2. c. 2.
That what the Lord had blessed was Wine, he would declare himself, in saying
to his Disciples, I will drink no more of this Fruit of the Vine, until I drink
it with you in the Kingdom of my Father. Origin in all likelihood had no other
meaning, when he observed, Origin. Hom. 7. in ^evit.
that Jesus Christ gave unto his Disciples Wine, which he called the Production
of the Vine; and in as much as that he would not drink himself at the
Celebration of the Sacrament, it was, that being ready to offer the Sacrifice
of his Body, he thought fit to show in his Person the accomplishment of the
Type and Figure, which had gone before in Aaron and the High Priest under the
Law, who were forbidden drinking Wine, when they were to draw near the Altar to
sacrifice. The Poet Juvencus may also be here admitted, if the Passage which
might be alleged of his were in its purity, and had received no alteration;
but because in all appearance it has been altered, I Will pass it over in
silence, that no body may have cause of Exception, and instead of Juvencus I Will
produce St. Athanasius, which says: Athan. in Synops.
That when the Lord gave the Mystery, or the Sacrament, he said, I will drink
no more of this Vine. And St. Hilary: Hilar. in Mat. cap. 30.
That having taken the Cup, and broke the Bread, they drank the Fruit of this
Vine. And this is the reason wherefore St. Basil, to prove, Basil lib. 2.
contr. E^nem.
that we call the Product of the Earth Fruit, and not Children, thus alleges
the Words of our Lord, I will no more drink of the Fruit of the Vine, that is
to say, of the Production of the Vine. St. Epiphanius disputing against the
Encratian Heretics, or the Hydroparastarians, who used only Water in the
celebration of the Eucharist, and for that reason were called Hydroparastites,
or Aquarians, refutes them by the Words of our Savior, saying, Epiphan.
haeres. 47.
Their Sacraments are no Sacraments, but they counterfeit them in imitation of
the true; therefore they shall therein be condemned by the Words of our
Savior, which said, I will not drink of the Fruit of the Vine. St. Chrysostom
observes something of the same Nature, when he assures, That Jesus Christ,
Chrysostom. hom. 83. in Math.
to pluck up by the Roots this pernicious Heresy, and to show us that when he
distributed the Mysteries, he gave Wine, he said expressly of the Fruit of the
Vine, for the Vine (says he) does not produce Water but Wine. Gennad. lib. 1.
Dogm Eccles. cap 75.
And Gennadius Priest of Marsellis, blaming those, which under a pretext of
Sobriety, used Water instead of Wine in the celebration of the Sacrament,
refutes them by this reason, That there was Wine in the Mystery of our
Redemption; and he proves it by these Words of Jesus Christ, From henceforth I
will not drink of the Fruit of the Vine. Amalarius, Florus, and Christian
Druthmer spoke no otherwise in the IXth Century; but because we will not change
the method prescribed, we will at this time wave their Testimonies, and the
proof of this ancient Tradition, by the Testimony of several Witnesses which
have been famous in the Church, as St. Justin Martyr, St. Irenaeus, Tertullian,
and many others; although Chiliasts and Millenarians. For St. Jerome informs us,
that to prove that our Lord should drink Wine during the Reign of a 1000 years,
which they believed he was to reign upon the Earth, they made use of these
Words of our Savior, Apud Hieron. Ep. ad Hedib. q. 2.
I say unto you I will no more drink of the Fruit of the Vine, until I drink it
new with you in my Fathers Kingdom; from this place, says St. Jerome, some
dream of the Fable of a 1000 years, during which they argue Jesus Christ shall
reign corporally, and that he will drink Wine, whereof he drank not from that
time until the end of the World. What St. Jerome dislikes in them, is the reign
of a 1000 years, during which they imagined that Christ should drink Wine upon
Earth; whereof he had not tasted any from the moment which he drank in the
celebration of the Sacrament, and whereof he was not to drink until this
pretended Reign of a 1000 years.

The first thing to be considered in a Discourse is the Scope and Design of him
that speaks, because it is the Mind that sets the Tongue a going, and that it is
with regard to his Intention, when he has discoursed of a Matter, the
Expressions made use of must be considered for representing his Thoughts;
without this we must needs stray, or at least fall into one of these
Inconveniences, either not to comprehend the Sense of what is read, or to
impute unto him that speaks things which are strange, or even sometimes unjust
and unreasonable: For Example, Jesus Christ commands us in the Gospel to
imitate the Wisdom of the unjust Steward which had wickedly wasted the Goods
committed by his Lord unto his Trust; this Precept, to consider it barely and
literally, is very wide of the Mark which our Savior intends, contains a
wicked Practice, and quite different from that which he teaches us in his
Gospel, which being pure and holy, infinitely surpasses what is best and most
commendable in the Heathen Morals: But if we consider his Scope and Intention,
there is nothing in this Precept which is not worthy the School of Christ. What
he requires of us is not to imitate the ill-dealing of this unjust Steward
which wasted his Master's Goods; he only would have us imitate his Wisdom in
making Friends, when he saw his Stewardship was like to be taken from him; that
is to say, that we also should make good use of those Goods which he is pleased
to bestow on us, and whereof he makes us Stewards; that we should employ them
to the relief of the Poor, that by means of our Alms-deeds, and Charity, we
should make our selves Friends which may contribute unto the saving our Souls,
by the Prayers which they make unto God for us. Nothing can be more reasonable
than this Rule which St. Chrysostom lays down; Chrysostom. Hom. in haec verba
Pater si fieri potest. t. 5. p. 125, 6.
We must not (says he) look only upon the Terms, but the Scope of him that
speaks, the cause and occasion of his Discourse, and comparing all together,
find out the sense and meaning of what is therein contained. Nevertheless, it
must be noted, this Rule has its particular use when the Expressions are
doubtful and difficult, and when by staying at the Terms, and following the
rigor of the Letter, a convenient Sense cannot be given unto what is said or
heard; except in such a case, nothing hinders but looking unto the scope of him
that speaks, stress may be laid on his Words, and much light taken from his
Expressions. Thus have the Holy Fathers proceeded in examining the Words used
by our Savior, in instituting the Sacrament, because all they have told us
hitherto, are only so many Reflections which they have made upon the Words and
Expressions of this Merciful Savior; but because they were verily persuaded
that Jesus Christ, which is Wisdom it self, had an end in instituting this
Divine Mystery, they would know the end and design which he proposed in leaving
this precious earnest of his Love unto his Church; Do this, says our Lord, in
remembrance of me; for as often as ye eat this Bread, and drink of this Cup,
says St. Paul, you show the Lord's Death till he come. From whence they
concluded, that the Intention of Jesus Christ in instituting the Sacrament, and
that of the Church in celebrating it by his Command, was by this means to
preserve amongst Christians the remembrance of his Death and Sufferings; but
because his Death does suppose his Incarnation and Birth, and that moreover,
his blessed Resurrection and Exaltation into Glory ensued thereupon, I find
they have included in this Commemoration commanded us by Christ, the
consideration of his Incarnation, bitter Death, of his Resurrection, and of his
Ascension into Heaven. According to which some of them join unto the
consideration of his Death, that of his Incarnation; as St. Justin Martyr,
which says; Just. Martyr contra Tryph. p. 296.
That the Lord commanded us to make the Bread of the Eucharist, in remembrance
that he made himself Man for those which believe in him, and for whom he made
himself Mortal; and the Cup in remembrance of his Blood. But sometimes also,
considering the Death of Christ as the end of his Conception, and of his Birth,
because he took not our Nature, and was born of a Virgin but to die, they are
content to consider the Sacrament as a Memorial of his Death only: Id. ibid. p.
259.
In this regard the same St. Justin said; That Jesus Christ commanded us to
make the Bread of the Sacrament in remembrance of the Death which he suffered
for the Souls of those which have been cleansed from all Malice. This was also
the meaning of Tatian his Disciple, Tat. Diates. t. 7. Bibl. Pat.
when he said, The Lord commanded his Disciples to eat the Bread and drink the
Cup of the Sacrament, because it was the memorial of his approaching
Affliction, and of his Death. There were others, who making this Reflection in
themselves, that the Death of Christ would be of no benefit unto us without his
Resurrection, which assures us of his Victory over the Enemies of our
Salvation, and of the Eternal Father's accepting of the Satisfaction he made
unto his Justice in our stead, and in consideration whereof he delivers us from
the Slavery of Sin, and the Devil, have considered the celebration of the
Sacrament as the commemoration of his Death and Resurrection: Such was the
Reflection of St. Basil, Basil. de Bapt. c. 2. p. 581.
when he observed, that, What we eat and drink, (to wit, of the Bread and Wine)
it is to the end we should always remember him who died, and is risen again for
us. Others, in fine, considering that Jesus Christ was ascended into Heaven,
and that he had left us the Sacrament as a pledge of his Presence, to comfort us
in expectation of his glorious Return, they thought the consideration of his
Death ought not to be separated from that of his Ascension, and that as they
should think of his Humiliation and Sufferings, they should also think of his
Exaltation and Glory; This was in all likelihood the meaning of St. Gaudent.
tr. 2. l. 2. Bibl. Patr.
Gaudentius, when he taught, That the Sacrament is our Viaticum, or Provision
for our Journey, whereby we are strengthened in the Way, until by departing out
of this Life we go to him; that it is an earnest of his Presence, and the
portract of his Passion, until he come again from Heaven; but an earnest and a
resemblance which he will have us take in our Hands, and receive with the Mouth
and Heart: to the end we may have engraven in our Memories the great Benefit of
our Redemption. To thus much also amounts what is said by the Author of the
Commentaries, In Cap. 11.1 ad Cor.
attributed unto St. Jerome, That Jesus Christ has left us the last
Commemoration, or the last Remembrance, as if one taking a Voyage into a far
Country, would leave a Token with his Friend, to the end that whenever he
looked on it, he should be mindful of his Love and Kindness, which he cannot do
without shedding Tears if he perfectly loved him; and that he gave us this
Sacrament, to the end that by this means we should always remember the Death
which he suffered for us. Sedulius has only transcribed this Testimony in his
Commentaries upon the same Epistle, and upon the same Chapter. Primatius, an
African Bishop, declares in the VIth Century, that it was his Judgment, and he
explained himself almost as the other two had done; and Christian Druthmer will
say the same in the IXth Century: as for the Author of the Apostolical
Constitutions, Constit. Apost. l. 8. c. 12.
he has joined all these considerations together; For he will have us to
remember his Passion, his Death, Resurrection, Ascension into Heaven, and his
second Coming, which will be when he comes with Power and Glory to judge the
quick and the dead, and to reward every one according to his Works. The same
thing is to be read in the Liturgy of St. Mark, and what is found in that which
the Latins use at present comes very near it. But the Fathers rest not there,
for I have observed that when they speak of the Eucharist, as of a Pledge and
Memorial, they set it in opposition not only of the Truth, but even also of the
Truth absent; so it has been understood by Gaudentius, Sedulius, Primasius,
the Author of the Commentaries attributed unto St. Jerome, in the Passages we
have alleged, whereunto may be joined these Words of the latter, In 1 ad Cor.
Cap. 11.
That we have need of this Memorial all the time which shall continue until he
be pleased to come again. It is in the same sense Theodoret said, Theodoret in
1 ad Cor. c. 11.
After his coming we shall have no need of Signs or Symbols of his Body,
because the Body it self shall appear. It was also the meaning of St. Austin,
if I mistake not, when he said, Aug. Sermon. 9. de diverse. Id. in Psalm. 37.
That we shall not receive the Eucharist when we are come unto Christ himself,
and that we have begun to reign Eternally with him; he said also elsewhere,
That no Body remembers what is not present: A Maxim grounded upon the Light of
Reason, De memor. and reminisc. c. 1. De Invent. l. 2.
for it is by this Principle the Philosopher said, that the Memory is not of
things present; and the Prince of Eloquence, That the Memory is that whereby
one remembers things which are past.

I never think of these Words of the Institution of the Sacrament, This is my
Body, but I deplore with grief and sorrow of Heart, the State of Christians,
which have made the Sacrament, which our Savior instituted, to be the Bond of
their Love and Union, the occasion of their Hatred, and the sorrowful matter of
their sad Divisions; and as I should be overjoyed to contribute any thing to
disabuse those which are in Error, by giving the Words the Explication which
they ought to have, I thought one of the best means to effect it, was
diligently to search in what sense the Holy Fathers have taken them, and in
what manner they understood them, for I make no question, but a belief agreed
upon by Christians at all times, and universally received at all times in all
the Climates of the Christian World, is Catholic, Orthodox, and by consequence
worthy to be retained in the Church, as an Apostolical Truth. Therefore, I have
applied my self unto this Inquiry, to endeavor to find in their Works their
true and real Thoughts; and because, for the most part in their Homilies, and
popular Exhortations, they are transported with the fervor of Zeal, and the
motions of Piety, which often made them use Hyperbolical Expressions, fit for
the Pulpit, and suitable unto Orators, which should be pathetical and feeling,
I have not stopped at these sorts of Works, I have chiefly examined Commentaries,
and Expositions, where for the most part they speak Dogmatically, and in cold
Blood, and the true and genuine Thoughts of those which write or expound may be
seen. And but that I mean exactly to keep within the Bounds prescribed at the
beginning of this second Part, I might continue my Inquiry unto the XIIth
Century, which would give us the Testimonies of Zonaras a Greek Canonist, and
of Rupert de Duitz, as the IXth does those of Raban, of Christian Druthmar, and
of Bertram. Laying then aside these five Testimonies, not to infringe the Law I
willingly imposed on my self, I Will begin with Clement of Alexandria, Clem.
Alex. Paedag. l. 2. c. 2.
who lived at the end of the second Century; Jesus Christ (said he) blessed
Wine, saying, Take, drink, this is my Blood, the Blood of the Vine; the holy
Liquor of Joy, represents by Alegory the Word, to wit, with regard to his
Blood, which was shed for many for the Remission of Sins. From Clement of
Alexandria I will pass unto Theophilus of Antioch, Theoph. Anti. och. in Matthew.
who wrote in the same Age; When Jesus Christ (says he) said, This is my Body,
he called Bread, which is made of many Grains, his Body, whereby he would
represent the People which he has taken unto himself. Tertul. l. 4. contr.
Marc. c. 40. Cyprian. ep. 76.
The third shall be Tertullian, which says, That Jesus Christ having taken
Bread and distributed it unto his Disciples, he made it his Body, saying, This
is my Body, (that is to say) the Figure of my Body. The fourth is St. Cyprian;
When the Lord, says he, does call the Bread made of several grains of Wheat,
his Body, he signifies thereby the faithful People whose Sins he bore,
inasmuch as it was but one Body. The fifth is St. Jerome, Hieron Com. in Matthew.
c. 26.
who dyed in the year of our Lord 420; As they were at Supper (says he) Jesus
took Bread, blessed it, and brake it, and gave it to his Disciples, and said,
Take, eat, this is my Body. And taking the Cup he gave Thanks, and gave it unto
them, saying, Drink ye all of it; for this is my Blood of the New Testament,
for the remission of Sins. When the Typical Passover was accomplished, and that
Jesus Christ had eaten with the Apostles the Flesh of the Lamb, he took Bread,
which strengthens Man's Heart, and proceeds on to the true Sacrament of the
Passover; to the end, that as Melchisedek, Priest of the most High God, had
offered Bread and Wine to represent him, so he also should represent the Truth
of his Body and of his Blood. The sixth is St. Austin, contemporary with St.
Jerome, and dyed about eleven years after him; The Lord made no difficulty to
say, August. contr. Adim. c. 12.
This is my Body, when he gave the Symbol of his Body. The seventh is
Theodoret, Our Lord, says he, made an Exchange of Names, Theod Dial. 1.
and gave unto his Body the Name of the Symbol, and unto the Symbol the Name of
his Body; and in the same place, tells us in Truth, whereof the Holy Food is
the Sign and Figure; Is it of the Divinity of Jesus Christ, or of his Body and
Blood? Id. ibid.
It is evident it is of the things whereof they have their Names; for the Lord
having taken the Sign, said not, This is my Divinity, but This is my Body, and
afterward, This is my Blood. The eighth is Facundus Bishop of Hermiana in
Africa, who assisted at the Fifth Ecumenical Council, about the middle of the
sixth Century; Facund. l. 9. p. 404, 405.
We do call (says he) the Sacrament of the Body and Blood, which is in the
Bread and consecrated Cup, the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ; not that the
Bread is properly his Body, and the Cup his Blood; but because they contain in
them the Mystery, or the Sacrament of his Body and Blood: From whence it is
also that the Lord himself called the Bread and the Cup, which he blessed and
gave unto his Disciples, his Body and his Blood. The ninth is St. Isidor,
Bishop of Sevill in Spain, Isid. Hist. o^igin. l 6. c 19.
We call (says he) by the Command of Christ himself, his Body and Blood, that
which being sanctified of the Fruits of the Earth, is consecrated and made a
Sacrament. The tenth is Bid, that bright Star of the English Church, which
finished his Course, Anno 735. Beda Comm^. in Marc. 14.
Jesus Christ (says he) said unto his Disciples, This is my Body, because
Bread strengthens the Heart of Man, and Wine does increase Blood in the Body;
it is for this reason that Bread represents mystically the Body of Jesus
Christ, and the Wine his Blood. The eleventh is a Council of 338 Bishops,
Council. Constantinop. in act. Council. Nicaen. 2 act 6.
assembled at Constantinople against Images, in the year 754. Jesus Christ, say
these Fathers, having taken Bread, blessed it, and having given Thanks, he
brake it, and giving it to his Disciples, he said, Take, eat, for the Remission
of Sins, This is my Body; in like manner having given the Cup, he said, This is
my Blood, do this in remembrance of me; there being no other kind of Thing, nor
Figure chosen by him, that could so fitly represent his Incarnation. See then
the Image of his quickening Body made honorably and gloriously. Here are eleven
substantial Witnesses, which being added unto the five others which we passed
over, and shall appear in due time, make up the number of sixteen, without
touching those which may by evident and necessary Consequences be drawn unto
the same Testimony^; for I have made choice only of those which seemed most
evident, and of those also some speak in more express Terms than others. The
Reader may judge, if all these Witnesses which speak of Bread, Wine, Fruit of
the Vine, of Figure, Sign, Type, Symbol, Sacrament, of Representation, of
Fruits of the Earth, do not give a figurative sense unto these Words, This is
my Body, This is my Blood. And to do it the better, let him exactly see if any
of these ancient Commentators have spoken of Reality, of bodily Conversion, and
of local Presence in interpreting them: for, say the Protestants, they could
not pass over in silence so important a Doctrine as that, in an occasion which
indispensably obliged them to say something of it, without rendering themselves
guilty of horrid Hypocrisy and Injustice: So that if they have not done it, and
that there appears no such thing in what has been produced and examined, as
indeed, say they, whatever Scrutiny we could make, no such thing, nor like it,
does appear; it may be safely and lawfully concluded that all these Fathers
have taken these Words not in a proper and literal Sense, but in a figurative
and metaphorical Sense. Moreover, all these Reflections of the Ancients, upon
these Words of the Institution of the Sacrament, amount just to the manner of
understanding them, commanded by the Council of Trent, when it forbids to
interpret the holy Scriptures, Sess. 4.
contrary to the unanimous consent of the Fathers: Because, as it is explained
by Melchior Canus, Locor. l 7. c. 3. number. 10.
Bishop of the Canaries, who assisted at the Council; The Sense of all the
Saints, is the Sense of the Holy Ghost.

CHAP. II.
Of what the Fathers believed, concerning what we receive in the Sacrament, and
what they have said of it.

BEsides the many Reflections made by the ancient Doctors, upon the Words used
by our Savior in the instituting this most august Sacrament, which we have
sufficiently enumerated, and set down in the foregoing Chapter; I find they
have said many other things which may direct us unto the true understanding of
their Belief, which we will enquire into in this second Chapter. In the first
place, they have called the Eucharist, Bread and Wine, in the very act of
communicating; There is given unto each of these present, Just. Mart. Apol. 2.
vol. 1. I^en l. 4. c 34.
says Justin Martyr, the Bread, the Wine, and the Water which have been
consecrated. St. Irenaeus, Bishop of Lions, gives it the same Name, calling it
The Bread upon which Prayers and Thanks have been made. And I make no question,
Contr. Tryph. p. 260. Orig. contr. Cells. l. 8. Id. ibid. Id. Homil. 5. in
Levitic. Cyprian Ep. 76. and 63 Apud Eusebius. Hist. l. 6 c. 43. prope fin.
but it is also for the same reason that our Christian Philosopher, I mean St.
Justin, speaks, of the Eucharist of Bread and Wine. Origin against Celsus, The
Bread which is called the Eucharist, the Symbol of our Duty toward God. And in
the same Book, The Bread offered with Thanksgivings, and Prayers made for the
Mercies bestowed on us. And in his Homilies upon Leviticus, The Bread which the
Lord gave unto his Disciples. St. Cyprian was of the same Judgment, when he
called it, The Bread of the Lord: And in his Treatise of the Cup, or in his
Epistle to Cecilius, he very often calls it, Bread and Wine mixed with Water;
and says, That the Body of the Lord is not Flower only, nor Water only, but a
composition of these two things kneaded and molded together, and made into the
substance of Bread. And Cornelius Bishop of Rome, writing unto Fabian Bishop of
Antioch, of what passed in the undue Ordination of Novatian unto the
Episcopacy, and speaking of the Sacrament in the act of distribution and
reception, he calls it, That Bread: From hence it is that Tertullian disputing
against the Marcionites, Tertul. contr. Marc. l. 1. c. 23.
who taught, that the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ was not the Creator, he
reproaches them, That they were baptized in the name of another God, upon
another Earth, and with another Water, and that they made Prayers, and gave
Thanks unto another God, upon the Bread of another. It is easy to understand
that in speaking in that manner to Marcion, he presupposed that the Orthodox
made their Prayers unto God the Creator, upon this Bread; that is to say, The
Bread of the Eucharist. And the Author of the Epistle to the Philadelphians,
under Ignatius's Name, Ep. ad Philad.
says, That there is one Bread broken unto all. If we descend lower, Conc.
Ancyr. c. 2. Conc. Neoces. c. 13.
we shall find that the Council of Ancyrus, in the year 314, forbids Deacons
that had sacrificed unto Idols, To present the Bread and the Cup. And that of
Neocesarea of the same Year says, That the Country-Priests cannot offer nor
give the Bread in Prayer, nor the Cup in the chief Church in the City, if the
Bishop or the Priests of the City are present. Eusebius. them. l. 5. c. 3.
Eusebius Bishop of Cesarea wrote about the year 328. That the Ministers of the
Christian Church, express darkly by the Bread and Wine, the Mysteries of the
Body and Blood of Christ. It was also the opinion of St. Hilary Bishop of
Poictiers, Bil. in Matthew. c. 30.
when he said, That the Passover of our Lord was made, the Lord having taken
the Cup and broke the Bread. Macar. Hom. 27.
St. Macarius followed the same Steps, in saying, That in the Church one
participates of visible Bread to eat spiritually the Flesh of our Lord. Council.
Laod. c. 25.
The Council of Laodicea, assembled about the year 360, ordains, That Ministers
ought not (that is to say the Deacons, or rather Subdeacons) to administer the
Bread, nor bless the Cup. A Council of Carthage made this Decree, Council.
Carth. c. 24.
That in the Sacraments of the Body and Blood of our Lord, nothing else should
be offered but what the Lord himself had done; to wit, Bread, and Wine mingled
with Water. This Decree is the 37th in the Code of the Canons of the Church of
Africa, and it is there inserted something different, but yet in such a manner
as does not alter the Sense. Aug. de Civit. Dei l. 17. c. 5.
St. Austin is no less positive, when he declares, That to eat the Bread, is
under the New Testament the Sacrifice of Christians. Cyril. in Joan. l. 4. c.
14 and l. 12. Hesych. in Levit. l. 6. c. 2^.
And St. Cyril of Alexandria says, That in the Eucharist Jesus Christ
distributed and gave Bread unto his Disciples. For the same Reason Hesychius
assures us, that The Oblation of Jesus Christ is performed in Bread and Wine.
Eudox. Bibl. Patr. t. 14. p. 130.
The Princess Eudoxia, Wife unto the Emperor Theodosius the younger, may take
place amongst all these Witnesses which we have alleged, her Deposition being
of no less moment than the rest, seeing she speaks according to the
Instructions given her in the Church, when she says, That our Lord having
broke Bread, gave it unto his Friends, Apud Phot. Bibl. Cod. 115.
that is to say, unto his Disciples. An Anonymous Author in Photius his
Library, assures, That Jesus Christ in his Mystical Supper gave unto his
Disciples Bread and Wine. The sixteenth Council of Toledo, Council. Tolet. 16.
c. 6.
held in the Year 693, says twice, That the Lord breaking a whole Loaf, gave
it to be taken in parcels by his Disciples. And the Council in Trullo Anno 691,
Council. in Trul. c. 32.
take and apply unto themselves the 24th Canon of the Council of Carthage,
where it is forbidden to offer any thing but what Jesus Christ gave; to wit,
Bread, and Wine mingled with Water.

Secondly; The same Fathers testify that the Bread of the Sacrament is Bread
which is broken. I will not here make use of the Testimonies of those, which
positively affirm that our Lord did break Bread in his Sacrament, as Clement of
Alexandria, Origin, Juvencus, St. Hilary, St. Austin, St. Cyril of Alexandria,
the Empress Eudoxia, the XVI. Council of Toledo, etc. I will restrain my self
at present unto those which say, that we therein break Bread, as the Author of
the Epistles under the Name of St. Ignatius, for he speaks of breaking one
Bread, and says, Ignat. ep. ad. Ephesians. and ad Philad. Recognit. l. 6. ad sin.
Pasch. 1.
there is one Bread broken unto all. And the Author of Recognitions observes of
St. Peter, that he broke the Eucharist. Theophilus of Alexandria says, that we
break the Bread for our own Sanctification. St. Chrysostom, that was the
object of his Persecution and Harred, was of the same Mind, when he said,
Wherefore did the Apostle, when he spoke of Bread, Chrysostom. hom. 24. in 1 ad
Cor.
say, which we break, for that is seen to be done in the Sacrament. This is
also what St. Austin testifies, when he says: Aust. ep. 86. and ep. 59. Id.
Sermon. 140. de Temp. c. 2. Fulg. de Bapt. Ae^hiop. Isid. Hispal. de Off. Eccl.
l. 1. cap. 18. Act. 2. and 20.
That the Bread is broken in the Sacrament of the Body of Jesus Christ, and
that what is upon the Lord's Table, is divided into little Bits, to be
distributed; And elsewhere, that the breaking of the Bread should comfort us.
St. Fulgentius thus reads the Words of St. Paul, The Loaves which we break. And
St. Isidore of Sevil, The Bread, says he, which we break, is the Body of Jesus
Christ. We see also that St. Luke means the Sacrament of the Eucharist by the
breaking of Bread: which the Syriac Interpreter has expressed by the breaking
of the Sacrament: and where St. Luke says, that the Disciples were met
together to break Bread, he has rendered it, We were met together to break the
Eucharist. Therefore it is that the holy Fathers, which speak of breaking Bread,
speak also of dividing it in pieces? As when Clement of Alexandria observes,
Clem. Alex. Strom. l. 1. page 271. Aug. cont. Don post Col. c. 6. Cypr. de
laps. Cyril. Ale^. in Joan. l. 4. c. 14.
that the Eucharist being divided, each of the People took part of it. And St.
Austin, that Judas and Peter received each of them a Piece. And St. Cyprian
speaks of a Woman which had locked in her Chest a Portion of the Eucharist.
There Is nothing more common in their Writings; whence came the Terms of Parts,
Morsels, Portions, which were common so long time in the Church, and which made
them say, that Jesus Christ gave Morsels of Bread unto his Disciples? And that
but a little is taken, witness what Eusebius says of a Priest of Alexandria,
that he sent by a young Boy unto Serapion, a little, Eusebius. Hist. l. 6. c. 441
Aug. Sermon. 35. de verb. Dom. cap. 5.
or part of the Eucharist. And St. Austin, that we receive but a little, and
are fatned by it inwardly in the Heart. Unto this Consideration may be added
the constant Tradition of the Church, whereon we have largely insisted in the
VIII: Chapter of the first Part; where we have shown, that the holy Fathers
have unanimously deposed, that the Sacrifice of Christians is a Sacrifice of
Bread and Wine.

In the third place, speaking of the Eucharist, they say, That it is Aug. sermon
34 de diverse. c. 28.
Corn, Eudox. in 36. and Arnob. in p. 4.
Wheat, Theod. dial. 1
Fruit of the Vine, Sedul. in op. Pasch. c. 14. l. 4:
the Fruit of the Harvest, and the Joy of the Vine, Isid. Hisp. l. 6. orig. c.
19.
the Fruits of the Earth, Tertul. cont. Marc. l. 1. c. 14.
the Blessings of the Creator, Iren. l. 4. c. 34 and l. 5. c. 4, 8.
Creatures of this World, Clem. Alex. Paedag. l. z c. 2.
the Blood of the Vine, the Liquor of Joy, Cypr. ep. 76. and 63.
Bread made of several Grains, Wine pressed out of several Grapes, Orig. contra
Cells. l. 8.
Breads or Loaves, in the plural number, Just. Mart. contra Tryph.
wet ard dry Food. They say moreover, That it is the Bread of the Eucharist; as
St. Basil, Basil. de Sp. S. c. 27.
the Mystery of Bread and Wine; as St. Gaudentius Bishop of Bresscia, Gaud.
tract. 2. in Exodus 14.
the Sacrament of Bread and Wine; St. Austin, Aug. contra Faust. l. 20. c. 13
the Sacrament of Bread and of the Cup; as St. Fulgentius, Fulg. ad Monum. c.
11.
the Sacrament of Bread; as Bede, Bed. Hom. 2. Fer. de pasch.
that it is not common Bread; as Justin Martyr in his second Apology, Ireneus
l. 4. c. 34. Cyril of Jerusalem, Mystag. 3. and Gregory of Nysse in Baptism.
Christ. page 802. tom. 2. The Fathers rest not there, they positively affirm,
that it is Bread and Wine. Clement of Alexandria, Clem. Alex. Paedag l. 2. c. 2.
What our Savior blessed, says he, was Wine, he plainly showed his own self,
in saying unto his Disciples, I will no more drink of this Fruit of the Vine,
until I drink it with you in my Father's Kingdom. St. Cyprian said the same,
for having repeated these same Words of our Savior, he says, Cypr. ep. 63.
That we find, that what our Savior offered was a Cup mingled with Water, and
that what he said to be his Blood, was Wine. Nothing can be seen more formal to
this purpose, than what is read in Aug. ad Infan. apud Fulg. de Bapt. Aet. c.
ult. Theod. Dial. 1. Prosp. de promis. and praed. part. 1. c. 2. Facund. l. 9.
c. ult.
St. Austin's Sermon unto the new Baptized, related entirely by St. Fulgentius,
where speaking unto them of the Sacrament which they saw upon the holy Table,
What you have seen, says he, is Bread and a Cup, as your Eyes do testify.
Theodoret, who was present at the Council of Calcedon, The Lord, says he, in
distributing the Mysteries, did call the Bread, his Body, and the Wine, his
Blood. We may also say the same thing of the counterfeit Prosper, which says,
That the Lord did declare at his Table, that the consecrated Bread was his
sacred Body. Of Facundus, which says, The Lord himself called the Bread which
he had blessed, and the Cup which he gave his Disciples, his Body and his
Blood. And in fine of Maxentius a Religious Person, and afterward Priest of
the Church of Antioch, in whose Dialogues we read, That the Bread whereof the
Universal Church does participate, Maxent. cont. Nest. dial. 2.
in remembrance of the Death of our Lord, is his Body.

But this is not yet all they have to say unto us, there is found in their
excellent Works several other things, which lead us as it were by the hand unto
the Knowledge of what we search for. In the first place they declare our Bodies
are nourished with what we receive at the Lord's Table; as Justin Martyr, who
speaks of the Eucharist, Just. Mart. Apol. 2. Iren. l. 4 c. 34. and l. 5. c. 2.
Aug. sermon. 9. de diverse. Isid. Hispal. apud Bertram. de Corp. and Sang. Dom.
Ibid.
as of a Food wherewith our Flesh and Blood are nourished by Transmutation. St.
Irenaeus does depose, that our Flesh is fed with it, that our Blood, our Body
and Flesh are nourished, increased, and do subsist by it. St. Austin says,
that it is Bread which fills the Belly. St. Isidore Archbishop of Sevill, that
the Substance of this visible Bread does nourish the outward Man, and satisfies
it. Or as Ratran, who has transferred to us his Words, (not any more to be
found in Isidore's Works now printed) that all that is outwardly received in
the Sacrament of the Body and Blood of our Lord, is fit to feed the Body. The
Fathers of the sixteenth Council of Toledo, in the Year 693, Conc. Tolet. 16.
c. 6.
speak of the Remainders of the Sacrament, as of a thing, that a quantity of it
may incommode the Stomach. That was also the Belief of Raban Arch bishop of
Mayence, in the ninth Century; and of the Taborites in Bohemia, in the
fifteenth, as shall be demonstrated in time and place convenient.

Secondly, there are some of them that positively affirm, that what is
distributed at the holy Table, is Bread, the Matter whereof, after we have
taken and eat it, does pass by the common way of our ordinary Food. Origin
teaches so in plain terms, when expounding these Words of the 15th Chap. of
St. Matthew, Origin. in Math. 15.
That it is not what enters into the Mouth defiles the Man, he says, If what
enters in the Mouth, goes into the Belly, and is cast into the Draft; the Meat
which is sanctified by the Word of God and Prayer, goes also into the Belly,
according to the gross part of it, and afterward into the Draft; but by reason
of Prayer made over it, it is profitable according to the proportion of Faith,
and is the cause that the Understanding is enlightened and attentive unto what
is profitable; and it is not the Substance of Bread, but the Word pronounced
upon it, which is profitable unto him that eats it not in a way unworthy of
the Lord. This Doctrine was also taught in the ninth Century by Raban
Archbishop of Mayence, and by Heribold Archbishop of Auxerre, and I think I
lately hinted that Amalarius Fortunatus, who lived in the same Century, was of
this Judgment, which shall be examined, when we come to inquire into the Belief
of the ninth Century. Father Cellot, the Jesuit, attributes the same Doctrine
unto the Greeks. Append. Miscel. op. 7. p. 564
It is true this Doctrine was not the Opinion of all the ancient Fathers of the
Church; therefore I said at the beginning of this Observation, that there were
some of them that did believe so: in effect, St. Cyril of Jerusalem says:
Cyril. Hieros. Mystag. 5.
That the Bread of the Sacrament does not go into the Belly, and is not cast
out into the Draft; but that it is dispersed throughout the Substance of the
Communicant for the good of his Body and Soul. The Author of the Homily of the
Eucharist for the Dedication, in St. Chrysostom's Works says almost the same
with St. Cyril: Sermon. de Euchar. in Encoen. apud Chrysostom. t. 5. pa. 596.
Take no heed that it is Bread, think not that it is Wine, for they are not
cast out as other Meat, God forbid you should once think so; for as when Wax is
cast into the Fire, nothing of its Substance does remain, or there remains no
superfluity, or it leaves not behind it neither soot nor cinders; in like
manner here, imagine that the Mysteries are consumed with the Substance of the
Body. We may add John Damascen unto these two Authors, Damasc. l. 4. Orthodox.
fid. cap. 14.
who speaks thus: The Shewbread did represent this Bread, and it is this pure
Oblation, and without Blood, which the Lord foretold by the Prophet, which
should be offered unto him from the East unto the West, to wit, the Body and
Blood of Christ, which should pass into the Substance of our Soul and Body,
without being consumed, without being corrupted, or passing into the Draft; O
God forbid! but passing into our Substance for our Preservation. These three
Testimonies, as every one does see, differ from Origin, which indeed was also
the Opinion of Raban, Heribold and Amalarius; but if they were not of the
Opinion of Origin, they were of that of St. Justin Martyr, Irenaeus, St.
Austin, St. Isidore of Sevil, of the sixteenth Council of Toledo, Ratran, and
others: I mean, that if they believed not with Origin, that the Bread of the
Eucharist, as to its material Substance, was subject unto the shameful
necessity of other common Food, they believed with the others, that it turned
it self into our Substance, that our Bodies were nourished by it, and that they
were increased and strengthened by it; and so their Difference with Origin was
only in the Circumstance, whether or no the holy. Bread went unto the Place of
Excrements, Origin holding the Affirmative, the others the Negative: but as to
the Ground of the Doctrine, I find them all agreed, and that all of them teach,
that what we receive at the Lord's Table, is the Substance of Bread; which some
subject to the same fate of our common Food, that goes into the Belly, and from
thence into the Draft; others think this Bread does pass into our Substance,
and if it feed our Souls by the virtue wherewith God accompanies it after
Consecration and lawful Use of the Sacrament, it also nourishes and increases
the Body by its proper Nature, without turning into Excrements. And the latter,
as I conceive, are inclined unto this Opinion the rather, because receiving but
very little Bread and Wine in the Sacrament, they made no difficulty to believe
that it all turns into our Substance.

In the third place, the holy Fathers testify that this Sacrament is consumed:
Aug. de Trin. lib. 3. c. 10.
The Bread, says St. Austin, which is made for that purpose, is consumed in
taking the Sacrament: And again, in the same Chapter: What is put upon the
Table is consumed, the holy Colebration being ended. Commonly there was no more
alleged but this Passage of St. Austin, to prove that the ancient Christians
believed, that what was received at the Sacrament, was of such a nature as to
be in effect consumed. Wherefore I hope the Reader will not be displeased if I
lead him farther, and make it appear, this manner of Speech was used in the
Church a long time after St. Austin's Death. These Considerations we make upon
the Doctrine of the holy Fathers, are of such importance, that we endeavor to
find out in all Ages of the Christian Church what Footsteps they have left us
of it in their Writings. Hugh Maynard in his Notes upon the Books of Sacraments
of Gregory the first, alleges, and wholly transcribes a Pontifical
Manuscript, which is kept in the Church of Rouen, and is, as far as I can
guess, near to the eighth Century, and probably of later times; in this
Pontifical the whole Ceremony of holy Thursday is represented, and amongst many
other Observations, this is to be read: When the Bishop washes his Hands, In
Not. Menar. in Sacram. Greg. p. 84.
and the Deacons go unto the Altar to uncover the holy Things, and that the
Bishop comes to the Altar, separates the Oblations to break them, that he takes
some of the whole ones to keep until next day, the Day of Preparation, and that
they communicated without the Blood of the Lord, because the Blood was wholly
consumed the same Day. It may be easily seen that the Blood mentioned by the
Pontifical, is not the proper Blood of Jesus Christ; for all Christians
unanimously confess, that the real Blood of our Lord, which was shed upon the
Cross for the Salvation of Mankind, is shed no more, and is not in a state of
being consumed in the Celebration of the Sacrament; then, says the Protestant,
he must needs speak of a Typical and Figurative Blood, I mean of the Mystical
and Sanctified Wine, which Believers drink at the holy Table, and which is
subject unto the fate of being consumed: No other Explication can be given unto
the Words of the Pontifical abovementioned, which does not ill suit with those
of St. Austin; and I promise my self that the tenth Century (however dark and
ignorant it be represented by Historians) will furnish us with another Witness,
an Abbot of a famous Monastery, which will speak of the other Symbol, what the
Pontifical has said of the Symbol of Wine.

In the fourth Place; They avow that the Sacrament of the Eucharist is an
inanimate Subject, as Theophilus Archbishop of Alexandria, for refuting the
Opinion of Origin, who denied that the holy Ghost exercised any Operation upon
Things that have no Soul; he speaks thus: In affirming this, he does not
consider, Theop. Alex. Pasch. 1. Bibl. Pat. t. 3. p. 87.
that in Baptism the Mystical Waters are consecrated by the holy Ghost, which
descends, and that the Bread of the Lord, whereby the Body of the Lord is shown
forth, and which we break for our Sanctification; and the holy Cup, which with
the Bread is set upon the Table of the Church, and which are things inanimate,
are sanctified by Prayers, and by the coming of the holy Ghost. St. Epiphanius
was not far from this Belief, when comparing the Bread after Consecration with
the Body it self of our Savior, he said, Epiphan. in Anchor.
That the one is round as to its Form, and insensible as to its Power; but the
other has the Features and Lineaments of a Body, and is all Life, Motion, and
Action. To thus much also amounts their Belief, that the Change in the
Sacrament concerned not the Nature of the Bread and Wine to change them into
another thing, but only to add unto them the Grace which they had not before:
that is to say, a quickening and sanctifying virtue in the right use of the
Sacrament. Theod. dial. 1.
Jesus Christ, says Theodoret, has honored the visible Symbols with the Name
of his Body and Blood, not in changing their Nature, but in adding the Grace.

In the fifth place; These same Fathers affirm, that the substance of Bread and
Wine remain after Consecration: it is the Judgment meant of St. Chrysostom:
Chrysostom. ep. ad Caesar.
The Bread of the Sacrament, says he, is called Bread before it is sanctified;
but Divine Grace having sanctified it by the Ministry of the Priest, it is no
longer called Bread, but it is judged worthy to be called the Body of Christ,
although the Nature of Bread remains. Monsr. de Marca in his French Treatise of
the Eucharist, Page 12, 13. of the last Edit. page 9.
does agree, That until St. Chrysostom, the Fathers believed that the Bread did
not change its Nature after Consecration: Moreover, he confesses for truth the
Letter of St. Chrysostom unto Caesarius. As also the Abbot Faggot does in his
Letter unto Monsr. de Marca, Son to that Illustrious Prelat and President of
the Parliament of Paris; he therein further informs us, that this Letter of St.
Chrysostom is in the custody of Monsr. Bigot, who in his Voyage into Italy
found it in the Library, whence Peter Martyr of Florence formerly procured it,
I mean in the Library of the Duke of Florence; so that for the future there
ought not to be any farther Contest of the validity of this Letter, because the
true Author of it cannot be unknown. Theodoret, a great admirer of St.
Chrysostom, Theod. dial. 2.
tells us: That the Nature of the Symbols is not changed. And in another of his
Dialogues, The Mystical Symbols, says he, after Consecration do not change
their proper Nature, for they continue in their former Substance, Gelas. de
duab. in Christ. nature. ad Nestor. and ^ueych.
in their first Shape, and in their first Form, and are visible and palpable as
they were before. Pope Gelasius, at the end of the fifth Century: Certainly,
says he, the Sacraments of the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ which you
receive, are something that is divine, whence also it is that by them we are
made Partakers of the Divine Nature, and nevertheless they still retain the
Nature and Substance of Bread and Wine. It was also the Judgment of Ephraim
Patriarch of Antioch in the sixth Age: Ephraem. An^t^och. apud Phoc. cod. 229.
The Body of Jesus Christ, says he, which Believers receive, does not forsake
the outward Substance, and hold inseparably unto the inward Grace. And that it
may not be questioned that he spoke of the Sacrament of his Body, he adds the
same of Baptism, saying, that it preserves, just as the Eucharist does, the
outward Form, and the inward and spiritual Grace: And Baptism, Id. ibid.
says he, being wholly spiritual, and being but one, keeps the propriety of
its sensible Form, that is to say, Water, and loses not what it was made. A
Council of the East assembled at Constantinople Anno 754, declares: Council.
Constable. in Act. Nicae^. 2. Act. 6.
That Jesus Christ commanded us to offer the Image of his Body, a Thing chosen,
to wit, the Substance of Bread. Ahyto Bishop of Basil, Walafridus Straho,
Ratran will teach the same Doctrine in the ninth Century, Ratherius Bishop of
Verona, in the tenth, and the Taborites of Bohemia in the fifteenth. Yet it
must be confessed there is to be found in the Writings of the Ancients, a
Passage where the Author, be he who he will, seems to differ from this Belief,
universally received by the Church in his Time; it is in an Easter Sermon,
attributed unto Caesarius Bishop of Arles, who lived in the sixth Century,
although it be not certain whether it be his or not; but so it is that in this
Sermon amongst other things it is said: Caesar. Hom. 1. de Pasch.
That the invisible Priest (he means Jesus Christ) changes by the secret Power
of his Word the visible Creatures into the Substance of his Body and Blood.
Some would answer, that the private Opinion of Caesarius should not take place
against the many Testimonies above alleged, not being just that one should be
preferred before so many, the greater part whereof were nothing inferior unto
Caesarius in Dignity and Learning, and some surpassed him both in one and the
other, as St. Chrysostom, and Pope Gelasius; others in Dignity at least, as St.
Ephraim Patriarch of Antioch, not to mention his Learning, which in all
likelihood was nothing short of Caesarius, if he were truly the Author of the
Sermon which we examine; and others in fine in Learning, as Theodoret, whose
Light and Knowledge was incomparably greater: and they would not fail here to
apply that Maxim of Vincentius Lyrinensis, Vincent. Lyrinens. common.
already cited in the beginning of this History: If sometimes the different
Opinion of one Person, or of some few which are deceived, rise up in opposition
against the Consent of all, Id. ibid.
or at least of much the greater Number of Catholics. Against the Obstinacy of
one, or of a few more, should first be opposed the Decree of an universal
Council, if there be any. Secondly, if there are none, let the Opinion of
several great Doctors, that do agree amongst themselves, be followed; for,
says he, whatsoever is believed by one particular Person, above or against
what is received and allowed by all, be he Saint, Doctor, Bishop, Confessor, or
Martyr, let it be reputed a low, peculiar, and close Thing, private and
particular to himself, and let it not have the Authority of an Opinion
commonly, publicly, and generally received. This is what several might answer
unto this Difficulty, and their Answer would not be contemptible: Others think
more kindness may be showed unto Caesarius, in reconciling him with the rest
rather than reject him; for they conceive this Act of Humanity is due unto an
Author to give a favorable Construction to his Words, and not to make him
clash with the Opinion generally received, which ought especially take place in
things that regard the essential Parts of Piety and Religion; because in those
Things, without endangering our Salvation, we cannot separate from the Belief
which has been always received in the Church of God. Let us see then how they
would reconcile Caesarius with those other glorious Witnesses abovementioned:
It may easily be done, say they, if you consider, that the Fathers often speak
as Caesarius did, although they only understand a Change of Quality, which
befalls the Substance wherein this change is made, Tertul. cont. Marc. l. 3. and
l. 1. ad Uxor.
though nevertheless it is not changed it self; for instance, Tertullian said,
That we shall be changed into an Angelical Substance; instead of saying, that
we shall be changed into an Angelical Quality, as he elsewhere explains
himself. So Eusebius said of the Soul of Helen Mother of Constantin the great,
Eusebius de vita Constant. l. 3. cap. 46.
that she was transformed into an incorruptible and Angelical Substance; to
signify, that she had acquired Angelical Qualities, in respect whereof she
might assume the Name of Angelical Substance. So St. Austin, Aug. in Psalm. 68.
Hom. 1.
By Sin Man fell from the Substance wherein he was made; nevertheless Man
continues to be Man, but because he lost the Righteousness and Holiness which
beautified and adorned his Nature, he made no difficulty of saying so. And St.
Peter Chrysologus, speaking of the change happened in the human Nature of Christ
by the Refurrection, Chrysolog. Hom. 82.
says, that our Lord changed Substance, which is not true but in regard of
Qualities. But to come nearer the Sacraments, all Christians generally confess,
that the Water of Baptism does not lose its Substance, Tertull. de Baptism.
yet that hinders not but Tertullian calls Baptism, a divine Substance, because
the Waters of Baptism receiving by Consecration the Holiness which they had
not, they are said in some fort to pass into the divine Substance, it being
reasonable, that the Subject should derive its Name from its best and most
noble part. What then may hinder, but Caesarius might say in a good sense of
the Bread and Wine in the Sacrament, That Jesus Christ does change them into
the Substance of his Body and Blood, although the Bread and Wine keep their
Substance, because he makes them pass into the efficacy of his own Flesh, as
St. Cyril of Alexandria speaks. Certainly it ought not to be thought strange,
if they consider that Pope Gelasius, who wrote about 50 Years before Caesarius,
Gelaf. de duab. not. Christ.
that the Substance or Nature of Bread and Wine still remains, as we but now
heard, for all that says, that the Bread and Wine pass into a divine
Substance, because the Consecration gives them a heavenly and divine virtue, by
reason whereof in some sort they may bear the Name of a divine Substance;
whereas before Consecration they had only a Substance whose Qualities seemed
but to nourish the Body, and they find nothing therein more harsh than what is
said by Ratran, Bertram. de corp. and fang. Dom. Aug. annot. in Job t. 4 ex. c.
5. p. 394. Prosper ad Demetr.
That our Savior did formerly in the Wilderness change the Manna and the Water
of the Rock into his Flesh and Blood. And St. Austin, that Jesus Christ
changes us into his Body. And in fine, St. Prosper his Disciple, speaking of
our Lord Jesus Christ, that the Body of Sin is converted or changed into his
Body. Caesarius himself, say they, deserves that Right, and invites us thus to
understand him; for in the first place, he teaches in the same Sermon, that
Jesus Christ intending to transport his Body into Heaven, left us his
Sacrament, to have always his holy Sacrifice in Remembrance, who suffered Death
for the Expiation of our Sins, Because, says he, Id. ibid.
he was to remove from our Sight the Body which he had taken, and place it in
Heaven, it was requisite he should in that Day consecrate the Sacrament of his
Body and Blood, to the end that by the Mystery (that is, by the Sacrament)
should be honored what was once offered for the price of our Redemption; and
that because the Redemption for the Salvation of Mankind had a continual
Progress, the Oblation also of the Redemption should be perpetual, and that
this everlasting Sacrifice should always live and be remembered in the State of
Grace. Secondly, he compares the Change which comes to the Sacramental Symbols,
unto that which befalls Men in Baptism, to show us that both the one and the
other, being of the same nature, it can be only a change of Virtue and Quality;
The Man renewed (says he) by the saving Mysteries, Id. ibid.
passes into the Body of the Church by the Water of Baptism, and by the Fire
of the Holy Ghost, he is made the Bread of the Eternal Body. After which he
adds, Let no Body then doubt but the Original Creatures may pass into the
Nature of the Body of our Lord; seeing he perceives Man by the Art of heavenly
Mercy, is made the Body of Jesus Christ. As they say, the honor of Caesarius
is no way to be faved, nor any good sense be given his Words; but in saying
that he intends to show, that as Man regenerated by Baptism, is not made the
Body of Christ, but Mystically and Morally, so also the Bread of the Sacrament
does not pass into the Nature of his Body, but Sacramentally and Virtually,
using also the Word Nature for Quality; In the same sense as St. Macarius used
it, Macar Hom. 44. Greg. Nyss. in Cant. Hom. 9. Id. Orat. 1. in Christ. Resur.
Id. de Virgin. c. ult.
when he said, That the truly Faithful Soul must be changed from this vile
Nature, unto a Divine Nature, to intimate a Divine Quality. Gregory of Nyss,
That we are changed into a spiritual Nature, that is to say, into a spiritual
Quality. And again, That the Humanity of Jesus Christ is passed into the Divine
Nature, to signify that it has been made to participate of the virtue of the
Divinity: And in fine, That we may pass from the Nature and Dignity of Men,
into the Nature and Dignity of Angels. There Is nothing more frequent than these
kind of Expressions, in all the Monuments of Antiquity. I will add unto all
these Considerations, that I could not find the Homily of Easter now in
question amongst many Homilies of Caesarius, In Mr. Colbets, And St. Victors.
which I have lately seen in two Libraries, which may make it be suspected that
it is of some Author much younger than Caesarius.

In the sixth place, the holy Fathers teach that Church Fasts are broken,
Tertul. de Orat. c. 14.
by participating of the Eucharist, as Tertullian teaches, Many do think
(says he) that on Station-days, (they stayed there till three a Clock without
eating) we should not attend Prayers and Sacrifices (that is to say, the
celebration of the Eucharist) because that in receiving the Lord's Body, the
Fast of the Station should be broke. I cannot conceive, says the Protestant,
that those who believed that this Body whereof they speak, and which is
received at the holy Table, was the true and natural Body of Jesus Christ,
could have this strange Fancy, that the Fast should be broken, in taking into
their Mouths, and Stomachs, the holy and incorruptible Body of our Lord and
Savior: And I cannot imagine those People could be so ignorant to believe it,
nor Tertullian so patient to suffer such an Indignity without sharply reproving
it, as it deserved; he was too vehement not to do it: and if one were much less
so than him, it would be very hard not to be concerned that People that made
Profession of Christian Religion, should so outragiously treat the glorified
Body of Jesus Christ. Id. ibid.
Let the Reader judge with an unbyassed Mind, if he please, and he must agree
with me, that the Latins act very well according to their Hypothesis, when they
say, that they believe, the true Body of Christ does not break the Fast. What
we say of these first Christians, will appear yet more plainly, if we consider
the Council given them by Tertullian in the same place; which is to receive the
Sacrament and keep it, to take it at Evening when the Station is ended; In
receiving, says he, the Body of the Lord, and keeping it, you will save both,
you will partake of the Sacrifice, and do the Duty of the Day. I conceive I
have discovered Marks of this Belief, in our France in the VIth Century, and to
the end those which read this Work, may the better judge if I am deceived, I Will
here insert the Passage at large, it is taken out of the Life of St. Melain
Bishop of Phemes, and is also found in the Supplement of the Councils of
France, where we have an Account of an Assembly of Bishops, held at Angers,
Anno 530. In supplem. Council. Gallic. p. 49, 50.
Almost at the same time (says the Author) the Man of God St. Milain, and the
Elect of God, Albin, and St. Victor, Launus, and St. Marsus, assembled in the
City of Angers, in the Basilisk of St. Mary Mother of God; St. Milain, by
common consent of the rest, celebrated Mass at the beginning of the Fast of
Lent, and having ended, before they went away, the blessed Priest gave them in
Charity the holy Eucharist with God's Grace, and his Benediction. But Marsus
preferring the Fast of the Day before his Charity, and neglecting the Eucharist
whereof he should have communicated, let fall the Portion he had received of
St. Milain into his Bosom. Being then permitted to return to their Church, and
having saluted each other, they by the Grace of God began their Journey; they
had s^^^^ce gone ten Miles, but St. Marsus felt the Eucharist was turned into a
Scrpent, which rouled about him, and as he found by the pain he suffered, that
he was severely punished for his Disobedience, and Neglect he had committed at
the Communion. He cast himself at the Feet of St. Milain, and told him what was
happened; the holy Bishop wept for him all Night, Watching and Praying, and
next Day gave him Absolution, and the Blessing, and presently after the Serpent
took again the Form of the Eucharist, and St. Marsus taking it, he communicated
with Joy, which he neglected to do to his Damage. It is plain that the
Eucharist, here mentioned, is nothing else but the Bread of the Eucharist,
which St. Cyril of Alexandria, commonly calls by that Name: In short, this
Eucharist was intended for the Communion, as appears by the whole Story.
Therefore St. Milain gave unto each of them a Portion; it also appears that
Marsus had received some Tincture, that the receiving the Sacrament broke the
Fast, and I find not but the other Bishops were of the same Mind. All that is
blamed in Marsus, is the having preferred the Fast of the Day before the
Communion, whereas he ought to have preferred the Communion before the Fast;
that is to say, that it was better to have communicated with the others, and
broke his Fast as they had done, than to deprive himself of the Sacrament to
keep the Fast of the Day; Theodoret. Hist. Relig. p. 791.
because the Sacrament is a Bond of Charity which is infinitely greater than
Fasting. Therefore the Anchorit Marcion, said to Avitus, who went to visit him
in his Solitude, and who made some scruple of breaking his fast to eat with
him, We know that Charity is more excellent than Fasting. But, in fine, it was
believed in our France in the VIth Century, as 'twas in Tertullian's time, that
the receiving the Eucharist broke the Fast; and it shall appear in the Course
of this History, that the Greeks believed so, in the XIth Century, and that
they still believe it at present as Father Cellot informs us. To conclude, if
any desire to know the Dioceses of these five French Bishops abovementioned, he
may understand St. Milain was Bishop of Rennes, Albin of Angers, Launus of
Constance in Normandy, Ap^d. Eus. b. Hist. l. 6. c. 49. Sermon. 35. de verb. Dom.
c. 5. Contr. Donat. post Collat. c. 6. Clem. Alexand. S^romat. l. 1. p. 271.
Cyril. Alex. in Joan. l. 4. c. 14.
Victor of Man's, and Marsus of Nantes.

In the seventh place, I observe, that the Fathers speak of the Eucharist, as
of a thing whereof but a little is received, a Bit, a Piece, a Portion: So the
Priest of Alexandria in Eusebius sent unto Seraphion, A little of the
Sacrament: So St. Austin speaks of receiving a little; and again, That Peter
and Judas received each of them a Morsel: So Clement of Alexandria said, That
each of the People took a little: And St. Cyril of Alexandria, That Jesus gave
Morsels of Bread unto his Disciples: And so in a number of other places, which
is not necessary here to mention in a thing not contested, and that is owned by
every Body. In fine, having endeavored with some labor to find if the ancient
Doctors of the Church have affirmed, as the Latins at this time do, that
several Miracles are done by the Sacrament, August. l. 3. de Trinit. c. 10.
I can find nothing of that Nature; on the contrary, they have informed me,
That these things might have been honored, or receive respect, as religious;
but not cause astonishment, as things strange, or miraculous.

CHAP. III.
Of the Use and Office of the Bread and Wine of the Sacrament.

HAving seen what was believed and said in this spacious and vast Country of
Ecclesiastical Antiquity, of the things received in the Sacrament; and having
examined the Reflections which the Doctors of that Empire have made upon the
Words of Institution of this Divine and August Sacrament; we are obliged to
enquire what they have taught of the Use, Office, and employ of these sacred
Symbols, I mean of the Bread and Wine. If we will search into their Records,
wherein the Laws and Maxims of this Kingdom may be found, we shall see that
those which have had the Government and Direction of it, have conceived that
the Eucharist is the Sacrament, the Sign, the Figure, the Type, the Antitype,
the Symbol, the Image, the Similitude, and the Resemblance of the Body and
Blood of Jesus Christ: It Is true, it is not enough to say so, the Reader must
moreover see the Testimonies where the holy Fathers say so, for it is their
Opinions are now in question, and not ours. Let us then take all these Titles
in Order, and show what the ancient Doctors of the Church have said unto each
of them, at least as far as may be necessary unto our purpose.

They say, in the first place, That it is a Sacrament; Hill. in Matthew. cap. 9.
Ibid. c. 30.
as when St. Hilary, Bishop of Poictiers, speaks Of receiving the Sacrament of
the Bread of Life, in Faith of the Resurrection, and that he says of Judas,
Ambros. de iis qui init. c. 9. Aug. Ep. 163. Id. l. 3. de Trinitat. c. 4. Id.
Sermon. ad Infant. Facund. l. 9. p. 404, 405. Isid. Hisp. d^ Offic. Eccles. l. 1.
c. 18.
that he was not worthy of the Communion of Eternal Sacraments. St. Ambrose
calls it, The Sacrament of the true Flesh of our Lord. St. Austin, The
Sacrament of his Body, and of his Blood: Again, he says, That it is a great
Sacrament: And again, These things (says he) are called Sacraments. Facundus
said the same, when he says, That the Sacrament of the Body and Blood of
Christ, is called his Body and Blood, and that Believers do receive the
Sacrament of his Body and Blood. St. Isidore of Sevil, in the VIIth Century,
says positively, That the Bread and Wine are made the Sacraments of the Divine
Body, being sanctified by the Holy Ghost. But being there is nothing more
frequent amongst the Latin Fathers than this manner of Speech, which continued
in the Latin Church until these late times; we shall not insist on gathering
more Testimonies, to prove, that the holy Fathers believed, that the Eucharist
was the Sacrament of the Body and Blood of Christ. It shall suffice to warn the
Reader, Aug. de Civit. D^i l. 10. c. 5. comr. advers. leg. l. 2. c. 9. and a^^i.
that St. Austin teaches us in sundry parts of his Works, that the word
Sacrament signifies a holy Sign; and that those which desire more proofs of
this Expression, may see what is said by the Author of the Commentaries,
attributed unto St. Jerome, on the 11th of the 1st Epist. to the Corinthians.
Charlemain in his 4th Book of Images, chap. 14. Christian Druthmar upon St.
Matthew. in the Library of the Fathers, Tome 16. p. 361.

The second Title we have set down, August. cont^. Adim. c. 12.
is that of Sign. St. Austin says, That our Lord made no difficulty to say,
This is my Body, when he gave the Sign of his Body.

The third is that of Figure, Tertul. contr. Marc. l. 4. c. 40.
according to which Tertullian said, That Jesus Christ made the Bread his Body,
in saying, This is my Body, (that is to say) the Figure of my Body; Id. l. 3.
c. 19.
and in the foregoing Book, he said, That our Lord gave unto the Bread the
Figure of his Body. St. Gaudentius Bishop of Bress, Gaud. tract. 2. in Exodus
Aug. in Psalm. 3.
said, That the Wine is offered in Figure of the Passion of our Lord, that is
to say, of his Blood. And St. Austin declares, that Jesus Christ in his first
Sacrament, recommended, and gave unto his Apostles the Figure of his Body and
Blood. It was also the Opinion of the Author of the Treatise of the Sacraments,
L. 4. de Sacram. ap^d Ambros.
falsely attributed unto St. Ambrose, when he calls the Oblation of the
Eucharist, The Figure of the Body and Blood of our Lord Jesus Christ. This
Passage also is alleged by Paschas Rathbert, ^ede in Luc. c. 22.
in his Book of the Body and Blood of our Lord. Venerable Bede, who died Anno
735, spoke the same Language, for in his Commentary upon the Gospel according
to St. Luke, he says, That instead of the Flesh and Blood of the Jews
Passover, Our Lord substituted the Sacrament of his Flesh and Blood in the
Figure of Bread and Wine: Id. in Psalm. 3.
And upon the 3d Psalm he repeats the Words of St. Austin, and says, That our
Lord in his Sacrament, gave unto his Disciples the Figure of his Body and
Blood. This Expression continued longer in the Latin Church, seeing Charlemain,
who lived until the Year 814, used it in one of his Letters unto Alcuin, De
Ration. Sep^^uzg. ad Alcuin.
wherein he treats of the Reason of the Septuagesima, Our Lord, says he,
Supping with his Disciples, broke Bread, and also gave them the Cup for the
Figure of his Body and Blood, and left them a great Sacrament for our Benefit.
Christian Druthmar will employ the same Word in the IXth Century.

The fourth is that of Type, E^^r. de nature. Dei non serut.
in this sense Ephrem the Syrian says, in the IVth Century, That our Lord
taking Bread into his Hands, broke it, and blessed it, for a Type of his
immaculate Body; and that he blessed the Cup, and gave it to his Disciples, for
a Type of his Blood. Cyril. Hi^ros. Mystag. 4.
St. Cyril of Jerusalem, In the Type of the Bread, is the Body given unto you,
and the Blood in the Type of Wine. St. Gregory of Nazianzen, Greg. Nazian.
Orat. 42. vol. 2. de Pasch.
We are made Partakers of the Passover, and nevertheless typically, although
this Passover is more manifest than the old one; for the legal Passover, I dare
affirm, was an obscure Type of another Type, (that is to say, of the
Eucharist.) And again, Id. Orat. 17. p. 273. Hieron. in Jerem. c. 31. Id. l 2.
contr. Jovin. Ibid. Theod Dialog. 3. Id. Dialog. 1.
he calls the Bread and Wine of the Sacrament, The Types of his Salvation. St.
Jerome in his Commentary upon Jeremiah, The Type of the Blood (of Jesus Christ)
is made with Wine. And again, Jesus Christ offered not Water, but Wine, for a
Type of his Blood. And again, The Mystery which our Lord expressed in Type of
his Passion. Theodoret speaking of the Holy Bread, calls it, The venerable and
saving Type of the Body of Jesus Christ. And in another place, he said, That
the Eucharist is the Type of the Passion of our Lord, and that the Holy Food is
the Type of his Body, and of his Blood.

The fifth is that of Antitype, Constable. Apost. l. 5. c. 13.
the Author of the Apostolical Constitutions says, That our Lord gave unto his
Disciples the Mysteries, Anti-types of his Body and precious Blood, Judas not
being there present. And again, He calls the Eucharist, Ibid. l. 6. c. 29.
Ibid. l. 7. c. 26.
the Antitype of the Royal Body of Jesus Christ. And again, he affirms, That
we celebrate the Anti-types of the Body and Blood of our Lord. St. Macarius,
Macar. Hom. 27.
There is offered in the Church Bread and Wine, the Antitype of his Flesh and
of his Blood. Eustatius Bishop of Antioch, Act. 6. Cenc. Nicaen. 2.
expounding these Words of the 9th Chapter of Proverbs, Eat of my Bread, and
drink the Wine which I have mingled: by the Bread and Wine (says he) he
means the Anti-types of the bodily Members of Jesus Christ. Basil. Liturg.
St. Basil in his Liturgy, We beseech thee, presenting the Anti-types of the
Body and Blood of thy Christ. St. Gregory of Nazianzen, Greg. Nazian. de obi^u
Gorgon. vel Orat. 11. Id. Orat. 1. Cyril. Hierosol Mystag. 5. Theod. Dial. 2.
Id. Dial. 3. extr.
his intimate Friend, to express both parts of the Eucharist, says, The
Anti-types of the precious Body and Blood. And in his Apologetick, he considers
the Sacrament as The Antitype of great Mysteries. St. Cyril of Jerusalem,
says, That we eat the Antitype of the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ.
Theodoret, The Divine Mysteries (says he) are the Anti-types of the true Body.
And elsewhere, He speaks of participating of the Anti-types of the Body. Now
the words Types, and Anti-types, are nothing else but the Form, the Expression,
and a Representation, and they signify almost the same as the word Figure does.

The sixth is that of Symbol, which signifies, a Sign, Signal or Mark, as
Grammarians say; so in the Apostolical Constitutions, Cons^^t. Apost l. 6. c.
23.
there is mention of a Sacrifice which is celebrated in memorial of the Death
of Jesus Christ, and which was instituted to be the Symbol of his Body and of
his Blood. Dionvs. Hier. Eccles. l. 9.
The Author of the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy, under the Name of Dennis the
Areopagite, declares, That Jesus Christ is signified, and that we partake of
him by the venerable Symbols. Ibid.
And again, he observes, That the Bishop that officiates washes his Hands
before the sacred Symbols, and that this washing is done before the most holy
Symbols, as in the Presence of Christ himself, Eusebius. demonst l. 1. c. 10.
who knows our most secret Thoughts. Eusebius says, we have received, or
learned to make the Memorial of this Sacrifice (of our Lord) upon the Table,
with the Symbols of his saving Body and Blood. Ib. l. 8. a Genesis
And in the same Treatise, he says, That Jesus Christ commanded his Apostles
to make use of Bread for a Symbol of his Body, and accordingly he calls the
Wine the Symbol of his Blood, Ibid.
and testifies, that our Lord himself gave unto his Disciples, the Symbols of
the Divine Economy, that is to say, Chrysostom. Hom. 83. in Matthew. Palled. in vita
Chrysostom.
of his Incarnation. St. Chrysostom: If Jesus Christ be not dead, of whom are
the consecrated things Symbols? Palladius in the Life of St. Chrysostom, often
uses this term, speaking of pouring out the Symbols, of communicating of the
Symbols of our Lord, Theod. 1 Cor. 11.
and of burning the Symbols of Mysteries. Theodoret, After the coming of our
Lord, we shall have no more need of the Symbols of his Body. Id. in Psalm. 109.
And in another Treatise, The Church offers the Symbols of his Body and Blood.
And in his Dialogues he often speaks thus, Id. Dial. 1.
Our Lord, says he, has made an exchange of these Names, and has given unto
his Body the Name of Symbol, and to the Symbol the name of his Body, (that is
to say, giving unto his Body the name of Bread, and the name of Bread unto his
Body) calling himself a Vine, and his Blood that which is the Symbol of it.
Ibid.
He says again, That our Lord honored the visible Symbols, with the Name of
his Body and Blood, that the Holy Food is the Symbol and Type of the Body and
Blood of our Lord. Id. Dialog. 2.
And in the following Dialogue he speaks of the Mystical Symbols, which after
their Sanctification do not change their first Nature. Maxim. in c. 3. Hier.
Eccles.
And Maximius Scholiast of the pretended Dennis the Areopagite, speaking of the
Bread and Wine of the Eucharist, said, These things are Symbols, and not the
Truth it self. Vict. An ioch. in c. 14. M^rc.
Victor of Antioch, in his Commentary upon St. Mark, calls the Bread of the
Eucharist, The Symbol of the Body of Jesus Christ.

The seventh is that of Image; but because Image, Similitude and Likeness,
signify the same thing, we will comprehend all three under the Name of Image.
Eusebius. them. l. 8 a Genes.
Eusebius Bishop of Cesarea says: That Jesus Christ commanded his Disciples to
make the Image of his Body. Trocop in Ge^es. c. 49. Gelaf. de duab. Christ. Not.
Procopius of Gaza upon Genesis: He gave, says he, unto his Disciples the
Image of his Body. Pope Gelasius said the same at the end of the fifth Century:
Certainly, says he, the Image or Similitude of the Body and Blood of Jesus
Christ is celebrated in the Mysteries, that shows us plainly, what we are to
believe touching Jesus Christ our Lord, even what we profess, what we
celebrate, and what we receive in his Image. The Author of the Dialogues
against the Marcionites in the Works of Origin keeps the same language, when he
calls the Bread and the Cup, the Images of his Flesh and Blood. Orig. Dial. 3.
contra Marc.
And 338 Bishops assembled at Constantinople Anno 754, say, that Jesus Christ
has commanded us to offer the Image of his Body; and all along in their
Discourse, which is very large, they constantly and diverse times call the Bread
of the Eucharist, the Image of the Body of our Lord.

We may add unto these Testimonies of the ancient Doctors of the Church, those
which say, that the Body and Blood of our Lord are signified, shown,
represented in the Eucharist, as having clearly the same force and meaning as
the former; as when Tertullian says of the Bread of the Sacrament, Tert. l. 1.
c. 14.
that it is a Bread by which Jesus Christ represents his Body. St. Cyprian,
Cypr. ep. 63.
that the Blood of Jesus Christ is exhibited by the Wine: the which is repeated
by the Council of Braga in the second Canon, Anno 675. Dion. Areop. Hier. Eccl.
^. 3. Theoph. ep. Pasch. Ambros. de iis qui init. c. 9. Apud Bed. in 1 Cor. 11.
The pretended Denis the Areopagite, that by the Symbols Jesus Christ is
signified. Theophilus Bishop of Alexandria, that by the Bread of our Lord, his
Body is represented unto us. St. Ambrose, that before the Words of divine
Benediction, another thing is named, after Consecration the Body of Jesus
Christ is signified. St. Austin, that the Infant is not frustrated of the
participation of this Sacrament (he means that of the Eucharist) when he finds
what the Sacrament does signify. The Commentary upon St. Paul's Epistles under
the Name of St. Ambrose, that in eating and drinking (in the holy Communion) we
signify the Flesh and Blood. In fine, the true St. Jerome imitating
Tertullian's Expression, Hieron. in Mat. c. 26.
that Jesus Christ took Bread and Wine, that he might also represent (that is
as Melchisedek had done before) the truth of his Body and of his Blood.

But the more easily to penetrate into the meaning of these Expressions, and
the better to understand their Force, we must relate two things which we have
observed in the Writings of the holy Fathers. First when they speak of the
Eucharist, as of a Sign, a Symbol, a Figure, an Image; It is in opposition unto
the Reality, which they consider as absent. In this sense they say, Maxim.
(...) Dionvs. Areop. p. 68. and 75. and 6^
that these things are Symbols, and not the Truth, That the sacred Oblations,
to wit (the Bread and the Cup) are Signs of Things from above, which are more
certain; That the things in the Old Testament were the Shadow; that those of
the New are the Image; but that the Substance shall be in the World to come:
That the Shadow was under the Law, the Image under the Gospel, and the Truth in
Heaven. And I believe it was in this sense that the old Latin Liturgies said,
Lord, Ambros. l. 1. de Offic. c. 48. Vetus Liturgia apud Bettram.
in receiving the Earnest of Life Everlasting, we humbly beseech thee that we
may receive by a manifest Participation what we now have in a Sacramental
Image. And sometimes after, That thy Sacraments, O Lord, may accomplish in us
what they contain, to the end we may receive in reality, what we now celebrate
in show and appearance.

The second thing I have observed is, that the Holy Fathers unanimously avow
that the Image and Figure cannot be the Thing itself whereof they be the Image
and Figure: As when Tertullian says, Tert contra Marc. l. 1. c 9.
That the Image will not be entirely equal unto the Substance; for (says he)
it is one thing to be according to Truth, and another thing to be the Truth it
self. And elsewhere, Id. contra Prax. c. 26. Athan. contra Hipocr. Melet.
Contr. Marcel. l. 1. c. 4. Hilar. de Syn.
that which is of a Thing, is not the Thing it self whereof it is. And St.
Athanasius, that which is like unto a Thing, is not the Thing it self whereunto
it is like. Marcellus of Ancyras, if it be not Eusebius himself who disputes
against him: Never was the Image of a Thing, and the Thing whereof it is an
Image, one and the same. And St. Hilary Bishop of Poictiers, No Body is the
Image of himself. St. Ambrose Bishop of Milan observed almost the same
language, when he said, Ambr. de fide l. 1. c. 4. Id. in Psalm. 118. sermon. 12.
Ibid. sermon. 13.
No Body can be his own Image. And elsewhere he opposes the Image and the Sign
unto the Substance: It is the Image, says he, and not the Truth. And again;
These are Signs, and not the Substance. Gregory of Nazianzen in his Treatise of
Faith against the Arrians, whereof we have only Ruffin's Translation, unjustly
attributed to St. Ambrose, Greg. Nazian. de fid. vel orat. 49. p. 729. Id. orat
13. and 37. Id. orat. 36.
as appears by St. Austin's 111th Letter, The Resemblance, says he, is one
Thing, and the Truth another; for Man was also made after the Image and
Likeness of God, yet he is not God. Accordingly he declares elsewhere, that the
Image never attains to the Original, and that the nature of an Image consists
in the representing of the Arch-type. Gregory of Nyss, Brother unto the great
St. Basil, spoke the same: Greg. N^ss. de anim. and refur. Gaudent. tr. 2. in
Exodus Aug. de Trin. l. 7. c. 1. Theod in Dan. l. 2. c. 2. Claud. de stat. anim.
l. 1. c. 5.
The Image, says he, would be no more an Image, if it were quite the same with
that whereof it is an Image. It is in the same sense St. Gaudentius said, That
the Figure is not the Verity, but the resemblance of the Verity. And St. Austin
in his Treatise of the Trinity: What can be more absurd than to say, that an
Image is the Image of it self? And Theodoret in his Commentaries upon the
Prophet Daniel: The Image has the Features and not the Things themselves.
Cla^dian Mammert Priest of Vienna: One Thing, says he, is the Truth, and
another Thing the Image of the Truth. And we have already heard Maximius.
Scholar of the pretended Denis the Areopagite saying, These things are Symbols,
Maxim. in c. 3. Hieros. Eccles
but they are not the Substance. There be some, which treating of the Eucharist
with regard to the Body of Jesus Christ, have not forborne these kind of
Expresons, as the Deacon Epiphanius in the second Council of Nice: If, says
he, it be the Image of the Body, Synod. Nic. 2. Act. 6. Niceph. de cherub. c.
6. t. 4. Bibl. Patr.
it cannot be the divine Body it self. And Nicephorus Patriarch of
Constantinople: How is it that one and the same Thing is called the Body, and
the Image of Jesus Christ; for that which is the Image of any one, cannot be
his Body; and that which is the Body, cannot be the Image: because every Image
is a thing different from that whereof it is an Image? And we shall see in due
Time that it was in the ninth Century the Doctrine taught by Ratran, Bertram.
de corp. and sang. Dom.
That the Earnest and Image is Earnest and Image of something, etc. that is,
that they refer not unto themselves, but unto another.

But what? may some say, is that all you have observed in traveling in the
Dominions of Ecclesiastical Antiquity? The Registers of that Kingdom do they
contain no other Laws? and have you found no other Maxims in its Records? Is
it possible that the wise and prudent Counselors, who in the several Ages have
had the Government and Conduct of it, have agreed to speak so meanly of the
Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, and considered this great and sublime Mystery
but as the Image, the Figure, the Type, the Symbol of the Body and Blood of our
Lord? as if a Believer under the Gospel were to feed his Soul only with empty
and vain Figures, with Images without efficacy, and with Sacraments without any
virtue? Reader, have but a little patience, and you shall see that the holy
Fathers have not abandoned their Belief unto Scorn or Calumny, and that they
very prudently prevented the Reproaches which would have been made against
them. What likelihood is there, that Persons of so much Light and Knowledge as
the ancient Doctors of the Church were, should speak meanly of the venerable
Mystery of the holy Sacrament? they who so valued, and commended, and highly
praised the holy Scriptures, which St. Paul calls, the Power of God unto
Salvation unto those which believe; Romans ^.16.
and who have considered it as the powerful and efficacious Instrument of the
Conversion and Salvation of Men? which made St. Justin Martyr, writing against
Tryphon the Jew, to say: Just. Martyr contra Tryph.
We have not believed vain Fables and Words which cannot profit, but which are
full of the Spirit of God, and grow into Grace: for (as he observed a little
before) the Words of our Savior have in them something which command a Respect
and Fear, and they are able to shame those which turn from the right way;
whereas those which exercise themselves therein find Comfort and Peace. What
appearance is there that these same Fathers, which have given unto Baptism one
of the Sacraments of the New Testament, which the Apostle calls, the Washing of
Regeneration, Tit. 3. Gal. 3.
and wherein he assures that we put on Jesus Christ, such great, high and
magnificent Commendations and Encomiums, calling it the Remedy which drives
away all Evils; the Death of Sin; the Chariot which carries to Heaven; the
Deluge of Sin; the Scattering of Darkness; the Key of the Kingdom of Heaven;
the Enlargement from Slavery; the Breaking of Bonds; the putting on of
Incorruption; Grace; Salvation; Life; the Remedy; the Antidote; that which
leads to Immortality; the Water of Life; the Waters which can extinguish the
Fire to come, and which bring Salvation; the best and most excellent of the
Gifts of God; and several other Elogies of this Nature: I say what likelihood
is there that they should have had any meaner, lower or less honorable
thoughts of the holy Sacrament? and that after the Apostle's Declaration, 1
Cor. 10.
That the Bread which we break, and the Cup which we bless, are the Communion
of the Body and Blood of Christ; that they should look only upon this Sacrament
as an empty and bare Sign without any effect or virtue, without raising their
Contemplations any higher? Alas! God forbid we should ever do them the
Injustice as to think so. In short, if they taught that the Bread and Wine in
the Sacrament are Images and Figures, they judged them not to be empty Figures,
which had no other use nor virtue, but to set before our Eyes some form that
may be like the Original whereof they are Figures, like the Images and Pictures
which are to be seen in Painters and Carvers Shops; they have firmly believed
that they are Signs instituted by God, and consequently accompanied with his
Grace and Benediction, which makes them efficacious unto those which receive
them worthily, and that with holy dispositions draw near unto the Mystical
Table. And if I mistake not, this is what St. Epiphanius means, when speaking
of this Sacrament he says, Epiph. in pan. exposit. fid.
That the Bread is the Food or Nourishment which we there receive, but that the
virtue which is in it, quickens us. As if he should say, that this quickening
does not proceed from the proper Substance of Bread, but from the virtue and
enlivening efficacy, wherewith our Lord, according to his Promise does
accompany the lawful use of his Sacrament. What he adds of Baptism, does
sufficiently inform us of his meaning, when he says, That it is not the Water
alone which cleanses us, but that by the Water it perfects our Salvation, by
the Faith, and Energy, by Hope, and the perfection of the Mysteries, and the
Invocation of Sanctification. St. Gregory of Nysse, if I mistake not, explains
himself fuller, when he says of the Bread and Wine of the Sacrament, Greg.
Nyss. de B. pt. Christ.
That being but common Things, and of little worth before Consecration; both
the one and the other do operate excellently after Sanctification, which is or
comes from the Spirit. It is in the same sense that St. Cyril of Alexandria
cited by Victor of Antioch, Victor MS. in c. 14. Marc.
said, That God having pity of our Infirmities, bestows or sends upon the
Things presented or offered (that is to say, the Bread and Wine) an enlivening
virtue, and does change them into the efficacy of his Flesh. It is this same
power which St. Cyril in his Epistle to Caelosyrius calls, the Virtue, and
Benediction, Cyril. Alex. Ep. ad Cae^^^. t. 6.
and the quickening Grace. It is also the Doctrine of Theophylact, as will
appear when we examine the Belief of his Age, which being beyond the ninth
Century, permits us not here to insert his Testimony; but so it is, that this
virtue and efficacy, whereof we speak, Chrysostom. de Sacerd. l. 3. c. 4. t. 4.
Id. de Coem. Appel. and de resurrect. Christ. t. 5. Theod. Dial. 1. Gelas. de
duab. not.
is nothing else but the Grace mentioned by St. Chrysostom, when he represents
unto us the Priest praying, that the Blessing might descend upon the Sacrifice,
that is to say, upon the Sacrament. And elsewhere he says, that it is the holy
Ghost that gives this Grace, and that without it the Mystical Body and Blood
are not made. And Theodoret; a great Admirer of St. Chrysostom, witnesses,
that our Savior added Grace unto the Nature of the Bread and Wine. It is also
for the same reason that Pope Gelasius says, That the Sacraments of the Body
and Blood of Jesus Christ, are Things divine, and that by them we are made
Partakers of the Divine Nature. I^d. Hispal. orig. 1.6.
And St. Isidore Archbishop of Sevil, That th^s divine Virtue operates
inwardly the Benefit of the Sacraments, that is to say, the Salvation which God
communicates unto us by the Ministry of the Sacraments. Therefore it is that
Raban Archbishop of Mayans in the ninth Century will have it called, the
virtue of the Sacrament, and the Nourishment of our Souls. But in fine, it is
unto this efficacy and virtue that is to be attributed all the great Praises
which the holy Fathers give unto the Sacrament, in the same manner as is
imputed unto the power which our Savior gives unto the use of Baptism, whereof
the same Fathers have delighted themselves in honoring this Sacrament of our
new Birth; their design having been to raise and advance the Dignity of these
Mysteries, and the admirable effects they produce by the Grace, Benediction,
and Virtue which God bestows on them for the Salvation of Men. And it is in
relation to this Efficacy and Virtue whereof we have treated, that the Fathers
call the Eucharist, The Body and Blood of Jesus Christ, saying, that the Bread
and Wine pass into his Body and Blood; that they change, and are transelemented
into his Body and Blood. They also use other expressions, which in effect
amount to the same, all which the Latins expound to their advantage, and which
they make the chief ground of their Belief; But because these last Expressions
at first sight seem inconsistent with what they said unto us before, that the
Eucharist is true Bread and real Wine, Bread which is broken, that nourishes
the Body, which is converted into our Substance, Bread which is inamate, that
is consumed in the celebration of the Sacrament, whose Substance remains, and
that passes as to its material part, by the sordid way of our ordinary and
common Food; that this Bread and this Wine are the Signs, the Symbols, the
Types, the Antitypes, the Sacraments, the Figures, the Images, the
Resemblances, and the Representations of the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ;
not vain Figures, and empty and void Signs without any effect and virtue; but
Signs and Sacraments replenished (as may be said) with all the Virtue, and all
the Efficacy of the Body broken, and the Blood of our Lord poured out; who
having instituted them to be the Instruments and Organs of our Salvation, does
accompany their lawful use with his Blessing and Grace, to bestow upon us the
Merits of the enlivening Sacrifice of his Death, which Merit ought never to be
separated from his Body, seeing it was by the sufferings of his broken Body,
and his Blood poured out, that he merited for us this quickening and saving
Virtue: For this Reason, I say, it will be very necessary to clear up this
Difficulty, and to remove this seeming Contradiction; I say seeming, for I make
no question but the Fathers themselves will sufficiently inform us of their
Intention, and that we shall find in their Works, Lights, by which we shall
safely conduct the Reader to the clear and distinct knowledge of the belief of
the ancient Church upon this Article of our Salvation. Those who are any thing
verst in reading their Works, doubtless do observe that when they say, the
Sacrament is Bread and Wine, they never intimate that it is a figurative,
improper, and equivocal Expression, and that it must not be taken according to
the Letter, neither do they say that the Sacrament is called Bread and Wine,
although it is not so after Consecration, because it was so in effect, and still
retains the Accidents and Likeness: For my part, I ingeniously confess, that I
have never found such Cautions, or Advertisements in their Works. Nevertheless,
Men having much difficulty to believe those things which resist the Testimony
of their Senses and the light of Reason, and the Holy Fathers affirming
frequently that the Eucharist is true Bread and real Wine; if, say the
Protestants, they believed it was not Bread nor Wine, though they called it so,
but the very Body and Blood of Christ, they should have been so kind, nay
'twould have been their Duty to have informed their Readers and Hearers, that
they might avoid this Stone of Stumbling, and Rock of Offense; see here
already, say they, a very considerable Information; and which will be more, if
it be considered, that when on the other Hand they say, that the Eucharist is
the Body and Blood of Christ, etc. They fail not to make certain Observations
which suffer us not to be ignorant after what manner they understand it to be
so: Aug. Sermon 53. de verb. Dom.
For in the first place, they make this Observation, Almost all (says St.
Austin) call the Sacrament the Body of Christ. And again, Id. l. 3. de Tri^it.
c. 4.
We call nothing the Body and Blood of Christ, but that which being taken from
the Fruits of the Earth, and consecrated by mystical Prayer, is received by us
for the Salvation of our Souls. Isid. H^sual. Orig. 6. c. 19.
And St. Isidore of Sevil, By the command of Jesus Christ himself we call his
Body and Blood, that which being taken out of the Fruits of the Earth, is
sanctified and made a Sacrament. We may also allege upon this Subject, those
amongst them who have declared in the first Chapter of this second Part, that
Jesus Christ in instituting his Eucharist called the Bread and Wine his Body
and his Blood, and those who in the second affirmed, that the Sacrament was
Bread and Wine; but to avoid repeating the same Testimonies, we remit the
Reader unto those two Chapters, where he may consult those two Observations;
whilst we shall only say that this Observation being so express and positive,
gives very much Light and Strength unto the silence we hinted at, although it
appears plain enough to be understood by several; but yet farther, they give us
notice in the second place, that the Sacrament is honored with the Name of the
Body of Jesus Christ: The Bread, says St. Chrysostom, Chrysostom. ep. ad Caes^r.
Theod. Dial. 1.
is esteemed worthy to he called the Body of cur Lord. And Theodoret in one of
his Dialogues, He that called Wheat, and Bread, that which is his Body by
Nature, has honored the visible Symhols with the Name of his Body and of his
Blood. Having a long while meditated (says the Protestant) upon these sorts of
Testimonies of the Holy Fathers, I have been forced to conclude, that because
one thing which is honored with the Name of another, cannot be truly that same
by whose Name it is honored; or that these Holy Doctors which affirm, That the
Bread of the Sacrament is honored with the Name of the Body of Jesus Christ,
knew not how to reason, which cannot be said without slandring them; or that
they believed not that this Bread was really the Body of Jesus Christ. He adds,
that he does not examine what they should have said, but what they did say, and
he infers, that none can dispense themselves from approving what is contained
in the second Branch of his Dilemma. For my part, I leave it to others to judge
the Inductions which are made from the Passages of these Holy Doctors, because
it is properly the Interest of Roman Catholics or Protestants, whose Arguments
I only allege. But this is not all which the Holy Fathers say for the clearing
up of their Intentions. They tell us for a third Advertisement, that if the
Sacrament be the Body of Jesus Christ, it is but after a manner, and in some
sort. So St. Austin does declare, Aug. Ep 23 ad. Bonif. Id. in Psalm. 33, Conc.
2.
The Sacrament (says he) of the Body of Jesus Christ, is the Body of Jesus
Christ after a manner; And elsewhere, Jesus Christ accommodated himself after a
certain sort, when he said, This is my Body. I have not yet observed that these
kinds of Corrections and Restrictions were used when things were spoken of,
which were truly what they were called; but only when the Discourse was of
those which were only so improperly, and by reason of certain relations which
they have unto the Subjects whose Names they bear, and in whose consideration
there is no scruple made to say, that they are the Subjects themselves, not
really in the strictness of the Expression, but after a sort; Quintil. inst.
Orat. l. 8.3. p. 404.
so the most excellent Orators, whom we may term the Masters of the Science,
put this Term, after some sort, for one of the Tempers which may be used for
modifying of Metaphors, and figurative Expressions, which may be too bold. But
let us continue our design, and hear the famous Theodoret, who will furnish us
with such pregnant and clear Lights, that we shall have no difficulty to
comprehend in what sense the Holy Fathers called the Bread and Wine of the
Sacrament, Theod. dial. 1.
the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ; see here how he speaks, The Lord (says
he) made a change of Names, giving unto his Body the Name of the Symbol, and
unto the Symbol the Name of his Body; which he said upon the occasion that our
Savior had called his Body Bread, in the 6th Chapter of St. John, and the
Bread his Body in the Institution of the Sacrament: So that his design is to
show that the Sacrament is the Body of Christ, as the Body of Christ is Bread,
seeing he puts no difference in this exchange of Names, and that he observes
that the Name of the Body of Jesus Christ belongs no more to the Sacrament,
than that of Bread belongs to the Body of Jesus Christ. Tertullian, if I
mistake not, had an opinion much like this, long before Theodoret, when he
said, Tertul. con^r. Marc. l. 3. c. 19. Chrysostom. i^ c. 5. Galat.
That Jesus Christ called the Bread his Body, to interpret the ancient Prophecy
of Jeremiah, which had called the Bread his Body. St. Chrysostom will not a
little contribute to the clearing of what we examine, for explaining these
Words of the 5th to the Galatians, The Flesh lusts against the Spirit, and
the Spirit against the Flesh; He observes that this Word Flesh has diverse
improper and figurative Significations, and amongst these sundry
significations, he puts this, that sometimes it is taken for the Mysteries, or
for the Sacraments; The Scriptures (says he) is wont to call the Mysteries by
the Name of Flesh, and the whole Church, saying, that it is the Body of Jesus
Christ; but nothing can be seen plainer, nor more intelligible than these Words
of Facundus, Facund. l. 9. c. ult.
We call the Sacrament of the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ, which is in the
Bread and consecrated Cup, his Body and Blood, not that the Bread is truly his
Body, nor the Cup his Blood.

Hitherto these Holy Fathers have not ill informed us of the Nature of this
manner of Speech, that the Eucharist is the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ, but
nevertheless they intend not to rest there, they will moreover inform us
wherefore it is so used in the Church. They tell us then, in the first place,
that the Bread and Wine is called the Body and Blood of our Lord, by reason of
their resemblance: It is the Lesson St. Austin teaches us in one of his
Letters, Aug. Ep. 23. ad Bonif.
If the Sacraments (says he) had not some resemblance unto the things whereof
they be Sacraments, they would be no Sacraments; and it is because of this
likeness, that they often take the Names of the things themselves; as then the
Sacrament of the Body of Jesus Christ, and the Sacrament of his Blood, are
after some sort, his Body and Blood, so the Sacrament of Faith is Faith. He
means, that the Eucharist should be the Body and Blood of Christ, by reason of
the resemblance which there is betwixt them, as the Sacrament of Faith (that is
to say Baptism) is called Faith; and as the Fridays before Easter are called
the Passion of our Lord; and the representation of his Death, which is made in
the celebration of the Sacrament, his Death it self: He instanced these two
Examples of this kind of Speech in what preceded that which has been cited. I
will not here stand to show that the Fathers ground this resemblance, some in
the composition of Bread and Wine, and others in their Effects, because we have
done it in the first Chapter of the first part. Secondly, they say, that they
are so called, because They are the Sacraments, the Signs, and the Figures,
which do contain the Mystery; I find it was formerly the reason of the Learned
Tertullian, Tertul. contr. Marc. l. 3. c. 19.
God (says he) has called the Bread his Body, that you might know that he
whom the Prophet had anciently represented by the Bread, has now given unto
Bread the Figure of his Body. And I cannot see that any other meaning can be
given unto these Words of St. Austin, Our Savior made no difficulty to say,
this is my Body, August. contr. Adim. c. 12.
when he gave the Figure of his Body: It is necessary to observe, that this
Holy Doctor having alleged the Words of Jesus Christ, This is my Body, at the
end of the Chapter he cites these Words of the Apostle, The Rock was Christ; to
show that what is said in the Old Testament, that the Blood is the Life of
Beasts, ought to be understood significatively, to signify that it is the Sign;
as the Bread is called the Body of Christ, because it is the Figure, and the
Rock Christ, because it was the Symbol of Christ. The same St. Austin speaks
thus elsewhere, How is the Bread his Body, and the Cup, Id. ad Infant. apud
Fulgent. and Bed.
or that which is in the Cup, his Blood? Brethren, these things are called
Sacraments, because one thing is seen, and another thing is understood; that
which is seen is of a bodily Substance, that which is understood has a
spiritual Fruit. I judge, it was also the sense of Theodoret when he wrote,
Theod. dial. 1.
that our Lord, who called his natural Body Wheat and Bread, and who also
called himself a Vine, has also called the visible Symbols, by the Name of his
Body and Blood, not by changing their Nature, but adding Grace unto their
Nature. Fac. l. 9. ^ ult.
It is in the same sense Facundus said, The Bread is not really his Body, nor
the Cup his Blood, but they be so called, because they contain the Mystery, and
for this reason our Lord called them his Body and Blood. This is the
Explication which St. Ireneus gives unto the Names of Body and Blood, wherewith
Jesus Christ honored the Bread and Wine of the Sacrament, Iren. l. 5 adver.
haeres. c. 4.
It is (says he) the Eucharist of the Body and Blood. And I know not, but St.
Eloy Bishop of Noyon, Eligii vit. l. 2. c. 15. t. 5. Spicileg.
borrowed this kind of Expression from St. Iraeneus, for he makes use of it in
the VIIth Century. Let him (says he) that is sick trust in the sole Mercy of
God; and let him receive with Faith and Devotion the Sacrament of the Body and
Blood of Jesus Christ. Orig. in Matthew. c. 15. Chrysostom. t. 5. Homil. 33.
It is also in this sense that Origin calls the Bread, the symbolical and
typical Body; Also St. Chrysostom, the mystical Body and Blood. Eusebius Bishop
of Caesaria does positively make a difference betwixt the Mystical Body of our
Lord, be it what it will, and his true Body; when going to explain what Jesus
Christ says, in the 6th Chapter of St. John, ^useb. de Eccles. Theol. l. 3. c.
12. Hi^ron. in Ezech. c. 41. Bed. in c. 14. Mar. and 2^. Luc.
of the eating his Flesh and Blood; he observes, That he spoke not of the Flesh
which he had taken, but of his Mystical Body and Blood. St. Jerome calls it, the
Mystery of the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ. And Venerable Bede thus explains
himself, The Bread and Wine do Mystically relate unto the Body and Blood of
Jesus Christ. In the third place, they give us for a Reason of this
Denomination, that the Sacrament is a memorial of Jesus Christ, and of his
Death; but for this third Reason, we refer the Reader unto what we have said in
the first Chapter of this second Part; where we have examined the Reflection
which the Holy Fathers have made upon these Words of the Institution, Do this
in remembrance of me. We must then pass unto their fourth Reason, which
consists, as they tell us, in that the Bread and Wine are in the place and
stead of the Body and Blood of Christ: It is very likely Tertullian thought so,
when he said, The Body of Jesus Christ is reputed to be in the Bread, Tertul.
de Orat. c. 6.
This is my Body, Corpus ejus in pane c^nsetur, hot est corpus meum. Mr. Rigaut
is not far from this Opinion, when he makes this Observation upon the Words of
Tertullian, It appears that they may be thus explained: by the Sacrament of
Bread, he recommends his Body, as St. Austin, lib. 1. quaest. Evang. 43. has
said, by the Sacrament of Wine he recommends his Blood; But whatever Mr. Aug.
in Joan. Tract. 45.
Rigaut's Explication may be, St. Austin speaks, as I think, cleanly enough in
one of his Treatises upon St. John, where he makes this difference, Id. de
Civit. Dei l. 18. c. 45.
betwixt the ancient People which lived under the Law, and those now, who live
under the Gospel; See how the Faith continuing the same Faith, the Signs have
been changed; the Rock was Christ; unto us, what is put upon God's Table is
Jesus Christ. He also elsewhere establishes this Maxim, That all those things
which do signify, seem in some sort to hold the place of the things signified;
as when the Apostle says, that the Rock was Christ, because, without doubt, it
signified Jesus Christ. It is in the same sense St. Cyril. Hierosol Mystag. 4.
Cyril of Jerusalem said, Let us receive these things with full assurance, as
the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ, for in the Type of Bread, the Body is given
unto you, and the Blood in the Type of Wine. Bullinger writing against
Casaubon, alleges a Greek Text out of a Passage of Victor of Antioch, taken
out of his Commentary upon St. Mark, wherein we find the same Doctrine, Victor.
Antio. in Marc.
Seeing our Savior has said, This is my Body, This is my Blood, those which
offer or present the Bread, must esteem, after Prayer and Consecration, that
it is the Body of Christ, and participate of it, and that also the Cup is
instead of his Blood. But I see nothing more positive and formal hereupon, than
what is said by Proclus Bishop of Constantinople, in one of his Orations,
Proclus Orat. 17.
where he exhorts his Hearers to imitate the Piety and Devotion of the wise
Men, which went to worship the Child Jesus in the Manger at Bethlehem; for
after having represented unto them, that instead of Bethlehem they had the
Church, instead of a Stable the House of God, and instead of a Manger the Altar
or Communion Table; he adds, instead of the Child, we embrace the Bread which
was blessed by the Infant. And it shall appear in its place, that Amalarius was
very near of this Opinion, when he taught, That the Sacrament is that which is
sacrificed instead of Jesus Christ. But because the Fathers, which say, That
the Bread and Wine are the Body of Jesus Christ, say also, that they pass and
are changed into the Body and Blood, they have taken care to explain unto us
these latter Expressions, as they also have fully done the former; for they
tell us that when they say, That when the Bread and Wine pass into the Body and
Blood of Christ, they mean that they pass into the Sacrament of his Body and
Blood. This is the Explication which St. Isidore Archbishop of Sevil gives us
in these Words, Isid. Hispal. de offic. Eccles. l. 1. c. 18.
The Bread which we break, is the Body of Jesus Christ, who says, I am the
true Vine; but the Bread because it strengthen^ the Body, is for this Reason
called the Body of Jesus Christ, and the Wine because it increases Blood in
the Body, for that cause refers unto the Blood of Jesus Christ, now these two
things are visible, yet nevertheless being sanctified by the Holy Ghost, they
pass into the Sacrament of the divine Body. It was also the Opinion of Bid,
Bed. Hom. de^ Sant. in Epiphan.
Jesus Christ (says he) daily washes us in his Blood, when we renew at the
Altar the remembrance of his holy Passion, when the Creatures of Bread and Wine
pass into the Sacrament of his Flesh and Blood, by the ineffable Sanctification
of the Holy Ghost. Raban, Bishop of Mayans, was of his mind, but we may not
speak of him now; And when these same Fathers say, That the Bread and Wine are
changed and converted into the Body and Blood of our Lord, they also tell us,
that it is into the Virtue and Efficacy of his Body. It is in this sense that
Theodotus said, Apud Clem. Alex. p. 800. Vict. in Marc. 14. Manus.
That the Bread is changed into a spiritual Virtue. St. Cyril of Alexandria,
cited by Victor of Antioch, speaks yet plainer, God (says he) taking pity of
our Infirmities, communicates into the things offered, an enlivening Virtue,
and changes them into the Efficacy of his Flesh; whereunto amounts, what has
been already said by Theodoret, Theod. Dial. 1.
That Jesus Christ has honored the Symbols with the Name of his Body and
Blood, not in changing their Nature, but in adding his Grace unto their Nature:
It is for that Reason he adds, Ibid.
That the Lord made an exchange of Names, giving unto his Body the Name of
Bread, and unto the Bread the Name of his Body, to the end, (says he) that
those which participate of the Divine Mysteries, should not stop at things
which are seen, but that by the change of Names, they should believe the change
which is made by his Grace. It is just what Ephraim, Apud Phot. God. 229.
Patriarch of Antioch, intended by these Words, The Sacrament does not change
the outward Form, but it remains inseparable from the hidden Grace, as it is in
Baptism. Ammon. cat. in Joan. 3.5.
For as Ammenius says, The material Water is changed into a divine Virtue. I
think no other sense can be given unto these words of the 338 Bishop, assembled
in the Council at Constantinople, Anno 754, In Conc. Nicaen. 2. Act. 6.
against Images, As the natural Body of Jesus Christ is Holy because it was
Deified; so also this here, which is his Body by Institution, (he speaks of the
Substance of Bread) and which is his Image, is Holy, as being made Divine by an
Institution of Grace. But we will retrench, having voluntarily prescribed our
selves this Law to avoid Confusion; therefore it shall suffice to observe, That
from all these Considerations of the Holy Fathers which we have alleged, there
results two Doctrines from their Writings, both which have been their
Foundation for the Virtue and Efficacy which they attribute unto the Sacsament;
the first is, that they regard it as a Sacrament, which not only barely
signifies, but which also exhibits, and communicates unto the believing Soul
the thing which it signifies, I mean, the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ: This
is it which made St. Chrysostom say, explaining these Words, Chrysostom. Hom. ^4.
in 1 ad Cor.
The Bread which we break is the Communion of the Body of Christ, wherefore did
he not say, that it is the Participation? because he would give something more
to be understood, and show a great Union. For we not only communicate in that
whereof we receive and take, but also in that we are united; for as this Body
is united unto Jesus Christ, so are we also united unto him by this Bread. This
was also the Judgment of St. Macarius, when he said, Macar. Hom. 27. Dionys. c.
3. Hier. Eceles.
That in participating of this visible Bread, the Flesh of Christ is
spiritually eaten. And also of the Author of the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy, who
calls the Bread and Wine the venerable Symbols whereby Jesus Christ is
represented, and whereby we enjoy him. And of Victor of Antioch, Vict. Antioch.
in Marc. c. 14.
By the Symbol of Bread (says he) we are made to participate of the Body of
Christ, and by the Cup we partake of his Blood. St. Fulgentius had no other
meaning when he thus read the words of St. Paul, Fulg. de Baptis. Aethiop
the Breads which we break are they not the participation of the Body of the
Lord. And in another place, which we find in the Fragments of the ten Books he
wrote against Fabian the Arrian, he declares himself so fully, that nothing can
be said more expressly unto the Subject in hand, The participation it self
(says he) of the Body and Blood of our Lord, Id. ex l. 8. Fragm. 28.
when we eat his Bread and drink his Cup, intimates this unto us, to wit, that
we should dye to the World; from hence it is they oppose the Communion of the
Body and Blood of our Lord, by means of the Bread and Wine of the Eucharist,
unto the participation of Devils, by the eating of Meats consecrated unto
Idols. The Author of the Commentaries of St. Paul's Epistles in St. Jerome's
Works, interpreting these Words, The Bread which we break, etc. makes this
Observation; Apud Hieron. in c. 10.1 Cor.
In like manner it appears that the Idolatrous Bread is the participation of
Devils; and upon these, you cannot drink the Cup of the Lord, and the Cup of
Devils, etc. You cannot (says he) be partakers of God and of Devils. Theodoret
said something of this kind upon these Words, Theod in c. 10.1 Cor. t. 3.
You cannot be partakers of the Lord's Table, etc. How (says he) can it be,
that we should communicate of the Lord by his precious Body and Blood, and that
we should also communicate of Devils in eating what has been offered unto
Idols? It was also the Language of Primasius an African Bishop, Primas. in. c.
10. 1 Cor. t. 1 Bib. Patr.
who makes these Reflections upon the same Words, Even so the Bread of Idols is
the participation of Devils, you cannot have Fellowship with God and Devils,
Ibid.
because you would participate of both Tables. Sedulius speaks almost the same.
The second Doctrine which results from the Hypothesis of the Fathers, is, That
considering that the Death of Christ is the cause of our Life, which Life
consists in the Sanctification of our Souls, by means whereof we have Communion
with God, which is the lively Fountain of Life, and therefore before Conversion
we are said to be dead, they have attributed unto the Sacrament the virtue of
sanctifying and quickening us. This is the sense of Theophilue of Alexandria,
Theoph. Ep. Pasch. 2.
saying, That we break the Bread of the Lord for our Sanctification. Hilary
Deacon of Rome, or the Author of the Commentaries upon St. Paul's Epistles,
under the Name of St. Ambrose, be he whom it will, assures us, Apud Ambros. in
c. 11.1 Cor
That although this Mystery was celebrated at Supper, yet it is not a Supper, but
a Spiritual Medicine, which purifieth those which draw near with Devotion, and
which receive it with respect. Gelas. de duab. not. Christ.
Pope Gelasius testifies, That the Sacraments of the Body and Blood of Christ
render us partakers of the Divine Nature. Aug. tract. 27. in Joan. In Anaceph.
Therefore St. Austin will have us to eat and drink of it, for the
participation of the Holy Ghost. Therefore it is St. Epiphanius says, That
there is in the Bread a virtue to vivify us; which is that influence of Life
mentioned by St. Cyril.

CHAP. IV.
A Continuance of the Doctrine of the Holy Fathers.

ALthough the Holy Fathers have hitherto sufficiently explained themselves, and
that they have fully declared what was their Belief touching the Nature of the
Eucharist, in saying, That it is true Bread, and true Wine; and that this Bread
and Wine are the Signs, the Images, and the Figures of the Body and Blood of
our Lord; but Signs accompanied, if it may be so said, with the Majesty of his
own Person, and filled with the quickening Virtue of his Divine Body broken for
us, called his Body and Blood by reason of the Resemblance, because they are
the Symbols and Sacraments, the Memorials of his Person, and of his Death,
because they are unto us instead of his Body and Blood, and pass into a
Sacrament of this holy Body and precious Blood, and are changed into their
Efficacy and Virtue: nevertheless if we can discover what were the Consequences
of this Doctrine, I doubt not but it will yet receive greater Illustration. For
as it is impossisible that they should have believed the Conversion of the
Substance of Bread and Wine into the Substance of the Body and Blood of Jesus
Christ, without admitting the three following Doctrines; to wit, the eating of
the Flesh of Christ with the Mouth of the Body; the eating of this same Flesh
by the Wicked, as well as the Just; and the Human Presence of Christ upon
Earth: So it is also impossible they should deny these three Positions, without
rejecting this substantial Conversion: Therefore I suppose it is necessary to
enquire exactly what they herein believed; for if they have received them as
Articles of their Belief, it will be a great Conjecture in Favor of the
substantial Conversion, notwithstanding what they have already declared: But if
on the other hand, they have rejected them, or been far from admitting of them,
it will be a very great Conjecture to the contrary, and at the same Time a
strong Confirmation of what they have deposed in the precedent Chapters. To
begin then our Enquiry by the first of these three Points, I mean by the eating
of the Flesh of Jesus Christ; I say, if we consult Clement of Alexandria, we
shall find he makes a long Discourse in the first Book of his Pedagoge, and
that in all that Discourse he considers Jesus Christ, either as the Milk of
Children, that is to say, those which are Children in Knowledge; or as the Meat
of firm grown Men, that is, more advanced in Knowledge; but always as a
Spiritual Food, and mystical Nourishment, which requires to be eaten after the
same manner, as appears by what he says of the Birth and Regeneration of the
new People, of the Swadling-cloths wherein he wraps them, of the Growth for
which he appoints them this Food, and in that he makes our Hearts to be the
Palace and Temple of the Son of God; Hereunto particularly relates what he
says, that the Lord in these Words of the Gospel of St. John; Clem. Alex.
Paedag. 1. c 6. Id. ibid.
Eat my Flesh, and drink my Blood, speaks of Faith and of the Promise by an
illustrious Allegory, as by Meats whereby the Church which is composed of many
Members, is nourished and gets growth; and what he adds afterward, the Milk
fit and necessary for this Child, is the Body of Jesus Christ, Id. ibid.
which by the Word, does feed the new People, whom our Lord himself has
begotten with bodily Pangs, and wrapped, as young Infants, in his precious
Blood; and in fine, this pious and excellent Exclamation: O wonderful Mystery!
Id. ibid.
it commands us to put off the old and carnal Corruption, as also the old
Nourishment, to the end, that leading a new Life, which is that of Jesus
Christ. and that receiving him into us, if it were possible, we should lay him
up in us, and lodge the Savior in our Hearts. And elsewhere he says, That
it is to drink the Blood of Christ, to be Partaker of the Incorruption of our
Lord; which he attributes to the entering of the Holy Ghost into our Hearts.
Tertul. de Resurrect.
Tertullian also speaks yet more clearly, explaining figuratively and
metaphorically all that excellent Discourse which we read in the sixth of St.
John, where our Savior speaks of eating his Flesh, and drinking his Blood:
Although (says he) our Savior says, that the Flesh profits nothing; the
Meaning must be understood according to the Subject of the Discourse; for
because they imagined his Discourse was hard and unsupportable, as if he
intended to have given them his very Flesh to eat; to dispose Matters into a
spiritual Sense, he said in the first place, It is the Spirit that quickneth:
then he adds, The Flesh profits nothing, that is, to vivifie. He also shows
what he will have us understand by the Spirit, the Words which I speak unto you
are Spirit and Life; as before, Whosoever hears my Words, and believes in
him that sent me, has eternal Life, etc. Therefore to obtain Life, there must
be an Appetite for this Word; we must devour it by the Ear, meditate of it by
the Understanding, and digest it by Faith. Also a little before he called his
Flesh heavenly Bread, pressing in, and above all by the Allegory of necessary
Meats, the Memory of the Fathers, which had preferred the Fleshpots of the
Egyptians before the heavenly Vocation. And elsewhere he teaches us the
Reasons wherefore these Kinds of Expressions must be taken figuratively, when
he gives us this general Rule for the Interpretation of the Holy Scriptures: If
the natural Sense will not admit (to wit, Id. contra Marc. l. 3. c. 23. Rigalt.
in unum locum. August l. 11. de Gem. ad Litt. c. 1.
what the Letter of the Scripture bears) it follows, that the Expression should
pass for a Figure or Metaphor. The late Mr. Rigaut, very pertinent to this
Matter, reports the Maxims of St. Augustine: If (says he) in the Words of God,
or of any one sent to be a Prophet, there is found any Expression, which cannot
be understood by the Letter, without Absurdity, it is out of doubt, that it
should be understood as spoken figuratively, to signify something. Orig. in
Levit. Hom. 7. f. 2.
Therefore Origin also understands the Words of Christ in the 6th. of St. John,
figuratively, saying particularly of these, If you eat not my Flesh, and drink
my Blood, that it is a killing Letter, if it be taken in a literal Sense;
whereas if we understand them spiritually, they kill not, but there is in them
a quickening Spirit. And elsewhere explaining these Words, He sleeps not until
he has eat and drank the Blood of the slain. He seeks under the Law and the
Gospel, amongst the Jews and Christians, the literal Accomplishment of this
Prophecy; and not finding it amongst the Jews, who were expressly forbidden to
eat the Blood; nor amongst the Christians, which for a long time made a Scruple
of eating it, particularly in Origen's time, he says, Id Homil. 6. in Numb.
That of necessity we must depart from the Harshness of the Letter unto the
Sweetness of the Allegory. And having observed that what our Savior said in
the 6th. of St. John, That to eat his Flesh, and drink his Blood, had so
displeased the carnal Disciples which were with him, and forsook him, he adds,
That it is said of the Christian People, of the faithful People, That they
drink the Blood of Christ, not only by the Ceremony of Sacraments, but also
when we receive his Words, wherein is Life; as he says himself, The Words
which I have spoken unto you, are Spirit and Life. It is he then, says he,
that is broken, whose Blood we drink; that is, That we receive the Words of his
Doctrine. He says almost the same in the 35th. Treatise upon St. Matthew.
Eusebius de Theol. Eccles. contra Marc. l. l. 3. c. 12.
Eusebius thus makes our Savior speak to explain what he says in the 6th. of
St. John, of the eating of his Flesh; Do not think, that I speak of the Flesh
wherewith I am environed, as if you should eat it, and think not that I command
you to drink sensible and corporal Blood, but know, that the Words I have
spoken unto you, are Spirit and Life: For it is my Words and my Discourse,
which are this Flesh and Blood, whereof whosoever eats always, he shall be
Partaker of Life eternal, as being nourished with heavenly Bread. Let not then
what I have said unto you touching the eating my Flesh, and drinking my Blood,
offend you (says he) and let not an unadvised Understanding of what I said
unto you of Flesh and Blood, trouble you; for these Things profit nothing,
being understood carnally; it is the Spirit that quickens those which can
underderstand it spiritually. Athan. in illud quicunque dixerit verb. contra
fill. homin.
St. Athanasius speaks no less clear for explaining these Words of Jesus
Christ; Does this offend you? what and if you see the Son of Man ascend up
where he was before? it is the Spirit that quickens, the Flesh profits
nothing, the Words which I speak unto you, are Spirit and Life. Our Savior,
says he, spoke of the one, and the other; that is, of his Flesh and Spirit;
and he distinguishes the Spirit from the Flesh, to the end, that not only
believing what was visible of him, but also that which was invisible, they
might learn that the Things which he said were not carnal, but spiritual; for
unto how many Persons could his Body have sufficed for Meat, to become Food for
all the World? Therefore for that Reason he speaks of the Ascending of the Son
of Man into Heaven, to withdraw them from carnal Thoughts, and to teach them,
that the Flesh of which he had spoken unto them, was heavenly Food and
spiritual Nourishment, which he was to send them from on high: For the Words,
says he, which I have spoke unto you, are Spirit and Life: as if he should
have said unto them, This Body which appears, and which is given for the World,
shall be given as Meat, to be distributed as Meat unto each one, and to be made
unto all a Preservative in the Resurrection to eternal Life. Macar Homil. 27.
And can it be thought St. Macarius was of another Mind, when, speaking of the
Bread of the Eucharist (he said) That those which should partake of this
visible Bread, should spiritually eat the Flesh of Christ. Cyril. Hierosol.
Mystag. 4.
Nor St. Cyril of Jerusalem, when he observed, that the Jews which did not
spiritually understand the Things which Jesus Christ had said, were offended,
and forsook him, thinking that he commanded them to eat Flesh. Nor St. Basil,
observing that the Faculties of the Soul are called by the same Names as the
external Members, Basil in Ps. 33.
and that because our Lord is the true Bread, and that his Flesh is Meat
indeed, it is necessary that the Contentment and Pleasure which is taken in
eating Bread, should be created in us by a spiritual Appetite. Nor the
incomparable St. Chrysostom in that excellent Discourse, which one of his
Homilies upon St. Chrysostom. Hom. 46. in Joan.
John does furnish us: It is the Spirit that quickneth, the Flesh profits
nothing. See here what he would say: You must understand spiritually these
Things which I have spoke of my self; he which understands them carnally,
profits nothing at all by them. It is carnal to be concerned how he came down
from Heaven, and to account him the Son of Joseph, and how he will give us his
Flesh to eat. These Things, I say, are all carnal, which ought to be understood
mystically and spiritually: Ibid.
And how should they understand what it was to eat his Flesh? They should have
staid a convenient Time, and not have gone away, have enquired, and not
despaired; the words which I have said unto you, are Spirit and Life; that is,
they be Divine and spiritual; they have nothing of the Flesh, nor no natural
Consequence; they are exempt from all these Necessities, and above the Law of
all things here below. When he says, the Flesh profits nothing; he speaks it
not of his true Flesh, but of those which understand the Things which are
spoken in a carnal Manner: And what is it to understand carnally? It is barely
to look upon the Things which are spoken, without judging any farther. For
Things which are seen, are not so to be judged of, but to consider all the
Mysteries with the Eye; of the Understanding. And again; Those, that is, the
Jews, understood carnally, and with human Thoughts; and these, that is, the
Apostles, spiritually, and by Faith; therefore Jesus Christ said, The Words
which I have spoken unto you, are Spirit. Do not think that my Doctrine is
subject to the Consequence and Necessity of things; spiritual things will not
suffer to be subjected unto earthly Laws. St. Austin is so copious and abundant
upon this Subject, that I should fear tiring the Reader, if I should undertake
to report all that he says. It shall then suffice, not to weary you with a
long Chain of Passages, to make choice of some of the clearest; and to this
purpose, I Will begin with the famous Testimony which is seen in the third Book
of Christian Doctrine. Aug. de Doctrine. Christ. l. 3. c. 16.
If it be a Command that forbids any Crime or Wickedness, or that commands any
Charity or Utility, the Proposition is not figurative; but if it seems to
command any Crime or Wickedness, or that it forbids any Utility or Good, it is
figurative. If, says Jesus Christ, you eat not the Flesh of the Son of God,
and drink not his Blood, you have no Life in you. He seems to command some
Wickedness or a Crime, it is therefore a Figure, which commads us to
communicate of the Passion of our Lord, and profitably to remember that his
Flesh was crucified and broken for us. Id. de. verb. D^m. Sermon. 33. and tr. 25.
in Joan. Id. in. Joan. tract. 26. Id. tract. 1. ^n Ep. Joan.
Unto this excellent Passage I Will add these Advertisements which he gives us.
Prepare not the Mouth, but the Heart; wherefore do you prepare the Teeth and
the Belly, believe and you have eaten him. And what he says elsewhere, to
believe in him, is to eat the living Bread; he that believes in him, eats, he
is invisibly fatned, because he is invisibly regenerated. And again; Id. in
Joan. tract. 26.
They have shed the Blood of Jesus Christ when they persecuted him, and they
drank it when they believed. And again; This is the Bread which came down from
Heaven, to the end, that whosoever eats thereof should not die; that is to be
understood as to the Virtue of the Sacrament, Ibid.
and not as to the visible Sacrament; it is to be understood of him that eats
inwardly, not outwardly; which eats in his Heart, and not grinds with the
Teeth. Again; This then is to eat this Meat, Id. in Psalm. 98.
and to drink this Drink, to dwell in Christ, and to have Christ dwell in them.
And in fine, upon the 98th. Psalm, understand spiritually what I have said unto
you, you shall not eat this Body which you see, and shall not drink the Blood
which they will shed that will crucify me; I have given you a Sacrament, which
being spiritually understood, will quicken you; and if it be necessary to be
celebrated visibly, yet it must be understood invisibly. Fulgent. Sermon. de
dupl. Nativ.
This was also the Mind of St. Fulgentius, younger than St. Austin, but an
African as well as him, and moreover a great Follower of his Doctrine; to the
end, says he, that Man might eat the Bread of Angels, the Creator of Angels
was made Man, feeding both the one and the other, and yet remaining entire. O
how excellent is this Bread which feeds Angels by the Sight, to the end they
may be satisfied with him in his Kingdom, and which feeds us by Faith, so
that we should not faint by the Way. Unto these two Africans we may join a
third, Facund. l. 12. c. 1.
to wit, Facundus. Wherefore should he have asked them if they also would
forsake him, if they had understood what he had said spiritually? for in
understanding the Mystery they could not have been offended, and would not have
departed from him. But they were asked, to the end they should answer, That
although they had not understood what had been said, they might be kept in aw
by the Authority of their good Master, and that in them he might give us a
wholesome Example of Humility and Piety, that where Knowledge is wanting, we
should give place unto Authority. In fine, St. Peter so answers unto our
Savior's Question, that he says, not that he will not depart because he
understood the Mystery, but because that it self which had been said by such a
Master, appertained, doubtless, unto eternal Life. For he says, Lord, to whom
shall we go? thou have the Words of eternal Life, and we have believed and
known, that thou art the Christ the Son of the living God. Whereas, if he had
understood this Mystery, he would rather have said, Lord, we have no need to
depart, because we believe, that it is by believing in thy Body and Blood that
we must be saved. So that we must not wonder, if Philo of Carpace, or some
other under his Name, requires for this Manducation, the Lips of Thoughts, and
the Teeth of Meditations; if he esteems it a Divine Banquet. If we were
permitted to carry on this Tradition, we might continue the Proofs until the
Separation of the Waldenses and Albigenses, Tom. 1. E^^^. Pat. p. 229.
but not to infringe the Rule which we have set, we will say no more now,
deferring to produce the other Testimonies, each in the Age wherein they lived.

After having examined what the Holy Fathers believed of the eating the Flesh
of Jesus Christ, we must enquire what was their Opinion touching the Communion
of the Hypocrites and the Wicked, that is, if they have judged, that wicked Men
did in reality eat the Body of Christ, or its Sacrament only. Origin. in Matthew.
cap. 15.
Origin first demands Audience, and thus declares himself: No wicked Person
(says he) can eat the Word it self, which was made Flesh; for if it were
possible for him that continues wicked to eat the Word made Flesh, which is the
living Word and Bread, it would not have been written, whosoever eats of this
Bread shall live for ever. Id. Homil. 3. in Matthew.
And again; The Good eat the Bread which came down from Heaven, but the Wicked
eat a dead Bread, which is Death. Ratherus Bishop of Verona has transmitted
unto us a Passage of Zeno Bishop of the same Place, and one of his
Predecessors, which some make Contemporary with Origin, and Martyr of Jesus
Christ, Zeno Veronens. apud. Rath. t. 2. Spici^eg. Dach. p. 181.
under the Emperor Gallienus; he cites it out of Zeno's Sermon touching the
Patriarch Juda and his Daughter-in-law Thamar. The Sermon is indeed Printed,
but the Passage whereof wespeak, is not now to be seen in it; it shall be here
inserted, and the Reader may see that he was of Origen's Opinion. The Devil
(says he) is the Father of all wicked Livers; and it is much to be feared, that
he in whom the Devil inhabits by these three Sins, Pride, Hypocrisy, and
Luxury, does not eat the Body of Jesus Christ, nor drink his Blood, although he
seems to communicate with Believers: Our Savior saying, He that eats my
Flesh, and drinks my Blood, dwells in me, and I in him: which may be thus
construed; he that dwells in me, and I in him, eats my Flesh, and drinks my
Blood; for I cannot see how the Devil can reside in him in whom God lives,
Hier in cap. 66. Esa.
and which lives in God, but he dwells in him that is empty and darkened by
Hypocrisy or Pride, and defiled by Luxury. St. Jerome also speaks the same
Language. All those (says he) which love their Pleasures more than God,
sanctified outwardly in Gardens and Doors, but not in Body nor Mind, do not eat
the Body of Jesus Christ, nor drink his Blood; of which himself says,
Whosoever eats my Flesh, and drinks my Blood, has Life eternal; because
they cannot enter into the Mysteries of Truth, and at the same time eat the
Meats of Impiety. It is the constant Doctrine of St. August. de Civit. Dei l.
21. c. 25. Id. ibid.
Augustine which he establishes in several Places. It must not be imagined
(says he) that a Man which does not belong to the Body of Jesus Christ, should
eat the Body of Christ. And again; Let it not be said, that those do eat the
Body of Jesus Christ, because they are not numbered amongst the Members of
Christ: For, not to say any thing else, they cannot at once be the Members of
Jesus Christ, and the Members of an Harlot. And in fine, himself saying,
Whosoever eats my Flesh, and drinks my Blood, dwells in me, and I in him;
does show what it is to eat the Body of Christ, and to drink his Blood, not in
Sacrament only, but in Truth; for it is to dwell in Christ, and to have Christ
dwell in him: It is as if he had said, Let not him which dwells not in me,
and in whom I do not dwell, think or imagine, that he eats my Flesh, or
drinks my Blood. Id. Tract. 26. in Joan. p. 94. 6.
And elsewhere speaking of the Sacrament of the Eucharist; It is received
(says he) at the Lord's Table by some unto Life, and by some others unto
Death; but the thing it self, whereof it is a Sacrament, is Life unto all Men,
and is not unto Destruction unto any which participate of him. Id. ibid.
And a little after; He that dwells not in Jesus Christ, and in whom Christ
dwells not, eats not spiritually his Flesh, and drinks not his Blood,
although he grindeth visibly with his Teeth, the Sacrament of the Body and
Blood of Jesus Christ, but rather he eats and drinks unto his Damnation the
Sacrament of so great a Thing, Prosper sent. 339. August. de verb. Apost. sermon.
2. c. 1.
by presuming to come to the Sacraments of Jesus Christ, being unclean. St.
Prosper allegeth this Passage in stronger Terms, and such, that in his Time it
was read without the Word spiritually; for he says only of the Wicked, That he
eats not the Flesh of Jesus Christ. But let us again hear the same St. Austin
faying, Id. Tract. 27. in Joan.
That the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ shall be Life unto every one, if what
be received visibly in Sacrament, is eaten and drank spiritually in the Truth
it self; therefore he exhorts Believers not to eat the Body and Blood of
Jesus Christ in Sacrament only as the Wicked do. Philo Carp. t. ^1. Bibl. Pat.
p. 228. in Cant.
Let us then conclude the Examination of this second Tradition, by the Words of
Philo of Carpace; That it is only unto those which are pure of Heart, that this
pleasant Food, this heavenly Bread, that this supersubstantial Drink is given;
until we arrive at the Place where it shall be shown, that it was also the
Belief of the Greek Church in the XIth. Century.

What remains to be treated of in this Chapter, is the Question of Jesus
Christ's Presence upon Earth; to wit, if besides the Presence of his Divinity,
whereby he is always present with the Church Militant, he is also really and
effectually present by his Humanity. Having applied my self with some diligence
in inquiring into the Belief of the Holy Fathers, upon this Article of our
Faith, I have found, that when they explain how our Savior is present and
absent unto his Church, they always touch the presence of his Divinity, but
they never say any thing of the Presence of his Humanity; or if they do, it is
but absolutely to exclude it, when at the same Time they establish the other
for the Comfort of Believers; Origin in Mat. tract 33.
according to which Origin endeavoring to reconcile the Passages of Scripture,
which say, That Jesus Christ shall be always with us, with others which say,
that he will go and depart, he teaches us, that he is with us, and will not
depart as to the Nature of his Divinity, but that he will depart, and retire
himself from us, Id. ibid.
according to the Economy and Dispensation of the Body which he had taken;
that he departs from us as Man, but that he is every where present according
to the Nature of his Divinity. And a little under, It is not the Man, (that is
to say, the human Nature) which is every where, where two or three are gathered
together in his Name; neither is it the Man (that is to say, the human Nature)
neither, which is with us until the end of the World; nor it is not the human
Nature that is present with Believers wheresoever they are assembled, but it is
the Divine Virtue which was in Jesus Christ. And St. Cyril Hierosol. catech.
illum 14. extr.
Cyril of Jerusalem; he (says he) who is sitting there above, is also here
present with us; he beholds the Strength and Order of the Faith of each one;
for because he is now absent after the Flesh, do not think but that he is
present here in the midst of you in Spirit, knowing what is said of him, seeing
our Thoughts, trying the Reins and the Heart. I pass by St. Chrysostom in
silence; In Joan. Homil. 71, 74, 77.
for although in several of his Homilies upon St. John, he establishes the
Absence of our Savior as to his human Nature, yet because he does not express
himself in so strong and clear Terms as others, I will omit alleging his
Testimonies, to go on unto St. Austin, August. de ve^l^. Dom. sermon. 60. Id.
tract. 50. in Joan.
which leaves us no ground of Suspicion. He indeed is with us (says he) by his
Divinity, but if he had not departed from us corporally, we should always see
his fleshly Body, and should never have believed spiritually. And elsewhere
what he said, Behold I am with you always unto the end of the World; that
(says he) is accomplished according to his Majesty, his Providence, his
ineffable and invisible Grace; but according to the Flesh, which the Word had
taken; according to which he was born of the Virgin, etc. Id. in Joan. tract.
78.
You shall not have me always with you; for why? because he conversed forty
Days with his Disciples in his bodily Presence, then he ascended up into
Heaven, they conducting him in seeing, not following of him; and he is not
here, for he is there at the right Hand of his Father; and he is here, for he
is not departed as to the Presence of his Majesty. Besides, we have Jesus
Christ always by the Presence of his Majesty, but after his bodily Presence, it
was very well said unto his Disciples, Ye shall not have me always; for the
Church had him a few days in his bodily Presence, now she embraces him by
Faith, and sceth him not with corporal Eyes. And again in another Place he
affirms, that according to his Godhead, he forsook not those which he left as
Man; that he departed, as to what regarded his Manhood, in that whereby he was
but in one Place; but that he stayed as to that whereby he is God, August. in
Joan. tract. 92. Id. ib. tract. 102. Ibid. tract. 107. Id. S^rm. 120. de
diverse. c 7.
in regard of that whereby he is every where. The same St. Austin again, He was
(says he) to go and leave his Apostl^s according to his bodily Presence; but
he was to be with all his to the End of the World by the Presence of his
Spirit. And elsewhere, He left the World by the Departure of the Body, he went
unto the Father by the Ascension of his human Nature; but he has not left the
World in regard of the Presence of his Providence. And in another Treatise, He
recommended (says he) unto his Father those which he was about to leave as to
his bodily Presence. In fine, he assures us, That in regard of the Presence of
his Divinity, he is always with the Father; but in regard of his bodily
Presence, he is now above the Heavens at the right Hand of the Father, Cyril.
Alex. in Joan. 13.33. p. 747. Ib. in c. 16. 16. l. 11. and in c. 17. 12. p.
933, 973. Id. ib. in c. 16.6. l. 10. p. 916.
although that he is in the Heart of Christians by the presence of Faith. St.
Cyril of Alexandria, does he not say, That although he be absent from us, as to
the Flesh, nevertheless he governs all Things by his Divine Virtue, and is
present with those which love him? And elsewhere in the same Treatise, That
although he be absent corporally, yet he dwells in the Saints by his Spirt;
that he is not gone, but after the flesh, but that he is always present by the
Virtue of his Divinity. And again having laid it as a certain Truth, That Jesus
Christ going to his Father, yet staid with the Apostles by the effectual
Operation, the Grace and Power of the Spirit: He says besides all that, I eo
1. Sermon. 2. de Ascens. c. 2.
It is not to be doubted, but that he departed and absented himself as to his
Flesh, and the Presence of his Body. Pope Leo the first: Our Lord Jesus Christ
(says he) being gone up to Heaven in the Presence of his Disciples, forty Days
after his Resurrection, he put an end to his bodily Presence, to remain at the
right Hand of his Father, Ib. c. 4.
until the Time divinely appointed for the gathering the Children of the Church
was accomplished, and until he comes to judge the quick and the dead in the
same Body wherein he ascended. And again; Jesus Christ entered into the Glory of
the Majesty of his Father, Id. Sermon. de Nativit. sua. M^^im. Taurin. Hom. 4. de
Sepult. Dom.
and began to be more present by his Divinity in a more ineffable manner, being
departed according to his Humanity. And again; He is absent in regard of his
Flesh whereby he may be seen, but is present as to his Divinity, whereby he is
always entirely every where. St. Maximus Bishop of Turin; We should not now
(says he) any^more seek the Savior in, or upon the Earth, if we could touch
or find him, Fulgent. l. z. ad Trasim. c. 17. Id. de Baptis. Aethiop. c. 3. Id.
de Incarn. and Great. Christ^ c. 10.
but according to the Glory of his Majesty, to say with the Apostle St. Paul,
Now we know Jesus Christ no more after the Flesh. St. Fulgentius Bishop of Rusp
in Africa, declares, That according to his bodily Substance he left the Earth
when he went up into Heaven; but according to his Divinity and immense
Substance, he never left the Earth nor Heaven. And elsewhere, As to his Body he
is gone up to Heaven, but as to his Divinity, he staid with his upon Earth;
that he ascended into Heaven, as to his Body, in his Disciples Sight, but that
he forsakes not his upon Earth, Vigil. Taps. l. 1. contra Eutych. c. 6. Ibid.
in regard of his Deity. Vigilius of Tapsus, an African Bishop also; The Son of
God (says he) has left us as to his human Nature, but as to his Divine
Nature, he said, Behold, I am with you always unto the End of the World. And
two Lines after, He is with us, and he is not with us, because those which he
has left, and from whom he departed, in regard of his bodily Presence, he has
not left nor forsaken them as to his Divine Nature: as to the Form of a Servant
which he removed away from us, carrying it into Heaven, Id. contra Eutych. l.
4. cap. 14.
he is absent from us; but he is present in Earth by the Form of God, which
departs not from us. And elsewhere in the same Work, Whilst his Body was on
Earth, certainly it was not in Heaven, and now that it is in Heaven, certainly
it is no longer on Earth; and it is so true, that it is not there, that it is
according to it, that we look for Jesus Christ's coming from Heaven; whereas
according to the Word, Id. contra Arr. etc. l. 2. c. 17.
we believe that he is present with us on Earth. And again, explaining these
Words of Jesus Christ unto his Apostles; I go unto my Father: He spoke
certainly (says he) of the human Nature which he had taken, in regard whereof
he was to go to his Father, from whence he was to come to judge the quick and
the dead; but as for his Divinity, which fills all things, and which is
comprehended in no space, as it leaves no Place, so neither goes it to any
Place. Bed. Hemil. 3. aestiv. de temp. feria 6. Pas^h. Id. in Joan. cap. 9
Venerable Bede in the eighth Century is no less positive herein than others,
for he assures, That Jesus Christ was received into Heaven as to his Humanity
which he took from the Earth, and that he remains with the Saints upon Earth
by his Divinity, which equally fills Heaven and Earth. And upon these Words.
Behold, I am with you always until the End of the World: Id. in Marc. c. 13.
and Hom. 4. de Confess.
Him (says he) that was then in the World by his bodily Presence, is now every
where present by his Divity. And elsewhere he says, That Jesus Christ
ascending triumphantly unto his Father after his Resurrection, Id. Homil.
aestiv. de temp. Them. Jubilit.
has left the Church, in regard of his bodily Presence, the which nevertheless
he never for sook as to the Protection of his Divine Presence, continuing with
her unto the End of the World. And explaining these Words of Jesus Christ unto
his Apostles; You shall see me a little while, because I go to my Father, etc.
It is (says he) as if he had plainly said, the Reason that you see me a little
while after I am risen from the dead, Id. Domin. cantate.
is, because I am not to tarry always upon Earth, in respect of my Body, but I
must go into Heaven in regard of the human Nature which I have taken. And
again, When I am ascended into Heaven, Id. Dom vocem jucunditatis.
you shall not see me such as you were wont to see me now, environed with
mortal and corruptible Flesh, but you shall see me coming with Glory to judge
the World, and appearing to the Saints after Judgment with greater Majesty.
Id. Hom. hyem. de temp. Dom. 3. post Epiphan. Id. in Festiv. Pentecostes. Id.
ibid.
He himself again testifies, That he has left the World, and is gone to the
Father, because he has withdrawn from the sight of those which loved the
World, that which they had seen, and had carried by his Ascension unto the
invisible things, the human Nature which he had assumed. He says farther, We
amongst the Gentiles which have believed, cannot our selves go unto the Lord,
whom we cannot now see in the Flesh, but those amongst us which confess the
Frailties of our Servitude; we should now draw near by Faith unto him which is
sat down on the right Hand of the Father. In St. Matthew. c. 28.
In fine, he declares, That the Lord ascending into Heaven after his
Resurrection, has left the Apostles as to the Presence of his Body, but that
he never left them as to the Presence of his Divine Majesty; that we have for a
Comforter Jesus Christ our Lord, whom, though we cannot see bodily, yet we have
contained in the Evangelists all that he did, and said during the Time that he
was in the Flesh. This same Language was used in the IXth Century, as shall be
seen afterward, and we shall also make one of the Prelates of the Gallican
Church despose in the XIIth Century, to learn from his Mouth, that it wa^ not
then forgotten in our France; but in the mean while it will not be amiss to
observe, that according to the Belief which we have established, the holy
Fathers have only taken notice of two comings of Jesus Christ, the one attended
with Shame and Ignominy, the other with Glory and Majesty; but both visible,
without ever telling us, that there was a third, which holds the middle betwixt
both, whereby Christ descends daily upon the Earth. On the contrary, the
Protestants affirm, That Tertullian declares the Nature of a true Descent in a
manner, which shows, as they say, That neither him, nor the Church in his
Time believed, that a Body could descend from one Place to another without
being seen; Phantome Tertull. contra Marc. l. 4. c. 7.
For, says he, writing against the Ghost of Marcion, when it is made, it is
seen, the Eyes perceive it, it is done gradually, and so it requires to ask, in
what Posture, with what Retinue? Is it with Violence, or moderately? Or also in
what Hour of the Day or Night it came down? Moreover, who see it come down? who
gave an account of it? who affirmed it? And again says he, Is it a thing which
is not easily to be believed when it is affirmed? I declare, says the
Protestant, that I could never adjust this Declaration of Tertullian's with the
invisible Descent of the Body of Jesus Christ, in an infinite number of Places;
and that I should be obliged unto those which would help me to the means to do
it. For if what the Latins teach, be true, that the Body of Christ descends
every Day upon the Communion Table in an invisible manner, I must be obliged to
accuse Tertullian, not only of Negligence, but also of Stupidity, to have
spoken so absolutely, and without excepting what happens in the Eucharist,
although I have otherwise a singular Esteem for his great Wisdom and Learning.
But on the other Hand, seeing Tertullian is agreed with the other Doctors of
the Church, and that he says nothing contrary to their Testimonies, wherein
they constantly oppose the Presence of the Divine Nature of our Lord unto that
of his human Nature, the Presence whereof they formally deny upon Earth; I
cannot forbear, says he, to conclude, that they have owned but one sole
Presence of the Body of Jesus Christ, I mean one visible Presence; and that the
Invisible Presence of that holy Body never entered into their Thoughts. In fine,
say they, it is, whereunto amounts all the Declarations which hitherto have
been made, and whereunto we may also add these excellent Words of St. Austin;
Aug. in Joan. tract. 50. I^. in Ps. 46.
He is gone, and he is present; he is returned, and he departed not from us;
for he carried his Body unto Heaven, but he withdrew not his Majesty from the
Earth; and these, he took away his Body from our Sight, but as God he departed
not from your Hearts; contemplate him ascending, believe in him absent, expect
him as to come, but feel him always present by his secret Mercy. From hence
does proceed sundry Doctrines, that if I mistake not, deserve to be considered.
In the first place, when the holy Fathers make a Difference betwixt the
corporal Presence of our Lord, with his spiritual Presence: They teach, that
this latter is common unto him with the Father and the Holy Ghost. When the
Son, says St. Austin, August. tract. 107. in Jo^^. Id. ibid. ^act. 106.
removed from his Apostles his corporal Presence, he with his Father kept them
spiritually. And elsewhere, He kept his Children by a bodily Presence, and he
was to depart from them by a bodily Absence, to keep them with his Father by a
spiritual Presence. Secondly; although they every where establish the Absence
of our Lord, as to his Body, yet they teach, that he is present with the
believing Soul; but they make this Presence depend upon the Intercourse of
their Faith and Devotion, which lifts it self up unto Heaven, where he dwells,
which goes and meditates on him, at the right hand of his Father, and that goes
to take him upon the Throne of his Glory; and so it is this excellent Passage
of St. August. tract. ^0. in Joan.
Austin is to be understood: Let the Jews hear, let them take him; but they
answer, How shall I take him, seeing he is absent? How shall I reach with my
Hands unto Heaven to embrace him upon his Throne? Send up thither thy Faith,
and you have already embraced him; your Fathers have embraced him in the Flesh,
but you receive him in your Heart; for Jesus Christ is absent as he is also
present. Id. Sermon. 74. de diverse. c. 4.
And again, We now believe in him that sits on the right Hand of the Father,
yet nevertheless whilst we are in this Body, we are absent from him: If any
make any doubt of it, or deny it, and that he says, Where is your God? we
cannot show him unto him. In fine, I believe, that from this same Fountain
proceeds also this other Stream, I mean the sursum Corda, which was famous in
the ancient Church, which they made to echo out aloud in the Christian
Assemblies at the very Time when they disposed themselves to receive the
Communion, and which still remains in all their Liturgies; for by these Words
they were warned not to look barely or only upon the Bread and the Cup, as the
great Council of Nice does speak, by the Relation of Gelatius of Cyzika, but to
lift up all their Thoughts into Heaven toward the only Object of their
Devotion, which is Jesus Christ our Savior; therefore the holy Fathers often
exhort their Flocks not to seek Jesus Christ upon Earth, Chrysostom. Hom. 24. in
1 ad Cor.
but in Heaven; witness St. Chrysostom, who says, that to draw near him, we
must be like an Eagle, and fly unto Heaven it self, mount on high, and have
nothing common with the Earth, not grovel nor be drawn downwards, but fly
continually upwards; look toward the Sun of Righteousness, having the Eye of
the Understanding opened. And elsewhere, Id. Hom. 11. ad Pop. Antiochen.
If you would see my Wing, I have one swifter than the Eagles to fly not ten or
twenty Degrees, nor unto Heaven only, but even beyond the Heavens, and above
the Heaven of Heavens, where Jesus Christ sits at the right Hand of God. And
again, the reason wherefore Christ called us Eagles, Id. de Baptism. Christi.
saying, Where the Body is, there will the Eagles be gathered together; it is,
that we should ascend up into Heaven, and that we should fly upwards, supported
by the Wings of the Spirit. But on the contrary, says he, we grovel on the
Earth like Serpents, Id. Hom. 4. de incomp. Dei Not.
and eat Dust. And elsewhere, Let no Body have at that time Thoughts concerning
the Affairs of this Life, but banishing from his Mind all worldly Thoughts,
transport himself wholly into Heaven, as it were, assisting at the Throne of
Glory, and flying with the Seraphims, offer the most holy Hymn unto the God of
Majesty and Glory. Id. Hom. in Seraph.
And again elsewhere, Consider these Things, O Man, and representing unto your
self the Greatness of the Gift; raise your self up, Cyril. Hierosol. Mystag. 5.
and forsaking the Ear^^^ke your Flight toward Heaven. St. Cyril of Jerusalem
said also ^^fore St. Chrysostom, The Priest cries, Lift up your Hearts on High;
for in truth, in that terrible moment we should have our Hearts lifted up unto
God, and not down toward the World and earthly Thing. The Priest then commands
with Authority, that every one forsakes the Thoughts of this Life and household
Cares, and that he should lift up his Heart unto Heaven, where God the Lover of
Mankind is. St. Austin said the same, August. de bono persev. c. 13. Psalm. 39.
and sermon. 44. de tempore, and de Verb. Dom. 53. and in Ps. 148. Sermon. 4, 29.
and 38. a Sirmund. edit, and 82. de diverse. Germ. Constable. in contempl. Job l. 6.
de verb incarn. c 24, 25. apud Phot. Cod. 222.
What is said in the Sacraments of Believers, That we should lift up our Hearts
on high unto the Lord, is a Gift of God; for which Gift the Priest warns those
to whom it is said, to give thanks unto the Lord; and they answer, That it is
just, and that the Thing deserves it well: For, seeing our Heart is not in our
Power, but that it is raised by the help of God, to the end it should rise, and
think on Things which are above, where Jesus Christ sits on the right Hand
of God, and not on the Things of the Earth; unto whom should Thanks be given
for so great a Benefit, but unto our Lord Jesus Christ, who is the Author of
it? German Patriarch of Constantinople says, That the Believers which are to
communicate, are warned to lift up their Hearts, and that they answer, We have
unto the Lord; to the end they should lift up their Thoughts from Earth unto
the King of Heaven. The Friar Jovius in the Library of the Patriarch Photius,
When the Body of the Lord (says he) is shown upon the holy Table, those which
attend on both sides, representing the Cherubins with six Wings, fan the Things
which are there offered, with Wings which serve for Fanns, as it were to hinder
the Communicants from staying on the Things which are seen, but lifting them up
with the Eyes of the Understanding above all there is of Shadow, raising them
up by means of these visible Things to the Contemplation of Things invisible.
And unto this ineffable Beauty, in all likelihood it was, that the Collect of
Ascension-Eve, Apud Cassand. in Vigil. Ascens.
was conceived in these Terms in some Coppie's; We beseech thee, O Lord, that
by these holy things which we have received, the Effect of our Devotion may
tend where is with thee our Substance Jesus Christ thy Son, our Lord.

CHAP. V.
Continuation of the Consequences of the Doctrine of the Fathers.

ALthough what we have examined in the foregoing Chapter, does fully justify
that the Holy Fathers have been constant in their Doctrine, and that the
Consequences which depend upon it are absolutely conformable unto the
Principles which they have set down; Nevertheless, because there be several
others which we have not touched, we find our selves absolutely obliged to
handle them in this Chapter, the better to clear the Truth which we seek for,
and if in what remains to be examined, they have said any thing which might
favor the Hypothesis of the real Conversion, which the Latins have made an
Article of their Faith, it is certain, that what they have said hitherto will
not be of so much moment, and will lose of its worth and virtue; whereas if
nothing can be found, in what is yet to be seen, contrary unto what has been
already examined, it must then be necessarily concluded, say the Protestants,
that there is nothing in all their Writings that agrees with the Hypothesis of
the Latin Church: In fine, if these Holy Doctors have believed the change of
the Substance of Bread and Wine into the Substance of the Body and Blood of
Jesus Christ, then they must also have admitted of these following Maxims;
First, That a Body may be in several Places at once; but far from admitting
this Maxim to be true, they directly oppose it. Tertullian disputing against
the Heretic Hermogenes, which made the Creature coeternal unto God, Tertul.
advers. Hermog. c. 38.
If it be in a place (says he) it is then within the place; if it be within
the place, it is then bounded by the place within which it is; if it be
bounded, it has a remote Line; and being a Painter as you are, your own
Profession must needs inform you, that the furthest Line is the end of any
thing whereof it is the remotest Line. And elsewhere, Id. de anim. c. 9
he establishes the same Doctrine, when he places the Extent and the three
Dimensions, that is the length, breadth, and height amongst the most essential
Properties of a Body, and which necessarily and absolutely belong to their Bulk
and Mass. Arnobius was so strongly of Tertullian's Opinion, that he uses it as
a Principle universally received, to refute the Evasion of Pagans, who taught
that their Gods were in all the Images which were consecrated unto them; Arnob.
l. 6. p. 89. ult. edit.
It is not possible (says he) that one God should be at one and the same time
in several different Images; suppose that Vulcan has ten thousand Statues
consecrated unto him in all the World, can he be present, as I have said, in
all the ten thousand at one time? I think not. Why not? Because that which is
of a particular and singular Nature, cannot multiply it self into several
Subjects, and yet preserve its singleness entire and whole: From whence he
concludes a little after, That it must be said or confessed, that there must be
an infinite number of Vulcans, if there be one in each of these Images, or that
he is in neither of them, if there be but one Vulcan, because being but one,
Nature cannot admit that he should be divided to be in several. If the
Christians of those times had believed, that the Body of Jesus Christ their
Savior and God, had been in a Million of places at once, without being
therefore multiplied nor divided, it must indeed be granted that they had
chosen a miserable Advocate to defend their cause, because instead of defending
he betrayed it, and exposed it to the scorn of Infidels, in reproaching them
with that to be impossible, which they themselves held to be possible, and
which said, happened daily unto the Body of their God; but we intend not to do
this Injury unto the memory of this Christian Orator, that would be Injustice
and Ingratitude so to serve him, seeing he has said nothing but what is
conformable unto the Opinions of other Doctors of the Church; For when a Man
(says St. Hilar. de Trin. l 8. p. 41. l. and in Psalm. ^24. p. 211. ^.
Hilary) or his Resemblance, is in a place, he cannot be elsewhere at the same
instant, because that which is, is contained where it is, the Nature of him
which is in any place where he is sustained, being infirm and incapable of
being every where. Hence it is that the Fathers commonly prove the Divinity of
the Holy Ghost, by his being present in sundry places at once, in opposition
unto Creatures which can be but in one place at a time; I will not here alledg
all their Testimonies, it shall suffice to produce some upon a matter that
admits of no difficulty, Amb de spirit. l. 1. c. 7. t. 4.
Seeing that every Creature (says St. Ambrose) is circumscribed by its Nature,
by certain bounds and limits, and that the Creatures, even invisible Creatures,
are limited by the Propriety of their Substance, who dares call the Holy Spirit
a Creature, which has not a limited and bounded Power, for he is over all, and
in all, which is certainly the property of the Deity? Didymus who flourished at
Alexandria, at the same time when Ephrem did at Edessa, Didym. de Spir. S. l. 1.
If the Holy Ghost (says he) were a Creature, he should have a circumscribed
Substance, as all things which have been created, for although the invisible
Creatures are not circumscribed by place and bounds, yet they are bounded by
the propriety of their Substance; but as for the Holy Ghost, seeing he is in
many places, he has not a limited Nature. And a little under, he says, The
Angel which was present with the Apostle when he prayed in Asia, could not be
present at the same time with others which were in other parts of the World.
Pasch. de Spir. S. l. 1. c. 12.^.9. Bibl. Patr.
Paschas, Deacon of the Church of Rome, As all Creatures (says he) are subject
unto the beginning of time, it is known also that they be local and bounded by
certain Limits and Spaces; but as for the Holy Ghost, he is not enclosed within
Bounds or Limits like a Creature. I could add unto all these Witnesses, the
Depositions of several others, but because it is a matter the Truth whereof is
known unto those which are any thing verst in the Writings of the Ancients, it
is needless to insist any longer upon it, but only to observe that the Holy
Fathers do never except the Body of Jesus Christ from these general Maxims, as
if his Glorification had acquired him the propriety of being in several places
at once; their silence upon occasions of such weight, and where they could not
possibly dispense with themselves from making this Exception, if their belief
had admitted of it, does evidently prove that they constantly believed that
when the Body of Christ was in one place, it could not be in another, no more
than other Creatures, his Glorification having indeed given him a Glory which
he had not before, but without taking away from him the qualities or properties
of a true Body, besides they are not content to inform us of their Belief by
their Silence, they also inform us by their Words; for besides what they have
already told us of the local presence of Christ in Heaven, and his absence from
Earth, in regard of his Body and his Human Nature, the presence whereof they
have constantly opposed unto the Presence of his Divine Nature, they have
formally declared themselves against the Polutopie of his Divine Body, I mean,
against his presence in diverse places at one and the same time; Fulgent. ad
Trasim. l. 2. c. 17.
for they positively say, That the Human Nature of Jesus Christ is local,
absent from Heaven when he is upon Earth, leaving Earth when it goes up to
Heaven; that he is every where as God, but that he is in Heaven as Man, and
that he is in a certain place in Heaven, Aug. Fp. 57. and sub finem Ep. Id de
Civ. Dei l. 22. c. 29. Id. tract. 31. in Joan. Vigil. contr. Eutyck. l. 4. c.
14.
after the manner of being of a true Body; That there is no corporal Nature
that can be wholly and entirely in Heaven, and wholly upon Earth at once: That
Jesus Christ as Man, according to the Body is in one place, and that he so
departs from a place, that he is no longer in the place from whence he parted,
when he is gone to another place; That when the Body of the Lord was upon
Earth, it was not in Heaven, and in like manner being now in Heaven, doubtless
it is not upon Earth, and that it is so certain it is not there, that in regard
of it we look that Christ shall come from Heaven; Bertram. de Nativ. Christ. c.
3. t. 1. Spicileg. Dacher. p. 323.
That although Jesus Christ is every where present according to the property of
his Divinity, he is but in one place according to the dimensions of his Body,
because that which is local, is not in all places, but it goes unto some other
place, when it has left the place where it was before. Just. Mart. Apolog. 2.
p. 82.
Therefore St. Justin Martyr proved it as an Article of the Faith of Christians
in his time, That the Father Creator of the World, having raised the Christ
from the Dead, was to raise him up to Heaven, and there to keep or retain him
until he had slain the Devils his Enemies, and that the number of the good and
virtuous which he foreknew, should be accomplished; that is to say, until the
day of the general Resurrection: this is what the Protestants say. Secondly,
according to the Doctrine of the Latins, the Body of Jesus Christ must exist in
the Sacrament after the manner of a Spirit, invisibly, and without occupying
any space; if the Fathers were of this Opinion, they would not have failed to
have left us proofs in their Writings, or if they were obliged to say the
contrary of Bodies in general, and when they considered them in the Order of
Nature, they would doubtless have brought some exception touching the glorious
Body of our Lord Jesus: they were too prudent and too wise to forget so
considerable a Circumstance, the silence whereof might have been of very
dangerous consequence, and have done notable prejudice unto their Doctrine; so
that having exactly considered what they have said of Bodies in general, and in
regarding what they be naturally, it appears they have made no Exception for
the Body of Christ; it follows then of necessity, as the Protestants say, that
they believed not that it could exist after the manner of a Spirit, that is to
say, invisibly and without filling a space, according to the measure of its
dimensions; this is what I could discover in the Monuments of Ecclesiastical
Antiquity, which we have remaining, touching this Question, which is that the
Holy Fathers testify, That it is impossible, that that which has neither
Bounds, Cyril. Alexan. de Trinit c. 3. t. 6. Aug. l. 83. quaest. q. 51. t. 4.
and alibi. Fulgent. de^ de ad Pet. c. 3.
nor Limits, nor Figure, and which cannot be handled, nor seen, can be a Body:
That all Bodies, be they what they will, take up space and place, by its
compass; And that every thing continues in the state wherein God put it when he
made it, it not being the property of a Body to exist after the manner of
Spirits. The Protestants think it was in these kinds of Occasions, that the
ancient Doctors of the Church ought to have (...), if they had any other
Opinion of the Body of Christ, and that although they so determined the manner of
existing of Bodies, yet that they acknowledged another wholly peculiar unto the
Body of Christ after the Resurrection, after the which he may be in the
Sacrament after the manner of a Spirit, invisibly, and without taking up of any
space, and without that each part of this Divine Body should answer unto each
part of the place which should be proportioned unto its greatness and compass:
Nevertheless, the Truth is, say they, that no such thing has ever been found
in their Writings, and that no exception can be found for the Body of our
glorious Redeemer. Shall we say that they have therein wanted Wisdom and
Conduct, but they think this would be to stop the course of their Glory, and to
slander the great Reputation they have acquired in the Church of God, that it
would render them useless in the Controversies which divide Christians in the
West, because upon each point in dispute, some of either side may tax them with
the like thing and make them Parties. It were much better, say they, to confess
sincerely that they believed not that the Body of Jesus Christ could exist
after the manner of a Spirit, nor any other manner than as Bodies are wont to
exist, because that after his Resurrection, he would have his Apostles know by
seeing and feeling, that he had a true Body. In the third place, it is another
Consequence of the Belief of the Latin Church, that the Body of Jesus Christ,
which was formed so long ago in the Womb of the Virgin, by the Power of the
Holy Ghost, is made every day by pronouncing these Words unto which the Latins
attribute the Consecration of the Sacrament. I will not here examine the diverse
Means by which it is pretended to be done, my design not permitting it, because
I compose an Historical Treatise, as far as the Subject will permit me, and do
endeavor, as much as possible may be, to avoid any thing that savours of
Dispute and Controversy; I will then only say, that if the Holy Fathers were of
the belief of the Latin Church, touching the Sacrament of the Eucharist, they
could not avoid allowing as true, this third Consequence which necessarily
depends of it: Yet nevertheless, having read their Works, I find they held for
an undoubted Maxim, Athenag. legate pro Christ. Tertul. contr. Hermog c. 19.
Just. Martyr sect. 17.23.43.59. p. 44. Orig. in Exodus Hom 6. Hilar. l. 12. de
Trin. and in Psalm. 138. Athanas. contr. A^riau. orat. 3.
That what is made was not before it was made. That which is, is not made,
says Athenagoras, but that which is not. Tertullian, Nothing that is to be
made, is not without beginning, but rather it begins to be, when it begins to
be made: And before him, St. Justin Martyr said in his Treatise against the
Positions of Aristotle, That that which is made, and is to be, was not yet
before it was made, and that all Motion is made by the change of that which was
not before, but which was to be: Origin, Nothing (says he) could be made, but
what was not: And St. Hilary Bishop of Poictiers, All that is made, (says he)
was not before it was made: The famous St. Athanasius, It is the property of
Works and of Creatures, that they are said to be of the number of things which
were not, and which existed not before they were made: Phaebadius, or as
Severus Sulpitius calls him, Foegadius, Phoebad. contr Arrian. Ambros. de
incar. Domin. c. 3. t. 4. Greg. Nyss. contr. Eunom. l. 11. August. contr.
advers. leg. l. 1. c. 23. Vigil contr. Eutich l 3. c. 3.
Bishop of Again in Guyen, If he was made (says he) he was not: St. Ambrose,
What is made (says he) begins, that which was had no beginning, but he foresaw
it: And the Brother of St. Basil, Gregory of Nyss, "If he was made, he was not.
St. Austin in one of the two Books he wrote against the Adversary of the Law,
To make (says he) is to produce what was not before. In fine, for 'twere
endless to cite all the Passages of the Fathers, Vigilius an African Bishop in
his Books against Eutiches, How is it (says he) that he that was, is made,
seeing that to be made, is wont to be the property of him that had not
subsisted before, if it were not, that he was made what he was not? He speaks
of Jesus Christ that was made Man for our sakes in the fullness of time. Let the
Reader judge now, if these good and wise Doctors could speak so absolutely and
without any restriction, and receive into the Articles of their Belief, the
Doctrine of the substantial Conversion. I will add unto this Consideration,
what Origin says in his Commentaries upon Genesis, Orig. apud Eusebius. de
praeparat. l. 6. and in Philocal. c. 23.
related by Eusebius in his Book of Evangelical Preparation, and in the
Philocalie of St. Basil, and of Gregory Nazianzen, That which makes a thing,
is elder than the thing made. For a Man so Learned as Origin, one of the
clearest and transcendent Wits of his time, in the Church, or the whole World,
could not (say some) have spoke so weakly, and at the same time have believed,
that Men every day make the true Body of Jesus Christ, because by this
reckoning, the Cause should be after the Effect, and those which make the Body
of Jesus Christ, much younger than this Divine Body, contrary unto the Maxim of
Origin, which is grounded upon the Light of natural Reason; or at least it
should have been his Duty to have given us notice, that although this Maxim be
undoubtedly true, and that it takes place generally in all things that are
made; nevertheless, there is one particular occasion wherein it is quite
otherwise, I mean, the Subject of the Eucharist, because then by an
inconceivable Mystery, the thing made is incomparably elder than those that
make it; yet nevertheless (say they) we do not find in any part of his
Writings, the least sign of any such Advertisement: It must then be said, that
Origin was a Sot, or that he believed not of the Eucharist, what the Latins
believe at this time; I leave it to the liberty of those, which will be pleased
to take the pains to read this Treatise, to decide the which of these two
Opinions they think most agreeable unto Truth. In the fourth place, the Fathers
have constantly believed, That what contains, is greater than what is
contained; Nevertheless (say some) if their belief upon the point of the
Sacrament were the same with that of the Latin Church, they ought to have
excepted the Body of Jesus Christ from this Rule, and teach with the Latins,
that although for the most part, the continent is greater than the thing
contained, and that in effect it is so: Nevertheless, it happens by a Miracle
of the Almighty Power of God, that the Body of Jesus Christ having all the
dimensions of a true Body, as well as ours, yet does subsist entirely in a
little crum of Bread, and in a drop of Wine; if in advancing this fourth Maxim,
they made this exception in respect of the Body of Jesus Christ in the
Sacrament, they say it must be freely confessed, and without being p^^^ccupi'd
by a false Interest of any side, that if they have not taught the Doctrine of
the substantial Conversion, as formally as the Latins, they have at least
owned and admitted one of its Consequences, and that in that case cannot be
drawn from the Testimony of the Holy Fathers, the same advantage against the
Belief of the Latin Church, as otherwise might be done; but also say they, if
these zealous and wise Conducters of the Christian Churches have spoken simply
and without exception, the Latins must needs confess, that they knew not, or
rather refuted and opposed all the Consequences of their Doctrines which have
been examined: Let us see then, how they have governed themselves in relation
unto this, and let us faithfully receive their Depositions. Theophil. Antioch.
ad Antolyc. l. 2, p. 81.
I will begin with Theophilus Bishop of Antioch, a Writer of the second
Century, This (says he) is a property of the true God, not only to be every
where, etc. But also not to be contained in one place; otherwise the place
which contained him would be greater than him, for what contains, is greater
than what is contained. St. Irenaeus, Bishop of Lions in our France, Iren.
contr. here is. l. 2 c. 1.
despising the extravagancy of Marcion, which had invented two Gods, one good,
the other bad, Marcion's good God (says he) is hid or locked up in some place,
and environed about with some other Strength, which should in all likelihood be
the greatest, because what contains is greater than what is contained.
Tertul. contr. Marc. l. 1. c. 15.
It was also the Language of Tertullian, who also lays it down for infallible,
That nothing contains any thing, which is not greater than the thing contained:
According to which teaching elsewhere, that the Soul of Man is Corporal, He
says, that it cannot subsist but in a Body, which may be fit and
proportionable to its greatness, and that it cannot be there, if it be greater
or less than it, Id. de anim. cap. 32. Greg Nyss. de vit. Mos. p. 238.
How (says he) can the Soul of a Man either fit an Elephant, or be contained
in a Flea? St. Gregory of Nyss followed the same Steps when he said, If it be
thought that the Divinity is enclosed within Bounds, it is necessary that it
should naturally be contained in something that may be of another kind, for
what does contain, is greater than what is contained: Which he also repeats in
the following Page. St. Epiphanius disputing against the Marcionites, and
combating the multiplicity of imaginary Gods, which these Wretches did make,
Epiphan. haeres. 47.
If each one of the Gods of Marcion (says he) is bounded within its proper
place, these three Principles being circumscribed in certain places which
contain them, will not be found perfect; but that which contains will be
found greater than what is contained, and so, that which is contained cannot be
called a God, but rather the place which contains it. It was also the
Language of our France, in the IXth Century, as we shall learn by Bertram, or
Ratramn, who tells us, That the things which contain, Bertram. contr. Graec. l.
1. c. 7. t. 2. Spicil. D^ch.
are greater than the things contained. All these Testimonies are conceived in
general Terms, there is not to be seen any restriction or exception whatever,
and there is not to be discovered any thing which should oblige us to lay apart
the Subject of the Eucharist, as if the contrary of what is intended by this
Maxim, may therein happen; which fully justifies (as it is said) that the Holy
Fathers had no thoughts of it, when they taught this Position, which is
infallibly true, for it is believed they were too wise and too wary, not to
except the Sacrament of the Eucharist, if they had believed that there happened
in the celebration of this Divine Mystery any thing directly contrary unto the
Declarations which they but now made. In the fifth place, the existing of
Accidents without their Subject, is another inevitable Consequence of the
belief of the Latins, it not being possible to admit the one without the other,
by the natural Consequence of things; it is not then to be questioned, but if
the Fathers were of the same Belief, but that they also believed the other
Doctrine which follows it inseparably; I mean, that the Protestants will
conclude that the Fathers believed that there might be roundness, whiteness,
redness, without having any thing that is round, white, or red: or if they
believed with all the Disciples of Nature, and the Law, with the Pagan
Philosophers and Jewish Doctors, that naturally that could not be; they would
not have failed to declare, that what cannot be done in the order of Nature, is
nevertheless miraculously effected in the Sacrament, either by a Miracle that
imposes silence unto the testimonies of our natural Senses, and the purest
light of Reason; that there are Savours without any thing savoured, Colors
without any thing colored, Whiteness without any thing white, Redness and
nothing red, Length and nothing long, Figures and nothing figured, Appearances
and nothing apparent, a Liquor and nothing liquid, a Weight and nothing
weighty, and the like; but if on the contrary, they have not thought of making
any such Declaration in the place where they were particularly obliged to do
it, it may be concluded, say they, that as they have not admitted this
necessary Consequence of the substantial Conversion, they have not also
believed this Conversion. Let us then examine what they have said upon this
Subject, and report their Testimonies, not all, for we should be too tedious,
the number is so great; but as many only as may suffice for a full and
sufficient Proof and Evidence. Eusebius in the Evangelical Preparation, and
Basil, and Gregory Nazianzen, in their Philocalie of Origin, relate a Passage
of Maximius a Man of great Reputation in the second Century, Apud Eusebius. de
praepar. Evang. l. 7. c. ult. and in Philoc. Orig. c. 24. Apud Phot. cod. 232.
p. 927. ult. edit.
where he speaks thus; It is impossible that Art should subsist of it self,
because it is an Accident, and one of those things which receives its being
when it is in a Substance; for a Man may subsist without Architecture, but this
cannot be, if Man be not first. Methodius in the Library of Photius says, That
the Quality cannot be separated from the Matter, in regard of its Substance,
and that it is only by Imagination, that Qualities are separated from the
Matter, and the Matter from the Qualities. Greg. Nyss. in Hexam. p. 13.
Epiphan. haer. 73.
Gregory of Nyss, That the Figure is not without a Body. St. Epiphanius, That
by the word Substance, is showed the difference which is betwixt that which
subsists of it self, and that which does not subsist of it self. Isidore of
Damieta, Isidor. Pelus. l. 2. Ep. 7.
That the Substance is the Vehicle of the Quality, which cannot exist if the
Substance does not exist. The Author of the Exposition of Faith, in the Works
of St. Justin Martyr, Just. Mart. in expo. fid. p. 386. Aug. ep. 57. Id. ibid.
Id. l. 2. Solil. c. 13. and 19.
That the Accident cannot subsist of it self, but that it exists in things
which were before. St. Austin, That if the Quality of Bodies be taken from the
Bodies themselves, they will be nothing, and so of necessity they fail; and if
the Mass it self of the Body, whether it be great or little, is quite taken
away, its Qualities will have no Being, although they are not to be equaled to
the whole; if what is in a Subject subsists, its necessary also that the
Subject should subsist, and the Subject being destroyed, Cyril. Alex. Dial. 2.
de Trin. p. 451. Ib. p. 421.
that which is in the Subject cannot subsist. St. Cyril of Alexandria, If
whiteness and blackness are not inherent in the Subject whereof they are
Accidents, they cannot exist of themselves, and that the Accidents which are
naturally in Substances, have not of themselves any proper or determinated
Existence. Isid. Hispal. Orig. l. 2. c. 26. I^en. l. ^. c. 14. and Method. apud
Phot. cod. 234. Basil. ep. 43. Aug. Sol. l. l. 2. c. 12.
St. Isidore Archbishop of Sevil, That the Quantity, the Quality, and the
Situation, cannot be without the Substance. In fine, to conclude, I find that
these Holy Doctors denying the existence of Accidents without Subjects, do
positively declare, That it is inconceiveable, and impossible, that Nature will
not suffer it; that it is a thing monstrous and quite contrary to Truth, that
this separation may be made by thought, but not really, so that the Accident
should subsist alone; Cyril. Alex. in Joan. Ibid. Athan. Orat. 5. contr.
Arrian. p. 520. Bertram. contr. Graec. l. 2. c. 7. t. 2. Spicil.
that the Accident and its Subject, are in the main, but one thing; and that if
God himself had Accidents, they should exist in his Substance. And therefore it
was that Bertram writing for the Latin Church against the Greek Church, said,
that the Holy Ghost was not in Jesus Christ as in his Subject; Because (says
he) the Holy Ghost is not an Accident that cannot exist without his Subject; if
there were but one or two Doctors that spoke after this manner, it may be said
that they did not remember to except the Sacrament of the Eucharist, wherein
the Accidents of Bread and Wine exist miraculously without their Subjects, for
tho this Reason was not very strong, there being question of a Maxim equally
received both by Jews and Gentiles, at Athens and Jerusalem, as well as by all
Christians universally, excepting those of the Latin Church, which admit not of
it in the point of the Sacrament; Nevertheless with more appearance, this
neglect might be charged upon one or two Doctors, rather than unto a Cloud of
Witnesses, which have testified without touching a great many others, whose
Testimonies we have omitted, not to burden the Reader with too long a chain of
Passages: What likelihood, says the Protestant, that so many learned,
illuminated, prudent Persons, should so universally, positively, and constantly
teach, That Accidents cannot subsist without their Subjects, and that not one
of them have excepted the Sacrament, if they believed with the Latin Church,
that they did subsist in effect, without their Subject? I freely confess, says
he, that this proceeding surpriseth me, and that I see no other reason of this
obstinate silence, but this, it is, that they owned the truth of this Maxim,
That Accidents cannot exist without their Subject in its full extent, and
without any Restriction; which being so, says he, it must be ingeniously
confessed, that they take not the course to favor with their Suffrages, the
Doctrine of a substantial Conversion, seeing they have so absolutely and
unanimously rejected one of its most important and necessary Consequences. But
besides all these Consequences which we have examined, there is yet a sixth,
against which it is said the Holy Fathers have no less absolutely declared
themselves: It regards the deposition of our Senses, against which the Latin
Church does oppose it self, commanding not to believe them, when they tell us
that what we see upon the Holy Table, and that what we receive there for the
Comfort and Salvation of our Souls, is Bread and Wine, because it is not in
effect neither the one or the other, but appearances destitute of the Truth,
and that the Senses are deceived when they make us this false Report. If the
Holy Fathers were of this Opinion, doubtless they would have had the same
foresight, I say they would have undervalued their Testimony, as suspicious and
deceitful, at least in the subject of the Sacrament: Let us then set about
discovering what they have said, the matter is well worth the pains, and it
well deserves the care of this Inquiry; I have done it, and very far from
finding in their Writings any opposition against the report of the Senses: I
have observed that they have established their Testimony as certain and
infallible, and that they assure us by the Mouth of Tertullian, That otherwise
it would be to overthrow the whole state of Nature, Te ^^de anim. s. 17.
and disturb the course of our Life, and even darken the Providence of God it
self, which by this reckoning, should have given the oversight, the knowledge,
the dispensation and enjoyment of all his Works, unto lying and deceitful
Masters; that is, unto our Senses. And having chastised the Impudence of the
new Academy, which condemned the belief of the Senses, he passes from
Philosophers unto Christians, saying, As for us, we are not permitted, no, we
are not suffered to question the truth of our Senses, fearing least that in the
things of Jesus Christ, we should not take the liberty to question our Faith:
which he treats at large, and he proves the Faith and truth of their
Testimony, especially what regards this Subject; he says, That the sight and
hearing of the Apostles were faithful in what they reported of the Glory of our
Lord, when he was transfigured upon the Mount; that the taste of Wine at the
Marriage of Cana, although it was Water before, was no less faithful, as also the
touching which Thomas made. He alleges the Testimony of St. John, saying, That
they declared of the Word of Life, what they had heard, and seen with their
Eyes, and their Hands had handled; their Testimony (says he) should then be
false, if the sentiment of the Eyes, the Ears, the Hands, is of a Nature
capable of Lying; that is to say, if these three Senses can be deceived in the
Report which they make: Tertul. contr. Marc. l. 3. c. 8, 10, 11. and l. 4. c.
18. and alibi. ^ Iren. l. 3. c. 20. and l. 5. c, 1. Epiphan. hae^^l. 42.
Thence also it is, that the same Tertullian, St. Irenaeus, St. Epiphanius
disputing either against Marcion in particular, or in general against the
Heretics Docetes, and Putatives, of which number Marcion was, and all denied
the truth of the Incarnation of Jesus Christ, and of his Death and Sufferings,
attributing unto him only a Shadow and Resemblance of a Body; Thence it is, I
say, that they often call to their aid, the Testimony and deposition of the
Senses, to prove against these Heretics, the truth of our Savior's Human
Nature, and the certainty of his Sacrifice and Death; which makes Protestants
say, Is it possible, that Men which do so powerfully establish the inviolable
Fidelity of the deposition of the Senses, and that clear their Testimony from
any suspicion of Fraud or Deceit, not to trouble the order of Nature, nor to
ruin the commerce and society amongst Men, but above all, not to shake the
solid Foundation of the Religion of Jesus Christ; Is it possible, that those
People could have been of the belief of the Latin Church touching the
Sacrament? for every one knows, this Church declares it self against the
simplicity of their Testimony, that they accuse of Infidelity these faithful
Witnesses, and endeavor to deprive them of being believed amongst Christians,
because that being persuaded of their Verity, and the Truth of their
Deposition, it will have much ado to support and defend it self, and yet more
difficulty of insinuating into the Minds of those which do not question the
belief of them. But it may be, some will say, probably the Fathers have
excepted in this Dispute of the Testimony of the Senses, the Sacrament of the
Eucharist, as a particular thing, and which ought not to be reckoned along with
the rest; if it be so, it is not fit to keep it secret, nor to argue against
the Faith of the Latins of what they have said in behalf of the Senses; this
difficulty which may easily be fancied in the minds of many, has obliged me
exactly to enquire into their Writings, if they have not said any thing which
may inform us of their Intentions; and having made a strict search into all
parts, I find they have established the Fidelity of this same Testimony of the
Senses in what relates to the Sacrament. August. Sermon. ad Insent.
What you see (says St. Austin) is Bread, as also your Eyes do report and
testify. And Tertullian in the same place, which gives us the Testimony but now
alleged, amongst the things whereof he fears that Truth may be endangered, if
the Faith of the Senses are mistrusted, he mentions expressly the Wine of the
Sacrament; Tert. de anim.
Christians (says he) are not permitted to call the Testimony of their Senses
in question, fearing least they should say that Jesus Christ tasted some other
savor than that of Wine, which he consecrated in remembrance of his Blood: He
alleges to defend the Fidelity of the Senses, the Savor of the Wine of the
Sacrament; but say they, it cannot be imagined that he could have reasoned
after that manner, if he had believed what the Latins now believe, because
according to their Hypothesis, our Senses are grossly deceived, in taking that
to be Wine which is nothing less than Wine, but another substance infinitely
different; Shall we then conclude, say they, that he indiscreetly betrayed his
Cause, and that he ignorantly chose for a convincing Proof, that which was an
unsurmountable Difficulty? but should we say so, we should undoubtedly draw
upon us all the Learned, who looked upon him as one of the greatest Wits of his
Time, whose Mind being so enlightened, and his Judgment so solid, could not be
charged with such a Mistake; and not to call his great Reputation in question,
they had rather conclude according to all appearance, that he was not of the
belief of the present Latin Church, which I refer unto the Reader's Discretion;
but that nothing may be wanting to the clearing the question we now treat of,
and not to make the Holy Fathers contradict one another, it must be observed
that they considered two things (as some say) in the Sacrament of Christians, I
mean the sign, and the thing signified: As for the thing signified, all the
World agree that it falls not under the Senses, and that so we should not
expect that they should render us any Testimony: It is Faith that must instruct
and give us a Testimony, it is of Faith to direct and apply to us the Efficacy
and Virtue. As to the Signs and Symbols, they also say, that they have therein
also distinguished two things, the Substance and their Nature, and their Use
and Employment; that is to say, the quality of the Sacraments wherewith they
are qualified by favor of the Benediction: For example, in Baptism they
pretend that Water which is the Symbol, has two Relations, one of the bare
Element, of the Nature which keeps its Substance, and the other of the
Sacrament of Religion, which Consecration gives it. It is the same in the
Eucharist, for besides the Nature and Substance of Bread and Wine, which are
the Signs and Symbols, they bear the quality of Sacraments of the Body and
Blood of Jesus Christ, and it is Grace which God adds unto Nature: Now to apply
this unto our Subject, they say, that the Senses being Organs purely Natural,
they cannot lift themselves above Nature, nor make us a true report of what
does not depend upon their Laws, but whilst they keep within the bounds of
their Nature, and that they undertake nothing beyond their Strength, and the
Privileges granted unto them, their Testimony is infallible, and their
Deposition true and certain; therefore, when they show us that the Water in
Baptism is truly Water, according to its Substance, and the Bread and Wine of
the Eucharist, but Bread and Wine also in regard of their Substance; they
judge, that we ought to believe them, after what the Fathers have told us,
because then they do not pass the limits that God has set them; but when they
will pass further, and tell us that the Water of Baptism is but bare Water, and
the Bread and Wine of the Sacrament but bare Bread and Wine, we should command
their silence, because they pass beyond their Bounds, and passing beyond the
Limits of Nature, they take upon them to penetrate into the Mysteries of Grace,
which have been only given unto Faith to dispose of; they also observe, that
it is in these occasions that the same Fathers forbid us to hearken unto them,
or receive their Testimony, and that it is so must be understood, the Author of
the Book of them which are initiated, in St. Ambrose, What have you seen?
Ambros. l. 3. de init. c. 3. l. 4.
(says he) I have seen Water indeed, but not Water only, I also see the
Deacons saying Service, and the Bishop examining and consecrating; for the
Apostle has taught you, that before all things you should look, not to the
things seen which are temporary, Ibid.
but unto those which are invisible, which be eternal; and again, believe not
the Eyes of the Body only, what is not seen is most seen, because the one is
Temporal and the other Eternal, and that which is Eternal is not perceived by
the Eyes, but is seen by the Spirit and by the Understanding. And the Author of
the Book of Sacraments, Apud Ambros. l. 1. de Sacram. c. 3.
You have seen what may be seen with the Eyes of the Body, and human
Perception; but you have not seen the things which operate, because they are
invisible; those which are not seen are much more considerable than those which
are seen; because the things which are visible are Temporal, and the things
invisible are Eternal. And because there is this difference betwixt the
Believer and the Unbeliever, that the Unbeliever has only the Eyes of the Body
and of Nature, whereas the Believer has, besides the Eyes of the Body and of
Nature, those of the Spirit and of Faith. St. Chrysostom says, that the
Infidel sees only the substance of the Symbols, staying at the exterior of the
Sacraments; but as for the Believer he understands the Excellency, the Virtue,
and the Meaning, that is to say, with the Eyes of Faith; when he sees, as well
as the Unbeliever, the matter and substance of the Symbols with the Eyes of
Nature and of the Body; C^rysost. Hom. 7. in 1 ad Cor. p. 378.
The Unbeliever (says he) hearing mention made of Baptism, thinks that it is
but Water; but as for me, I do not only look upon what is seen, I consider also
the cleansing of the Soul which is done by the Holy Ghost; he thinks that my
Body only is washed, and I do believe my Soul is also purified and sanctified;
for I do not judge by the bodily Eyes of what is seen, but by those of the
Understanding; I hear the Body of Christ named, I conceive it after one manner,
and the Unbeliever understands it after another: Which he illustrates by this
excellent Comparison; An illiterate Person (says he) receiving a Letter, takes
it only for Paper and Ink; but a Person that understands Letters finds quite
another thing, he hears a Voice, and speaks with a Person absent, and will in
his time say what he lists, and will make himself to be understood by means of
Letters. It is the same with the Mysteries; for Unbelievers understand nothing
of what they hear spoken, so that they seem not to have heard it, although they
have heard it; whereas Believers, having the experience made by the Spirit, see
and understand the virtue of the things which are therein contained. This
Similitude, say they, is just and conducts us unto the true knowledge of what we
search for; for it is unto our Senses in regard of the Sacraments, as it was
unto this ignorant Man in regard of a Letter; for as this Man receiving a
Letter, said it was Paper and Ink, which is very true; so also our Senses
contemplating the Sacraments, assure us that it is Water, Bread, and Wine, so
far their Testimony is faithful: but as this same Man is deceived, when he says
that it is nothing but Paper and Ink, because he has not the Gift necessary to
penetrate the sense and meaning: Even so also, our Senses go astray, when they
say that it is but mere Water, and Bread, and Wine; because they keep not within
the Limits of their own Sphere, and that they rashly undertake to know that
which is not at all within the nature of their Object, we must then, say they,
to end this Difficulty, receive their Testimony in the Affirmative, and reject
their Testimony in the Negative, that is to say, they must be heard when their
report touches only the matter and substance of the Symbols, to affirm that
there is Water in Baptism, and Bread and Wine in the Eucharist; but not when
they say, that it is but only Water, Bread and Wine; for they do not understand
the reason of the Mystery, nor the quality of the Sacraments of Jesus Christ,
wherewith Consecration has invested them. I cannot pass over in silence two
Observations of the same St. Chrysostom, because they may both serve to the
illustrating the matter in hand; by the first he teaches us, that to make a
Sacrament, something visible must be established, that may be truly what it
appears to be, and which besides must lift up our Faith to the meditation of
something else that we do not see, Chrysostom. Hom. 7. in 1 ad Cor.
That is called a Sacrament (says he) when we stay not at what we see, but
that we see one thing, and believe another. By the second he gives us notice
that the fraud consists in the setting a thing which hides from our Eyes the
true form, and is nothing less in effect than what it appears to be outwardly,
Id. Homil. 13. in ep. ad Ephesians.
The fraud (says he) is when a thing does not appear to be what it is, but on
the contrary, it appears to be what it is not. There may be added unto all that
we have said, some other Maxims of the Holy Fathers, for instance, that all
Bodies should be visible and palpable, whence it is, that St. Cyril of
Alexandria told us already, Cyril Alex. de Trin c. 3. t. 1. Greg. Nyss. in
Hexa. p. 13. t. 1.
That which cannot be seen nor touched, is not a Body; and before him Gregory
of Nyss, If the Earth (says he) were invisible, it were wholly without color,
now what is without color is also without form, and that which is without
figure and form, Id. de Hom. apific. c. 24. p. 107. t. 1.
has not a Body: And elsewhere, If you take color from a subject, or the
solidity, and quantity, you destroy the symmetry of the Body; for as he says
afterward, Ibid.
that is not a Body, where there is neither color, nor form, nor solidity, nor
distance, nor the other Properties. And Vigilius an African, treating of the
two Natures of Jesus Christ, Vigil. advers. Eutych. l. 4. c. 14.
If the Flesh (says he) be of the same Nature with the Word, it must of
necessity be, that it was increated, invisible, and impalpable, but it is
impossible the Body should be subject to these conditions. Father Chifflet the
Jesuit, which has given us the last Impression of Vigilius of Tapsus, thus
relates these latter Words, It must not be doubted but the Flesh is subject to
these Conditions; whereas in all the other Editions is read, according to the
Copies of the Manuscripts, That it is impossible the Flesh should be subject to
these Conditions; so it has been read by Josias Simler, Cassander, and those
which have furnished us with the Library of the Holy Fathers; and in truth if
Vigilius had spoken otherwise, he had very ill defended the Catholic Cause,
and had made the Heresy of Eutyches victorious, as may be easily seen by
consulting the Passage; it must needs be then, that Father Chifflet had but ill
Manuscripts, or that he unawares let drop from his Pen these Words, It must not
be doubted, instead of these, It is impossible; it is all I can charitably say
to excuse him, without hindering others from the Liberty of thinking what they
please. The Patriarch Nicephoras, disputing with the Emperor Leo the Armenian,
In Manip^l. var. author. Combefis. p. 176.
touching Images, declares, That the Human Nature of Jesus Christ is visible,
palpable, and bounded. They say also that two Bodies cannot be in one place,
and that there can be no penetration of Dimension: therefore the Divine of the
ancient Church, Greg. Naziarz Orat. 2. de Theol. p. 541.
Gregory Nazianzen, amongst the many Absurdities which would follow if God were
a Body, observes this, That there would be a Body in a Body, which is
impossible, that he would cut some Body, or would be cut himself. And
elsewhere, he declares positively, Id. Ep. 1. ^d. Cledon. p. 741.
that the place of one Body, cannot contain two or more, as a Vessel of one
Bushel cannot contain two. And St. Cyril of Alexandria, It is impossible (says
he) that one Body can penetrate others, without cutting and being cut, without
yiedling and without being resisted; as liquid things do mingle together. They
further testify, That a Body ought to have its parts so distinguished one from
another, that each part should correspond unto every part of the place. St.
Austin explains himself thus, in a great many places, Aug. cont E^. fund. c 16.
t. 6.
it shall suffice to instance some, Any thing (says he) that is stretched out
by any manner of bigness, becomes less by parts, having one here another there,
for a Finger is less than the Hand, and less also than two Fingers, and one is
the place of this Finger, another of that, another that of the whole Hand. And
again, Ibid.
It is absolutely impossible that there is any Body but is less in its part
than in its whole, and that can possibly have in the place of one sole part,
another part both together, but one here, another there, in spaces, and
distinguished one from another. Id. de Orig. an^^^. 4 c. 12.
And elsewhere, He desines the Body by what is composed of parts, greater or
less; which fill spaces greater or smaller, Ib. c. 21.
thereafter as they be also greater or lesser. And in the same Treatise, he
says, That the Learned do call a Body, that which by distance of the length,
breadth, and depth, takes up space and places, to wit, the lesser by less
parts, and the greater by greater parts. Id. l. 10. de Trin. c. 7. and alibi
passim.
He testifies also elsewhere, That which is not a bodily Substance, does not
take up the least space of place, by its least part, Claud. Mam. de stat. anim.
l. 1. c. 17.
and the greater by the greatest. And Claudian Mammert, If (says he) the Soul
be corporal, it must then in that regard be extended in the Body, as Water in a
Vessel fills up the least parts of it, by the least parts of it self, and the
greatest by the greatest. Id. c. 18.
And again, No Body (says he) can be touched all at once, and how little
soever it be, it cannot be wholly in one place. And I cannot tell, but St.
Chrysostom had the same thought, Chryso. Hom. 11 in Ep. ad Ephesians.
when he said, That the Body ought not to be placed at hazard, but with a great
deal of heed because if it be out of his place, it is not in its proper
situation; and he makes the harmony and true composition of a whole, Ibid.
to consist, in that each part keeps in its place. They teach, that no Body can
dwell in it self, nor participate of it self: Him (says St. Chryso. Hom. 10 in
John.
Chrysostom, that dwells in the Tabernacle, and the Tabernacle, are not one and
the same thing, but the one lodges in the other, for no Body inhabiteth in
himself. St. Cyril of Alexandria speaks the same thing when he says, Cyril.
Alex. in Joan. 1.14.
That of necessity these two things must be distinguished, him that inhabiteth,
Id. Scholior. c. 25. t. 5. p 794.
and that in which he dwells; for as he says elsewhere, that which
inhabiteth, is not the thing it self wherein he inhabiteth, but rather one
conceives, that one is in the other. And as to what regards the participation
of himself, Id. in Joan. l. 1. c. 7 S. p. 58, 66. Id in Joan. ^. 2. c. 1. p.
119. Vide l. 9. c. 1. p. 792. Id. dial. 5. de Trin. p. 560.1.5.
he says in several places, that it is unpossible, there is nothing (says he)
that is a participater of it self, and that which partaketh, cannot be one and
the same thing with that whereof it does participate. And again, That which
participateth, does naturally differ from that of which it participates, all
manner of reason will force us to confess; for if that were not true, there
would be no difference betwixt one and another, but they would be all one, and
that which would be a partaker of something, would be a partaker of himself,
which cannot so much as be imagined without Absurdity; for how can it be
conceived that one can be a participant of himself? And elsewhere, It is not
necessary (says he) that that which one thinks to be partaker of a thing,
should be of another nature than the thing whereof he partakes, to the end it
might be said, and that it should not be thought that one and the same subject
should be partaker of himself; for he is of the same Nature. B. It is
necessary, Id. Dial. 6. p. 594, 598. Id. dial. 7. p. 643. Vid. Thesau^i ass^r.
19. p. 193. t. 5.
which he repeats twice in the following Dialogue, if not in the same Words, to
the same purpose and effect. And in fine, in the VIIth Dialogue, seeing there
is nothing that is partaker of it self, but that is done by relation of some
other, it must of necessity be said, that which participates is of another
Nature than that which is participated of. Salonius, one of our Bishops of
France, Salon. in Eccl. s. t. 1. Bl1. Pat. p. 152. E. and 153. A Vid. Hieron.
in h^nc loc^m,
expounding these Words of the 4th of Ecclesiastes, The Fool foldeth his Arms,
and eats his Flesh, makes this Observation, Who is such a Fool as to eat his
own Flesh? And he observes in the same place, That it is said by a Hyperbole,
because that it is incredible, that any Man should eat his own Flesh. All
Christians confess that Jesus Christ did participate of the Eucharist, how then
could the Fathers hold for constant and undoubted, that no Body can partake of
himself, so as to treat the contrary opinion of Absurdness and Extravagancy, if
they believed what the Latin Church believed of the Sacrament; for methinks
they could not choose but tell us that it is undoubtedly so, excepting only what
happened in the first Sacrament, where Jesus Christ eat his own Flesh and
participated of himself: Nevertheless, it is most certain that they have said
no such matter, and that they have made no exception; judge then of the force of
their Silence, after having judged of the strength of their Expressions. For as
for me, I must end what I have begun, in saying, that the Holy Fathers observe
yet further, that a Body cannot be entire in one of its parts, which
nevertheless is done according to the Hypothesis of the Latins, when our
Savior did participate of the Eucharist. Every Body (says St. Austin) which
occupies a place, August. de immo^talit. anim^ c. 16. t. 1.
is not quite whole in every one of its parts, but in all of them, therefore
one of these parts is in one place, and the other in another. I will add unto
all these Considerations, to conclude the Chapter, that these Holy Doctors have
deposed, that any thing which can be seen or touched, and that comes within the
Senses, is a Body. Tert. de resur. car^. Ed. Rhen. p. 68. Id. advers. Marc. l.
4. c ^
Tertullian assures, That what may be seen or held is a Body. And elsewhere, he
justifies the truth of the Body of Christ against Marcion, in showing that he
suffered himself to be touched; It cannot be thought (says he) that he was a
Spirit, because he admitted himself to be touched strongly and violently.
Whereupon he alleges this famous Verse of Lucretius, That nothing besides a
Body, can touch, nor be touched. Lactantius Firmianus, Tutor unto Crispus, Son
of Constantine the Great, Lactant. instit. l. 3. c. 17. Tit. Bostren. contr.
Manich. l. 2. Amb of. in c 1. ad Coloss. Chrysostom. Hom. 26. in Joan. Theod.
dial. 2.
speaking of Epicurus his* Atoms, says, That if they are little Bodies and
solid, they may be seen. Titus Bishop of Bostria in Arabia does witness, That
any thing that can be seen is a Body. St. Ambrose Bishop of Milan, That what
may be touched and handled is a Body. Hillary Deacon of Rome, in the works of
the same St. Ambrose, What one sees is a Body. St. Chrysostom, What is
submitted to the Senses is a Body. And Theodoret in one of his Dialogues, What
may be seen is a Body. Let the Reader, if he please, apply all these
Testimonies unto the subject of the Sacrament, and consider with himself, with
what Doctrine they best agree, either with that which teaches, that what is
therein seen and touched, are mere Accidents; or with that which holds that
they are true Substances of Bread and Wine.

CHAP. VI.
Other Proofs of the Doctrine of the Holy Fathers, with the Inferences made by
Protestants.

ALthough we have hitherto represented several Things which have been believed
and practiced in the Country of Ecclesiastical Antiquity, yet it is not all
which I observed during the Time of my residing in that Country; I will then
continue the History of my Travels, not to conceal any Thing from the Public
of the Laws and Customs of that spacious Empire, upon the Point which we have
undertaken to examine. For it would not be just, after having had Communication
of their Records and Registers, wherein all that relates unto this august
Sacrament is faithfully contained, that I should omit any Thing that I have
there found: not to fail then of my Duty, nor the fidelity due to the Quality
which I have taken; I say that besides the Things which I have already
observed, I find that about two hundred Years after the first Beginning of this
great Empire, those which had the Direction and Government of it, applied their
Thoughts very much in giving diverse mystical Significations unto the holy
Sacrament, and that those which followed them applied themselves thereunto
also; for they thought, that the Bread of the Eucharist being a Body composed
of several Grains, and the Wine a Liquor pressed from several Grapes, they very
well represented the Body of the Church, composed of several Believers united
into one Society. It is the Doctrine of Theophilus of Antioch, of St. Cyprian,
St. Chrysostom, St. Austin, St. Isidor of Sevil, of Bid, Wallafridus, Strabo,
of Raban, and others; but he Testimony of the blessed Martyr St. Cyprian shall
suffice in a Thing which is not contested. Cyprian ^p. 76.
When (says he) the Lord called his Body, Bread, which is made of several
Grains of Wheat, he would show the faithful People which he carried in himself,
in as much as it is but one People; and when he called his Blood, Wine, made of
several Grapes pressed together and made one, he also signified this faithful
People composed of several Persons united into one Body. The Foundation of this
mystical Signification can be nothing else, if the Protestant be believed, but
the Nature and the Substance of these two Symbols unto which the holy Fathers
have given this Signification after the Consecration, which has rendered them
fit for this Use. In fine, going to represent the Unity of Believers, which are
sundry Persons really subsisting, but united into one Body by the Bonds of the
same Spirit. I do not see (says he) but that the Bread and Wine of the
Sacrament, whereof the one is molded of sundry Grains, the other pressed from
several Grapes, may be proper to represent this Unity, at least, that the
Substance of several Grains of Wheat, and of several Grapes, may continue
molded and mixed together. See there after what manner he understands this
constant Doctrine of the holy Fathers. Moreover, he desires to be suffered to
add, that what confirms him in this Opinion, is, That if any other Sense be
given unto this Doctrine of the ancient Fathers, this Inconvenience will scarce
be avoided, to wit, that one shall be forced to say of the true and proper Body
of Jesus Christ, This Bread composed of sundry Grains, represents unto us the
Church composed of sundry Believers; which Thing truly Christian Ears would
scarce be able to endure. Besides, we have observed in the first Chapter of the
first Part, that the ancient Church was wont to mingle Water with the Wine in
the Celebration of the Sacrament; and that in the beginning of the third
Century there was a Mystery sought for in this Mixture: The Reader may please
to view the Place where even those of the holy Fathers are named, which have so
spoken; it being needless here to repeat what has been there mentioned, but
only to make some few Reflections which we were not there permitted to do; and
which nevertheless may serve very much to clear up the Intention of these holy
Doctors. The first is, That they have given two several Significations unto the
Water, and the Wine, saying, That the Water represents the faithful People, and
the Wine the Blood of Jesus Christ: For I cannot conceive, that these two
Usages could take place, if both these Things did not remain distinct the one
from the other, because each of them has a several Object to represent, so
that the one of them cannot represent the Object which the other does signify.
Secondly, they have established betwixt the Wine and the Blood of Jesus Christ,
the same Relation which they have established betwixt the Water and the
faithful People, it not being to be seen that they have given any more Virtue
unto the Wine to signify the Blood of the Son of God, than they have given to
the Water to represent the Christian People, and without giving notice, that
the Wine is the Blood of Jesus Christ in a more particular manner than the
Water is the faithful People. On the contrary, they have spoken so equally of
them, both in regard of the two Significations which they attributed unto them,
that it is impossible to discover the least difference. In fine, the holy
Fathers declare, That the Wine and Water mingled together, signify the Union
of Jesus Christ and Believers, which they could not discern, but in the
Thoughts of the Union of these two Elements; I speak of the Water and Wine,
which subsisted firm and indissoble; and the Firmness of the Union of these two
Things could not subsist, if their Nature, and the Truth of their Being, did
not subsist also. And to say the Truth as far as I can judge, these good
Doctors have not made this Signification which they gave to the Wine and Water,
to depend barely upon their mingling only, but principally of the Subsistence
of this Mixture, which was absolutely necessary, that it might represent the
Truth and Solidity of the spiritual Union of Jesus Christ and his People. There
is an admirable fine Passage of St. Cyprian upon this Subject, but which I
shall dispense my self from inserting here, because it is to be seen at large in
the Place abovementioned. Whilst I shall join unto this mystical Signification
two others, which we have touched in the same Place in the first Part. By the
one, the Wine and Water mingled in the consecrated Cup, were to represent the
Water and Blood which run down the Side of our Lord Jesus at the time of his
Passion; and by the other, the Union of the Eternal Word with the Humanity: But
all these mystical Significations are destroyed, if the Nature and Substance of
Things are abolished, in the which they had their only Foundation. After this
manner the Protestant does reason upon these Observations.

The Heretics disputing formerly against the Catholics and Orthodox, would
oblige the Catholics to prove their Doctrine and Belief in so many express
Words. In the Dialogue against Arrius, Sabellius, and Photinus, under the Name
of St. Athanasius, Vigil. l. 1. contra Arr. etc. l. 1. c. 23. ult. E^it. p. 140.
but whose true. Author is Vigilius of Tapsus, an African Bishop; The Arrian
demands of the Orthodox, that he will show him in the Scriptures the Word
Homousion, which signifies of one Substance; or that he may read it properly,
that is to say, in so many Syllables, or that he should cease making use of it.
It is also the Proceedings of the Arrians against the true Athanasius in his
Treatise of the Synods of Arimini and Seleutia. Athanas. de Synod. Arim. and
page 911. Id. ibid. p. 913. Id. de decret. Syn. Nicaen. p. 270.
But the Holy Fathers laughed at this ridiculous and impertinent Method: It
matters not, said St. Athanasius, if any make use of Terms not contained in the
Holy Scriptures, provided his Thoughts are Orthodox. And elsewhere he says,
That although these Words are not found in the Scriptures, it suffices they
contain a Doctrine agreeable to the Scriptures. And Vigilius, Homousion Vigil.
ubi supra cap. 26. p. 143.
That it must be collected from the Authority of Scripture by a reasonable
consequence; and that it is not just to quarrel about a Name which may be
firmly established by a great many Testimonies. It is so several other Doctors
have done, and indeed they did wisely; for there is nothing more unreasonable,
than to reduce Man to the Degree of Beasts, in depriving him of the Use of
Reasoning, whereby he draws certain Conclusions from necessary Principles. No
body then ought to wonder, if, besides the direct Doctrine of the Fathers upon
the Point of the Eucharist, I here insert the indirect, which consists in
necessary Inductions; because the Part of an Historian, which I assume in this
Work, does oblige me faithfully to represent unto the Reader the Inductions
which others are wont to draw from their Testimonies for the better
understanding their Doctrine, leaving it unto the Liberty of every one to judge
of their Value or Weakness. I will therefore continue these Sorts of Proofs
already begun, in this Chapter; What has been already said containing the
direct Proofs of their Belief, with the Consequences which are inseparable from
it. Athenag. de Resurrect. mort. ad ealcem oper. Just. p. 46.
Athenagoras in his Treatise of the Resurrection of the Dead, says something,
if I mistake not, worthy of Consideration: Neither the Blood, nor Phlegm, nor
Choler, nor Spirits, that is to say, as well Vital as Animal, shall be raised
with our Bodies in the blessed Resurrection, being no longer necessary unto the
Life which we shall then live. If the quickened Body of Jesus Christ be the
Model and Pattern of the Resurrection of Believers, as all Christians.
Universally agree; Athenagoras, say they, could not believe, that the Bodies of
Believers after the Resurrection should have no Blood, but that he believed
also, that the glorified Body of Christ had none also; and if he believed it
had none, how could it be thought that he believed that it should be drank in
the Eucharist but figuratively, because we there make a Commemoration of that
Blood which he shed upon the Cross for the Expiation of our Sins. A
Commemoration which we could not make, as St. Paul commands us, unless we
participate of the Fruits and Benefits of his bitter Death: A Participation,
which, as the Protestants say, is the Effect of the spiritual and mystical
Eating, or if you will, Drinking; Hieron. Ep. 61. c. 8, 9, etc. 1.2.
but also at the same time a real and true Eating, which is done by our Faith.
The same may be said by Origin, as appears by St. Jerome's sixty first Letter
unto Pammachius touching the Errors of John, Bishop of Jerusalem; and it may
be, he proceeded farther, at least, he was not only suspected, but taxed with
it. Moreover, in the fifth Century it was not fully determined, if the Body of
our Lord in the State of Glory wherein it is, Aug. Epist. 146. ad Cons. init.
had Blood? For we find by one of the Letters of St. Austin, which one
Consentius wrote unto him to be informed, if the Body of Christ now has Blood
and Bones. This Consentius was not an Ordinary Believer, or common Christian,
he seems to be a Bishop, or at least a Priest worthy of St. Austin's Respect
and Friendship; for in the Beginning of the Letter he gives him the Title of
most dear, or most beloved: And elsewhere he says unto him, That he is beloved
in the Bowels of Jesus Christ. I freely confess, Ep. 222.
says the Protestant, I cannot read these Words, without thinking of the
Belief of the Latin Church in the Point of the Sacrament; for it is not to be
conceived, that one of the Conducters of the Christian Churches, should propose
unto the great St. Austin so ridiculous and impertinent a Question, if it was
believed in his Time of the Sacrament, as is now believed by the Roman
Catholics. In fine, if it was the Belief of the fifth Century, I cannot see
how that Man can be excused of Folly and Extravagance. Nevertheless on the
other hand, St. Austin deals by him in such a manner, which suffers us not to
judge so disadvantagiously of him. What shall we then say, Continues he, to
excuse the Simplicity of this Man, and to give some Color to his Demand? Had
he never participated of the Eucharist, had he never approached unto the holy
Table, and had he never drank of the Cup of our Redemption? Wherefore then does
he ask of St. Austin to know, if the glorified Body of our Lord has Blood, if
it were true, that the Church at that time held for an Article of Faith, That
it was drank really and truly every time as they communicated of the holy Cup?
Or, wherefore does not St. Austin refer him back unto the Sacrament? the only
Consideration whereof might have satisfied Consentius, if the Belief of the
Latins had been the Belief of that Age. Let us proceed; St. Austin proves unto
his Friend by the Words of the Scriptures, That the Body of Jesus Christ has
yet now Flesh and Bones; but because in the Scripture he cites, there is no
mention of Blood, he leaves this Point in the Terms Consentius left it; that is
to say, in suspense; saying, That because Jesus Christ only said, That he had
Flesh and Bones, without adding Blood, we should not also extend our Question
any farther, nor add that of his Blood unto the other of his Flesh and Bones;
Fearing, says he, there should come some other more inquisi^ive Disputer,
which, taking occasion from the Blood, should press us, in saying, If he has
Blood, why not then Spleen? why not Choler and Melancholy, the four Humors
which compose the Nature of the Body, as the Science of Physic it self does
testify? Let the Reader be pleased to consider the Demand of Consentius, and
the modest Answer of St. Austin, to infer what he shall judge convenient: For
methinks, says the Protestant, that there is but two Sides to hold; the one is
to say, That the Question of Consentius was extravagant; and the Answer wholly
unworthy the great St. Austin; which cannot be said without want of Charity
toward the one, and abusing the Memory of the other. The other is to own, That
neither St. Austin, nor Consentius could have spoken as they did, and believe
what is now believed by the Latin Church. There is scattered here and there in
the Writings of the Ancients, several Things of this Nature, from whence may be
drawn Evidences for the Knowledge of what they believed. In this Rank may be
placed the Reproach made against the Orthodox in St. Austin, August. contra
Faust. l. 20. c. 13.
which we touched in Chap. III. Part 1. That they served Ceres and Bacchus,
under a Pretext of the Bread and Wine of the Sacrament; but because the
Accusations of Enemies are not always certain Proofs of the Truth of what they
charge, Ignorance and Malice having for the most part a great Share in these
Sorts of Reproaches and Accusations, I would lay no great Stress upon this
Reproach but now mentioned, if St. Austin's Answer did not thereunto engage me:
For instead of returning back this Accusation as a bitter Slander and Calumny,
and to say unto these Enemies of Catholics, that they were deceived in
thinking that their Eucharist was Bread and Wine, and in building this
erroneous Opinion on this wrong Foundation, that they served these false Gods
of the Heathens: He contents himself with telling them, that it is true, that
the Catholics did celebrate their Eucharist with Bread and Wine; Id. ibid.
but that this Bread and Wine did not regard, nor relate unto Ceres and
Bacchus. Although (says he) it is Bread and Wine, yet they have no Relation
unto those Heathen Idols. I add unto this Reproach the Accusation of Rabbi
Benjamin in St. Isidor of Damieta, mentioned by us in the same Place; Isid.
Pelus l. 1. Ep. 401.
for he accuses the Christians to have invented a new and strange Oblation, in
consecrating Bread unto God, whereas the Law commanded bloody Sacrifices. Some
think St. Isidore ought to have answered this Accusation with the Lie, in
plainly denying the Thing. If the Oblation of the Church had been not an
Oblation of Bread, but an Oblation of the real Flesh and Blood of Jesus Christ;
that it was the only Way this ancient Doctor could take to stop the Mouth of
this insolent Jew, if the Belief of Christians of his Time had been truly so,
there needs only common Sense to conclude thus. But St. Isidore very far from
so doing, he agrees with Rabbi Benjamin, Id. ibid.
that the Oblation of Christians is an Oblation of Bread. He only tells him,
That he does ill to call it New; because it was practiced even under the
Dispensation of the Law, during which they offered the Shewbread; and he
reproaches him of not knowing, That the Law it self did consecrate the
Shewbread. Hieron Ep. 22. ad Eustoch. cap. 5.
St. Jerome relates of several religious Persons of his Time in that they
excused themselves for drinking Wine; and with the more plausible Pretext to
cloak this Liberty of drinking many Times unto excess, they were wont to say,
in adding Sacrilege to their Drunkenness; Ah! God forbid that I should abstain
from the Blood of Jesus Christ. This Excuse is, as they think, as weak and
ridiculous as could be, if these religious Persons, and the Christians of that
Time had not believed, that what was contained in the Holy Cup, and which they
called the Blood of Jesus Christ, was truly Wine. For to what purpose, say
they, was it to insist upon what the Communicants drank at the Holy Table, to
authorize the Liberty they took of drinking Wine, if it had not been Wine in
effect? So that they believed no other Explication could be given to these
Words; which I submit to the Judgment of those which shall read this History.
Moreover, the Protestants say, That the same St. Jerome furnishes them again in
his Dispute against Jovinian, with a Proof of the Belief of the ancient Church.
It was about Wine, Hi. ron. advers. J^vin. l. 2. c. 4.
which St. Jerome would have forbidden, especially unto Maids and young People.
Jovinian on the contrary proves, That we should use it; and one of the Reasons
he alleges, is, That Jesus Christ offered Wine, and not Water in the Type and
Figure of his Blood. This Reason of Jovinian's is of no Force, if it be not
supposed, that what is in the Chalice, is Wine; it may be, Jovinian was
mistaken, some may say, and not knowing the Belief of the Church in his Time,
he reasoned on a wrong Ground. But what appearance is there, that although he
was not so Eminent as his Adversary, yet he had his Talents and Gifts? How
could he be ignorant of what was not hidden from the most Simple and Ignorant
amongst the People? Besides, St. Jerome's Answer gives us sufficiently to
understand, that Jovinian's Reasoning was well and solidly grounded, and that
he supposed a Principle universally received by all Christians. In fine,
however considerable a Man St. Jerome was, and whatever Respect we owe unto his
Memory, yet we may say, without wronging him, that he had his Failings; seeing
there is no Man without his Faults, and happy is he that has fewest, as says
the Poet. The most remarkable Fault in St. Jerome, was his Passion against his
Adversaries, and too great Earnestness in disputing, which sometimes
transporting him beyond the Bounds of Reason, inspired him with very injurious
and outrageous Expressions. Id. ibid c. 11.
It is then very likely he would not have spared Jovinian, if his Opinion had
been contrary unto that of the Church; and but that he would presently have
cried, Ah the Heretic! Nevertheless, he does not do so. On the contrary, he
answers after a manner, which plainly shows, that in this Point he was of the
same Opinion with Jovinian. Although that Jesus Christ (says he) was hungry
and thirsty, and that he was many times at Feasts, yet it is not written, that
he pleased his Mouth, nor his Belly, if you except the Mystery which he showed
in Type of his Passion. We have spoken in the second Chapter of our first Part,
of two sorts of Christians which used only Water in the Eucharist, besides the
Encratites, of whom we will say nothing in this Place. The former in the
Morning Assemblies abstained from the Use of Wine in the Celebration of the
Sacrament, because they feared least the Smell of it should discover them to be
Christians, and People which came from participating of the Eucharist; and that
discovering them to be such, Cyprian Ep. 63.
it might expose them to the Persecution of the Heathens. It may be (says St.
Cyprian) that some may fear at the Morning Oblation to make known by the Scent
of the Wine, that he has participated of the Blood of Jesus Christ. Was ever
any Fear so ill grounded, or any pannick Fear like this? If it had then been
believed, that what was drank in communicating, was the real Blood of Christ,
where was the Sense of those People, to be afraid of a Shadow, and to tremble
where there was no Cause of Danger? Seeing it could not be said, that the Blood
of Jesus Christ had the same Smell that Wine had; and that moreover it is
expressly spoken of the Smell of Wine, and not of the Odor of the Blood of
Christ. And what surpriseth them yet more, is, that those of whom we speak,
were not private ordinary Persons, but Conducters also; for St. Cyprian designs
such, at the Beginning of his Treatise, by those which consecrate the Cup of
the Lord, and distribute it unto the People. To say that the Smell of Wine
should rest in the Sacrament, although there had been no Wine, that could not
be; because the Holy Fathers before declared, That Accidents could not exist
without their Subjects, without ever excepting the Sacrament. Moreover, when
St. Cyprian condemned this Abuse, as doubtless he had reason to condemn it;
wherefore had he not said, That those People were the most to blame that could
be, to take for Wine, the proper Blood of Jesus Christ, and to think, that the
Sacrament had the Scent of Wine, seeing there was no Wine in it? Wherefore had
he not alleged against them the Belief of the Universal Church, if it held for
an Article of Faith, that what is contained in the mystical Cup, is not Wine
after Consecration, but the very Substance of the Blood of the Son of God. It
was, say they, the only Means that could have been used to have made them
ashamed, and to have reclaimed them from their Error; yet nevertheless St.
Cyprian does not make use of it: He contents himself to pity their Ignorance
and their Timidity, and to blame them, that they had not followed the Example
of Jesus Christ, who had not used Water alone in his Eucharist, nor Wine alone,
but of both. The other Christians which celebrated the Sacrament with Water,
did it by another Motive, as Gennadius has informed us, when he told us, De
dogm. Eccles. c. 75.
That they did so under a Pretext of Sobriety. Is it possble that this Thought
could ever come into the Mind of a Christian, that to drink the Blood of the
Lord Jesus, was to want Sobriety? What were Men made of in those Times, say the
Protestants? Had they common Sense and Reason as we have? For we cannot
conceive their Proceedings; it must be freely confessed, if participating of
the Holy Cup, they believe they drink the pure Blood of the Son of God, and not
Wine; how they could think, that under a Pretext of Sobriety, that they ought
to use only Water therein? But wherefore had not the Holy Fathers taken Care
better to instruct and inform them herein? it had been their Duty and Charity
to have cured these Souls from this mistaken Niceness which caused them to err:
they also did it; for they were too zealous and charitable to let themly in
Error: But how have they done it? was it in saying unto them, That the holy
Liquor in the Sacramental Cup is no longer Wine, but the proper Blood of Jesus
Christ; no, at least no such Thing is seen in their Writings, to think so. On
the contrary, you would think they take Delight in showing that it is Wine: Id.
ibid.
For see here all the Answer that Gennadius makes to combat this Abuse; There
was Wine in the Mystery of our Redemption, our Savior having said. I will
drink no more of this Fruit of the Vine. Prudence is very necessary in the
Conduct of Life; but I think it is more in matters of Religion, especially unto
Pastors and Conducters, which lead the Way unto others, they should take care
not to make any wrong Steps, I mean not to teach any thing, either by Preaching
or Writing, but what they carefully digest; particularly, not to urge any Thing
against Unbelievers or Heretics, that may reflect upon any of the Mysteries of
our holy Religion. No body that I know, has accused St. Chrysostom of want of
Prudence, and to say the Truth for what is known of him, great heed ought to be
taken of laying any such thing to his Charge: Nevertheless it is observed in
one Part of his excellent Works, one thnig which would certainly be ill
relished, had he been in the Opinion of the Latins. It is a Reproach which he
makes unto Laban upon his complaining that he was robbed of his Gods: Chrysostom.
Homil. 57. in Genesis ad c. 30, 31. t 2.
O Excess of Folly (says he unto him) thy Gods, says he, are they capable of
being stolen? Art thou not ashamed to say, Wherefore have ye stolen away my
Gods? For if this holy Doctor believed, that the Bread of the Sacrament, after
Consecration, were no longer Bread, but the true Body of Jesus Christ his
Savior, and his God; it may be said, that the Reproach he made unto Laban was
neither prudent nor judicious, because he might have been answered, That the
same might befall his God. And indeed others before me have observed, Alex.
Gerald. itiner. Romae I dit. extr.
that Alexander Geraldin Bishop of St. Domingo in that Spanish Island,
complained formerly unto the Emperor Charles the fifth That the Temple of his
Bishopric not being well covered, all therein was exposed unto Thieves;
insomuch (says he) that the Body of God it self is not there secure against
Robbers, against Witches, and Sorcerers, nor against the Rage of wicked Men.
But when we should not have the Complaint of this Bishop, all the World knows,
that what St. Chrysostom says of the Gods of Laban, may befall the consecrated
Host. One cannot then forbear either to accuse this holy Doctor of want of
Wisdom, or to say, that he did not believe the substantial Conversion of the
Latin Church, which I will refer to the Readers Judgment, whilst I say,
Theodoret. in Genes. Quest. 55.
that Theodoret, a great Admirer of St. Chrysostom, should not avoid the same
Censure, however discreet he was otherwise. If he had believed, that the proper
Body of Jesus Christ, which all Christians adore, and unto whom they address
the Sovereign Worship of their Religion, were truly and properly eaten with the
Mouth of the Body: Id. in Levit. Quest. 11. p. 124.
For if that were so, say they, with what Face could he say, That it is the
highest Folly to adore what we eat? And again when he asks this Question, Where
is there any Man of good Sense, that can call that his God, which he eats
himself after having offered it unto the true God? Had it not been to have
exposed himself to the Scorn of the Enemies of Christianity, and have given
them Occasion to have derided the Holiness of our Mysteries? I could add unto
all that we have said, in the first place, the Simplicity with which the
primitive Christians celebrated the Sacrament, as we shall perceive by Justin
Martyr, and the Liturgy of the pretended Dennis the Areopagite; for it is very
like, if they had believed that the Sacrament is the real Body of Jesus Christ,
they would have used more Ceremony in the Celebration. Secondly, The Form of
Consecration used in the ancient Church, as well in the East as the West, by
Prayers, Invocations, and giving Thanks, as has been shown in the seventh
Chapter of the first Part, does show in all likelihood, that the Doctrine of
the substantial Conversion was not believed, because this Conversion could not
be made without the abolishing the Substances of Bread and Wine; and that
Prayers and Benedictions never destroy the Creatures. Moreover, if what was
consecrated were not Holy before Consecration, as the Holy Fathers informed us
in the same Chapter, this Consecration could not happen unto Jesus Christ,
neither as God, nor as Man; not as God, for in this regard he is Holiness it
self; not as Man, because in this Regard he was ever Holy. Besides, if this
Consecration only retired the Elements of Bread and Wine from their common
natural Use, to employ them in a religious and holy Use, as they have also
declared unto us, it cannot be seen, that this Effect of Consecration can
subsist with the Ruin and Abolishment of these Elements: For the Use of any
Thing, be it Profane or Holy, does always presuppose its Truth and Existency,
otherwise it were useless in Religion and Nature. The Latin Church has also
laid aside this Form of Consecration, which she attributed, some Ages past,
unto these Words, This is my Body; wisely foreseeing, that whilst Consecration
was made to depend upon Prayers, and giving Thanks, the substantial Conversion
would scarcely be believed.

I will end this Chapter by another Consideration drawn from the Reasons and
Motives which obliged the Holy Fathers to give unto the Sacrament the Name of
Sacrifice, according to the Enquiry we made in Chap. VIII. of the first Part,
where we have at large proved by their proper Testimonies, that they have given
it this Title by reason of the Bread and Wine which Communicants presented upon
the Holy Table of the Church for the Celebration of the Sacrament, and by
reason of the Oblation which was made unto God of this Bread and Wine at the
instant of Consecration and afterward. Moreover, they also called it so,
because we there render Thanks unto God for bestowing upon us his well beloved
Son; so that it is an Act of our Thankfulness unto the Father and the Son, for
the admirable and ineffable benefit of his Death; because the Sacrament serves
us now instead of the Legal Sacrifices, being our external Worship under the
Dispensation of the Gospel, as Sacrifices was that of the Jews under the
Economy of the Law. And in sine, because it is the Memorial of the truly
Propitiatory Sacrifice of the Cross. These are the Reasons and Motives of this
Name of Sacrifice, which the ancient Doctors have given to the Sacrament, and
which we have largely insisted upon in the beforementioned Chapter. The
Protestants hence infer two Things; first, That all these Reasons and Motives
remove from the Minds of Christians the Idea of a real Sacrifice, and makes
them conceive that of a Sacrifice improperly so called. Thence it is, that when
the Jews and Pagans reproached them, that they had neither Altars, nor
Sacrifices, they freely confessed it, showing thereby, that if they had given
unto the Eucharist the Name of Sacrifice, and unto the Holy Table the Name of
Altar, it was but improperly, and by abuse of Language. Thence also it is, that
when they instruct those within and that they teach them what has succeeded
unto the Sacrifices of the Law; they contented themselves to oppose unto the
Mosaical Sacrifices, either the Spiritual Sacrifices which we offer unto God
under the Gospel, or the Sacrifice of the Cross, or both of them together; and
that there should rest no Scruple in the Minds of the People which they
instructed, touching the Nature and Quality of the Sacrifice of the Christian
Church, they unanimously depose at all Times, and in all Places, that it is an
Oblation of Bread and Wine. It is also what they were induced to believe,
because there was but one Altar, or one Eucharistical Table in each Church; and
that the Sacrament was celebrated but once a Day: For had they considered the
Sacrament as a real Sacrifice, they could not have had too many Altars, nor too
often offer the Sacrifice; because in the often doing it, there came the
greater Benefit and Comfort unto their Souls. It is also the Instruction which
they drew from Believers, being obliged to communicate; and that those were
made to depart out of the Church, which did not communicate; in that they never
celebrated the Eucharist without Communicants, and that Oblations were not
received, but from those which were admitted unto the holy Sacrament. Why
should that be, if it had been a real Sacrifice, seeing one might have assisted
with Profit, although one communicated not, as is now practiced in the Latin
Church. The second thing they infer, is, That seeing they have not looked upon
the Eucharist as a Propitiatory Sacrifice for the Sins of the Quick and the
Dead, they have looked upon it as a Sacrament of Communion only, and a
Sacrament which is the Memorial of Jesus Christ, and of his Death, and where
there is distributed unto the Communicants Bread and Wine for a Pledge of their
Salvation: For therein is distributed what is there offered unto God after
Consecration. Now the Holy Fathers testify, That there is offered unto God
Bread and Wine, Gifts and Fruits of the Earth, the first Fruits of his
Creatures, Food which he bestows upon us, the same things which Melchizedeck
offered, the Symbols and Sacraments of the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ. So
it is they have formally expressed themselves in this eighth Chapter, which I
desire the Reader to peruse over again, to see if these two Inductions are
lawful and natural.

CHAP. VII.
Continuation of the Doctrine of the Holy Fathers, and the Inferences of
Protestants.

BEsides what has been hitherto said, it is observed, that there be certain
Occasions wherein the Holy Fathers should have omitted the Names of Figure,
Antitype, Sacrament, if they had believed, that it had been the real Body of
Christ himself; nevertheless they have done the quite contrary: For instance;
The Author of Apostolical Constitutions, Constit. Apost. l. 7. c. 26.
gives us a Form of Prayer and Thanksgiving for the Communion, where he makes
the Communicants say, We give thee Thanks, O Father, for the precious Blood of
Jesus Christ which was shed for us; and for his precious Body whereof we
celebrate these Antitypes; that is to say, these Figures; he himself having
commanded us to show forth his Death. Whereupon the Protestants say, That this
Form of Thanksgiving does not well agree with the Belief of the Latin Church,
and that it is conceived in Terms too weak, if the Author which transmitted it
to us, had believed the real Presence, which makes the Spirit of the
Communicant in the heat of his Devotion, to look unto Jesus Christ himself, and
to the Substance of his Body; whereas this here speaks unto him of Antitypes,
and of Figures. So in St. Basil's Liturgy, the Priest celebrating, prays unto
God, Liturg. Basil.
in presenting him, says he, the Antitypes, or the Figures of the Body and
Blood of Jesus Christ. For although in this Prayer he desires of God, that he
would sanctify and consecrate them, nevertheless it does evidently appear,
that he considers the Symbols of Bread and Wine as already consecrated; because
they could not, without the Virtue of Consecration, be the Figures of the Body
and Blood of Christ, which he looked upon as already done; which, according to
the Belief and Practice of the Greeks, was done in that very Moment. Greg.
Nazian. Orat. 11. p. 187.
St. Gregory of Nazianzen in the Funeral-Oration of his Sister Gorgony, relates
amongst other things the miraculous Recovery of this Virtuous Woman, and refers
it unto the Sacrament, in these Words; She put her Head (says he) near the
Altar, and shedding a Flood of Tears, after the Example of her who washed with
her Tears the Feet of Jesus Christ; she declared, that she would not leave that
Place, until she had obtained and recovered her Health; her Tears were the
Incense which she poured forth upon all his Body: she mingled them with the
Antitypes, or the Figures of the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ, as much as her
Hands could hold, and instantly, O Miracle! she felt her self healed, and
retired. What did St. Gregory think of, will some say, in relating this
History, if he had believed what the Latin Church believes? For if that were
so, no body but would judge, that he ought to attribute this Recovery of his
Sister, not to the Sign, but to the Thing signified; not to the Figure, but to
the Body it self of Jesus Christ; nevertheless he does the quite contrary, it is
to the Antitype and the Figure, that he attributes this wonderful Effect; and
thereby he shows, that he was of another Opinion. There is in the Works of this
same Father, an Oration, wherein doubtless, he discovered the Strength of his
Wit, and the Treasure of his Eloquence; I mean, wherein he has omitted nothing
to obtain his Desire, which was, to preserve the City of Nazianzen, whereof his
Father had been Bishop, and which the Emperors Prefect threatened with
Destruction and Ruin. Levit.
This excellent Man taking Pity of this poor City, and passionately desiring to
preserve it from the Storm wherewith it was threatened, he earnestly beseeches
the Prefect to spare it: He beseeches, he conjures, he sets before his Eyes all
that is most holy, and most sacred in Religion; Id. Orat. 17. p. 273.
and to touch him even to the Heart, he says unto him, amongst other Things, I
represent before your Eyes this Table where we communicate all together, and
the Types and Figures of my Salvation, which I do consecrate with this same
Mouth, with the which I present my Request; this Mystery, I say, which lifts us
up unto Heaven. Must it not be confessed, says the Protestant, either that St.
Gregory was but a very bad Orator, and that he took but an ill Course to
appease the Prefect, to stir up his Compassion toward the Inhabitants of the
City of Nazianzen, in laying before him the Figures of his Salvation; and
instead of speaking unto him of the Body it self of Jesus Christ, and of saying
unto him, That he conjured him by this precious Body, which he made with the
same Mouth which entreated him? or that he had not yet learned the Doctrine of
the substantial Conversion; and because to this Day no body ever denied unto
Gregory Nazianzen the Quality of a good and eloquent Orator, He adds, That it
must of necessity be concluded, that he was not in all likelihood of the Belief
of the Latin Church in the Point of the Sacrament. In the Life of St. Eloy
Bishop of Noyon, who lived in the VIIth Century, there is a kind of Sermon, or
rather a Collection of Exhortations and Remonstrances, which he made unto the
People that he instructed in the Faith of Jesus Christ, and unto whom he
preached the Doctrine of his holy Gospel, and amongst several of these
Instructions, the Scope whereof was to incline them unto good, and to divert
them from Evil, he directs this unto them; S. Elig. l. 2. vita ejus c 15. p.
217. t. 5. Spicil. Da^h.
Hinder them from making Diabolical Sports and Games, and from Dances, and that
they do not sing the Songs of Pagans, that no Christian be exercised therein;
because that by these Songs one becomes a Pagan; for it is not just, that the
Devils Songs should proceed out of the Mouth of a Christian, wherein enters the
Sacraments of Jesus Christ. There Is no body but does easily perceive, that St.
Eloy's Exhortation had been incomparably Stronger, and more efficacious, if,
instead of Sacraments, he had spoken of the real Body of Jesus Christ: For if
the Hearers had been hardened to the highest Degree, he must needs have moved
them, in showing them, that it was a shameful thing to see devilish Songs
proceed out of a Christian Mouth, wherein the proper Body of Christ does enter:
Was it not the fit time to have said it? and could he dispense himself from
saying it, if he had believed what the Latin Church now believes? Seeing then
that he said it not, and that he contented himself with speaking of the
Sacraments of Jesus Christ: one cannot also reasonably dispense themselves from
inferring, that he was of another Belief; it is as the Protestant says, what
may be collected from this Testimony. There is in the third Tome of the
Councils of France, which Father Sirmond has published, a Letter of the
Bishops of the Provinces of Rheims and of Rouen, that is to say, of the
Suffragan Bishops of those two Archbishopricks assembled at Cressy, Anno 858.
to consider of the Order of Lewis King of Germany, which forcibly invaded the
Kingdom of Charles the Bald, his Brother. In this Letter, which is very long,
and divided into Chapters, they represent several things unto this Prince; and
because he desired they would give him their Oaths, they strongly refused,
alleging this Reason for their Denial; That it would be an abominable thing,
Council. C^ris. t. 3. Gall. p. 129. Extr.
that the Hand which makes by Prayer, and the Sign of the Cross, Bread and Wine
mingled with Water, the Sacrament of the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ, should
be concerned after the Promotion to the Episcopacy, with any secular Oath,
whatever it did before Ordination. In the first place I advertise the Reader,
there is in the Text, Conficit corpus and Christi sanguinis Sacramentum; but it
may plainly be seen it should be read, Corporis and Christi sanguinis
Sacramentum, and translated as we have done, The Sacrament of the Body and
Blood of Jesus Christ, otherwise it would be Nonsense; for what signifies, make
the Body and the Sacrament of the Blood of Christ? From all which they
conclude, That the Fathers of the Council should have spoken in much stronger
Terms, if that instead of saying, that they made the Sacrament of the Body and
Blood of Jesus Christ, they had said, that they made the Body and Blood: They
think that the Occasion also required it, and that their Denial would have been
better grounded; and they affirm, that if an Assembly of Prelates of the Latin
Church were in the like Conjuncture, they would make no mention, and that
justly of the Sacrament of the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ; they would speak
directly of the Glorious Privilege of making the real Body and Blood of Jesus
Christ. Whence is it then, that these Prelates of the Synod of Cressy did not
do so; it is in all likelihood, because they were not of the same Belief.
Optatus Bishop of Mileva in Numidia, aggravating the Crime of the Donatists,
which had with horrible Impiety thrown down the Sacrament of the Orthodox unto
the Dogs, speaks of it after a manner which would not be easily pardoned, had
he believed as the Latins do, that it is the very Body of Christ himself: What,
says he, is there more sinful and impious, than to throw the Eucharist unto
Beasts? But what could be weaker than this Expression, if this Eucharist were
the real Body of the Son of God? ought he not to have thundered after another
manner against these wicked Wretches? Should he not have exaggerated with
stronger, and more Emphatical Terms, the Horror of so fearful an Abomination?
In a Word, ought he not have given it a blacker Term than that of Impious, and
have painted the enormous Sin of these wicked Wretches with other Colors? Can
it be thought that a Bishop of the Latin Church should be contented with such a
kind of Expression in the like Occasion? not at all: Wherefore then was Optatus
content? They can conceive no other Reason, but the Difference of their Belief?
Let the Reader judge if there be any other more probable? In the mean while I
must tell you, that having sometimes meditated of St. Chrysostom's Books
touching the Evangelical Priesthood, to see how he advanced its Dignity, and
having applied my self in reading them, to endeavor to discover wherein he
makes the greatest Privilege of this Order to consist; which with his
Eloquence he exalts as much as he thought fit. I find that he only attributes
unto it the Function of Prayer, to obtain by their Prayers the Grace of the
Holy Spirit upon the Sacrament. Chrysostom. l. 3. de Sacerdot. c. 4 p. 32. vid.
p. 31.
The Priest, says he, is present, not bearing Fire, but the Holy Ghost; he
makes long Prayers, not to the end that Fire should come down from Heaven to
burn the Things offered, but to the end, that Grace descending upon the
Sacrifice, should by that means inflame the Spirits of those which are present,
and make them purer, and more bright than Silver tried in the Fire. And he
says this in Opposition to the Sacrifice of the Prophet Elias, 1 Reg. 18.
when he assembled all the Prophets of Baal to prefer the Evangelical
Priesthood, 1 Reg. 18.
and what is done in the Celebration of the Sacrament much before and above the
Priesthood of the Law. How is it that this excellent Genius had not bethought
himself of saying, that though the mystical Sacrificers of the New Testament
did not cause to come down from Heaven a material Fire by their Prayers, as
Elias did, to consume the Oblations offered upon the Holy Table, but the
Heavenly and Divine Fire of the Holy Ghost for the purifying of our Souls? They
do make, moreover, the true Body of Jesus Christ by the Force and Virtue of
these Words, This is my Body. Was there ever a more proper and favorable Means
and Occasion to advance this Evangelical Dignity, and to place what it does
daily do in the Celebration of the Sacrament, by converting the Substance of
Bread and Wine into the Substance of the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ, which
is infinitely more than what Elias did against Baals false Prophets? Every Body
knows in what manner the Romish Catholic Doctors do exalt this Dignity, and
that they never forget when they treat of its Advantages and Privileges, to
attribute unto their Priests the Privilege of making the real Body of the Son
of God. And I don't wonder any Body should think strange of it, if they
consider the Doctrine and Belief of the Latin Church; how is it possible then
that the great St. Chrysostom should have forgotten it, that he has not said a
Word of it, and that in so presing an Occasion he passed over in silence a
Circumstance so remarkable and essential to his Subject. Men may say what they
please, but for my part, says the Protestant, I find no other Reason for it,
but their Difference of Belief. St. Austin in his Books against Faustus the
Manichean, undertaking to advance the Honor and Excellency of our Sacraments
above the ancient Sacraments so far as to exhort us to suffer for them with
more Vigor and Courage than the three Hebrew Children, or Daniel and the
Maccabees did for theirs, contents himself to say, August. l. 19. contra Faust.
c. 14.
That it is the Eucharist of Jesus Christ, the Signs of things accomplished;
whereas the ancient Sacraments were promises of things to come. Had he believed
that our Eucharist is not a Sacrament only, but also the Substance of the Body
of Jesus Christ, and his Flesh also; wherefore did he conceal and was silent in
this essential Difference from the old Sacraments, because his Reputation alone
had been sufficiently capable of inflaming our Zeal, and of more effectually
disposing us unto Martyrdom for its Defense, rather than any thing else which
he said unto us. When we censure, we endeavor to represent to the Offender the
Greatness of his Fault to make him the more to loath it, and all means is used
to let him see the Enormity of it, especially in raising and advancing the
Excellency of the Object which he offended; for it is commonly according to the
Nature and Quality of the Object offended, that the Degree and Greatness of the
Offense is proportioned; let us then see after what manner the Holy Fathers
have demeaned themselves toward them which have offended against the Sacrament
of the Eucharist: For, doubtless, considerable Informations may be drawn from
these kinds of Censures. A Council of Carthage assembled Anno 419. condemns by
one of its Canons, which is the 18th in the Code of Canons of the Church of
Africa, as we already observed in our first Part, the Custom of putting the
Eucharist in the Mouth of the Dead; Cod. can. Eccles. Afric. Justel. c. 18.
It has been resolved, says the Council, that the Eucharist should not be
given unto the Bodies of the Dead; for it is written, Take, and eat: Now dead
Bodies can neither take, nor eat. A Defense which the Council of the East was
obliged to renew in the year 691. but in the same Terms of that of Carthage; it
is something in condemning this Abuse: But certainly, say some, if the Church
of the Vth and VIIth Century believed, that it is the real Body of the Son of
God, it was too slightly condemned. This Profanation deserved a ruder Censure,
and deserved a much stricter Prohibition. The third Council of Braga in
Gallicia assembled Anno 675. censured those which offered Milk instead of Wine
for the holy Sacrament; and see here the Terms that it uses: Council. Bracar.
3. c. 2 ^. 4. Council. p. 833.
Let them forbear then to offer Milk at the Sacrifice, because the manifest and
clear Example of the Truth of the Gospel appears plainly to our Eyes, which
admits not of offering any thing but Bread and Wine. The Protestants think,
that the Censure of the Council had been better applied, if it had been
represented unto those which dared to offer Milk instead of Wine, that it was
not Milk, but Wine which was to be converted into the proper Substance of the
Blood of Jesus Christ; and that it is very likely, that if the Fathers had
believed this substantial Conversion, they would not have failed to have done
so, because the Occasion invited them thereunto. The XVIth Council of Toledo
assembled the Year of our Lord 693. do censure another Abuse, which is, That
some Priests bethought themselves of offering for the Communion little Crusts
of Bread, which they raised round from Loaves, intended for their own use,
instead of offering of whole Loaves: The Council-reproves this Liberty,
whereunto it opposes the Example of Jesus Christ, who took an entire Loaf; but
it said not unto those People, that they were to blame, slightly to offer bits
of Bread without considering, that the Bread of the Eucharist is changed into
the Substance of the Body of Jesus Christ, which nevertheless might have been
of great weight unto them. On the contrary, it commands to offer midling
Loaves, fearing, if they were too big, the overplus which remained after the
Communion, might by its Grossness and Quantity, incommode the Stomach of them
which eat it; which, as it is supposed, drew them quite from any Thought of
Reality, and conducted them unto the Consideration of the Sacrament. In fine,
when Ratherius Bishop of Verona prohibits at the End of the Xth Century,
committing the Eucharist unto Lay-persons to be carried unto sick Folks, he
does not show in censuring this Abuse, that there is any Crime in putting into
profane Hands the real Body of our Savior, there being none but the Persons
which he has consecrated unto his own Service, which ought to enjoy this
Privilege, which in all probability he would not have failed to do, had he
been thoroughly persuaded of the Truth of the real Presence; he only commands,
T. 2. Spicil. Dacher. p. 261.
That none presume to give the Eucharist unto any Layman or Woman to be
carried unto the Sick. But it is not yet time to end these Proofs, the
Instructions which the Holy Fathers gave their Neophytes, and new Baptized,
will very likely afford us others: For although they never spoke against their
Judgment, not even in their Homilies and popular Sermons, where, according to
the Circumstance of the Times, they used some Restriction of not giving the
Eucharist the Name of Bread and Wine, thinking there might be present some
Catechumeny and Persons not initiated, which might hear them, and in whom the
Names of Bread and Wine might have created too low and mean Thoughts of the
Excellency of our Mysteries: Nevertheless, because it is supposed, that they
have expressed themselves clearer in instructing these young Plants but newly
grafted into the mystical Stock of the Church, by holy Baptism; let us see what
Succor we can draw from these sorts of Catechisms, wherein to give their
Neophytes a great Idea of the Sacrament, they forbear not using strong and
elevated Expressions; but yet in such a manner, as they plainly discover in
what Way they are to be understood: For instance; Cyril. Hierosol. Mystag. 5.
p. 244, 246.
St. Cyril of Jerusalem thus speaks unto his Catechumeny newly Baptized; In
coming to the Sacrament, come not with Hands stretched out, nor with the
Fingers open, but laying your right Hand in the left, as being to receive the
King, and hallowing the Palm of the Hand, receive the Body of Jesus Christ in
saying Amen. And having communicated of the Body of Christ, draw near unto the
Cup of his Blood, not in stretching out the Hands, but in bowing, by an Act
which shows a kind of Adoration or Veneration and of Worship, saying Amen,
sanctify your selves in receiving the Blood of Christ. Se here a fair and
great Idea of the Sacrament; but that his Neophyte should carry his Thoughts no
farther than he ought, he explains unto him in the same place, that he speaks
of a Body of Jesus Christ, of which he may lose some Part, of which a Crumb may
fall to the Ground; and of a Blood, whereof a Moisture and Humidity rests upon
the Lips, and wherewith one may wet the the Eyes, Ibid.
the Face, and other Organs of the Body: Having then, says he, with assurance
sanctified your Eyes by the touch of the sacred Body, receive it, taking heed
thou lose none of it; for what you lose of it, is as if you should lose one of
your Members. Tell me, if any one should give you Lingots of Gold, would you
not keep them with all manner of Diligence, taking care not to lose any Part of
them, and not to suffer Damage? And should you not take care that there fall
not any Crumb of this which is more precious than Gold, and than Pearls? And
afterward passing to the consideration of the Blood whereof he exhorted him to
participate with profound Respect, he teaches him of what Blood he should
understand it, when he adds; Ibid.
And as the Moisture and Humidity is yet upon the Lips, touching with your Hand
the Eyes, the Face, and other Organs of the Senses, sanctify them; and having
attended the Prayers, give Thanks unto God for that he has rendered you worthy
to participate of these great Mysteries. Hitherto our Neophyte has not been
ill instructed; but let us again hear how he spoke unto him in the foregoing
Catechism; Id. Catech. Mist. 4. p. 237. Ibid.
Jesus Christ affirming and saying of the Bread, This is my Body; who is it
that can yet make any doubt of it? and in saying of the Wine, that it is his
Blood; who will question it? and who will say it is not his Blood? Ibid.
He teaches him, that the Bread is the Body of Jesus Christ, and the Wine his
Blood; but to the end that he should not stagger at it, Ibid.
he conducts him unto the Metaphorical and Figurative Sense, when he says in
the same place; The Body is given unto you in the Figure of Bread; and the
Blood in the Type of Wine: And if he says unto him besides, That we shall be
Bearers of Christ, when we have his Body and Blood distributed into our
Members. See here what he adds to let him see how that is done. Jesus Christ
said unto the Jews, If you eat not my Flesh, and drink my Blood, you have no
Life in you. But they not understanding it spiritually, were offended, and
forsook him; thinking that he would have them eat human Flesh. The old Law also
had Shewbread which are not now used, because they appertained unto the
ancient Dispensation; but under the new, the heavenly Bread, and the Cup of
Salvation, sanctifies both Body and Soul; for as the Bread regards the Body,
so also the Word does regard the Soul. In fine, he gives also this other
Instruction unto his Neophyte; Hold for certain, that the Bread which is seen,
Id. ibid. p. 2^9
is not Bread, although the Relish judges it to be Bread; but believe that it
is the Body of Jesus Christ; and that the Wine which is seen, is not Wine,
although the Taste think so, but that it is the Blood of Jesus Christ. These
Words already begin to inform him, That there is Bread and Wine in the
Sacrament, and that the Sight and Taste do both testify the same; the
Infallibility and Certainty of which Testimony, the Fathers have asserted. But
because St. Cyril's Design in so speaking unto him, was to instruct him, that
he should not look upon them as bare Bread, and bare Wine, but as the
efficacious Sacraments of the Divine Body and Blood of Jesus Christ, Id. P. 237.
which they fail not to communicate unto those who worthily participate of
them: He told him a little before, Do not consider them as bare Bread and Wine;
for by these Words he plainly presupposes, that it is Bread and Wine, as he
presupposes elsewhere, that it is Water and Oil, when he says of Baptism, Do
not look at the bare Water, Id. Catech. 3. illum p. 16. and Mystag. 3. p. 235.
consider not this Washing as of common Water; beware of thinking that it is
common Oil. Thence it is, that he likens the Change which happens unto the
Bread and Wine of the Eucharist by Consecration, unto what befalls the Oil of
Chrism by Benediction, to the end his Catechumeny may be persuaded, that it is
a Change of the same Nature. Id. Mystag. 3. p. 235.
As (says he) the Bread of the Sacrament after the Invocation of the Holy
Ghost, is no longer common Bread, but the Body of Jesus Christ: So also this
holy Chrism is not bare Oil, or if it may be so said, common, after Invocation;
but it is a Gift and Grace of Jesus Christ. And to complete this Instruction,
Id. Mystag 5. p. 244.
he tells him in the fifth Catechism, you hear a Divine Melody, which to invite
you to the Communion of the holy Mysteries, sings these Words, Taste, and see
how good the Lord is. Think you that you are commanded to make this Trial with
the Mouth of the Body? not at all, but rather with an undoubted Faith, which
changes not; for you are not bid to taste the Bread and Wine, but the
Antitype, or the Figure of the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ. As St. Cyril
ended his Course, St. Gaudentius was called to the Bishopric of Bressia in
Italy; he also composed a kind of Catechism for his Neophytes, Gaudent. tract.
2. de rat. Sacram Bibl. Patr. t. 2. p. 14.
wherein he speaks unto them after this manner, In the shadow of the Legal
Passover there was not one, but several Lambs slain; there was one slain for
every House, one alone not being sufficient for all the People, because it was
the Figure, and not the Passion it self of our Lord. The Figure is not the
Substance, but the Imitation of the Truth. In this Truth then whereof we are
persuaded one died for all, and the same being offered in all the Churches,
does nourish in, or by the Mystery of Bread and Wine, being believed he
vivifies, and being consecrated he sanctifies those which consecrate, it is the
Flesh of the Lamb, it is his Blood; for the Bread which came down from Heaven
said, the Bread which I will give, is my Flesh, and I will give it for the Life
of the World; and his Blood is also well expressed by the Species of Wine;
because when himself says in the Gospel, I am the true Vine; he sufficiently
declares, that all the Wine offered in the Figure of his Passion, is his Blood.
In this whole Discourse he teaches them in the Death of Jesus Christ, to
search the Body and Substance of what had been prefigured by the Lambs of the
Jews; and if he speaks unto them of offering it again, he intended not to
understand it of a real Immolation, because all Christians have always
believed, and all do still believe, that Jesus Christ was never truly
sacrificed but upon the Cross, and that he cannot be any more sacrificed,
because he cannot die again. They might then easily understand, that St.
Gandentius spoke unto them of an improper Sacrifice, which consists in the
Representation of that which was made on the Cross: For it is in this Sense St.
Aug. Ep. 23. Gaud. Sermon. 19. p. 72.
Austin says, That he is every day offered in Sacrament and in Figure. And
Gaudentius himself, That we offer the Sufferings of the Passion of Jesus Christ
in Figure of his Body, and of his Blood. Besides, in telling them, that he is
immolated who was consecrated, He plainly shows them, that it is done not in
the Person of Jesus Christ, but in his Sacrament, else he should have instilled
into these Catechumenes two Doctrines which would directly contradict Christian
Piety; one is, That Jesus Christ is less than him that consecrates him. Cyril.
Alex. de Trin. dial 6. p. 558 t. 5. Heb 7.7.
For as St. Cyril of Alexandria says, What is sanctified is sanctified by a
greater and more excellent thing, than it is by Nature; according to what is
said by the Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews, that which is less, is
blessed by the greater. The other is, That Jesus Christ should not have been
always holy. For as the same Cyril again says, Id. ibid. p. 595.
Reason will absolutely persuade us to say, That that which is said to be
sanctified, has not ever been holy. Therefore our Gaudentius declares unto
them in the same Catechism, That Jesus Christ commanded to offer the Sacraments
of his Body and Blood in the Species of Bread and Wine, that is to say, Gaud.
ubi supra p. 16.
in the Substance of Bread and Wine: For by the Species the Ancients did not
understand Accidents without their Subject, because they have declared, that
could not be, but they understood the Substance it self of things; so that in
their manner of Speech, the Species of any thing, is the thing it self. As when
St. Aug tract. 11. in Joan. Ib. p. 14
Austin speaks of the Species of Baptism, to signify Baptism. St. Gaudentius
thus continues his Instruction; The Creator of Natures himself, and the Lord
which brings forth Bread out of the Earth, does again make his Body of Bread
because he can do it, and has promised it, and he that made Wine of Water,
makes his Blood of Wine. There was two things which hindered these Neophytes
from staggering at these Words; the one was, That they knew as well as all
other Christians, that the true Body of Jesus Christ was made a great while
ago, which made them refer these Words unto the Sacrament. The other was, That
their Catechiser himself obliged them to understand them so, when he calls the
Eucharist, Ibid. 14, and 16.
the Mystery of Bread and Wine; and that he says, That the Blood of Jesus
Christ is expressed or shown by the Species of Wine; that all Wine that is
offered in Figure of his Death, is his Blood; and that in the Bread is received
the Figure of the Body of Jesus Christ. Ib p. 14. Ibid. Ib. p. 15, and 26.
And to the end they should not imagine that for being the Figure of the Body
of Jesus Christ; it ceased to be his Body, he declares positively unto them,
That the Figure is not the Verity, but the Imitation or Symbol of the Verity.
From thence it is, that he exhorts them to receive the Sacrament of the Body of
our Lord with a Heart full of Zeal, and a Mouth that is not languishing; and to
offer the Sacraments of his Body and Blood in the Species of Bread and Wine.
Ibid. p. 15.
So that when he told them afterward, That Jesus Christ passes into it, that
is to say, the Bread and Wine; they easily conceive, that it is in regard of
his Efficacy and Virtue wherewith he accompanies the lawful Use of his
Sacrament; or as he says himself, by the Fire of his Divine Spirit. And when
he bids them, Ibid. p. 15.
not to hold that for terrestial which is made celestial; it is as if he had
said, That they should not look at what the Symbols had of earthly and common,
but to lift up their Souls unto what they have of Heavenly and Divine; Ibid.
I mean unto the Quality wherewith the Sacrament is accompanied for the
Consolation of our Souls. Do not boil (says he) the Sacrament in the Vessel of
a carnal Heart, which is naturally subject unto its Passions; Ibid. 15, and 16
this were to account it a common and earthly thing: whereas you should believe
that it is made by the Fire of the Divine Spirit, what it is declared to be.
For (he adds) what you receive is the Body of this heavenly Bread, and the
Blood of this holy Wine; because in giving unto his Disciples the consecrated
Bread and Wine, he said, This is my Body, this is my Blood. Let us believe, I
beseech you, in him in whom we have believed, the Truth cannot lie. And indeed
it would be a criminal Unbelief not to believe what Jesus Christ has said, who
is the Truth it self, viz. That the Bread is his Body, and the Wine his Blood,
which by the Confession of all, cannot be true, but in a Figurative and
Metaphorical Sense, and not properly according to the Letter. But St.
Gaudentius will not yet have done with his Neophytes, he thinks there yet wants
something for their Instruction, because he has not yet told them that the
Eucharist is a Pledge of the Presence of our Savior, an Earnest which he has
given us to supply his Absence, and to comfort us during the Time we are absent
from him, in setting before our Eyes the Image of the Death which he suffered
for us. Ibid. p. 16.
It is truly (says he) this Hereditary Present of the New Testament, which he
has left unto you as a Pledge of his Presence, in the Night wherein he was
betrayed to be crucified; it is that Viaticum of our Journey whereby we are
nourished by the Way until we go unto him in departing this World; for he would
that his Benefits should remain with us, he would have our Souls to be always
sanctified in his precious Blood by the Image of his Passion: therefore he
commanded his faithful Disciples, which whom he established the first Ministers
of his Church, conticontinually to practice these Mysteries of eternal Life,
which it is necessary all Priests should celebrate in all Churches throughout
the World, until Jesus Christ comes again from Heaven to the end that the
Priests themselves, and all the faithful People should always have before their
Eyes the Protraiture of the Passion of Jesus Christ, and that carrying him in
their Hands, and receiving him with the Mouth and the Heart, we may have deeply
engraven in our Memory the Grace of our Redemption; and that we should possess
against the Poison of Devils the sweet Antidote of a continual Preservative.
These Words are sweet, and full of Light, as well as of Piety; but here are
others of the same Catechism, which made no less Impression upon the Minds of
the new Converts, and which no less assisted them in understanding of this
Mystery; In that he commanded (says he) to offer the Sacraments of his Body
and Blood in the Species of Bread and Wine, Ibid. p. 16.
it is for a twofold Reason; in the first place, to the end the Lamb of God
without Spot might give unto the faithful People to be celebrated, a pure
Sacrifice without Fire, or Blood, or Boiling the Flesh; and that all the World
might offer easily and safely: then as it is necessary Bread should be made of
several Grains of Wheat reduced into Flour by the help of Water, and that it be
baked by Fire, there should reasonably be received in it the Figure of the Body
of Jesus Christ, who we know made one sole Body of the Multitude of all
Mankind. Unto these two Catechists I will add a third, which was incomparably
more famous; August. Sermon. ad Infant. ap. Fulg. de Bapt. Aethiop.
it is the great St. Austin, who gave this Lesson unto his Neophytes: What you
see is Bread, and it is also what your Eyes do testify; but the Instruction
which your Faith desires, is, That the Bread is the Body of Jesus Christ, and
the Cup his Blood. This is said in a few Words, and it may be these few may
suffice for your Faith; but Faith requires to be instructed; for the Prophet
says, If you believe not, you cannot understand; then you may now say unto me,
seeing you have commanded us to believe, explain unto us what it is, to the end
we might understand; for this Thought may be in every body's Mind: We know of
whom Jesus Christ our Lord took Flesh, to wit, of the Virgin Mary; we know he
was nursed in his Infancy, that he was fed, that he grew, that he attained the
Age of Manhood, that he suffered Persecution of the Jews, that he was nailed to
the Cross, that he there died, and was buried; that he rose the third Day, that
he ascended into Heaven when he was pleased to go thither; that he lifted up
his Body from whence he shall come to judge the quick and the dead; and that he
is now sitting on the right Hand of the Father: How then is the Bread his Body,
and the Cup his Blood? Brethren, these things are called Sacraments, because
one thing is what we see, and another is that we understand; that which is seen
is a bodily Species; that which we understand has a spiritual Fruit: If then
you would know what the Body of Jesus Christ is, hearken to St. Paul the
Apostle, which said unto Believers, You are the Body of Jesus Christ and his
Members, your Sacrament is laid upon the Lord's Table, and you there receive
your Mystery. You say Amen unto what you are, and you thereto subscribe by your
Answer. It is said unto you, The Body of Jesus Christ; and you answer, Amen; be
Members then of Jesus Christ, that your Amen may be true. But why all this to
the Bread? let us not add here nothing of our own, but let us farther hear the
same Apostle speaking of this Sacrament; We which are many, are one Bread and
one Body; understand this and rejoice; for here is nothing but Unity, Piety,
Charity, one Bread and one Body, although we be many. Observe, that the Bread
is not made of one Grain, but of many: When you were exorcised, you passed, as
it were, under the Mill; when you were baptized, you were, as it were, kneaded;
and when you received the fire of the Holy Ghost, you were baked like Bread: Be
then what you see, and receive what you are. See here what the Apostle has
said of Bread, whereby he sufficiently shows, without repeating it, what we
should believe in regard of the Cup; for as to make this visible Species of
Bread, several Grains are reduced into one Body to represent what the Scripture
says of Believers, they were but one Heart, and one Soul in God: It is also
the same of Wine; consider how it is one, several Grapes are in a Bunch, but
their Liquor is mingled all into one Body; so it is Christ has represented us,
so it is he has made us his, and that he has consecrated upon the holy Table
the Mystery of Unity, and of our Peace. So it was they instructed in the
ancient Church the new Baptized; they were told, that what they see upon the
Holy Table, was Bread; and their own Eyes were called to witness this Truth.
They were taught, that this Bread was the natural Body of Jesus Christ, as it
was his mystical and moral Body, that is to say, his Church; because it is the
Sacrament both of the one and the other; and that in the Sacrament must
carefully be distinguished the Substance of the Symbols which are visible and
corporeal, from the Benefit which accrues unto the believing Soul, and which is
a Thing invisible and spiritual; that faithful Believers are, although for
mystical Reasons, the very same thing which they see upon the mystical Table,
that is to say, Bread; according to what the Apostle says, we are one Bread;
and that they do receive truly that which they see mystically. Now let the
Reader judge, if these Catechisms, and these Instructions are for the Use of
Roman Catholics, or for the Use of Protestants; as for my particular, I Will
pass unto a new Consideration.

CHAP. VIII.
Proofs of the Doctrines of the Holy Fathers, drawn by Protestants from some
Customs of the Ancient Church.

THere are two sorts of Language used in the Society and Commerce of Men, to
communicate unto each other their Thoughts and Intentions, I mean Words and
Actions. The Language of Actions is silent indeed, yet nevertheless very
intelligible; because Actions, I speak of those authorized by public Use, are
for the most part as significant as Words: It is not then to be thought
strange, if we do relate what Inferences the Protestants draw from certain
Customs which were practiced by the ancient Church, and which we have at large
established in the first Part: Therefore we will look upon them in this, as
established, and will content our selves in barely mentioning them one after
another, to infer from each of them what may lawfully be deduced. In Africa in
St. Austin's time, they communicated after Meat, Thursday before Easter; and in
several Churches in Egypt, every Saturday in the Year at Evening, after having
made a good Meal: Without speaking of the Church of Corinth in St. Paul's time,
where some think the same was practiced, what Belief could those People have of
the Sacrament of the Eucharist? It is no very easy matter to think, that they
believed it to be the Substance of the Body of Jesus Christ, and his Flesh it
self, else it must be confessed, that they were guilty of an horrible
Profanation to lodge in a Stomach full of Meats, and it may be sometimes even to
excess, the precious Body of the Savior of Mankind, the only Object of their
Worship and Adoration. Nevertheless, none of the ancient Writers have condemned
this Practice; those which have treated of it, have spoken as of an innocent
Custom, which had no hurt in it, and which, moreover, was authorized by the
Example of Jesus Christ himself. Therefore when the third Council of Carthage
commanded to celebrate the Sacrament fasting, it excepted the Thursday before
Easter, whereon it permitted to participate every Year after the Meal. An
evident Proof, say some, that there was no Crime in this Custom, whereas it
would have been intolerable, if they had believed then the same of the
Sacrament, as the Latin Church now does belive of it: Therefore no Body can
justly blame the Severity of its Laws, when it is so strictly prohibited to
communicate otherwise than Fasting. The ancient Church for a long time used
Patens and Chalices of Glass; and we do not find, that these first Christians
ever made any difficulty of putting the Sacrament in Glass-Chalices, nor that
they were ever blamed that did it. On the contrary, some of those which used
this Practice were commended for it; nevertheless we cannot say, that these
ancient Believers were less circumspect than we are, in the Celebration of the
Sacrament: Wherefore then was it, that they feared not so much spilling of it
in that Occasion, as the Latin Church has done some Ages past? Let this
Difference be well considered, for, says the Protestant, I am much deceived,
if upon a serious and impartial Debate, it will not be attributed unto the
Difference of Judgment, it not being to be imagined, that Christians so good,
and zealous, and fervent for the Religion of Jesus Christ, as those were of
whom we speak, and have had the same Belief of the Sacrament that the Latin
Church at this time has, which for some time past, does not suffer the Use of
Glass-Chalices, that they had not, at least, used so much Precaution as she
does, to consecrate and distribute the Sacrament; I mean they would have made
it a Scruple of Conscience of putting the Body of their God and Savior in so
brittle a Thing as Glass, those which were so careful, that none of the sacred
Symbols of their Bread and Wine should fall to the Ground. The ancient
Christians gave the Eucharist to young sucking Children at the Breast; a Custom
which continued in the West until the XIIth Century, and which is still
practiced in most Christian Communions, excepting the Roman Catholics, and the
Protestants. How came it to pass this Abuse was so long tolerated in the
Church, if it had been always believed therein, what the Latins do believe at
present, who cannot justly be blamed, by little and little, to have abolished
this Custom? One could not without Horror, see exposed what was believed to be
the Body and Blood of Christ, unto the undecent and sad Accidents, which
oftentimes of necessity happen in communicating of young Children; those little
Creatures being incapable, by reason of their tender Age, of receiving the
Sacrament with Respect which is due unto the Body it self of Jesus Christ our
Redeemer. But wherefore did the ancient Church for so many Ages suffer such an
Abuse, or at least, having tolerated it some time, wherefore had she not
bethought her self of abolishing it, instead of letting it take root in the
midst of it? Was it not so wise as the Church at this time is? Had she less
Zeal, less Piety, and less Prudence? had she less love for Jesus Christ, or
less Veneration for his sacred Person? certainly I suppose not. This Difference
then of Conduct cannot be grounded upon any other Reason, but upon the
Difference of Faith: whilst Christians believed that what they received in the
Eucharist, was Bread and Wine in Substance, but that at the same time they were
also the Divine Sacraments of the Body and Blood of Christ; the Reasons which
moved them to give the Eucharist unto young Children, made them pass by the
Indecencies which might be feared on the Behalf of these little Creatures. But
when the Doctrine changed in the West, and that in the Latin Church they began
to say, that it was the very Body and Blood of Jesus Christ, this ancient
Custom was abolished, it not agreeing well with their Belief: And indeed we see
this Abolition was made about the time when this notable Change happened in
their Doctrine. And because that in other Christian Communions, there is no
Alteration happened by any public Decree in the Tradition of their Fathers
upon the Subject of the Sacrament, they have innocently retained the ancient
Custom of giving the Sacrament unto little Children. I confess this Practice is
contrary to what St. Paul desires of Communicants, which is to examine
themselves before they draw near unto the holy Table; of which Proof little
Children are incapable. But as we do not here treat, but only of what was done
by the ancient Christians, and of what is still practiced by several Christian
Churches, and not of what ought to be done, I Will say no more of it; referring
the Induction which the Protestants draw from this Practice, unto the Judgment
of all reasonable Persons, which will take the Pains to read this History. The
Communion under both Kinds was practiced in the Church until these last Ages,
wherein the Latins deprived the People of the Use of the sacred Cup; for as for
all other Christian Societies, which hold not Correspondence with her, they
retain the Custom of administering the Sacrament under both Symbols, although with
some little Difference. The great Ground of the Latin Church for so doing,
being through Fear of shedding it: But how comes it to pass, that this Fear is
so lately crept into their Thoughts? Whence is it, that she her self practiced
the Communion under both Kinds, for above a thousand Years without any body
scrupling it? On the contrary, when she began to forbid the Use of the Cup unto
the People by a Decree at the beginning of the XVth Century, a great many
Persons complained of it, and whole Countries earnestly desired, it might be
restored unto them. Wherefore did she so long time grant unto her People the
Communion under both Symbols distinctly? Was there then less cause of Fear of
shedding, than when they deprived them of this Advantage, particularly at the
time when in Rome it self they used Chalices of Glass? For it must be owned,
that Glass being a weak thing, there was never greater ground to fear spilling,
than during the time those Chalices were used; yet nevertheless when there was
most cause of this Fear, they suffered the People to participate of the Cup of
our Lord, as well as of his Bread; and when there is less Danger,
Glass-Chalices being no longer in Use, they are refused it. Whence, say they,
proceeds such a notable Change, which could have no show of Reason, if the
Doctrine had not been altered? but because wise and prudent Persons do not
incline unto these Sorts of Changes, without some powerful Motives, it must be
freely confessed, that no other can be found, whatever Scrutiny could be made,
but the Change of Belief. And in truth, say they again, if this Change be not
presupposed, it will be a very hard matter to forbear censuring those of
Lightness, which made it a Change; I say, of the Nature, that is, of, and in a
thing which was grounded upon the Authority of Christ himself, and the constant
Practice of so many Ages. Whereas if the prohibiting the Cup be considered as a
Consequence of this Change, it will not be hard to conceive, that the Fear of
shedding the real Blood of the Son of God, obliged them to forbid unto the
People the Use of the holy Cup, rather choosing to deprive them of this Comfort
and Consolation, than to fall into the Inconvenience of some negligent spilling
of the Substance it self of the Blood of their Divine Savior. A Fear which
has not seized the other Christian Communions, because they have not practiced
any Innovation in this particular; or that at least there has not any been
made by any public Determination. In the ancient Church the Eucharist was
delivered into the Communicants Hand, who with the Hand put it into their
Mouth, as has been proved; and we may produce Examples of this Practice in the
XIIth Century, in Flanders: At this time in the Latin Church it is put directly
into the Communicants Mouth, unto whom it is not permitted to receive it with
the Hand, although the Church of Rome her self practiced it so formerly for
several Ages. From whence again could proceed this Change, but from the Change
of Doctrine? whilst it was believed, that what was received at the mystical
Table, was true Bread and Wine; but Bread and Wine which the Consecration had
separated from the common Use they had in Nature, to apply them unto a holy and
religious Use in Grace, Communicants were permitted to receive the Sacrament in
their Hands. But when they taught, that it was the real Body of Jesus Christ,
they began to put it into the Mouth of such as presented themselves at the
Communion, judging their Hands were not worthy to receive the Flesh it self of
their Savior; and fearing that some, by Neglect, should let fall to the Ground
this precious Body; an Inconvenience which their Forefathers never thought of,
or if they did think of it, they did not so much fear it, though otherwise they
were as circumspect in the Celebration of this Divine Sacrament, so far as to
take Care with incomparable Exactness, that none of it should fall to the
Ground. Let every body judge the Reason of so notable a Difference. But if the
Sacrament was put into the Hand of Communicants, they were wont also for a long
time to carry it home along with them to their Houses: At present amongst the
Latins, it would be a criminal Action, Father Petau tells us, and held for a
Profanation of this Sacrament. As for my part, I cannot blame this Severity of
the Latin Church, because she believes that it is the adorable Body of the Son
of God, whereunto is owing Sovereign Respect. What shall we then say unto the
ancient Fathers which permitted it, and which believed not, as St. Basil tells
us, that this Custom was not worthy of Blame? We cannot but know that their
Zeal was greater than ours, and their Piety more ardent than what appears in us
at this time. How then have they so long time tolerated this Practice in the
Church, and even in that of Rome, as St. Jerome has made appear? From whence
the Protestant concludes, That one cannot reasonably forbear attributing the
Reason of this Toleration to any thing, but the Difference of their Doctrine,
and to say, that their Belief upon this Point being quite contrary, they made
no Scruple of suffering what the Latins would not suffer at present for all the
World. And as they suffered Communicants to carry the Sacrament to their Houses
to keep and take it when they pleased, they also suffered them to carry it in
their Travels and Journeys, even by Sea, where they made no Difficulty of
celebrating and participating of it when Occasion required; as the Example of
Maximinian Bishop of Syracusa, and his Companions do testify, for being in
Danger of suffering Shipwreck, they received (it is said) the Body and Blood of
their Redeemer: But in the Latin Church it is practiced quite contrary at this
time, it not being permitted to celebrate the whole Mass, neither at the Sea,
nor upon Rivers, but only to read the Epistle and Gospel, to say the Lords
Prayer, and give the Benediction: In a Word, to say that which was anciently
called the Mass of the Catechumeny, that is to say, unto that Part called the
Canon. Thom Valdens. and Guilhelm. Duran^ apud Cassand, in Liturg. c. 34.
Cassand. ib.
Whence it is Cassander makes this Observation, drawn from a Book of the Order
of the Mass according to the Use of the Church of Rome: This dry Mass, that is
to say, without Consecration and Communion, is also called Naval; because it is
judged it can only be said after that manner in an unsteady place, and where
there is motion, as at Sea, and upon Rivers; in which places it is believed
that an entire Mass cannot be said. Pope Gregory the first, nevertheless,
blamed not what was done by Maximinian and his Companions, when he relates the
History of it in his Dialogues, no more than St. Ambrose does the Action of his
Brother Satyrus: All which again gives Ground to believe that in all
likelihood, they had not then that Opinion of the Sacrament, which Roman
Catholics now have; for they would not have failed to have taken the same
Caution. Anciently in the Church the Communion was freely sent unto sick Folks
by Lay-persons, by Boys, Men, or Women, which continued in the West until the
IXth, and Xth Centuries. What Appearance is there they would so long have
tolerated this Custem, if the Belief of those times had been the same of that
of the Latin Church at present? it is thought they would have been more
reserved; and that they would not have so slightly entrusted the Body of Jesus
Christ unto all Sorts of Persons, indifferently. But besides all these Customs
which we have instanced, and from whence we have drawn the necessary
Inferences, there be yet others which we already examined in the first Part,
the Consequences whereof we are also obliged to show. The ancient Christians
made no Difficulty to employ the Sacrament to make Plasters, as St. Austin
has assured us: every body knows, that to make a Plaster, sometimes Drugs are
used that must be bruised and pounded in a Mortar; sometimes Roots are used
that must be boiled; and which by means of certain Liquors, are reduced into
the consistence of an Ointment, or thick matter, and such as may conveniently
be spread upon a Linencloth, or upon Flax, afterward to apply it unto the
distempered part which wants Ease. Was there ever any Christian that believed
such a Sort of Medicine could be made of the proper and natural Body of Jesus
Christ? that it could be beat and pounded in a Mortar, or boiled with Liquor?
or, in a Word, reduced in the State, which they are wont to do those Things
which are requisite to make Plasters? or if any were so extravagant to believe
it, or so wicked and senseless to attempt it, had it been possible to be done?
all others would they not have exclaimed against such a Person? would they not
have esteemed him monstrous, and worthy enduring the greatest of all
Punishments? Nevertheless, there has been found those which made Plasters of
the Eucharist, and which, far from being blamed, have been praised and
commended by pious and devout Persons fearing God, witness that Mother
mentioned by St. Austin. Seeing then that a Plaster cannot be made of the true
Body of Jesus Christ, it necessarily follows, that where there was one made, it
was of the Substance of the Symbols; and that the Christians that did so, were
persuaded, that it was not the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ, but a Substance
of Bread and Wine. In the ancient Church the Sacrament was buried with the
Dead: as there is no Christian but knows that Christ died, that he was buried,
and rose again the third Day; neither is there any but do know that he dies no
more, and that he shall no more be buried. Those then which heretofore buried
the Eucharist with the Dead, did not believe in all likelihood that it was the
very Body of our Lord; for they would not have done any such thing, the very
Thoughts of it would have terrified them, and they would have esteemed
themselves the worst of Men to have put their Savior, which they knew to be in
Heaven, in the Possession of Sovereign Glory, into such a mean and low Estate.
In this same Church in several Places they caused to be burnt the Overplus of
the Sacrament; and in other Places they caused it to be eaten by Children,
which they made come from School on purpose: Is it to be thought, that if they
had believed it was the very Substance of the Body of Jesus Christ, that they
would have given it so freely unto Children, who were sent for to come from
School to that effect? It is also more unlikely, that they would have caused to
be burnt the Flesh it self of the Savior of Mankind, and to cast the Son of
God into the Fire, who had ransomed them from the eternal Fire of Hell. The
ancient Christians have sometimes taken the consecrated Cup, and have mingled
it with Ink, and then dipped their Pen in these two Liquors mixed, the more
authentically to sign what they had intended to ratify, not considering what
is in the Cup, but as a Symbol and Sacrament of the Blood of the Son of God;
yet one would be struck with some Terror so to see profaned this Sacrament of
our Salvation; but if one considers it as the Blood it self of Jesus Christ,
one shall find himself seized with a holy Fear: And because it cannot fall
within the Compass of a Christian's Thoughts, to employ unto this Use the
Substance of the Blood of our Lord, if he had it in his power it self, it must
be concluded, that those who did it, were very far from thinking that it was
the real Blood of our Savior. It may be, the same Consequence might be drawn
from the Practice of the Greek Church, which mingles warm Water with the Wine
after Consecration, and at the instant of communicating. But because we shall
be obliged to speak elsewhere of the Belief of the Greeks, we will not enlarge
upon it in this place, and we shall only advertise the Reader, that all the
Customs from whence have been drawn these Inductions contained in this Chapter,
have been examined in the 5, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, and 16 Chapters of the
first Part of this History, and are those which Protestants do make, and which
the Quality of an Historian, which I have assumed in this Work, has obliged me
to represent.

CHAP. IX.
Other Proofs drawn from the Silence of Heathens, and of things objected
against them by the Holy Fathers.

HAving sometimes applied my self to consider how the Enemies of Christians
have behaved themselves in reference to the Simplicity of our Mysteries, I find
they have been displeased with most of them, and that they have aspersed them.
The Jews, as we find in the Acts and the Epistles of the holy Apostles, could
not endure that Christians should believe Jesus Christ, the Son of the blessed
Virgin, was the Messiah which had been promised, nor that they should believe
he was risen from the Dead, and ascended into Heaven; nor that they should
endeavor to free Men from the Yoke of Moses his Law. It will suffice only to
read the Dialogue or Conference of Tryphon the Jew, Just. Martyr Dial. cum
Tryph. p 290, 291, 292, 293, 317.
against Justin Martyr, therein to see, that this Son of the Synagogue did
Reproach unto the Children of the Church, as things incredible, monstrous, and
grossly forged, what we teach; That Jesus Christ was before Abraham and Aaron;
that he assumed our Nature, and was born of a Virgin; a Mystery which this
insolent Jew esteems ridiculous and fabulous, insomuch as wickedly to compare
it unto the Fables which the Greek. Poets relate of their Danae; and in that we
believe God was born, and was made Flesh: but he finds nothing more incredible
than the Cross of Jesus Christ; Tertul. ad Judaeos cap. 10.
which Tertullian also reckons amongst the chiefest Objections which the Jews
made against Christian Religion, according to what the Apostle said, That the
Cross of Jesus Christ was a Stumbling Block to the Jews, and Foolishness to the
Gentiles. The same Tryphon again reproacheth unto Christians as a great crime,
that they adored a Man, and that they placed their Confidence in him. From
whence he takes Occasion to charge them of introducing another God besides the
Creator. As for the Gentiles, they were no better disposed than the Jews,
because they despised the same Belief, and counted fabulous all other Articles
which seemed to contradict the common Notions, and which did not exactly agree
with the Principles and Maxims of other Religions. For Example: Clem. Alex.
Strom. l. 6. p. 677.
Clement of Alexandria observes, that they found it very strange, that we said
God had a Son; that this Son should speak in Man; that he suffered; and that
they esteemed this Doctrine as a Fable and Forgery. Tertullian witnesses the
same. Te^t^l. Apol. c. 21.
Therefore having explained the incomprehensible Mystery of the eternal
Generation of the Son, and of his Incarnation, he speaks according to their
Supposition, and says; Nevertheless, believe this Fable, that is to say, admit
at last this Doctrine which you look upon as a Fable. And elsewhere speaking
again according to the Opinion the Gentiles had of it, he calls the Mysteries
of our Faith, the Foolishness of Christian Discipline; and puts particularly in
this Number, a God born, Id. de Ca^n. Christ. c. 4, and 5. Id. Apolog. c. 47,
48. and de tes^im. an. c. 4. Just. Apol. 2. p. 60 Arnob. l 2. p. 24.
and yet born of a Virgin, and a God of Flesh, crucified and buried. Whereunto
he adds in another Treatise; The last Judgment, the Torments of Hellfire,
Heaven, and the Resurrection of the Body. And he collects from all these
Articles of Faith, that they condemned them of Vanity, of Presumption, of
Folly, and of Stupidity. St. Justin Martyr also writes, that they called the
Incarnation and Passion of the Son, an Extravagancy. And Arnobius assures us,
That they made a Jest at the Simplicity of Christians, in obliging them to
believe the Resurrection from the Dead, and the everlasting Torments of
Hellfire. Orig. contrs C^ls l. 1.
But if we look upon the Books of Origin against the Philosopher Celsus, we
shall therein find other things which will inform us of the wicked and
prodigious Fables, which the Gentiles made use of to slander and calumniate the
Birth of our Divine Jesus, and of making the inviolable Chastity of the blessed
Virgin, the Subject of their Raileries. This Philosopher reproacheth unto
Christians the Doctrine of the Incarnation of the Eternal Word, as a thing
unworthy the Divinity. Id. l. 2. p. 79. uit edit.
The Son of God (says he) ought to have appeared like the Sun, which shows
it self in spreading its Light over all Things. And afterward directing his
Words unto Christians, he says unto them; That having said the Word was the
Son of God, they declare, instead of the pure and holy Word of God, a Man
shamefully punished, whipped, and nailed to a Cross. He makes a Jest, Id. ibid.
l. 6. p. 3 5.
that we should believe that God is born of a Virgin, saying, that God
intending to send a Spirit, had no need to form it by his Breath in the Womb of
a Woman; because knowing before how to make a Body, he could have made one for
himself, without sending his Spirit in so filthy a place. And to render the
more ridiculous this great Mystery of our holy Religion, he compares it unto
the Fables of Danae, Id. lib. 1. p. 30. Id. l. 3. p. 131. and 8. p 385.
of Menalippe, of Auge, and of Antiope. He could not suffer they should adore,
and as he says elsewhere, that they should honor with a Worship religious
above all Religion, a Man that had been a Prisoner, and was dead. As also for
that Reason justifies the Plurality of his Gods, as if Christians contented not
themselves in worshipping one alone, under a Shadow that they worshipped Jesus
Christ. Id. l. 8. p. 385.
If Christians (says he) worshipped but one only God, they might, it may be,
have some Pretext of despising all others; but they render infinite Honors
unto this, which has appeared but of late; nevertheless they think they do not
offend God, when they serve and honor his Minister. What St. Cyril of
Alexandria has written against Julian the Apostate, sufficiently informs us of
all the Blasphemies which this Back slider from the Christian Religion spewed
out against all that was most Holy and Sacred in the most important and
essential Mysteries of our Religion. He denied the Incarnation of the Divinity
of Jesus Christ, which is the Ground and Foundation of all our Hopes, the
Salvation he has purchased for us with the Price of his Blood; he reviles us
with the glorious Title of Mother of God, which we give unto the holy Virgin;
Julian Ap Cyril. Alex. l. 8. p. 262. t. 6.
You cease not (says he) to call Mary, Mother of God. He refutes the Mystery
of the Trinity of Persons in the Unity of Essence, accusing us of contradicting
Moses, who says there is but one God; whereas we admit of Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost. Id l. 9. p. 290, 291.
Moses, says he, taught there is but one God, but you have invented Things
which agree not with what Moses said; for you teach, that the Son is God with
the Father. Id. l. 8. p. 262.
And in the foregoing Book, They will tell me, it may be, they admit not of
two, nor three; but I Will show, that they do admit of it by the Testimony of
John, when he says, In the Beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God,
and the Word was God. Id. ibid. p. 276.
If the Word is God (says he again) as you assure it is, begotten of the
Substance of the Father; wherefore say you, that the Virgin is the Mother of
God? For how can a Woman of the same human Nature with us, bring forth a God?
And morover, seeing God said positively, It is I, and there is no Savior but
me; how then dare you call him your Savior, which is born of a Woman?
Accordingly we read in the Acts of the Martyrdom of Terachus, of Probus, and
Andronicus, which Cardinal Baronius inserts in his Annals: but which Mr. Emery
Bigot, unto whom the whole Republic of Learning is obliged, has given us more
entire in Latin, two or three Years since, and from whom we daily expect it in
Greek: we there read it, I say, that the Judge Maximius a Pagan, hearing
Terachus which he caused to be tormented, say, That he trusted in the Name of
God and of his Christ, failed not from thence to take Occasion to treat him
with Unjust and Cursed, and to tax him with the Plurality of Gods; P^ass SS.
Tarachi, etc. p. 7.
False and wicked that thou art (said he) thou adorest then two Gods, which
thou confessest with the Mouth, and thou deniest those which we do serve. But
to return to the great Enemy of the Christian Name, I mean Julian the Apostate,
he also has vilified our holy Baptism, reproaching us with what we believe of
the Virtue and Efficacy of these mystical and healing Waters. See (says he)
what St. Paul says unto them, Julian Ap. Cyril Alex. l. 7. p. 245.
that they have been cleansed and sanctified through the washing of Water: as
if Water penetrated unto the Soul, to wash, and to purify it: But Baptism
cannot heal a Leper, non a Scurf, -- nor a Scab, nor a Gout, nor a Dysentery,
nor a Dropsy, nor the least Sickness of the Body; and then how much more
unable is it to remove Adulteries, Rapines, and all other Impurities of the
Soul? This wretched Apostate has ever undertaken to condemn the wise and just
Conduct of the God which we adore, in punishing of some for the Sins of others;
and for the same Reason he makes some Attempt against the Doctrine of Original
Sin; he urges what is written, That God visits the Iniquities of the Fathers
upon the Children; and insolently condemns what God said in the Book of Numbers
touching Phineas, who ran a Javelin through the Israelitish Man, which defiled
himself with the Midianitish Woman, till that he had turned away his Anger from
the Children of Israel, and hindered that he had not consumed them. Id ibid l.
5. p. 160, 161.
Suppose (says he) there had been a Thousand, which had undertaken to
transgress the Laws of God, ought six hundred thousand been destroyed for the
Sin of one thousand? It seems to me, says he, it had been much better to save
one wicked Man with so many thousands of Good, than to have destroyed so many
thousands of good Men in the Destruction of one wicked Man. There is scarce one
of all our Mysteries, but have been attacqued by the Jews, or the Gentiles, and
have been censured by them; which does evidently show that they had Knowledge of
them, and that they were not ignorant of what was believed and practiced in the
Christian Religion, either by reading our Books, or by the Relation of some
Apostates that fell away: what we have hitherto said, sufficiently testifies
it, Lactant. Instit. l. 5. c 2.
and what Lactantius says of a Heathen, which wrote against the Religion of
Jesus Christ, does fully confirm it. He related, says he, so many Things, and
Things so secret and private, that he seemed to have formerly been of the same
Belief. That which causes Admiration in a great many, is, that amongst so many
Things as they have said of our Religion, amongst so many Reproaches which they
have made against Christians, touching the Nature of their Mysteries, amongst
so many Accusations as they have contrived against them, amongst so many
Calumnies wherewith they have endeavored to slander them, they have never
attacqued them about the Mystery of the Sacrament. The Emperor Julian scoffed
at the Mystery of Baptism, but as for the Sacrament of the Eucharist, we do not
find, that either him, or any other has ever given it the least Onset: Their
Admiration is the greater, when they consider that the Doctrine of the real
Presence has been exposed unto very sharp Reproaches of the wise Men of the
World; for Cardinal du Perron relates, Du Perr. de l' Eucharast l. 3 c. 29. p.
973. La Boulay le Goux in his Travels part 1. c. 10 p. 21.
upon the Credit of Sarga a Jesuit, that the Philosopher Averroes, a Mohammedan
by Religion, said, That he found no Sect worse, or more foolish, than that of
Christians, who eat and tear the God which they adore. And Mr. Boulay le Goux
does testify in his Travels, That Mohammedan Soldiers in a Contest they had
with his Servants, amongst other Reproaches which they used, they called them
Wicked, Unbelievers, Eaters of their God. I will not here insist upon the
Treatise of Joseph Albon, a Spanish Jew, called Ikkarim, wherein he represents
all the Inconveniences which arise from the Doctrine of the substantial
Conversion; and which, as he conceives, does contradict the Lights of Reason,
and the Testimony of the Senses; but I will only say, that the Protestants draw
this Consequence, That if the ancient Christians had been of that Belief, the
Jews and the Gentiles would not have failed in all likelihood to have
reproached them of it, and to have made it the Subject of their Scorn; for they
cannot think that Celsus had less Wit than Averroes, nor that the ancient
Enemies of Christianity were less inquisitive, nor less concerned than the
Turks are now, who commonly live in Ignorance. The Roman Empire was never more
refined by Arts and Sciences, than when the Christian Religion began to be
established; so that Christians had for their Enemies and Persecutors Men full
of Wit, Knowledge, and of Understanding, and which had spent a great part of
their time in Search of Learning: nevertheless we do not find that they have
contested with them upon the Subject of the Eucharist, nor that ever they made
them the Reproaches that Averroes and the Turks have made, and do still make
unto those of the Latin Church. It is the Observation which the late Mr. Rigaut
made, Rigalt. not. ad Tertul. l. 2. ad Uxor. c. 5.
when he said, That amongst so many Villainies and Injuries wherewith they
charged the Christians, even in accusing them of Impiety, under pretext they
had no Altars, and that they sacrificed not. And amongst so many Apostates
which fell away from their Religion, there was not one found that accused them
of eating the Flesh, and drinking the Blood of their God. And to say the Truth,
say the Protestants, there is great Reason to wonder at this Silence, if it be
supposed that the ancient Christians believed and did what is done and believed
by the Latin Church in the point of the Sacrament. We know that the Romans and
Greeks despised the Religion of the Egyptians, which was, indeed, full of
Idolatry, Javenal Satyr 15.
and which one of their best Poets made a Mock of in one of his Satyrs; Neither
are we ignorant of these Words of the best of their Orators; Cicero l. 3. de
Not. Deor.
Do you think there is any Man such a Fool as to believe that what he eats is
God? They cannot then conceive, that those People were of such Thoughts, and
that they should have been silent toward Christians, if they had indeed
believed, that they did eat the Flesh it self of their God and Savior; What
likelihood is there they would have spared them upon it, after having flouted
them with most of their Mysteries, and after having made them the Subject of
their Raileries and Pastimes? Certainly when they compare this constant and
continued Silence, with the Reproach made against the Latins, they can see no
other Cause of this different Proceeding, but the Difference of Belief. For if
the primitive Christians had believed with the Latin Church, that what they
receive at the Lord's Table, was truly and really their God, the Gentiles would
not have failed to have made them the same Reproaches which the Infidels make
against the Latins. Seeing then they have not been exposed unto the like
Reproaches, one cannot choose (as they think) but conclude in all likelihood,
that they had not the same Belief, yet it must be granted there i^ to be seen
in the Writings of the Ancients, one Testimony, from whence it may seem to be
collected, that the Gentiles believed that Christians did really eat the Flesh
of Jesus Christ: It is Oecumenius that has preserved it under the Name of St.
Irenaeus, and of the first Martrys of Lions, Oecumen. Comment. in 1 Pet. c. 2.
he thus represents it unto us; The Greeks having taken the Servants of
Christian Catechumenies, and torturing them to discover some Secrets touching
the Christians: These Servants having nothing to say to the liking of those
which tormented them, except what they had heard their Masters say, That the
Divine Communion is the Flesh and Blood of Jesus Christ, they also thinking it
was really Flesh and Blood, said so unto those which examined them; which they
took as if the thing had been indeed done by Christians; and they signified so
much unto the other Greeks, and constrained Sanctus and Blandina the Martyrs,
by violence of Torments to confess it; but Blandina answered them boldly, and
to the Purpose, with these Words; How can it be, that those who abstain from
Meats which are allowed them, should endure such things? It is said, that
whoever will but take the pains to compare this Relation of Oecumenius with the
ample and exact Relation of what passed in the Trials of the Martyrs of Lions
and Vienna, which is conserved till our Time in Eusebius his Ecclesiastical
History, and with what the Fathers 7 or 800 hundred Years elder than him, have
taught us, to wit, That the Gentiles have not at all made these Reproaches
against Christians upon the Subject of the Sacrament, would therein find so
many and great Differences, that he would verily conclude, that Oecumenius in
all likelihood, relying too much upon his Memory, has reported an Occasion of
this Reproach quite otherwise than it is to be seen in the Acts inserted by
Eusebius in his History, and particular Circumstances, which are not there to
be found; some whereof are also contrary unto those which are therein at this
present; but that none should have Cause to complain, as if it were intended to
discredit a Testimony which may give light unto the History which we write, it
must be received as it is, without inquiring any farther, if it agrees, or not
agrees with the Acts before spoken of. To this Effect it is said, That it might
well be, that the Gentiles, transported with Hatred and Malice against the
Christians, might have given a wrong meaning unto what they had extorted by
Torments from the Mouth of some of their Domestics; and that having heard of
them, that their Masters called the Bread and Wine of the Holy Communion, the
Body and Blood of Jesus Christ, they concluded, that it was indeed his Body and
Blood, and that they did really eat this Flesh and Blood: But as it was not
just to judge of the Belief of Christians upon the Testimony of their Enemies,
whose aim was only to slander the Truth of their Religion, let us consider a
little, say they, what is contained in the Words of Oecumenius, or if you will,
of St. Irenaeus speaking by the Mouth of Oecumenius: In the first place, they
attribute unto the Ignorance and Stupidity of these Slaves, that they thought
that the Christians held the Sacrament of the Eucharist for the true Flesh and
Blood of Jesus Christ, because they called it his Body and Blood; having heard
their Masters say, that the Divine Communion is the Flesh and Blood of Jesus
Christ: They thought that it was really the Flesh and Blood, and said so unto
those which examined them. Secondly, they declare positively, That the Pagans
had taken it, as if the Christians had eaten really this Flesh and Blood, which
shows that the Christians had quite another Opinion: (...), c^e^^adire juxta
Hesy^hium, (...).
They understood it, it is added, as if it had truly been done by Christians.
And in fine, they represent unto us Blandina answering them freely, That
Christians were so far from eating the Flesh and Blood of their Savior, that
they voluntarily abstained, and that by a kind of Duty, even from Meats and
Flesh which was lawful: How can it be, says she, that those that abstain by
Exercise from Flesh, which is lawful, should endure such things? And because
Christians never denied a spiritual eating the Flesh of Christ, and which is
the only eating they have acknowledged, or do yet own, however they may differ;
It is evident, say the Protestants, that when by the Mouth of Oecumenius, they
deny, that they eat the Flesh of our Savior, they understand it of a bodily
and carnal eating; but as for the Sacrament, they did never deny, but that they
did eat it with the Mouth of the Body. I know not if they are deceived in this
Discourse, but they believe it is very well grounded in the Testimony which we
have examined. And that nothing may want to clear the Reproach made against
Christians of eating human Flesh, the Reader may remember, if he please, what
has been said in Chap. 2. of the first Part, that these infamous Reports came
not from the Eucharist of Catholics and Orthodox, but from the abominable
Mysteries of the Gnostics, and the Carpocratians, of whom we treated in the
same place. It shall suffice to observe here, that when the Holy Fathers
answered unto this shameful Reproach, or rather this black and devilish
Calumny, it was by a downright Denial, and to show it was a Thing so horrible
and so far distant from their holy Discipline, that the very Thoughts of it
displeased them, without ever making any Exception of the Eucharist. The false
Devils, Just. Martyr. Apol. 1. vel. 2. p. 50.
says St. Justin Martyr, caused it to be practiced by certain wicked Men; for
they having killed some body to cloak their Calumny against us, they made some
of our domestic Servants be put to the Rack, or Children, or ignorant Women,
and by cruel Torments, they constrained them to say Things against us, which
they forged, and which they themselves did do secretly, whereof seeing there is
nothing which concerns us, we make no matter, having the eternal and ineffable
God for Witness of our Thoughts and Actions. Athenagoras yet speaks more
positively; Who, says he, Athenag. legate. pro Christ. p. 38.
of those that are in their right Senses, can say that we are Murderers? For it
is not possible to eat Man's Flesh, unless first some one is killed, having
then invented the former, if they are examined of the second, if they have seen
the things whereof they speak, no body is so bold as to say, that they have
seen them. There be some amongst us that have Servants, some more, some less,
from whom it were unpossible to hide us; but not any of them have informed any
such thing against us. For which of them can charge Murder, or eating of human
Flesh, unto those whom they know are not permitted to stop to see the Execution
of those which are thereunto justly condemned. Minutius Felix, I would, says
he, Minut. in Octavio.
see him that says or thinks that we be initiated by Murder, and the Blood
of an Infant; do you think it can possible be, that so tender a little Body
should be appointed to be mangled; that any in piercing it with Wounds, should
shed and pour forth the Blood of a newborn Infant, scarce yet a Man; no Body
can believe it, but those that are so bold as to undertake it. And a little
lower; We are not suffered to see nor hear talk of Manslaughter, and we so
avoid Murder, that we do not use nor admit of the Blood of Beasts amongst our
Meat. Tertul. Apol. c. 9.
Tertullian, whose reasoning is strong, refutes the Calumny of the Heathens by
these Words, which certainly are worthy of him: Let your Error (says he) make
you blush before Christians, which do not as much as taste the Blood of Beasts,
and therefore do abstain from things strangled, and from that of Beasts which
have not been slain, for fear of defiling themselves with any sort of Blood
whatever, even of that which is in the Body. In fine, to prove them, you
present unto them Puddings made of Blood, because you very well know, that they
are not permitted to do the Things whereby you would make them offend. Is it
possible you should think that we thirst after Man's Blood, we that have an
Aversion unto that of Beasts? If it be not that we have found it more
delicious, you should then make use of it to prove them, as you do use Fire and
Incense; for then you would discover them in desiring Human Blood, as they
declare themselves in refusing to sacrifice; and so you may condemn them, if
they eat of it, as you do condemn them when they refuse to sacrifice; and by
this Means you would want no Human Blood, to hear and to condemn the Christians
which you keep Prisoners. I freely confess, says the Protestant, that I cannot
apprehend this Proceeding of the Holy Fathers, if they did really eat the Flesh
of Jesus Christ with the Mouth of the Body, after what manner, or in what
regard soever they eat it; and to say the Truth, if the Christians of their
Times did eat really and truly the very Flesh of Jesus Christ, they would have
been horrible Liars in denying, that they did eat Human Flesh without ever
excepting the Sacrament; they betrayed their own Judgment, and erring
shamefully in this Point, they rendered themselves unworthy of being believed in
what they have transmitted unto us touching the Faith and Belief of the Church.
But when on the other Hand, I consider their Candor and Sincerity, their Piety,
Zeal, and the great Inclinations they had to glorify God by their Death, and
the little Account they made of their Lives, I dare not accuse them of
Prevarication, nor of Hypocrisy; I too much honor their Memory, and have too
great a Love for their Virtue: God forbid, says he, that I should ever do them
so great Injury, or have any evil Thoughts of them, because I own their
Proceedings to be sincere, and always accompanied with Truth: as for my
particular, I leave it unto indifferent Persons to judge of the Consequence
that has been made of their Conduct. But if the Silence of the Fathers has
served to show what was the Belief of the ancient Church, touching the Point of
the Eucharist, what the Holy Fathers have spoken against the Gods of the
Gentiles, will no less discover it. In the first place, they reproach them that
by Consecration, which consisted in certain precise Words and Formalities, they
rendered the Divinity which they adored present in the Image, and enclosed him,
as one may say, in his Statue, as has been showed in the 7th Chapter of the
first Part, whereunto I will only add these Words of St. Chrysostom; Chrysostom.
Hom. in Christ. not. t. 5. p. 477.
Is it not an exceeding great Folly to introduce their Gods into Wood and
Stone, and into Statues of a low Price, and to shut them up, as it were in
Prison, and yet to think that they do nor say nothing that is amiss? Let the
Reader judge if the Fathers would have spoke after this manner, if they had
been of the same Belief the Latin Church is of, and if they had not given their
Enemies some Advantage over them. In the second place, (1) Apol. 2. p. 69.
St. Justin Martyr; (2) L. 5. p. 91.
the Author of the Recognitions; (3) Ad Deme^. p. 201.
St. Cyprian; (4) Arnob. l. 6. p. 89.
Arnobius; (5) Inst. l. 2. c. 4.
Lactantius; (6) Homil. 57. in Genes. t. 2. Tertul. Apol. c. 13.
St. Chrysostom do tell them their Gods may be stolen; and that they should
watch them and lock them up safe. In truth, says the Protestant, it would be
hard to excuse them of Impudence and want of Judgment, for these holy Doctors
to have insulted after this manner over the Vanities of the Gods of the
Heathen, if they had believed of the Sacrament what is believed by the Latin
Church; because it is most certain that the Host of the Roman Catholics, which
they look upon as their God and Savior, is carefully kept under Lock and Key,
and is subject and in danger to be stolen. In fine, Tertullian deriding the
Domestic Heathen Gods, says amongst other things, That sometimes they gave
them in pawn. Every particular Christian might have done the same by the
Sacrament; because at that time they were permitted to carry it home to their
Houses, and keep it. And Cardinal Du Perron says, Du Perr. de l' Euch. l. 3.
c. 29. p. 918.
upon the Report of Paul Jovius and Gennebrard; That for certain St. Lewis King
of France left an Host for Pledge of the Ransom which he had promised the Sultan
of Egypt for granting him his Liberty. There be others which have observed,
Obs^rvat. upon the History of Chalcondyle.
that Vladislaus King of Hungary, who was slain at the Battle of Varn, Ann.
1444, also gave one unto Amurath the second, Emperor of the Turks, for a Pledge
of his Faith upon the concluding of peace with him. It is not very likely that
Tertullian, who was of a wise and very solid Judgment, should make Reproaches
against his Enemies, which they might have retorted upon himself, if he had
believed that the Eucharist is our God, and our Redeemer; he shows then in
doing so, that he believed not so as the Latin Church believes at this present.
These are the Inferences which the Protestants draw from what has been written
in this Chapter.

CHAP. X.
The last Proof, drawn from what has passed in regard of Heretics, either
referring unto the Customs of some of them, or in reference to their Silence,
or in fine, of the Holy Fathers disputing against them.

THE Emperors Valentinian and Marcian, Collect. Romans bipart, i. p. 104.
speaking of Heretics, said thus, The Enemies of our Religion have obliged us
to seek God more carefully, to find him more manifestly; for the Light that
shines after Darkness seems to be greater, and drink is most pleasant unto
those that are a thirst, as rest is most agreeable unto those which be weary.
In effect, Heretics have formerly, as it were, challenged the Holy Fathers
unto the Combat, and have invited them unto the occasion of meditating more
particularly of the Truth of the Mysteries which they attacked, therefore as
they were obliged to stand the closer upon their Guard, having to do with
Enemies which took all advantages against the purity of our Religion, I believe
it may be safely said, that of all the Works of these Holy Doctors, there are
scarce any more solid and more complete than their Polemicks, I mean, the Books
they wrote against these Enemies of Christianity; it is true they had no
Controversy with Heretics upon the point of the Sacrament, but nevertheless,
because the Holy Fathers do sometimes employ this Divine Mystery to refute some
of their Heresies, we will not omit drawing from those places some Light for
illustrating the matter which we examine; but before we proceed so far, we will
endeavor to explain some Inductions from certain Customs practiced by some of
them, and of their Silence. As to the former of these two Heads, we see in the
second Chapter of the first part, that the Heretic Marc, pretended to
consecrate Challices wherein there was Wine, and even White Wine as some think,
and that insisting very long upon the Words of Invocation and Prayer, he made
it appear red and of a Purple Color, to the end it should be believed that the
Divinity which he called Grace, should from the highest Heavens distill his
Blood into the Cup, by means of his Invocation; whereupon it is said, that if
the Catholics of his time had believed that the Wine of the Sacred Cup was
changed by the virtue of Consecration, into the real substance of the Blood of
Jesus Christ, the imposture of this Deceiver would not have been so much
regarded by those miserable Wretches which he seduced, for they might have said
unto him, that he took a great deal of pains to little purpose, in making the
Blood of the God which he preached, come into the Cup; seeing that the
Catholics and Orthodox without any Magic or Enchantment, did what he
pretended to do by the help of his Sorceries, in casting a Mist before the Eyes
of those that were present; and that by pronouncing of these Words, This is my
Body, This is my Blood, they change the Wine of the Cup into the very Blood of
the God which they adore: Nevertheless, St. Irencus, nor St. Epiphanius, which
have narrowly enough examined the Heresy of this Deceiver, and all that he did
in the celebration of the Mysteries, nor any one else that I hear of, have not
made him this Objection, to expose unto the sight of the whole World, the folly
of his enterprise; which shows, as the Protestants say, that the Orthodox
Christians did not then believe, that what was in the consecrated Cup was the
real Blood of Jesus Christ. In the same Chapter of the first part, we mentioned
the Ascodrutes or Ascodrupites, which rejected both Baptism and the Eucharist,
saying, That invisible things should not be represented by visible things, nor
incorporeal things, by sensible and corporal, and that Images and Figures ought
not to be made upon Earth. How could the Holy Fathers grapple with these
Heretics, or condemn as a Heresy that which they taught, that the Symbols of
Spiritual and Heavenly Things ought not to be sensible nor corporal, if
Catholics had not in their Sacraments Symbols of this Nature: For it would
have been unjust to condemn that for a Heresy in others, which we believe and
approve our selves; or how should these Heretics have abstained from the
celebration of Baptism and the Eucharist, if the Orthodox had believed with
them, that there was nothing sensible nor corporal in the one nor the other of
these two Sacraments; for what made them lay aside these Sacraments, was the
substance of the Symbols which were corporal and visible; and as the same
reason which made them deny Baptism, made them also reject the celebration of
the Sacrament, this was the reason that they did not find the Bread and Wine of
this Sacrament, no less visible and corporal than the Water of the other; so
that the Holy Fathers opposing their Heresy refute it alike, both for the one
and the other Sacrament, and in disputing against it, they own that the
substance of the Symbols are sensible and visible in both; for in this respect
they make no distinction betwixt Baptism and the Eucharist; this is the
conclusion of the Protestant. As touching the silence of Heretics, it is
almost of the same force with that of the Gentiles; because the same Truths
which were the Object of the Scorn and Contempt of Pagans, were also the
subject of the slander and contradiction of Heretics, some whereof denied the
truth of the Human Nature of Jesus Christ, as Marcion, and several others,
which attributed unto him an imaginary Body, a Shadow and Figure of a Body,
teaching that the Son of God did not become Man, and that he manifested himself
unto Man only in a false shape, not having a true Body, but one in show: Others
have denied his Divinity, as Ebion, Cerinthus, Artemon, and others, which
maintained that our Jesus was not God, but Man only, and that he did not begin
to be, but when he was born of the Holy Virgin; two Mysteries which we have
seen, whereof the Jews and Pagans both made light: The Cross of Christ which
was the stumbling block of the Jews, and the scorn of the Heathen, was also
contradicted by Heretics, who were not ashamed to say that Jesus Christ had
not truly suffered, but that he either put another Man in his stead, or avoided
the fury of those which crucified him, by this seeming Body wherewith they say
he was invested.* The Resurrection of the Body which was esteemed a Story and
Fable by the Gentiles, also offended exceedingly some Heretics, as the
Gnostics, the Marcionites, and some others: And to speak in a Word, there was
scarce any one Article of our Faith, which in the first Ages of Christianity,
was not traversed by some Heresy, or that met not with some contradiction
amongst Christians themselves. What likelihood then, say they, is there, that
if the Doctrine of the substantial Conversion, and all the Consequences which
necessarily depend of it, had been taught by Christians, and received into the
Articles of their Faith, but it would have received some attempt by Heretics,
who not having disowned the use of their Senses nor of their Reason, could not
choose, as they think, but have disputed against them, especially when they
should have considered, that they would have denied the testimony of their
Senses, and the clearest light of their Reason: Nevertheless, we cannot find in
any Monument of the ancient Doctors of the Church, that the Heretics ever
contested with the Catholics and Orthodox upon the point of the Eucharist; it
is indeed true that some rejected the celebration of the Sacrament, tho upon
different Motives, but that they charged the Church, touching the substantial
conversion of the Symbols of the Eucharist into the Body and Blood of Christ,
there is not one to be found, especially of those which have owned the truth of
the Human Nature of the Son of God; at least, no such thing is to be seen in
their Writings, nor in the diverse Catalogues of Heresies that still remain, nor
in the Polemical Writings of the Holy Doctors against Heretics: for as for
those mentioned by the Author of the Letter unto those of Smyrna, under the
Name of St. Ignatius, of whom we have spoken in the third Chapter of the first
part; besides, it is very uncertain if there were ever any such, they denied
the Mystery of the Incarnation, and did not confess the truth of the humanity
of Jesus Christ; they rejected the Sacrament, the celebration whereof is a kind
of confessing and owning the truth of his Human Nature, but neither they, nor
any others have complained against the belief of the Church upon the subject of
the Sacrament, they have not armed against her, nor have separated from her
Communion upon account of this Divine Mystery, neither did the Church ever
thunder out Anathema's nor Excommunications upon this Subject. From whence say
some, proceeds so universal a Silence, and so great tranquillity upon so
important an Article, which since Paschas his time, that is to say the IXth
Century, has suffered such an infinite number of Contradictions in the West?
for this Friar of Corby no sooner published his Opinion, but there opposed
against him all the Learned Men of that Age, and it will appear in the course
of this Treatise, that ever since that time, the Doctrine of the real presence
has never been without a great many Opposers and Adversaries, which for that
reason have been Excommunicated, and esteemed Heretics by the Latin Church.
When I make this reflection in my self, says the Protestant, that the Minds of
Men have been at all times much of one and the same Temper, and been ever
almost of the same Disposition, and that besides the liberty of writing and
speaking against the Doctrines of the Church, was never greater than in the
first Ages of Christianity, nor less in the West, than since the Condemnation
of Beranger, I can find no other cause of so various and different proceeding,
but the difference of Doctrine, which until Paschas his time, was such, that no
Body had reason to take up Arms to dispute against it; whereas ever since the
establishing of his Opinion, which altered the ancient Belief, there has been
made continual Resistance and Opposition. Now I come to the Disputes which the
ancient Fathers have had against Heretics, wherein they have employed the
Mystery of the Eucharist. The first which troubled the settlement of
Christianity were the Saturnians, the Menandrians, Valentinians, Marcionites,
and others. I intend not to burden my Paper with all the Impieties of these
Wretches, but only to represent those against which the holy Doctors have made
use of the belief of the Holy Sacrament, and in what manner they have done it.
I find then there were three horrible Impieties held by these extravagant
Persons, against which they employed the Holy Sacrament; by the first, they
taught that Jesus Christ had not a true human Body, but a shadow of a Body, and
a mere form void of substance or solidity. By the second they said, that the
Father of Jesus Christ was not the Creator of the World, but that the World and
all Creatures which we see in it, are the effect of Passion, of Nature, and of
Ignorance, and not of the Father of Jesus Christ. And by the third, in fine,
they said, that all these material Creatures should be wholly destroyed, and
that by Consequence our Bodies being of the number of these Creatures, should
not be raised, being incapable of receiving supernatural Incorruption, nor of
participating of the Grace of the Holy Spirit, Flesh and Spirit not subsisting
both together. The Holy Fathers do allege the Eucharist to refute the first of
these Impieties, but it is requisite to know how they do allege it; for if
they had been in the belief of the Latin Church, they would not have failed, as
the Protestants say, to have told these Heretics that they overthrew the Faith
of the whole Church, which holds that the Substance of Bread and Wine is turned
into the Substance of the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ, which could not be if
he had not a true Body. They suppose this would have been the only means to
have refuted them, and they think the Latins would have used this course had
they to do with such Heretics. They say also, that the Argument would have
been clear and convincing, and that it is to be believed the ancient Doctors
would not have followed any other course if they had been of the same Opinions;
that yet nevertheless they do not argue after that manner to refute the first
Error of these Instruments of Satan; they only tell them, that seeing the
Eucharist is the Image and Figure of the Body of Jesus Christ, then of
necessity he has a true Body, because every Image and Figure does presuppose
the Existence and Truth of the thing that it represents, and that it is the
reasoning of Tertullian, in his Excellent Treatise against Marcion; Tertul.
adyers. Marc. l. 4. c. 40.
Jesus Christ (says he) made the Bread his Body; saying, This is my Body, that
is to say the Figure of my Body; now it had not been a Figure, if there had not
been a true Body; for a Shadow and empty Appearance, such as is a Spirit, is
not capable of having a Figure. The Author of the Dialogues against the
Marcionites, in Origens Works, reasons after the same manner; Author Dial
contra Marc. inter Orig op. Dial. 3.
If Jesus Christ (says he) had neither Flesh nor Blood, as the Marcionites
affirm, of what Flesh and Blood is it that he has given us the Images, that is
to say, the Bread and Wine of the Sacrament, when he commanded his Disciples to
remember him by those things? Against the second Impiety they also imply the
Holy Sacrament, and see here how they do it. Tren. contr. here is. l. 4. c. 34.
They say, The Holy Sacrament is an Acknowledgment which we make unto God,
under the Title of Creator, in offering unto him the first Fruits of the
Creatures which he has made; and that it were an injustice to the Father of
Jesus Christ, if he were not the Creator of the World, to offer unto him things
which belonged not unto him, as if he coveted that which belonged to another,
and desired to have what was not his own. That if the Creatures were the
product of Passion, of Nature, and of Ignorance, it were to wrong God, instead
of giving him Thanks, to offer him the Fruits of Passion, of Nature, and of
Ignorance. It is after this manner St. Ireneus does argue to confute the
Adversaries which he opposed, in showing them that the Father of Jesus Christ
must needs be the Creator of the World, because he accepts the Oblations of
Bread and Wine which is made unto him in the Eucharist; for to say, that it is
no longer Bread and Wine after Consecration, but the Body and Blood of Jesus
Christ, and that 'twas so St. Ireneus understood it, the Protestants say, this
would have been yiedling the cause unto these Heretics, who teaching that
Jesus Christ was not of the number of the Creatures of this World, would not
have failed to have inferred that his Father had not been the Creator, because
our Lord was offered unto him, which was not the work of the Creator, whereas
in saying that there was offered unto him Creatures of this World, as these
Heretics owned, as well as the Orthodox, that there was such offered unto him
in the Eucharist, he would have put them to silence, all the shifts they could
have made would have vanished away at the sight of this Truth, because they
confessed that Bread and Wine are of those Creatures whereof the Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ would not have received an Oblation, if he had not been the
Maker of them: Something of this Nature is seen in Tertullian's first Book
against Marcion, Chap. 14. It remains to see after what manner the Fathers have
acted to refute the last Impiety of these Heretics, who denied the
resurrection of the Body, maintaining that all material Creatures shall be
wholly destroyed and reduced to nothing, Iren. advers. haeres. l 4. c. 34.
and that the Flesh is incapable of receiving Incorruption, because
Incorruption is a Grace of the Spirit, which can have no Commerce nor Society
with the Flesh; We preach in the Eucharist, (says St. Ireneus) the Communion
and Unity of the Flesh and Spirit: for as the Bread which is of the Earth,
receiving the Invocation of God, is no longer common Bread, but is the
Sacrament, composed of two things, the one Terrestrial, the other Celestial; so
also our Bodies receiving the Eucharist, are no more corruptible, having the
hope of the Resurrection. If the Consecration destroys the substance of Bread
and Wine, it must be granted, say the Protestants, that this Holy Doctor took
wrong Measures, when he would that the Bread of the Sacrament should represent
the Flesh which is not destroyed under the Grace of the Spirit; because if the
Bread it self be destroyed, it cannot be employed to signify that our Flesh
shall not be destroyed. Seeing then that St. Ireneus does use it to this
purpose, it must be ingeniously confessed, that he believed that Consecration
did not annihilate the Nature and Substance of the Symbols. Tertul. contra
Marc. l. 1. c. 14.
They say, moreover that Tertullian confirms them in this Opinion, when he
says, The God of Marcion has not yet rejected the Bread of the Creator, to
represent his true Body, so that in his own Sacraments he has need of
borrowing the Goods of the Creator: But Marcion which is a Disciple above his
Master, and a Servant above his Lord, is much wiser than him; for he ruins
what his Master would have. It plainly appears by these Words, that Marcion in
destroying the Bread, that is to say, in teaching that it shall be destroyed,
as being of the Creatures of this World, does the quite contrary unto Jesus
Christ, who desires it and uses it in his Sacrament, and that by Consequence
preserves the Substance of it: For if Tertullian, say they, had believed that
he destroyed it in consecrating of it, he would not have opposed, as he does,
the act of Marcion, or rather his Doctrine, which condemns it unto an entire
destruction, unto the action of Jesus Christ which makes use of it, and does
employ it. And because there be several other things in the Works of this
African Doctor against Heretics, which may contribute unto this History,
Tertul. advers. Prax. c. 26.
I will instance some before I shall proceed farther. In his Book against
Praxeas, he sets it down for undoubted, That what is of a thing, is not the
thing it self: And it is thereupon he grounds the distinction of the Person of
the Holy Ghost, from that of the Father; either his Maxim is false, say some,
and very indiscreetly propounded, or he did not believe that the Eucharist was
the real Body of Jesus Christ, because it is the Sacrament, by the confession
of all Christians. Elsewhere disputing against the Blasphemy of Marcion, Id.
adv. Marc. l. 3. c, 10.
who said that Jesus Christ had not a true Body, he says, That it was unworthy
the Son of God to appear under a strange shape; you make us, says he to
Marcion, a miserable God, in that he could not show his Christ but in Effigy
of a thing unworthy of him. And presently after; Wherefore did he not come in
some other Substance more worthy of him? but especially why did he not come in
his own, and not to seem to have had need of another which is unworthy of him?
Let Christians judge, say the Protestants, if he could have spoke thus, and
believe that Jesus Christ does every day appear under the Effigies and
Resemblance of Bread, but an appearance destitute of the substance and truth of
Bread. Ibid. c. 8.
It is whereunto amounts also what is said unto this Heretic in the same Book,
Jesus Christ was not what he seemed to be, and disguised what he was, being
Flesh, and not being so, being Man and not Man, and in like manner Christ, God,
and not God; for what hinders but that he also bore the shadow of a God? shall
I believe it of his interior substance, who deceived us by his exterior? how
shall he be believed to be true in that which does not appear, seeing he has
been found so false, in that which did appear? See again if what he now says
can be accommodated with a Doctrine which teaches that Jesus Christ in the
Eucharist is not what he seems to be; for he seems to be Bread, and they will
have it to be a bodily Substance: As for my particular, I am content to guess
at what the Protestants infer from these Maxims. He again objects this to
Marcion, Ibid. c. 11.
Thou honor thy God with the title of a Deceiver, if he knew that he was
any thing else than what he gave cause to Men to believe he was. The boldness,
or rather rashness, say they, of Tertullian, cannot enough be admired so to
pursue and force Marcion, if the Church of his time had been of the belief the
Latin Church is now of. And in another Book of the same Treatise, he refutes
the shadow of this Arch Heretic, by the History of the penitent Sinner in the
Gospel, Id. adv. Marc. l. 4. c. 18.
In that she kissed, says he, the Feet of Jesus, in that she washed them with
her Tears, and wiped them with the Hairs of her Head, in that she poured
precious Ointment upon him, it shows that she handled a true real Body, and not
an empty shadow. All the World, as they think, may observe, that if the
Christians of those times had believed what the Latins believe, Marcion would
undoubtedly have opposed unto the example of the Sinner which Tertullian
presses against him, that of the Eucharist, which is handled, which is
received into the Stomach, wherewith a living Body may be nourished, which is
subject to Mouldiness and several other the like Accidents, and that it may not
for all this be concluded according to the Doctrine of the Roman-Church, that
it is the true substance of Bread, and not barely Accidents and Appearances. In
another Treatise speaking to the same Heretic, Id. de carne Christ. c. 5.
Wherefore (says he) will you that one half of Jesus Christ should be a
Fiction? he was nothing but Truth, wholly and entirely. Believe me, he chose
rather to be born, than to lie in any respect whatsoever. And there again, he
adds, that according to the Doctrine of Marcion, Jesus Christ had Flesh, hard
without Bones, solid without Nerves, bloody without Blood, covered without
Garments, a Body that was hungry without Appetite, that eat without Teeth, and
spoke without a Tongue; so that his Words were but a Shadow which deceived the
Ear by the sound of a Voice: And in fine, he presses in the same Chapter by
the Words of our Savior to his Disciples after the Resurrection, See that it
is I, for a Spirit has not Flesh and Bones as you see me have: Then he adds,
that if Jesus Christ according to the fancy of this Heretic had not truly
Flesh and Bones, it follows that when he so presented the Appearances unto his
Disciples, he openly deceived them, in showing them that for Bones, which were
not so in effect: See, (says he) he surpriseth, he deceives, he abuses the
Eyes, the Senses, the coming near, and touching of all his Disciples. There
needs not say they, much subtilty and wit to comprehend, that Tertullian could
not by these kinds of Arguments destroy the Hypothesis of his Adversary,
without at the same time giving mortal blows to the Eucharist of Orthodox
Christians of his time, if it had been the same with that of the Latins. But
because those which know the rare Genius of Tertullian, will never accuse him
of so great Imprudence, it must of necessity be concluded, that the belief of
the Church of his time, upon the point of the Sacrament, was quite contrary
unto that of the Latin Church; they think one cannot choose but make this
conclusion, which I leave unto the Reader's Liberty. And from this Dispute of
Tertullian against Marcion, I proceed unto that which the ancient Church had
against the Encratites, which detesting Wine as a Diabolical thing, and sinful
to be used, did celebrate the Mysteries with bare Water. What have the Holy
Fathers said unto them? how have they refuted this Heresy? have they said unto
them, that our Savior having employed Wine to the matter of this Sacrament,
bare Water cannot be converted into the Blood of Jesus Christ? have they
further said to them, that the aversion they had against Wine, should not
hinder them from using it in the celebration of the Eucharist, because though
it were Wine before Consecration, yet it was not after, the substance of it
being changed by the virtue of Consecration into the substance of the real
Blood of Jesus Christ, and that so it is no longer Wine which we drink, but the
real Blood of the Savior of the World? they have said nothing of all this unto
them: but then what have they said unto them? they have constantly represented
that Jesus Christ Offered Wine which be gave, and drank thereof; Which they
prove by these Words, I will no more drink of this Fruit of the Vine, until the
day I drink it new in my Fathers Kingdom. It is in this manner that Clemens of
Alexandria, St. Epiphanius, and St. Chrysostom argued against these Heretics
as has been shown in the second Chapter of the first part. But it is enough
spoken to this matter; it is time to conclude this Chapter, and by the same
means I will conclude the Proofs drawn from the Disputes of the. Holy Fathers
against Heretics, by the consideration of what passed betwixt them and the
Eutychians. The Heresy of the Eutychians, following the same Track of the most
part of others, sought out Artifices and Invention; the easier to insinuate it
self into the Minds of Men, thereby to make the greater Progress: For although
for the most part, they declared there was two Natures in Jesus Christ, but
that at the instant of his being received up into the Heavenly Glory, the Human
Nature was changed into the Nature or Substance of the Divine Nature; yet
nevertheless, I conceive, to speak truly, their Heresy was not much different
in this point from the Heresy of Marcion, and his Companions, which formerly
denied the Truth of Christ's Human Nature, and only attributed unto him a Show
and Appearance. And what makes me think so, is, that the ancient Doctors of the
Church do testify, that Eutyches did teach that Jesus Christ took nothing of
the substance of the Holy Virgin; but having brought I know not what Body of
his own from his Heavenly Father, he only passed through the Womb of the
Blessed Virgin, as through a Channel, I will not insist upon alleging all the
Passages of the Fathers which mention this, it shall suffice to instance in
some few. Feriand. Diacon. ad Anato.
He would not confess (says the Deacon Ferrand) that the Son was
consubstantial with his Mother, for he denied that the Holy Virgin had
communicated unto the only Son of God which was to be born of her by the virtue
of the Holy Ghost, the substance of his Flesh. And Vigilius an African says,
Diac. Vigil. adv. Eutych. l. 3. c. 3. and alibi.
that he assured the Word was so made Flesh, that it only passed through the
Womb of the Virgin, as Water passes through a Conduit, but that he did not
believe that he took any thing of her which was of the Nature of our Flesh. And
Theodoret treating historically of this Heresy, which he so learnedly has
refuted in his Writings, Theod. haeret. Fabul. l. 4. 13. p. 246. t. 4.
Eutyches (says he) taught that God the Word, took nothing of the Human Nature
of the Virgin Mary; but that he was steadily changed and made Flesh (I use his
ridiculous Expressions) that he only passed through the Body of the Virgin, and
that it was the incomprehensible Divinity of the only Son of God which had been
crucified, buried, and raised from the Dead. Therefore the Count Marcellin said
in his History, Ma cell. Cem. in Chronol.
Theodoret Bishop of Cyr, wrote of the Incarnation of Christ against the Priest
Eutyches, and against Dioscorus Bishop of Alexandria, which asserted that Jesus
Christ had not Human Flesh. St. Prosper also observes in his, Prosp. in
Chronol. ad Consul. Astur. and Protog.
that this Arch Heretic said, That Jesus Christ our Lord, Son of the Blessed
Virgin, partaked not of the substance of his Mother, but that in the likeness
of Man, he had only the Nature of the Son of God. This, as I conceive, is the
exact Opinion of the Eutychians, conformable in this point with Marcion;
therefore I find that the Holy Fathers which disputed against them, have
employed the Sacrament against them in the same sense, and the same manner, as
those which preceded them had done against the Marcionites; I mean, that they
proved by this Sacrament the truth of the Body of Jesus Christ, as commonly the
truth of a thing is proved by its Image, Theod. dial. 2. p. 84. t. 4.
and by its Picture. An Image, say they, must of necessity have its Original,
for Painters do imitate Nature, and delineate things which they do see; if then
the Divine Mysteries are the Figures or Anti-types of a true Body, it follows
that our Savior has now a Body, not changed into the Nature of the Divinity,
but filled with the Divine Glory. It is the reasoning of Theodoret in his
second Dialogue, which he repeats again in two other places. I cannot
comprehend, says the Protestant, the meaning of this ancient Doctor, if the
Doctrine of the real Conversion, at that time, was an Article of Faith in the
Church, wherefore to alledg the Sacrament as an Image and a Figure, to prove
the verity of the Body of Christ, if it were really and truly the very Body it
self; I cannot understand this Difficulty, but in freely confessing that
Christians at that time did not know nor believe this real Conversion; whence
it was that Theodoret did argue against the Eutychians, just as Tertullian had
done before against the Marcionites. The Evidence of this Truth will yet better
appear if it be considered, that there was an universal Peace amongst the
Orthodox and the Eutychians, touching the Sacrament of the Eucharist, which
Peace had been incompatible with the belief of the substantial Conversion,
which the Eutychians could not have admitted without pulling down with one
Hand, what they built with the other; that is to say, without destroying what
they taught, that Jesus Christ had not a true Body. But to the end no scruple
may rest hereupon in the Mind of the Reader, let us hear this Dialogue of
Theodoret with an Eutychian. Heret. Theod. dial. 2. p. 84, 85. t. 4.
It is very well that you have begun the Discourse of Divine Mysteries, for
thereby I will show you that the Body of Jesus Christ is changed into another
Nature, answer then to the Question which I shall propose: Orthod. I will
answer. Heret. What do you call before the Priestly Invocation, the thing which
is offered? Orthod. We must not speak openly, fearing we may be heard by
Persons not initiated. Heret. Answer obscurely. Orthod. I call it a Food made
of certain Grains Heret. And how is the other Symbol called? Orthod. It is
commonly called by a Name that designs a certain sort of Liquor. Heret. But
after Consecration what call you them? Orthod. The Body and Blood of Jesus
Christ. Heret. And do you believe you receive the Body and Blood of Jesus
Christ? Orthod. I do believe it. Heret. As then the Symbols of the Body and
Blood of Christ are one thing before the Priestly Invocation, but after
Consecration are changed and made another thing, so in like manner the Body of
Christ was changed into a Divine Substance after his Ascension. Orthod. You are
taken in your own Net which you laid, for the Mystical Symbols do not change
their Nature after Consecration, but they remain in their first Substance, in
their first Figure, and in their first Form, they are visible and palpable,
such as they were before; but they are apprehended to be what they are made,
and they are believed, and are worshipped to be what they are believed to be.
Compare now this Image with its Original, and you shall see the resemblance
which is betwixt them, for the Figure ought to resemble the Original. The Body
of Jesus Christ keeps his first Form, his first Figure, and his first
Circumscription, and in a word it has the substance of a Body; but after the
Resurrection it was made immortal and incorruptible, it is sitting on the right
Hand of God, and all Creatures do adore it, because it is called the Lord of
Nature. Heret. But the Mystical Symbol does change its former Name, for it is
no longer called what it was before, but it is called the Body of Jesus Christ,
whence it follows, that the Truth (which answers the Sign) should be called
God, and not Body. Orthod. It seems to me you are in Darkness, for the Symbol
is not only called Body, but Bread of Life, the Lord himself calls it so; and
as for the Body it self, we call it a Divine Body, a quickening Body, the Body
of our Lord; meaning thereby, that it is not the Body of an Ordinary Person,
but the Body of Jesus Christ our Lord which is God and Man. This Discourse
being written as it were with a Sunbeam, to use Tertullian's Expression, has
no need of Explication. Therefore we will here put an end to the proofs of the
belief of the Holy Fathers, to proceed to the Inquiry into the Changes arrived
first in the Expressions, and then afterward in the Doctrine it self.

CHAP. XI.
Of the change which came to pass in the Expressions, or the History of the
Seventh Century.

ALthough Custom in Speech be a very capricious Master, and exercises, over
the words which are subject unto its Tyrannical Government, an absolute
Authority, rejecting or using them at pleasure, or rather after its wild Fancy;
Nevertheless, there are certain expressions so confirmed by long use, and so
particularly adapted to signify certain things, that they cannot be Abolished
without disturbing the Commerce and Society of Men, and without forgetting by
degrees, and insensibly, the Nature of those things, for the representation
whereof they were designed: If this may befall in things of Civil Society, much
more is it to be feared in things of a Religious Nature; because for the most
part, the consequences and effects are more fatal and dangerous; therefore it
was, the Ancient Christians were so careful of exactly retaining certain terms
and manner of Expressions, which had been as 'twere consecrated in the Church,
and which could not be changed without opening the Door unto some alteration in
the Doctrine; so certain it is that we must not remove the bounds which our
Forefathers have set. It is upon this ground and motive, that it was said
throughout the whole extent of Ecclesiastical Antiquity, for above the space of
six hundred years, That the Eucharist was the Sacrament, the Sign, the Symbol,
the Image, the Figure, the Type, the Antitype, the Similitude and the
Representation of the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ, it never being seen in so
considerable a space of time in that vast and spacious Empire, that there was
any body that offered to question Expressions that were so well Established,
and moreover so constantly and universally received as they were. Nevertheless
in the Seventh Century there was sprung up in Mount Sinai a certain Friar
called Anastatius, which rashly passing over the Bounds that in this regard had
been observed, rejected the term of Sign or Figure, which was commonly used
until his time. But not to confound this Anastatius with others of the same
name, which had been Patriarchs of Antioch, and also to discover the Age
wherein he lived; it must be noted, that himself observes, that being at
Alexandria, he was told, Annestat. Sin. in c. 10.
that a good while after the Death of the Patriarch Eulogius, there was in that
City an Augustal Prefect, which favored the party of the Severian Heretics,
and who to this effect had contributed in corrupting the Writings of the
Ancients. Now Eulogius dyed by every bodies confession in the year of our Lord
608. This was not told unto Anastatius until a considerable time had past after
the death of Eulogius, let us say it may be about 20 or 22 years, which is the
least can be allowed: Anastatius then could not be informed of this matter till
the year 630. and he could be neither of the two Anastatiuses that were
Patriarchs of Antioch, Ibid.
seeing the last was murdered by the Jews in the year 608. Besides, he writes,
that being at Alexandria, there arose a question touching some words of St.
Chrysostom, which had been Bishop of the same place after his Uncle Theophilus,
which had been corrupted and altered; and that then one Isidor, Library Keeper,
and truly Orthodox, produced a Copy, an Exemplification of the Writings of St.
Cyril, which had not been adulterated; which shows, that in all likelihood
the Patriarch was Orthodox: for if he had been an Eutychian, he would not have
tolerated a Library Keeper that had been Orthodox, and an Enemy to his Belief:
therefore it may be concluded, if I be not deceived, that it happened about they
year 630. Hist. Miscel. l. 18.
And because Anastatius wrote some time after, there being yet in Egypt an
Augustal Prefect, it necessarily follows, that he wrote about the year 637. And
before the year 639. Hist. Sarac. in Omar.
that the Sarrazins entering into Egypt, expelled the Augustal Prefect, and made
themselves Masters of the Country. Which being granted, the Reader may please
to take notice, that this Anastatius of whom we speak, disputing against the
Heretics, which held that the Body of Christ could not suffer from the first
moment of his Conception, brings in the Orthodox, making this question to the
Heretic, Annas^at. Sin. in cap. 23.
Tell me I pray, the Communion of the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ, which you
offer, and whereof you are partakers, is it the true Body and Blood of Jesus
Christ, or common Bread, as that which is sold in Markets; or only a Figure of
the Body of Jesus Christ, as the Sacrifice of the Goat offered by the Jews.
Whereunto the Heretic having answered, God forbid we should say that the Holy
Communion is the Figure of the Body of Jesus Christ, or bare Bread. Anastatius
replies, We believe it to be so, and confess it according to Christ's words to
his Disciples, when in the Mystical Supper he gave them the Bread of Life,
saying, Take, Eat, this is my Body; He also gave them the Cup, saying, This is
my Blood: He said not this is the Figure of my Body and Blood. He is the first
that deviated from the usual Expressions, and that denied what all the holy
Fathers before him had affirmed, and some also after him, as we have showed in
the Third Chapter of this Second Part: And have shown, that these holy Fathers
testify, That when our Lord gave his Eucharist to his Apostles, he gave them
the Figure of his Body. Anastatius then denying what the others affirmed,
according to the Maxim of Vincentius Lirinensis, his Opinion should be rejected
as an Opinion private and peculiar to himself, and we are firmly and constantly
to hold and embrace the public and universal Belief; but because the words of
Authors are favorably to be interpreted, at least as much as may be; some say
it should be so done toward Anastatius, and that it is easy to give a good
sense unto what he said. He declares the Eucharist is the true Body and Blood
of Jesus Christ; he says nothing as they think, that being rightly understood,
but is very reasonable; because it is most certain, that the Sacrament is unto
the faithful Soul instead of the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ; that he truly
communicates unto him this broken Body, and this Blood poured out for his
Consolation and Salvation; and that it is changed, as St. Cyril of Alexandria
speaks, into the Efficacy of his Body. If Anastatius say they erred in
rejecting the word Sign and Figure, the Fathers both before and after him
having used it, it cannot be believed that he has changed any thing in the
ground of the Doctrine: they think so for several reasons; in the first place
he says, it is not simple Bread as is sold in the Markets; for thus speaking,
is to acknowledge that it is Bread, which by Consecration has acquired the
quality of an Efficacious and Divine Sacrament of the Body and Blood of Jesus
Christ, of whom for that reason, it takes the name, as it has the virtue and
efficacy in its lawful use; as when the Fathers say of the Waters of Baptism
and the Oil of Chrisin, Cyril. Hieros. Catech. 3. illum and Mystag. 3.
that it is not common Water and common Oil, they deny not that it is Water and
Oil, they only mean, that it is Water and Oil sanctified to be the Symboles of
the washing and purifying our Souls by the Blood of Jesus Christ, and by the
Virtue of the Holy Ghost. Secondly, He declares that it is not a Figure, as the
Sacrifice of the Goat which the Jews offered, that is a Type and Figure without
efficacy and virtue, having taken this name of Type and Figure, for a Legal
Figure, and without Operation; in which sense it is true, that the Communion is
not a Figure and bare Type, destitute of the truth, like the Types and Figures
of the Law, whereof he produces an Example in the Sacrifice of the Goat. In
the third place he speaks of a Body of the Lord, Which being kept in a Vessel,
corrupts in few days, Id. Anast. Ibid. c. 23.
changes and quite alters; of a Body and Blood, which as he says in another
Chapter of the same Treatise, may be broken, divided, Id. c. 13. Ibid. c. 13.
and distrihuted in parcels, broken with the Teeth, changed, poured out and
drank. And in the same Chapter he says, That the Body and Blood distributed
unto the People, saying, The Body and Blood of our Lord God and Savior, is a
Visible Body, created and taken from the Earth. They conclude then, that if
there was imprudence in his expressions, there was no Error in his Doctrine,
and they are very much confirmed in this Opinion, which I freely remit unto the
judgment of others, if they consider the Doctrine had received no Opposition in
the East nor West; Maxim. in Nol. Dionys. Arcop. page 68. and 75. and 69.
not in the East, because in the time Anastatius wrote in his Desert, Maximius
Abbot of Constantinople, whose Name was more famous, and his Doctrine more
eminent, taught, That the holy Bread and Cup of Benediction, are Signs and
sensible Symbols, or Types of true things, Symbols and not the truth; that the
things of the Old Testament were the Types; those of the New Testament are the
Antitypes, but that the truth shall be in the state of the World to come. This
Author faithfully retains the ancient Expressions and Doctrine of those which
went before him, and he thus defines the word Symbol: Id. in Interp. vocum.
The Symbol is a sensible thing taken for an intelligible thing, as the Bread
and Wine are taken for the Divine and immaterial Food. Not in the West, because
in the same Age Anastatius lived, Isid. Hispal. de Offic. Eccl. l. 1. c. 18.
St. Isidor of Sevil said, That the Bread which we break is the Body of Jesus
Christ, that the Wine is his Blood; that the Bread is called his Body, Id.
Origin. l. 6. c. 19.
because it strengthens the Body; that the Wine resembles the Blood of Jesus
Christ, because it creates blood in the body: Id. and voca. c. 26. and de
alleg. and in Genes. c. 12.
And that these two things which be visible, pass into a Sacrament of the
Divine Body, being Sanctified by the Holy Ghost: That by the Commandment of the
Lord we call the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ, that which being made of the
fruits of the Earth, is sanctified and becomes a Sacrament by the Invisible
Operation of the Holy Ghost. Id. in Genes. c. 31. and in Exodus cap. 22.
That the Bread and Wine is the undoubted Sacrament of the Body and Blood of
the Lord: Id. in Sentent. l. 1. c. 16. Vide lib. 1. Offic. cap. 37.
And that it is this Sacrament which Believers offer; and which they call, an
Oblation of Bread and Wine. Agreeable unto this Doctrine, he speaks elsewhere
of the Flesh of Jesus Christ, as of the Nourishment of Saints which preserves
from Eternal Death, and which makes those that eat it to live Spiritually; Id.
in lib. 2. Reg. ca. 3. p. 49.
and he says, That Jesus Christ ascending into Heaven, is gone in regard of
his Body, but is present according to his Majesty, Council. Hispal. 2. Council.
Eracar. t. 4. p. 832.
as he said, Behold I am with you even to the end of the World. And he borrows
these words from St. Austin, That our Savior gave unto his Disciples the
Figure of his Body and Blood. The second Council of Sevil, assembled Anno 619.
forbids Priests to make the Sacrament of the Body and Blood of Christ in
presence of the Bishop. The Council of Braga, Anno 675. testifies, That Jesus
Christ gave the Bread apart, and the Wine apart. He calls that which our Lord
gave his Disciples bread: And the 16th. of Tolledo, Assembled Anno 693. Council.
Tollet. 16. to 5. Council. p. 430. cap. 6. Eligius Noveom. in vita ejus l. 2.
cap. 15. p. 216. t. 5. Spicil. Dacher Ib. p. 217.
declares two several times, That Jesus Christ having taken a whole Loaf,
distributed it by parcels unto his Apostles. It speaks also of what remains
after the Communion, as of that whereof too great a quantity may burden the
Stomach of him that Eats it.

The true St. Eloy Bishop of Noyon gave this Precept unto those whom he
instructed, Let him that is Sick confide wholly in the Mercy of God, and
receive with Faith and Devotion the Sacrament of the Body and Blood of Jesus
Christ. And forbidding them to Sing the Songs of Pagan, he alleges for a
reason of this Defense, That it is not fit to hear Diabolical Songs proceed out
of a Christian Mouth, wherein enters the Sacrament of Jesus Christ. He retains,
as may be seen, the Ancient Expressions and Doctrine. According to which St.
Oven Archbishop of Roan his intimate Friend and Author of his Life, which he
wrote at large, does observe, that as he drew near his Death he said, That he
would be no longer absent from Jesus Christ. Ibid. l. 2. c. 32. p. 264.
It was thus the true St. Eloy spoke; and in so speaking, he rejects as false
and forged, some Homilies that have been published in his name, especially the
8th. and the 15th. the former of these being only a Rapsody, composed by
several Authors, some of which are of the 8th and 9th Centuries; whereas St.
Eloy died toward the end of the 7th. Century. Neither does he that wrote his
Life make any mention of these pretended Homilies. Thus several do reason.

CHAP. XII.
Wherein is examined what passed in the Eighth Century.

AS Anastatius, a Friar of Mount Sinai, had rejected the name of Sign or
Figure; not allowing to say, that the Sacrament is only the Sign of the Body of
Jesus Christ; words which might receive a good Construction, as has been
declared in the precedent Chapter: so John Damascen, surnamed Mansur, another
Friar of the East, extraordinarily given to the worshipping of Images, and
therefore Anathematized by 338 Bishops, Anno 754. bethought himself in the
Eighth Century of condemning the terms of Image, of Type, and Figure; but
because he stopped not at Expressions, but proceeded to the Doctrine, it is
requisite to see if he therein made any Alteration, and if his Innovation
favored the Belief of the Latin Church. See here then what he says: Damasc.
de Fide Orthod. l. 4. c. 14.
The Bread offered, the Wine, and the Water are supernaturally changed, by the
Invocation and coming of the Holy Ghost into the Body and Blood of Jesus
Christ; and are not two, but one and the same thing. Ibid.
And a little after; The Bread and Wine are not the Type, or the Figure of the
Body and Blood of Jesus Christ: Ah, God forbid; but the Body it self of our
Lord Deified: our Lord himself saying, Ibid.
This is, not the Figure of my Body, but my Body; not the Figure of my Blood,
but my Blood. And again; If some have called the Bread and Wine Figures, or
Signs of the Body and Blood, as St. Basil, they spoke not after Consecration,
but they called them so before the Oblation was consecrated. As there are two
things in these words of Damascen; the one regarding the Terms, the other the
Doctrine, we are obliged to examine both, to give the Reader all the
Information he may expect of us in this matter. I will begin with the Doctrine,
to see if it agrees with that of the Latin Church: If Damascen said, that the
substance of the Symbols were quite destroyed, and that if passed into the
substance it self of the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ, so that there remained
no part of the Bread and Wine but the bare Accidents only, which subsisted
miraculously without their Subject, it must be granted that he was of the same
Opinion that Roman Catholics are of at this time; and it were very unjust to
deny it: But if on the other hand, he so plainly expressed himself, that it
cannot be doubted but he believed that the substance of the Symbols remained,
whatever Change it was that intervened by Consecration, it must of necessity be
concluded, that his Belief upon this Point was not the Belief of the Latin
Church. The better to succeed in this Enquiry, it must be noted that he lays
this down for a certain Maxim; Id. Dialect. c. 1.
That the Accident cannot subsist in it self, but has its Being in another
Subject; Ibid.
that the Soul is a Substance, and Wisdom an Accident; that the Soul being
taken away, Wisdom also perishes: Ibid. c. 28.
That which subsisteth not of it self, but has its Existence in another, Id.
de Fide Orthod. l. 1. c. 17.
is an Accident. He affirms again, That nothing but the Divinity is infinite;
that Bodies have beginning and ending, and a bodily place, Ibid. c. 4.
and that they may be held; that what is invisible and impassible is not a
Body. All which things do not well accord with the Real Presence, Ibid.
no more than his restraining the Invisible Presence, whereby our Savior is
with us, unto the Presence of his Divinity. Moreover, he affirms positively
that the substance of Bread remains, and that it nourishes our Body by turning
into our substance. Id. l. 4. c. 14.
The Shewbread, says he, did represent this Bread, and it is the pure and
unbloody Sacrifice which our Lord foretold by the Prophet, which should be
offered unto him throughout the whole World; to wit, the Body and Blood of
Jesus Christ, which passes into the substance of our Body and Soul, without
being consumed, corrupted, or passing into the Draft: Ah, God forbid; but
passing into our Substance for our Preservation. All Christians confess that
this cannot be said of the true Body of Jesus Christ, as neither can it be said
of bare Accidents; it must then be understood of the Substance of Bread which
is called the Body of Christ, because it is the Sacrament of it: From thence it
is, the same Damascen compares the Change which befalls the Bread and Wine of
the Eucharist unto that which happens unto the Water of Baptism. As in Baptism
(says he) because Men are wont to wash themselves with Water, Id. Ibid.
and to anoint them with Oil, God has joined unto the Water and Oil the Grace
of the Holy Spirit, and has made it the Washing of Regeneration; so also in
like manner, they being accustomed to eat Bread, and to drink Wine and Water,
he has joined them unto his Divinity, and has made them his Body and Blood.
His Similitude would not be just, if the substance of the Symbols did not
remain in the Eucharist, as well as in Baptism. He uses also another, which
farther illustrates the nature of this Change. Ibid.
Esaias (says he) saw a Coal; now a Coal is not mere Wood, but it is joined with
Fire: so the Bread of the Sacrament is not bare Bread, but it is joined to the
Divinity; and the Body united to the Divinity, is not one and the same Nature;
but the Nature of the Body is one, and that of the Divinity united unto it is
another. Every body may easily understand that the Coal united to the Fire,
keeps its substance, although that by a kind of Change, it becomes red, and
like Fire: Therefore by the sense of the Comparison, it must needs be, that the
Bread of the Eucharist does keep its substance, although it be in some sort
changed by its being joined to the Divinity; and that so the Change which comes
to the Bread and Wine of the Sacrament, according to Damascen, is quite
different from that which is taught by the Latin Church; and I think it cannot
be any way questioned, after what is above said. Now, if I be asked what was
the Belief of Damascen; for if it be not the Belief of Roman Catholics, it
should in all likelihood be that of Protestants? I answer sincerely, that as
far as I can judge, it is not the Belief, neither of the one, or the other; but
a particular Opinion of this Friar; who believed that the Bread and Wine, by
the coming of the Holy Ghost, were in some sort united to the Divinity, which
took them unto it self (for he uses the term of Assumption) as it took the
Humane Nature of our Savior; and that by means of this Union to the Divinity,
they became one and the same Body, and not several, as he explained himself in
the first passage: an Unity which depends upon this known Axiom; That the
things united unto a third, are united amongst themselves. Methinks the Author
declares his meaning plainly enough, when having made himself this Question,
How is it that the Bread is made the Body of Jesus Christ, Ibid.
and the Wine and Water his Blood? He answers, The Holy Spirit comes and
changes these things in a manner that surpasses expression and thought. The
Bread and Wine are taken; which is just the term used by the Fathers to
represent the Assumption of the Humane Nature of Jesus Christ by the Divinity.

The Sentiments of Damascen will appear yet plainer, if we consider what he
says in his Letter unto Zachary, Bishop of Doare, and in the little Chapter
which follows; to wit, That the Bread and Wine of the Sacrament are made the
Body and Blood of Jesus Christ by way of Augmentation or Increase, which
befalls the Body of Jesus Christ: Thus he establishes the Subsistence of these
two Elements, and their joining unto the natural Body of Jesus Christ; but so
strict an Union, that they make, in the shallow Conceit of this Writer, but one
single Body, with the true Body of Jesus Christ. Moreover, he assures that the
incorruptible Body of our Savior, that is to say, his glorified Body, has no
Blood: a Doctrine with which it is impossible to reconcile the Belief of
Transubstantiation.

As to what Damascen says, That the Fathers have given to the Bread and Wine
in the Sacrament the names of Figures and Signs before Consecration, and not
after, he apparently deceives himself: for do but read what we have alleged in
the third Chapter of this second Part, where we have established this Tradition
by a very great number of testimonies of this holy Doctors. The Abbot of Billy
a very Learned Man, and well read in Ecclesiastical Antiquity, could not suffer
this presumption of Damascen's without reproving him, Billius in Orat. 11.
Greg. Naz. p. 632.
by, as it were, giving him the lie. Damascen (says he) denies that the Bread
and Wine are called Figures after Consecration by St. Basil, which is evidently
false; as plainly appears by several places in the Apostolical Constitutions of
St. Clement, of Gregory Nazianzen, and other Authors. Bessar. Card. de Sacram.
Eucharist. t. 6. Bibl. patr. p. 470. Edit. ult.
Bessareon a Greek by Nation, Bishop of Nice, and one of those which assisted
at the Council of Florence in behalf of the Greek Nation, but corrupted by the
Latins, who honored him with a Cardinals Cap, excuses Damascen, and
endeavors to give a good sense to his words; By the Figure (says he) whereof
he speaks in this place, he means a shadow, which is nothing else but a Figure,
simply signifying another subject, having not at all, any force nor power, to
act or operate; like the Sacraments of the Old Testament, which were the
Figures of the Sacraments of the New. But this Explication which is not wholly
to be rejected, does not hinder but that the Censure of the Abbot of Billy was
very Judicious. In fine, About the same time Damascen denied it, Stephen
Stylite, no less zealous than him for the defense of Images, confessed it, when
he said to the Emperor Constantine, which commanded them to be taken out of
Churches, Will you also banish out of the Church the Signs or Figures of the
Body and Blood of Jesus Christ, Vita Stephan. apud Surcum ad 28 Novem. cap. 36.
seeing that is an Image and a true Figure. But let us yet make some progress
in the East and West, to know what was the Language and Doctrine of the Church
in the Eighth Century. As for what concerns the West, Bid in Luc. cap. 22. Id.
in Psalm. 3. Id. in Hemil. de Sanct. in Epiph. Idem in Psalm. 133. t. 8. Id. de
tabern. l. 2. c. 2. t. 4.
if we enquire of venerable Bede he will tell us, That the Lord gave us the
Sacrament of his Flesh and Blood, in the Figure of Bread and Wine: And that our
Savior gave unto his Disciples in his Sacrament the Figure of his Body and
Blood; That the Creatures of Bread and Wine pass into the Sacrament of his Body
and Blood, by the ineffable sanctification of the Holy Ghost; That our Savior
has changed the Legal Sacrifices, into Sacrifices of Bread and Wine: And that
whereas the Ancients celebrated the Passion of our Lord in the Flesh and Blood
of Sacrifices, we celebrate it in the Oblation of Bread and Wine: According to
which he testifies in a great many places, Homil. de Sanct. in Epiph.
as has been seen in the 4th Chapter, That Jesus Christ is absent from us as
to his Body, but is present by his Divinity. It is true he says, That the Body
and Blood of Jesus Christ is received by the Mouth of believers for their
Salvation. But after what he has spoken, it is very evident, say the
Protestants, that he speaks not of receiving them in their matter and
Substance, but in their Sacrament, accompanied with a quickening and saving
virtue; and that if he be not so understood, he will be made to contradict
himself, and to destroy with one hand, what he built with the other; therefore
it is that he distinguishes the Sacrament; and that he declares, that the
wicked participate only of the Sign, and not of the thing signified, saying
with St. Prosper in the Sentences drawn from St. Austin, Id. in 1. ad Cor. 11.
He that is not reconciled unto Jesus Christ, neither eats his Flesh, nor
drinks his Blood, although he receives every day the Sacrament of so great a
thing unto his condemnation. It is also true, that he often calls the Bread and
Wine, the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ; but he declares with St. Austin,
whom he exactly follows, Id. in cap. 6. ad Romans Id. in Marc. cap. 14.
That it is by reason of the resemblance they have with the things whereof they
are Sacraments: And with St. Isidor of Sevil, That it is because Bread
strengthens the body, and Wine increases Blood in the Flesh; and that for this
reason, the Bread relates mystically unto the Body of Jesus Christ, and the
Wine to his Blood. And because, say they, in the matter of Sacraments, it is
not so much to be considered what they be, August. contra Maxim. l. 3. c. 22.
says St. Austin, as what it is they signify; because that as Signs they are
one thing, and yet they do signify another. Venerable Bede makes no difficulty
to say, That the Bread and Wine being visibly offered, another thing must be
understood which is Invisible, to wit, The true Body and Blood of Christ;
because in effect, he will have the Believer raise up his Soul and his Faith
unto Jesus Christ, sitting at the right Hand of his Father; for as he told us
before, He carried by his Ascension into the Invisible Heavens, Beda domui
vocem Ju. Id. Hom. de Astil. de temp. in vigil. Pasch.
the Humane Nature which he had taken: In fine, he is not afraid to speak of
Sacrificing again Jesus Christ for the advancement of our Salvation; but all
Christians agreeing, That Jesus Christ cannot any more be truly Sacrificed; he
doubtless speaks of offering him by the Sacrament; whence it is that he
acknowledges with St. Austin, That Jesus Christ was once offered in himself.
Let the Reader judge then what advantage the Latins can draw from these latter
words of Bedes, which they mightily esteem. Unto Bid may be joined Sedulius, a
Scotchman, or more truly, an Irishman; not him that composed the Easter work,
who was much later than the other; I mean the Author of the Commentaries upon
the Epistles of St. Paul, which many attribute unto one Sedulius a Bishop in
England, but originally of Ireland; who assisted with Fergust a Bishop of
Scotland, at a Council held at Rome under Gregory the 2d. Anno Dom. 721. I find
that the Author of these Commentaries, expounding the 4th Verse of the 6th
Chapter of the First Epistle to the Corinthians, cites a long passage of the
14th Chapter, and 19th Book of the Morals of Gregory the First, without naming
him. Now this Sedulius whom we place in the VIII. Century, until we receive
better information, furnishes us with these words, which he seems to have
taken out of Pelagius and Primasius, when explaining these words of St. Sedul.
Comment. in 1. ad Cor. C. 11.
Paul, Do this in remembrance of me, he says, He lest us his remembrance; as
if one going a long Loyage, left a Present with his Friend, to the end that
every time he saw it, he should think of his Love and Friendship; which he
could not look upon without grief and tears, if he dearly loved him: Whereby he
shows, that Jesus Christ left us his Sacrament to be in his stead until he
comes again from Heaven. We read in the Life of the Abbot Leufred, Vita
Leufred. C. 17. in Chron Insulae term.
about the beginning of the VIII. Century, that Charles Martell having desired
him to obtain of God by his prayers, the recovery of his young Son Gryphon, he
gave him the Sacrament of the Body of Christ. In notis Menard. in Sacram. Greg.
And we have seen in the second Chapter by the testimony of a Pontifical
Manuscript kept in the Church of Roan, that Christians then believed, that what
was drank in the Eucharist, was a thing which might be consumed, as that was
indeed consumed.

If we pass from the West into the East, German, Germ. Constantinop. Theor.
rerum Eccles. t. 12. Bibl. Patr. pa. 402. and 403.
Patriarch of Constantinople, and a great stickler for Image Worship, will
present himself unto us in the beginning of this same Century, and tells us,
that the Priest prays a second time, to the end the Mystery of the Son of God
may be accomplished, and that the Bread and Wine should be made and changed
into the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ, which the Latins stand upon very much;
but the Protestants pretend he declares very favorably for them; and moreover
they observe, that it is not certain this piece is that German's which lived in
the VIII. Century, others attributing it to another German that lived in the
XII.

They indeed observe, that to show of what kind the change whereof he speaks
is, he says, In celebrating the Eucharist, Ibid. p. 410.
the Oblation is broken indeed like bread; but it is distributed as the
Communication of an ineffable benediction, unto them which participate thereof
with Faith. He testifies that what is distributed at the holy Table is Bread,
but Bread accompanied with the Blessing of God, and with a Heavenly and Divine
Virtue for the Salvation and Consolation of Believers. Ibid. p. 408.
And in another place he says, That presently after Elevation, the Division of
the holy body is made; but though it is divided into parts, it remains
indivisible and inseparable, and that it is known and found whole and entire in
each portion of the things divided. These words can receive no good sense, but
by understanding them of the Sacrament, that is to say, of the Bread which is
broken in pieces as to its matter and substance; but that remains whole and
entire, as to the virtue of the Sacrament; which made the great St. Basil say,
Basil. Ep. 289. t. 3.
That to receive one part, or several at ae time, is the same thing as to its
virtue. Moreover, German will have us consider Jesus Christ as dead in the
Sacrament, and as pouring forth his precious blood for the Salvation of
mankind, when he says, Id. Germ. ib. p. 407, 409, 410.
That the Elevation of the precious body, represents the Elevation in the
Cross, the Death of our Lord on the Cross, and his Resurrection also; That the
Priest receiving the Bread alone, without the Blood, and the Blood also without
the Body, signifies nothing else, but that the Divine Lamb is yet all bloody;
and that we eat the Bread and drink the Cup, as the Flesh and Blood of the Son
of God, confessing his Death and Resurrection. And clearer yet in these words,
where speaking of the holy Bread, which he distinguishes from Jesus Christ, he
says, Ibid, p. 408.
That it is the only Bread wherein is figured and represented the Divine and
all-healing Death of him which was Sacrificed for the Lafe of the World;
because it is the only Divine Bread which is Sacrificed and Offered as the
Lamb: but as for the other Divine Gifts, they be not cut in the form of a Cross
with the Knife, but they are put in pieces as the members and parts of the
body. It is the true Commentary of what he says in the same Treatise, That
Jesus Christ is always sacrificed, because he is so, not in himself, for that
cannot be, by the confession of all Christians, but in the Sacrament; the
Celebration whereof does lively represent unto us the imolation of Jesus Christ
upon the Cross. Ibid. p. 408.
Add unto this that he declares, That Jesus Christ drank Wine in his Sacrament,
as he did after his Resurrection, not through necessity, but to persuade his
Disciples of the truth of his Resurrection. And that he desires at the instant
of communicating, we should lift up our thoughts from Earth, unto the King
which is in Heaven. Now let it be judged after all these declarations, what the
change can be, which he says is passed upon the Bread and Wine by
Consecration, if he meant a change of substance, or only of use and condition;
for the former seems unto Protestants to be inconsistent with the Explanations
which he has given us; whereas the latter does not ill accord with it, in all
appearance.

German says, That Jesus Christ is seen and felt in the Eucharist; but he
positively affirms, that it is done in his Sacrament; that is to say, that he
is seen and touched, inasmuch as the Sacrament is seen and felt which does
represent him. Ibid. p. 401.
Our Savior (says he) is seen, and suffers himself to be touched by means of
the ever to be revered and sacred Mysteries. I will not insist upon what is
said by this Patriarch, That the Bread and Wine offered by Believers for the
Communion, do in some sort become upon the Table of proposition (which amongst
the Greeks is different from that where the Consecration of the Divine Symbols
are made) I say they become in some sort the Images and Figures of the Body and
Blood of Jesus Christ; because it is a frivolous conceit, and with reason
rejected by Roman Catholics and Protestants.

But let us lay aside the Patriarch German, and prosecute the History of the
VIII. Century; in the same City where German was Patriarch, the Metropolis of
the Eastern Empire; Constantine the 6th. commonly surnamed Copronymas, Son of
the Emperor Leo the third, called Isaurus, assembled a Council of 338 Bishops,
Anno 754. The Assembly held full six months, during which, they quite abolished
the Worshipping of Images; and by the way, Council. Constantinop. in Act.
Council. Nicaen. 2. t. 5. Council. p. 756.
clearing up the Doctrine of the Church upon the point of the Sacrament, to
draw a proof against the same Images they had condemned, they left unto us for
a Monument of their belief, this following testimony; Let those rejoice which
with a most pure heart, make the true Image of Jesus Christ, which desire,
which venerate, and which do offer it for the Salvation of body and soul; the
which Jesus Christ gave unto his Disciples in Figure and Commemoration. And
having repeated the words of Institution, they add, That no other Species under
Heaven was made choice of by him, nor any other Type that could represent his
Incarnation; That it is the Image of his quickening body, which was honorably
and gloriously made; That as Jesus Christ took the matter or humane substance,
in like manner he has commanded us to offer for his Image a matter chosen,
that is to say, the substance of bread, not having any humane Form or Figure,
fearing lest Idolatry may get in; As then (say they) the Natural Body of Jesus
Christ is holy, because it is Deified: It is also evident, that his Body by
Institution, that is to say, his holy Image is rendered Divine by Sanctification
of Grace: for it is what our Savior intended to do, when by virtue of the
Union, he Deified the Flesh he had taken by a Sanctification proper unto
himself; so also he would, that the bread of the Sacrament, as being the true
Figure of his Natural body, should be made a Divine Body by the coming of the
Holy Ghost, the Priest which makes the Oblation intervening to make it holy,
whereas it was common; therefore the Natural body of our Lord, endowed with
Soul and Understanding, was anointed by the Holy Ghost, being united unto the
Godhead; so also his Image, to wit, the holy bread is filled with the Cup of
enlivening Blood which flowed out of his side.

What renders this testimony the more considerable and worthy to be credited,
is, That these Fathers which represented all the Eastern Church, or at least
the greatest part of it, were assembled about the matter of Images, and not
about the subject of the Sacrament; for had they been assembled upon the point
of the Sacrament, it may be some uncharitable person might suspect them of
pre-occupation, or of design; but having been assembled upon a very different
subject, of necessity it must be granted, that it is by the by, that they
inform us of the common and general Opinion and Belief of Christians. They
would draw from the Eucharist an argument against the use and Worship of
Images; and to do it the better, they were obliged to unfold unto us the Nature
of the Sacrament; and they explain it in saying, That it is the substance of
Bread; that it is no deceiving Figure of his Natural Body; and as they say a
little before, a Type and Commemoration of the Passion of Jesus Christ; and
that God in choosing this Type, and not a humane Effigies, intended to shun the
danger of Idolatry; they content not themselves to say, that the Eucharist is
an Image; they declare, That this Image is the substance of Bread; they speak
of Sacrificing this Image, this chosen matter, this Substance of Bread; they
pleased themselves in making a perpetual opposition betwixt the real Body of
Jesus Christ, and the Bread which is its Figure or Image; they say, That the
one is his Body by Nature, and the other his Body by Institution; that the
former is the matter of his humane substance, without personal subsistence, and
the other, a matter chosen, that is to say, the substance of Bread, not having
humane Features; that the one is holy, because it is Deified; that the other is
rendered holy by the Sanctification of Grace; in fine, That the one is his Flesh
which he has taken to himself, and that he has sanctified with a holiness
proper unto himself; and that the other is sanctified by the Grace of the Holy
Ghost, which by the Ministry of the Priest makes it holy, whereas it was
common. And because the Fathers which preceded them were wont to consider the
Sacrament as an Image of the Son of God; these also will have it to be an
express Image of this adorable Mystery; in contemplation whereof, we must lift
up our Faith, and bring down our Sins; its for this reason they say, That
there is no other thing under Heaven, nor any other Figure but that, chosen by
Jesus Christ to express the Image of his Incarnation; and a little under they
say, That our Savior's design in the Institution of the Sacrament, was to
represent and show clearly unto Men the Mystery of his Economy; that is to
say, of his Incarnation: therefore they thus conclude all their Discourse, It
has been demonstrated that it is the true Figure of the Incarnation of Jesus
Christ our God. If it be a true Image, as they do assure, it is necessary say
some, that the substance of Bread should remain after Sanctification, to
represent sincerely the truth of the Flesh of Jesus Christ, the which is not
abolished by his Union unto the Divine Nature; they add unto all these
considerations, that the Council testifies, that our Lord commanded us to make,
not his real Body, but the Figure of his Body and of his Blood; and in that
Jesus Christ commanded that this Image should be of the substance of Bread,
without the lineaments of humane shape, it was to prevent Idolatry: An Argument
which would be unworthy the Council, if it had believed that the Bread after
Consecration had been no longer Bread, but the Body it self of the Savior of
the World, which ought to be Religiously adored, by reason of his personal
Union with the Godhead; very far from fearing of committing Idolatry in adoring
of him. Thus it is that many do argue from this testimony.

They lived thirty two years in the East under the Authority of this Council,
but in the year 787. the Empress Irene having a violent affection for Images,
caused a second Council to be assembled at Nice in Bythinia, whither she caused
to come, People to her own liking, as also that favored Images, insomuch as
the better to accomplish her design, she conferred the Patriarchship of
Constantinople upon one Terrasius, which being a Lay person, could not
according to the Ecclesiastical Constitutions be capable of enjoying this
Dignity. In this Council, assembled at the desire and pleasure of the Empress,
who governed all things in the Minority of Constantine her Son, was disannulled
all that had been done at Constantinople against Images; and by the way, they
censured what the other Fathers had said, That the Sacrament is an Image of the
Body of Jesus Christ; because, said they, it is his true Body, and his true
Blood, and not an Image: Council. Nican. 2. act. 6. t. 5. Conc p. 5^. and 758.
see here their very terms; The Oblations are piously called Types, that is to
say, Figures and Images by some of the holy Fathers, before the perfection of
Sanctification; but after Sanctification they are called truly, they are, and
are believed to be, the Body and Blood of Christ. And thereupon they censure
those of Constantinople, for calling the Eucharist an Image, and to have
instanced for destroying of Images, the example of an Image, which was not an
Image, but the Body and Blood. I will not here make a comparison betwixt these
two Councils in their full extent, nor search into the parallels betwixt them;
I will say but little; but what I shall say will suffice to satisfy the
Reader. Sirmond. t. ^. Council. Gall. p. 191.
Not to mention what has been observed by Father Sirmond, that the second
Council of Nice cannot have the name of an Ecumenical and Universal Council;
it appears in the first place, that much simplicity and sincerity might be seen
in that of Constantinople, although we have but little of their Acts trasmitted
unto us, but what was done by their Enemies. But in that of Nice, I am obliged
to say that there is Injustice to be found, in that these Prelates do assure in
a great many places, that they had present in their Assembly the Legates of the
three Patriarchs of the East; whereas the certain truth is, Conc. Nican 2. act.
3. p. 594, 595, 596, 597.
that not one of the three Patriarchs of the East did send any Deputies
thither; but five or six Hermits of Palestine, ignorant and unexperienced
persons, as they call themselves, at the instance of the Deputies of the
Patriarch Terrasius, did depute two of their own number, John and Thomas, to
assist at this Council; of the Legates of the Patriarchs of Alexandria, of
Antioch, and of Jerusalem, I find no marks or mention; the pieces inserted in
the Acts of the Council testify the same. Secondly, in the Council of
Constantinople, the Fathers whereof it was composed, did not licentiously abuse
the holy Scriptures to draw it to their party; but I cannot forbear saying,
that it was quite otherwise in that of Nice, where they took liberty miserably
to wrest the Scriptures, and to corrupt them to draw inferences in favor of
Image Worship, this is to be seen in several instances, especially in all the
fourth Session. In the third place, we do not see that the Fathers of
Constantinople had recourse to so many and gross pieces as those of Nice, Act.
2. p. 555. Act. 4. p. 622.
who made use of them freely, and without any scruple, for the establishing of
their Opinion; as the Acts of Pope Sylvester in the second Session; the Book of
the Passion of an Image of Jesus Christ, under the name of St. Athanasius,
although this ridiculous piece had been but newly invented, Ibid. 642. Ibid.
649.
no question but by some one that was for Worshipping of Images; the obscene
and filthy History of a Friar tempted by the Spirit of Fornication, which they
attributed unto Sophronius Patriarch of Jerusalem, and a Letter of St. Basil
unto the Emperor Julian the Apostate, wherein this holy Doctor acknowledges
and embraces the Worship of Images, a piece also invented by some ignorant
Impostor; all this in the 4th Session. Therefore it is very judiciously
observed in the Books of Charlemain, that those of Nice, seeing the holy
Scriptures would not accord with their Errors, they had recourse unto I know
not what humane Fooleries, worthy of shame. I Will say nothing of their denying
the Epistle produced under the name of Ibas to be truly his, Act. 6. p. 775.
against the testimony of the Acts of the Council of Chalcedon, and the very
confession of Ibas himself. In fine, it is found that the Fathers of
Constantinople have very faithfully retained the Doctrine and Expressions of
those unto whom God had committed the conduct of the Church before them, for
they call the Eucharist an Image, Type, Commemoration, it is the common
Language of the Ancients; they teach, that it is Bread, the substance of Bread;
the Ancients had said so before them, as has been amply related in the second
Chapter of this part of our History: they call it the Body of Jesus Christ by
Institution, which amounts unto what their Ancestors said, that it is the
Typical, the Mystical, the Symbolical Body, the Body by Grace, as has been
declared; and they also agree with them, when they say that the Sacrament is
the Image of his Incarnation. But as for the Fathers of Nice, it is said, that
if they absolutely departed not from the Doctrine of the Ancients, they did at
least from their terms and expressions, when they denied that the Fathers had
called the Bread and Wine after Consecration, Types, or Figures; which appeared
so impudent unto those which have given us the Councils, that they could not
forbear reproving this confidence by this Annotation, which they have set in
the Margin; the Greek Fathers often call the things Sanctified, Figures, as
Gregory Nazianzen in the Funeral Oration of his Sister, and in his first
Appologetick; Cyril of Jerusalem in his 5th Mystagogical Catechism, and others.
The Abbot of Billy has also blamed, as has been before declared, the like
temerity in Damascen; and certainly with much reason, seeing there is nothing
more frequent in the Writings of the Fathers, than these kind of expressions;
yet it was upon this false ground that these Prelates of Nice founded their
censure against those of Constantinople, which had called the Eucharist the
Image of the Body of Jesus Ghrist, and that on the contrary they said, That it
is his Body it self. Words which the Latins are wont to explain to their
advantage, although the Protestants do not judge that in the main of the
Doctrine, Nice was not Diametrically opposite unto Constantinople: to
understand it aright, it must be remembered, the chief occasion of assembling
both Councils, was the subject of Images, the Council of Constantinople having
abolished the Use and Worship of them; And that of Nice having restored both
the one and the other; it must also be remembered, that the Fathers of
Constantinople taking from the Eucharist a proof against the Use and Worship of
Images, they called the Sacrament an Image, and declared, that it was the only
Image which Christ commanded to be made; But because the word Image does at the
first hearing, form in the mind the Idea of a proper Image and simple Picture,
that has no other use nor propriety then to represent unto our Eyes some form
like the Original, without any way participating of its Operation and Virtue:
(in a word, a Picture, like to those which be sold in Painters Shops) the
Prelates of Nice thinking those of Constantinople had in this sense given the
name of Image unto the Sacrament, as Cardinal Bessarion told us Damascen had
done, failed not severely to censure them; not but that the Fathers of
Constantinople had sufficiently enough explained themselves in saying, that
this Image, to wit, the Divine Bread, is filled with the Holy Ghost. But in
fine, the Prelates of Nice, either through Passion to their Adversaries, or
otherwise; for it is not for me to judge of their thoughts, reflected sharply
upon those of Constantinople, thinking they had taken this term of Image in the
sense as we have expressed; several things made them think so: In the first
place they tell us themselves, that it was their thought; and that they gave no
other signification to the word Image; As for the Image, say they, Council.
Nicaen. 2. act. 6. tom. 6. p. 800. t. 5. Council. Ibid. p. 799.
we know no other but that it is an Image which shows the resemblance of its
Original, whence also it is that it takes the name, and that it has nothing
else common with it; A little before they had said, That what the Image has in
common with the Original, is the name only, and not the definition; And again
in another place, Ibid. t. 3. p. 353
One thing is the Image, and another thing is the Original; and a man of sense
will never seek the Proprieties of the Original in the Image. Secondly, Elias
of Creet, now Candia, one of the Fathers of the Council shows they think very
clearly, that the intent of the Council was not to teach, that the Bread and
the Wine were changed into the substance of the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ,
but only into their Efficacy and Virtue; for using the words of St. Cyril of
Alexandria before alleged, Elias Cretens. in Orat. 1. Greg. Nazianz p. 201.
he says, That God does send into the things offered an enlivening virtue, and
that he makes them to pass into the operation of his Flesh; it is in the Greek
of St. Cyril, into the Efficacy of his Flesh: There is yet more, the Fathers of
Nice being in a humor of reproving and censuring those of Constantinople, as
to whatever with any weak show might fall within the compass of their censure,
it is no force to conceive, that they approved what they have not blamed; and
that they have owned as Catholic and Orthodox the things which they have not
censured. They say, that all reasonable persons will grant, if they consider
how the Bishops of Nice were affected toward them of Constantinople, whose
Constitutions and Decrees they publicly revoked; now of two things insisted
upon by these latter, the Prelates of Nice censured but one, they must then
approve of the other; and in approving, they must receive it as Catholic, and
as one of the Articles of their Belief. The Fathers of Constanstinople had
said, that the Eucharist is the Image of the Body of Jesus Christ; but they
said also, That this Image is the substance of Bread; here are Adversaries
eagerly bent against them. Adversaries that spare them not in any thing, that
strictly examine every thing they do or say, either to render them odious, or
to make them be esteemed Wicked and Villains; there is no likelihood then they
would have spared them, if they had departed from the Belief publicly received
in the Church, seeing they had taken the liberty of censuring them for using
the terms and expressions which their Forefathers had been accustomed to use in
the like occasions. In fine, of two things that Constantinople had asserted,
Nice does censure one, and not the other, it condemns the former, and not the
latter: The first does disgust it, the second does not; although the one
regards but the terms, and the other ingageth directly the ground of the
Doctrine it self; it will not permit it should be said, that the Eucharist is
the Image of Jesus Christ; but it will have it said. That it is the substance
of Bread after Consecration. Let us, for example, put instead of that of Nice,
a Council of the Latin Church; and instead of that of Constantinople, a
Protestant Council; who could imagine, that the Council of the Latin Church
should condemn that of the Protestants, for saying, That the Eucharist is the
Image of the Body of Jesus Christ; and that it should not condemn it for
affirming, That it is the substance of Bread even after Consecration;
Nevertheless this is just what is done by the Fathers of Nice. Is not there
then absolute necessity to conclude, That Nice was of Accord with
Constantinople, as to what concerned the Doctrine, and that neither the one nor
the other, departed from the Ancient Belief of the Church; this at least is
what is inferred: But may the Latins say, the Prelates of Nice say, that the
Eucharist is properly called the Body of Christ, and that it is so. The
Protestants answer, it cannot be thought strange in the thoughts they had that
the Bishops of Constantinople meant that it was an Image that had nothing
common with its Original, but the Name only; an Image that participated not of
its virtue, and that was destitute of any efficacy; and to say the truth, say
these latter, the Sacrament being impregnated, if it may be so said, with the
Grace and Benediction of our Savior, filled with his Virtue and Efficacy,
clothed with the Majesty of his own Person, accompanied with all the fruits
and advantages of his death, nothing may hinder from saying, That it is his
Body, because it enjoys the privileges; and that there is seen, in the lawful
use of this Copy, the same Virtue and the same Efficacy as that which resides
in its Prototype and in its Original, with the which it is by consequence, in a
manner, one and the same; for then especially is true what Eusebius said,
Eusebius. contr. Marcel. de Eccl. Theolog. l. 2. c. 23.
That no body in his right senses will say, that the King and his Image that is
carried about, are two Kings; but one only which is honored in his Image: And
St. Athanasius, Athanas. contr Arian. Orat. 4. and contr. Sabel. Gregal.
That the King and his Image is but one and the same thing: The Picture of the
King (says St. Basil) is called the King, yet they are not for that two Kings:
for as he says elsewhere, He that in an open place contemplates the Kings
Picture, and that says it is the King, does not for all that own two Kings, to
wit, Basil. de Spirit. S. c. 18.
The Portraicture, and him that it represents. Contr. Sabellian. vel Homil. 27.
t. 1. p. 522.
But according to the observation of St. Cyril Archbishop of Alexandria, The
Pourtrait may say unto him that looks upon it, and that besides would see the
King himself, the King and I are all one thing, as to the perfect resemblance.
Cyril. Alex. in Thesaur. assert. 12. t. 5. p. 111.
And I make no doubt but it was in this sense that some of the Ancients
considered the Bread of the Sacrament, and the Body of our Savior crucified
upon the Cross, as one Body, and not as several Bodies; and if I should doubt
of it, Haymond Bishop of Alberstat, or Remy of Auxerr, would soon cure me of
this doubt in saying, The Flesh which Jesus Christ has taken, Haym. Halber. in
1 ad Cor. c. 10.
and the Bread of the Sacrament, and the whole Church, do not make three Bodies
of Christ but one Body; that is to say, the Bread of the Sacrament, and the
Church, are called the Body of Jesus Christ, just as his Natural Body is,
because they are Mystically so, that they have all their relation unto his true
Body, and that by virtue of this relation they are deemed one and the same
Body; Theodot. apud Bulenger. cont Casaub.
and before Haymond, Theodotus of Antioch so expressed himself, As the King
(says he) and his Portrait are not two Kings, so also the Personal Body of
Jesus Christ which is in Heaven, and the Bread which the Priest distributes
unto believers in the Church, and which is the Antitype and Figure, are not two
Bodies: In fine, if it may be said in a good sense of all Images in general,
that they are one and the same with their Original, of greater reason may it be
said of the Eucharist, which is not an Image depending of the Painters Fancy as
the others, nor of the skill of his Pencil, but of the Institution of Jesus
Christ, which has instituted this Divine Sacrament, to be the remembrance of
his Death, the Portraicture and Image of his Person and Sufferings; but an
Image and Portrait that truly communicates unto us his Body broken, and which
in the Celebration of the Sacrament is always accompanied with his Virtue and
Efficacy; therefore St. 1 Chrysostom. Hom. 28. in 1 ad Cor.
Chrysostom says, That the Sacramental Table is exuberant with life, 2 Homil.
51. in Matt.
and full of the holy Spirit; 3 Catech. ad illuminand.
that the Cup is full of much virtue; 4 Ibid. Ambro. lib. de initiand. c. 4. t.
4. p. 346.
and that those which are initiated know the force and virtue of this Cup.
Which agrees not ill with what the Fathers of Constantinople said, That the
Bread of the Eucharist is filled with the Holy Ghost: And what they said of the
Bread and Cup of the Sacrament, the Author of the Book of those which are
initiated in St. Ambrose, says the same of the Water of Baptism, Believe
(says he) that the Waters are not alone, Just. Mart. Dial cum Tryph. page 231.
Ammon. Cat. in Joan. 3.5.
and that there descends a Divine Virtue into this Fountain: Thence it is St.
Justin Martyr calls the Water of Baptism, the Water of Life; and that Amonius
says, It is changed into a Divine Nature.

Seven years after, to wit, in the year 794. Charlemain being displeased at
what had been done at Nice in favor of Images, caused a Council to be
assembled at Francfort to prohibit the Worship, and stop the progress of an
abuse which then seemed intolerable unto the greatest number of Christians in
the West: And at this time were written the Books of Images which bear the name
of this Emperor, because in all likelihood they were written by his order,
rather than by his Pen. In one of these Books is censured the word Image or
likeness, as those of Nice had censured it in those of Constantinople: I will
not now examine if there was any thing of surprise in this Censure, that is, if
it was done with an intent of directing it against Nice, and not against those
of Constantinople: for although it is most certain that the principal design of
the Council of Francfort was to oppose that of Nice, against whom those of the
West were no less incensed, than those of Nice had been against them of
Constantinople, I will make no censure upon the matter, not to give occasion
unto any uncharitable Reader of censuring me. It shall suffice to cite the
words of the Book, Carol. Magnus de imag. l. 4. c. 14.
that all the World may see what was the thoughts of the Author in censuring
the word Image; The Mystery (says he) of the Body and Blood of Christ, ought
not now to be called Image, but Verity; not Shadow, but Substance; not the Type
of things to come, but what had been figured by Types; the Daylight is already
come, and Shadows are gone away; now Jesus Christ, the end of the Law, in
righteousness unto all believers is come; he has already fulfilled the Law: He
that was in the valley of the shadow of Death has seen a great Light; already
the Vail is fallen from the Face of Moses, and the vail of the Temple which is
rent, has discovered unto us all things that were hid and unknown, now the
true Melchisedek, to wit, Jesus Christ the righteous King, the King of Peace,
has bestowed upon us not the Sacrifices of Beasts, but the Sacrament of his
Body and Blood.

It is no hard matter to guess at the scope of these words, and to see that
they do not tend to the condemning the word Image, taking it for a holy Sign,
instituted of God not only to signify and represent, but also effectually to
communicate Jesus Christ unto our Souls, dead for our sins; their intent is
only to reprove this term, as it was taken for a legal Shadow, or for a
prefiguration of Christ to come; therefore to show that the Sacrament was not
of the Nature of Types and Figures of the Law, which did only represent,
without communicating the thing represented; it is spoken in opposition unto
the Sacrifices of Beasts, that our Savior has left us, not his Body but the
Sacrament of his Body and of his Blood; but a Sacrament so efficacious and
Divine, that the faithful Soul never participates of it, but that it really and
truly communicates of the thing it self; whereas the Types of the Law did only
prefigure it; therefore it is that the Author said a little before, Ibid.
speaking of the Mystery of the Body and Blood of the Lord, That believers do
receive it every day in the Sacrament. And in another Book he declares, Lib. 2.
c. 25.
That it is the Mediator of God and Men, which by the Ministry of the Priest,
and the Innovation of the name of God, does make the Sacrament of his Body and
Blood, which he has left us for a Commemoration of his Death and of our
Salvation: And again, The Apostle St. Paul, Ibid.
that chosen Vessel, considering that the Body and Blood of our Lord should not
only be equal unto all other Sacraments, but also preferable unto any, he
says, Let every one examine himself, and so let him eat of this Bread, and
drink of this Cup. He testifies, That what is eaten at the Holy Table is Bread;
and in saying that the Sacrament of the Eucharist ought to be preferred almost
before all others, he shows plainly, that he did not believe it was the very
Body of our Savior; for these words would have been unworthy a Christian, if
they had been spoken of the proper Flesh of the Son of God: But what need there
any other explanation than that which is given us by Charlemain himself, when
writing unto Alcuin his Tutor, De ration. Septuages. ad Alcuin.
he says, That our Savior Supping with his Disciples, broke Bread, and also
gave them the Cup, for a Figure of his Body and Blood, and gave them a great
Sacrament for our profit. Thus it is that several explain it.

But as to Alcuin, let us see what he will furnish us for the better
understanding the History of this Age; and if the Tutor will accord with his
Scholar. I will not insist upon the Treatise of Divine Offices which go in his
name, because the Learned do confess that it is not his, it shall suffice to
relate what is written by the late Andrew du Chesne; the last of which has set
his hand unto the Edition of his works; We do not (says he) want sufficient
conjectures to show that this Treatise is not Alcuin's; Gallia Braccata. Andr.
Quercetan. praefat. ad Alcuin. c. 17.
for the Author whoever it was, does testify that he is of Gall Narboness: and
an ancient Copy, by the help whereof we have recovered twelve whole Chapters,
Attributes the question of the Feasts of Saints, tacked unto the 18th. Chapter,
unto the Friar Elpris, who according to Trythemius, flourished in the year
1040. And in fine, in this Treatise there is mention of the Institution of the
Feast of All Saints the first of November: Nevertheless, it is easily found by
Sigebert and others, that it was not begun to be celebrated that day in France
and Germany, till a good while after the Decease of Alcuin, that is, Anno 835.
and Alcuin died Anno 804. Neither will I infist upon a Confession of Faith,
which Father Chifflet has published in the name of the famous Alcuin, because
it is no less Fathered upon this excellent Master of Charlemain, than the Book
of Divine Offices: And that it is most certain, it was taken out of the Books
of Anselm's Meditations, and unadvisedly crowded into the Works of St. Austin.
Now Anselm lived toward the end of the XI. Century, and the beginning of the
XII. And I could easily here insert all the evident proofs of Forgery which the
piece it self does furnish; but because it is so apparent a truth, and that
moreover I find it has already been done, I will proceed to the consideration
of what is found in the genuine works of Alcuin touching the subject in hand.
In one of his Letters he says of the Bread and Wine of the Sacrament, that
they be consecrated, in Corpus and Sanguinem Christi, into the Body and Blood
of Jesus Christ. But let us hear the Explication he gives unto us of these
words in the same place: Alcuin. Ep. 59.
The Sanctification (says he) of this Mystery does presage the effect of our
Salvation: The faithful people is understood by the Water; and by the Grains of
Wheat whereof the Flower is taken to make the Bread, is meant the Union of the
whole Church, which is baked into one body by the fire of the Holy Ghost, to
the end the Members should be united unto their Head, etc. And by the Wine, the
Blood of the Passion of our Lord is exhibited: and so when in the Sacraments,
the Water is mingled with the Flower and the Wine, the faithful People is
incorporated and joined unto Jesus Christ. He follows the steps of St. Cyprian,
from whence he borrowed the expression. And elsewhere he disputes against
Christ's Presence upon Earth. Id. in Joan. l. 5. c. 28.
He was (says he) to continue but a little time corporally with his Church;
but as for the Poor, they were to remain always; so that we might always give
unto them. Ibid. l. 6. c. 34, and 35.
And in the same Treatise, If I depart by the absence of my Body, I will come
by the presence of my Divinity, whereby I will be with you unto the end of the
World. And again, in the sense of venerable Bede: Ibid. c. 37.
It is expedient that I should remove from before your eyes the form of a
Servant, to the end that the love of the Divinity might sink deeper into your
hearts. It is necessary I should carry into Heaven this Form which is known
unto you, to the end you should the more ardently desire to be in that place.
And according to what St. Austin said in explaining the 6th. Chapter of St.
John; Whosoever eats my flesh, Ibid. l. 3. c. 15.
and drinks my blood, dwells in me, and I in him. This eating (says he)
his Flesh, and drinking his Blood, is to dwell in Jesus Christ, and to have
Jesus Christ dwelling in us: And so he that dwells not in Jesus Christ, and
in whom Jesus Christ dwells not, for certain, eats not spiritually the
Flesh, although he visibly and carnally does eat the Sacrament of the Body and
Blood of Christ; but rather, he eats and drinks unto his Condemnation the
Sacrament of so great a thing; because, being impure, he presumed to come to
the Sacraments of Jesus Christ, which none receive worthily but those that are
holy. After all this, let it be judged which side Alcuin was of. Although the
Book called the Roman Order is not of any certain date, and that the Learned do
not agree at what time it first appeared: Nevertheless, because there be some
that judge that it was written about the time that the Books of Images were
composed under the name of Charlemain; but they are deceived, Ord. Romans de
Offic. Miss. t. 10 Bibl. Pat. ed. 4. p. 5.
the Author being much younger. We will make no difficulty of joining it unto
what we have alleged of those Books, and of the Works of Alcuin. The
Subdeacons (says he) having seen the Chalice, wherein is the Blood of our
Lord, covered with a Linen Cloth; and having heard, Deliver us from Evil,
depart, and prepare the Cups and clean Clothes, wherein they receive the Body
of the Lord; fearing it should fall to the ground, and be turned to dust. Let
it be imagined if that could befall the true Body of Jesus Christ. And again,
Ibid.
in the same place; The Bishop breaks the Oblation; that is to say, the
Bread, on the right side, and leaves the piece he broke upon the Altar. He
speaks of a Subject that may be broken into bits and pieces. Ibid p. 6.
And in the following Page, The Fraction, or as it is read in the Margin, the
Consecration, being done, the youngest of the Deacons, taking the pattern from
the Subdeacon, carries it unto the place where the Bishop is, to the end he
may communicate; and having communicated, he delivers unto the Archdeacon, the
holy Host which he had bit. See again, if the Flesh of Jesus Christ could be
bit; and if it could be said of the real Blood of Jesus Christ what he observes
in the same place, Ibid.
That it is made in the Cup, where there is put a portion of the holy Host, a
mixture of the Body and Blood of our Lord. Ibid. p. 10.
And in the same Treatise, That the Deacon (says he) holding the Cup and the
Quill, does stand before the Bishop, until he has taken what he thinks fit of
the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ. I cannot tell if one may take more or less
of the true Body of Jesus Christ; and whether it depends on the free Will of
men, to take as they list, and as much as they please. In fine, Ibid.
he will have the Deacon take care with much precaution, that there be nothing
left remaining in the Cup and Plate of the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ. Is
it to to be conceived (say the Protestants) that any drop of the Blood of our
Savior could remain in the Cup; or any part of his glorified Body in the
Paten? In the Roman Order of those times, which this Author afterward relates,
there is to be read what we have alleged of the Cannon of the Mass in the 8th
Chapter of the first Part. Whence it is inferred, that the Oblation presented
unto God was, after Consecration, an Oblation of Bread and Wine, according to
the Inference which was made at the end of the 6th Chapter of this Second Part,
which it is not needful to repeat again in this place.

CHAP. XIII.
Containing the History of the IX. Century.

WHatever change happened unto the Ancient Expressions relating to the point of
the Sacrament; nevertheless, the Belief of the Church received no alteration
during the eight first Centuries, the Doctrine still continued sound, as I
think has been fully justified hitherto; but at last in the IX. Century*
Paschas Radbert a Friar of Corby near Amiens, yet bolder than Anastatius of
Mount Sina, who contented himself in giving an assault unto the ancient manner
of Expressions, about the year 818. attacked the Doctrine it self; the
Providence of God permitting that the Innovations which arose in the terms, and
in the belief, took beginning by two Friars; which being both of them enclosed
in their Cloisters, departed in their meditations, the one from the
Expressions, the other from the Belief of their Ancestors. I said that Paschas
began to write of this matter in the year 818. because it was in that year he
composed his Treatise of the Body and Blood of the Lord, as may be collected
from the Preface to his Scholar Placidus; where speaking unto Adelard his
Abbot, under the name of one Arsenius an old Hermit, he sufficiently shows,
that he wrote in the year that Bernard King of Italy, and some others, had
their eyes put out for conspiring against Lewis the Debonaire; and that some
Bishops that were of the same Combination were banished and deposed; which
happened exactly in the year 818. the Rebellion having begun in the year 817. as
the Historians of those times inform us. I will not mention that Paschas
appears sometimes to be disturbed at what may happen in going about to adjust
some ancient expressions with his new Opinion, to make his disguise succeed the
better: He proceeded by way of Explication; it shall suffice to say, that it
seems it may be so gathered from the words of his Letter unto Frudegard,
Although (says he) I have writ nothing in this Book, Pasch. ep. ad Frude. p.
1^25
which I have dedicated unto a certain young Man, which might be worthy the
Reader; nevertheless, as I am informed, I have excited several persons to the
understanding of this Mystery. Thence it is, that in his Treatise of the Body
and Blood of our Lord, he speaks of his Explication as of an admirable thing,
and whereof sufficient heed had not yet been taken; Id de corp. and sang. Dom.
c. 1.
To the end (says he) I might yet say something more admirable: But the chief
is, to know wherein his opinion did consist; Those that will a little consider
his Writings, may observe he taught, That what is received in the Sacrament, is
the same Flesh of that which was born of the Virgin Mary, Id ibid.
and which suffered Death for us; Although (says he) the Figure of Bread and
Wine does remain, yet you must absolutely believe, that after Consecration, it
is nothing but the Flesh and Blood of Jesus Christ; for which reason the Truth
it self said unto his Disciples, It is my Flesh for the Life of the World; and
to say something more admirable, It is no other Flesh but that which was born
of the Virgin Mary, that suffered upon the Cross, and which is raised out of
the Sepulcher. So it is that he explains himself also again in the 4th Chapter
of the same Book, and several times in his Letter unto Frudegard; It is the
testimony that an Anonymus Author gives us, which Father Cellot has published,
Aut Anonym. l. de Euchar. apud Cellot in append. histor. Gostech. op. 7.
and which was one of his Adherents, -- Paschas (says he) establishes under
the name of St. Ambrose, That what is received at the Altar, is no other Flesh
than that born of the Virgin Mary, which suffered on the Cross; which was
raised out of the Grave; and is at present offered for the Life of the World.
Against which Rabanus, in his Letter to the Abbot Egilon, sufficiently does
argue. In fine, we shall be informed by Rabanus and by Ratramn, that it was the
Opinion of Paschas; and that nothing should be wanting to the establishing of
his Opinion, he wrote two Books of the Virgins being delivered of Child; which
Books had always gone in the name of Ildefons, Archbishop of Tolledo; T. 1.
Spicileg. praes. ad Ratiam.
and are at this time under that name, in the last Edition of the Library of
the holy Fathers. But Dom Luke d'Achery a Benedictine Friar, has informed us
by the help of Manuscripts, that Paschas was the true Author of them. In these
two Books he teaches, that the blessed Virgin was Delivered after an
extraordinary and miraculous manner; and that Jesus Christ was not born after
the common course of Nature; but that he came out of the Womb of this blessed
Maid without any opening, and not as Tertullian says in some of his Writings,
Lege patefacti Corporis: But as Bertram or Ratramn refuted the ground of the
Doctrine of Paschas, so he also refuted this progress of it, by a little
Treatise he wrote on purpose, on the Birth of Jesus Christ; wherein several
times he qualifies with the name of Heresy, the Opinion which he refutes;
whereas I do not find that he ever gave this name unto what his Adversary had
taught of the Sacrament; which gives me occasion to make this conjecture, which
I freely submit unto the Reader's Judgment; to wit, That Paschas having
proceeded in what he wrote of the Sacrament by way of Explication; and as one
that did seek for the true knowledge of this Mystery: His Adversaries did not
call this Doctrine Heresy, how erroneous soever they knew him to be in other
there things, because in the Church it was not the custom to call any single
error Heresy, unless it was attended with Obstinacy. But Ratramn having seen
the Books of the Virgins Delivery, which were written after what he had taught
of the Sacrament, and as he drew near his Death; Ratram. de nativit. Christ. c.
4.5.9. t. 1. Specileg.
or as he says himself in the Preface of Dom Luke d'Achery, Multo jam senio
confectus: And having thereby judged, That he was not now a man that desired to
be instructed, but was strongly confirmed in the Opinion he had taught, and
which he endeavored to support by establishing the consequences which might
best suit with his Principles, he made no scruple to render this of which we
speak, odious, in calling it Heresy: but after all, whatever my conjecture may
be, Paschas. de corp. and sang. Dom. c. 14.
it is certain that Paschas omitted nothing that might set off his Opinion, not
Visions it self, and Apparitions of Jesus Christ during the Celebration of the
Sacrament; not fearing to be jeered that he was the first that bethought
himself of speaking of these kinds of Apparitions, unknown unto Christians for
above 800. years, seeing that in effect there is no certain Author found, that
has made any mention of them; yet that hindered not but Cardinal Bellarmine,
and Father Sirmond considered him as the first that cleared and explained the
Mystery of the Sacrament; Bellarm. de script. Eccles.
This Author (says Bellarmine) was the first that wrote seriously and amply of
the truth of the body and blood of our Savior in the Eucharist; And Sirmond,
Sirmond. in vita Paschas. operibus ciuprae^ixa.
He first of all so explained the true sense of the Catholic Church, that he
opened the way unto all others that have since written of the same matter. But
so it is, that if the belief of Paschas was the Ancient Belief of the Church,
he deserved to be laden with blessings and thanks for having so happily
labored for the Instruction and Edification of Christians, and in all
likelihood no body would have dared to contradict or oppose the Doctrine which
he published, or if any one undertook so to do, he should make himself the
Object of hatred and aversion unto all the World. It is then requisite to know,
how men carried it toward him after that he had published his Opinion. If we
enquire of himself, he will inform us, that he was accused of departing from
the common Belief, and of having rashly spread abroad the thoughts of a young
head; for see here how he writes unto his intimate Friend Frudegard; Pasch. Ep.
ad Frudegard. page 1632.
You have (says he) at the end of this little Book, the Sentences of Catholic
Fathers succinctly noted, by which you may see, that it was not out of a hasty
fit that I formerly meditated these things in my younger days; but that I took
them out of the Scriptures and the holy Fathers to teach them unto such as
desired to be instructed. At the beginning of the Letter; Id. ibi. p. 1619. and
1623.
You examine me (says he) upon a thing whereof several persons doubt. Id. in
Matt. l. 12. p. 1094.
In his Commentary upon the 26th. Chapter of St. Matthew; I have treated of
these things more at large, and more expressly, because I am informed that some
reproved me, as if in the Book of Sacraments which I published, I had given
unto the words of Jesus Christ more than the truth it self does allow. Ib. p.
1100.
And again, There are many that in these mystical things are of another
Opinion; and there are many that are blind and cannot see, when they think this
Bread and this Cup is nothing else but what is seen with the Eyes, and which is
tasted with the Mouth. Wherefore the Anonymous Author before mentioned, Aut
Anonym. u^i supra.
writes, that some affirmed, That what is received at the Altar, is the same
that was born of the Virgin; and that others on the contrary, denied it, and
said, That it is another thing. But having been told by Paschas himself, that
he had several Adversaries and Opposers, We must farther learn of him what was
the belief of this great number of Opposers; for after having cited the words
of Institution, Take, Eat, this is my Body; Paschas. Ep. ad Frudegard, and
Commentar. in Matthew. l. 12.
he adds, That those which will extenuate this term of Body, saying, That it is
not the true Flesh of Jesus Christ, which is celebrated in the Sacrament, nor
his true blood, let them hear these words, they pretend I know not what, as if
there was only in the Sacrament a certain virtue of the body and blood of Jesus
Christ, as if our Savior had told a lie, and that it was not his true Flesh
and Blood, etc. When he broke and gave the Bread unto his Disciples, he said
not, This is, or there is in this Mystery a certain Virtue or Figure of my
Body; but he said, This is my Body. And a little after, I admire that some
would now say, That it is not the reality of the Flesh and blood of Jesus
Christ in the thing it self, but in Sacrament; a certain efficacy of the body,
and not the body; a virtue of the blood, and not the blood; a figure, and not
the truth; a shadow and not the substance. It cannot then reasonably be, after
such formal and positive Declarations, that the world should think any other
Opinion can be attributed unto the Adversaries of Paschas, but that of the
Protestants of France, and of all others of their Communion: As the Belief of
Paschas is that of the Roman Catholics, to say otherwise were to dissemble, to
renounce the truth, and to be unworthy the esteem and credit of honest men: Let
it then be granted for certain, that in this important point which we do
examine, Paschas was a Roman Catholic, as it is spoken now a days: And that his
Adversaries on the contrary, were Protestant Calvinists; from whence it will
necessarily follow, that if the followers of Paschas in the IX. Century were
more considerable, and of greater numbers than his Adversaries, the Opinion of
the Latin Church had the victory over the other; but if also the number of his
Adversaries was greater, their Name more famous, and their Reputation better
established; it must be concluded, That the Belief of the Protestants had the
Victory; it appears that so things are to be understood, to do right unto both
parties:

The better to succeed in this design, I will begin with those that followed
Paschas; seeing it was him that obliged his Adversaries to contradict him, and
oppose themselves unto the Establishment of his Opinion; which appeared new
unto them, and different from the ancient Faith of the Church. It cannot be
denied but Paschas Radbert had good Endowments, as appears by his Works; and
that he was commended by some Writers of that time, as a Man of great Learning,
and above the common sort. Nevertheless, as to the Subject in hand, I have not
observed in what I have read, that many persons have declared in favor of him.
It is out of all question that Frudegard fell into his Opinion, after having
read his Treatise of the Body and Blood of Christ: for in the Letter which
Paschas writ him, Paschas. Ep. ad Frudeg. page 1620.
we therein find these words; You say that you believed so formerly (he speaks
of his Opinion) and that you read the same in the Book of Sacraments that I
composed. Since which time, Frudegard having read the Advertisement which St.
Austin gives in the third Book of Christian Doctrine, of understanding
figuratively what our Savior speaks of eating his Flesh, he was very much
shaken; and if he changed not quite, it may be said, that he continued in
suspense, without declaring for or against Paschas. It is what he informs us,
Ibid.
when he adds unto his first words; But you say that you have since read in St.
Austin 's third Book of Christian Doctrine, that where it is said, it is the
body and blood of Christ, it is a figurative manner of expression: and if it is
a figurative speech, and a figure rather than the truth; I cannot tell, say
you, how it should be understood. And you say afterward, And if I believe that
it is the same body as that which he took from the holy Virgin his Mother, this
excellent Doctor (that is to say, St. Austin) declares on the contrary, that it
is a great crime; to wit, to believe that it is the real body of Jesus Christ.
Paschas does what he can to continue him in the Opinion he had been of, before
he had read this passage of St. Austin; and the better to effect it, he
alleges this unto him under the name of this great Saint, and as being taken
out of his Sermons unto the Neophites; Ibid.
Receive in the Bread what was nailed upon the Cross, and in the Cup that which
came out of the Side of Jesus Christ. Words which for certain, are not of St.
Austin; and which are not to be found in any of his Works, which we have in
great numbers. Paschas, it is true, cites them as to the best of his
remembrance; and I cannot tell if, in a matter so important as this, it will
serve turn to say, As I remember; or, If my memory fail not. In the main, it
not appearing that he satisfied Frudegard in his doubts, the surest side we can
take in this Conjuncture is, to make him neither a Friend, nor an Adversary of
Paschas; but to leave him in his doubts, if we would not increase the Sect of
Scepticks. I will not say the same of the Anonymous Author, which Father Cellot
has furnished us, and whom we have twice mentioned already in this Chapter:
for it appears plainly he was on Paschas his side. I know not precisely the
time that he lived; although it is very probable, it was either at the latter
end of the IX. Century, or it may be in the X. but I know he was not a stout
Champion, and that his Courage was not able to restore Paschas his Party, if
they had the fortune to be worsted. Unto this day the name and quality of this
Proselite is not known; as also, it is not known who or what Frudegard was, if
it be not inferred, by Paschas calling him Brother and Fellow-Soldier, that he
was either a Friar, or Abbot of some Monastery. As for Hin^mar Archbishop of
Rheims, incomparably better known than our Anonymous, and more famous than
Frudegard, by his Dignity and Writings, I find my self a little at a loss: for
when I consider that he says with St. Cyprian and St. Austin, 1 Hinem. de
proedest. c. 3. epilogi. c. 1.
That our Savior recommended his Body and Blood in things that are reduced
into one: 2 Id. ibid. and de cavend. viriis. c. 12. and ad Hincm. Laud. c. 48.
That he reserves, with St. Austin and St. Prosper, the eating of the Flesh of
Christ for Believers only. 3 Id de non trina deitate c. 17.
That he declares with the former, that the Mystery of Bread passes into a
Sacrament. 4 Id. de caven. vit. c. 11.
And that he acknowledges with others, That our Savior has left us the
Sacrament as a Pledge of his Love, and as a Memorial of his Person, and of his
Death; as a Man traveling into a far Country, should leave a Pledge unto his
Friend. I cannot tell if I should make him a Friend of Paschas, whose Doctrine
does not agree well with what we have now mentioned. But when on the other
hand, I find in his Writings, some things which seem to favor the same
Paschas, I cannot tell how to make him his Adversary. Id. de cavend. vit. c. 12.
For example, what he says, That Jesus Christ is every day consecrated upon
his Table, that he sanctifies his Sacrament, and that he makes himself. Id. de
pradest. ^. 31.
And that he observes that Prudens Bishop of Trois, and John Scot, or of
Scotland, or rather of Ireland, said, That the Sacraments of the Altar are not
the real body and blood of our Lord, but only the memorial of his true body and
blood. Let the Reader then place Hincmar either amongst the Enemies of Paschas,
or amongst his Friends: for my part, I am very apt to believe that he was of
his favorers; I mean, that he followed his Opinion in the point of the
Eucharist: which yet I do not affirm as a thing indubitable, and which may not
be questioned. I will only say, that I do not find that he was of any
extraordinary esteem: for if we believe Father Sirmond, who otherwise was no
Enemy unto him: Archbishop Hincmar was wont to be deceived himself, Sirm. de
duob. Dionys. c. 4. Mauguin. Hist. Chron. p. 442. Apolog. pour les Saints Peers
l. 5. p. 3. c. 5.
and to deceive others. If we believe Monsieur the President Mauguin, he calls
him a Deceiver and a Dissembler. And if we will give Credit unto the
description that is made of him in the Apologies of the holy Fathers, Defenders
of Free Will, we shall find him to be both violent and ignorant; a Deceiver,
scandalous and malicious; a Calumniator, and a Man full of Vanity. These are
the Colors wherein he is displayed in that excellent Work; besides several
others which I pass over in silence. So that if Hincmar was such a person as
these Gentlemen describe him to be, I do not think he would render the Party
very considerable, in which side soever he is placed: yet he cannot be denied
the Knowledge of the ancient Canons, if I mistake not, wherein he was better
skilled, than in that which is dogmatical, and relating unto Divinity.

In the main, see here two Followers of Paschas; one of which, to wit, the
Anonymous, declares himself directly for him; and the other, I mean Hincmar,
though he makes not so formal a Declaration, does nevertheless in all
probability follow his steps. But in fine, they are the only two which I can
find to be of the Belief of Paschas in the IX Century, if it were true that the
Anonimous wrote in that Century; whereas if he wrote after, as Father Cellot
inclines to think he did, all the strength of this Friar, and afterward Abbot
of Corby, will consist in himself and Hincmar, in the uncertainty we are in,
whether St. Austin or Paschas prevailed over Frudegard. As for the Author of
the Commentaries upon St. Paul's Epistles, which some attribute unto Haymon
Bishop of Alberstadt, others unto Remy Archbishop of Lions; and others, in
fine, with greater probability, unto Remy Friar of Auxerr; I do not think he
ought to be reckoned amongst the Friends nor Enemies of Paschas: He did like
those that seeing a Kingdom divided into two Factions, take part with neither;
but think of making a third Party: for he would neither follow the Party of
Paschas, nor the Belief of those which argued against him; but would establish
in the West, as far as I can find, the Opinion that Damascen had broached in
the East, of the Union of the Bread of the Sacrament with the Divinity, to make
by means of this Union, one sole Body with the true Body of our Savior, as we
have showed in speaking of Damascen. And this is the reason that we here place
Remy of Auxerr, although he lived not, according to all Circumstances, but at
the end of the IX Century: and to say the truth, because he had a middle
Opinion betwixt that of Paschas, and that of his Adversaries, we cannot appoint
him a fitter place than this; to the end, that as he disturbed not the
Depositions of Paschas his Friends, neither should he trouble the Testimony of
his Adversaries. That the Opinion of Remy is such as we say, I hope the Candid
Reader will believe it to be so, when he shall see what we here produce of his
Commentaries upon the 10th and 11th Chapters of the First to the Corinthians,
and of his Exposition of the Cannon of the Mass, 'The Flesh (says he) which
the Word took in the Womb of the Virgin into the Unity of his Person, Remig.
Altiss. comment. in ^. ad Corin. c. 10.
and the Bread which is Consecrated in the Church, are one Body of Jesus
Christ; for as this Flesh is the Body of Jesus Christ, so also this Bread
passes into the Body of Jesus Christ; and they be not two Bodies, but one
Body; for the fullness of the Godhead which was in that Body, fills also this
Bread; and the same Godhead of the Son which is in them, fills the Body of
Jesus Christ, which is Consecrated by the Ministry of several Priests
throughout the World; and causes that it is one sole Body of Jesus Christ: And
as this Bread and Wine pass into the Body of Jesus Christ, so also all those
that eat it worthily in the Church, are one sole Body of Jesus Christ, as
himself has said, Whosoever eats my Flesh and drinks my Blood, dwells in
me and I in him. Nevertheless, this Flesh which he has taken, and this Bread,
Id. ibid. in cap. ^1.
and the whole Church, are not three Bodies of Jesus Christ, but one Body, And
afterward, Although this Bread is brought from several places, and that it is
Consecrated throughout the whole World by several Priests, nevertheless, the
Divinity that fills all things, fills it also, and makes it to be one sole
Body of Jesus Christ; and all those which receive it, ^d. in Canone Idiss. ^.
t. 6. Bibl. Pat. p. 441.
do make this same Body of Jesus Christ, which is one and not two. And
elsewhere, As the Divinity of the Son which fills all the World is one, so
also, although this Body is Consecrated in sundry places, and in an infinite
number of different days, yet they are not several Bodies of Jesus Christ, nor
several Cups, but one sole Body and one Blood, with that which he took from the
Virgin, and gave unto the Apostles; for the Divinity fills it, is joined to it,
and causes that as it is one, so also it should be joined unto the Body of
Jesus Christ, and should be one Body of Jesus Christ in verity. This Author,
whoever he was, says two or three things which sufficiently inform us of his
intention; for he says, that the Divinity joins the Bread unto the Body of
Jesus Christ, of necessity then he must needs believe that it subsisted still
after Consecration, because a thing that is not, cannot be joined unto another
thing; the uniting and joining of two different subjects, presupposes the
Existence of the one and the other; he says also, that the Church as well as
the Sacrament, is one Body with the natural Body of Jesus Christ; he affirms it
no more of the Sacrament than of the Church; he then meant that they were both
so, after one and the same manner. In fine, see here how he argues; the Natural
Body of Jesus Christ, the Sacrament, and the Church, are filled with one and
the same virtue, and animated, if it may be so said, with the same Spirit; they
are not then three Bodies, but one; the Unity of one Body depending on the
unity of the Principle that acts in him. So that because the same Principle
that acts in the natural Body of Jesus Christ, acts also in the Bread of the
Eucharist, and in the Church, they should not be, according to this Author, but
one and the same Body: because that, though considering them severally, they be
three different Bodies; yet to consider them in the unity of this Principle,
and in the Numerical Identity, if I may so say, of the same virtue, they become
one sole Body. This is as far as I can comprehend, the Opinion of Remy; which,
though not favoring the Opinion of Paschas, yet is not, for all that, the
Opinion of his Adversaries: Therefore we will let him stand alone, to receive
the Depositions of others which present themselves to be heard.

The first is Rabanus, very illustrious for his Dignity, and for his Merit.
Historians vie with each other to celebrate his Praises, as of the greatest Man
of that Age, and unto whom none was to be compared. He was first a Friar in the
Abbey of Fulda, then Abbot of the same Monastery, and at last Archbishop of
Mayance. This illustrious Prelate, and the most famous Disciple of the great
Alcuin, Tutor unto Charlemain, being informed of the Opinion of Paschas
Radbert, touching the Sacrament, set himself in a posture of arguing, and
openly opposing himself against it, as against a Doctrine that appeared new and
strange unto him, and contrary to the ancient Belief of the Church: This is the
Declaration which the Anonimous Author, and favourer of Paschas, has made us;
saying, That Rabanus disputed against him at large, Author Anonym. ubi supra.
in his Letter unto the Abbot Egilon. But if we had not the Testimony of this
Disciple of Paschas, we cannot be ignorant of this matter, seeing Rabanus
himself has transmitted the thing unto us; for in his Penitential, which Peter
Stuart, Professor in Divinity in the College of Ingolstat, has published, he
speaks after this sort; Raban. Maur. in Poenitent. c. 33 de Eucharist.
It is not long since some persons holding erroneous Opinions touching the
Eucharist of the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ, have said; That it is the Body
it self, and the Blood of Jesus Christ, which was born of the Virgin Mary, and
wherein our Savior suffered upon the Cross, and rose again from the Dead:
which Error we have opposed, as much as we could; and have signified in writing
unto the Abbot Egilon, what ought to be believed of the Body it self. It cannot
then be doubted but Rabanus wrote directly against Paschas, seeing that the
Opinion which he condemns, and which he opposes as erroneous, is just that of
Paschas, as we have plainly demonstrated. This Letter is lost, either through
the length of time, or the malice of Men which have lived since that time. But
it is sufficient that we do know that he wrote it; and by consequence, was a
great Enemy of Paschas; as unhe plainly testifies by several of his other
Works, which are come to our hands; for he teaches that the substance of Bread
and Wine remain after Consecration; and that these divine Symbols being
received by Communicants, part of it turns into their substance, and the rest
goes as their other ordinary food does, unto the place where Nature discharges
it self. Author Anonym. ubi supra.
The Anonymous Author, already cited several times, says positively, That he
held the Sacrament to be subject unto this Accident. And William of Malmesbury
wrote to his Brother Robert, in the Preface of the Epitome of Amalarius, of
Divine Offices; which is to be seen in a Manuscript at Oxford, Guillelm.
Malmesbur.
in All Souls College. I gave you notice (says he) that amongst those which
have writ of these things, there is one that you are to avoid, which is called
Rabanus; which in the Books of Ecclesiastical Offices says, That the
Sacraments of the Altar are profitable to nourishment; and for that reason are
subject to corruption, or malady, or age; or to be cast into the draft, or to
death it self. See how dangerous a thing it is to say, to believe, and to write
these things of the Body and Blood of our Savior. Tho. Waldens. t. 1. doctrine.
in praesat. and t. 2. c. 19.52. and 62.
Thomas Waldensis testifies the same in diverse parts of his Writings; where he
reproacheth Wicliff, That as he teaches that the Eucharist is digested, and
passes into our substance; so he might also teach, with Rabanus, that it
passes into the draft. And he instanceth the very Testimonies which Wicliff
had borrowed out of Rabanus, for the defense of his Doctrine. It is then most
certain that this Archbishop of Mayans taught two things of the Sacrament of
the Eucharist; one that by reason of its substance and matter, it was subject
unto the meanest accidents of our ordinary food: and in so saying, he followed
the Opinion of Origin; who said so positively, six hundred years before him.
The other thing which he taught is, That the Sacrament does feed our body, and
turns it self into our substance; which he learned from St. Irenaeus, St.
Justin Martyr, St. Austin, St. Isidore of Sevil, and others. But let us hear
what he intends himself to say unto us. Raba. Maur. de instit. Cleric. l. 1. c.
31.
Our Savior (says he) chose rather that believers should receive with the
mouth the Sacraments of his Body and Blood, and that it should be converted
into their nourishment (or as it is cited by Thomas Waldensis, agreeable to the
Manuscript Copies) into part of themselves; to the end that by the visible
thing, the invisible effect should be shown: for as material food does nourish
the body, and preserve it outwardly; so in like manner the Word does inwardly
strengthen and preserve the soul. And again; Ibid.
the Sacrament is one thing, and the virtue of the Sacrament is another: The
Sacrament is converted into the nourishment of the body, but by the virtue of
the Sacrament we do acquire Eternal Life. As then the Sacrament is converted
into us, when we do eat and drink it, so also are we converted into the Body of
Jesus Christ, when we do live in Obedience, and in Holiness. And building
always upon this Foundation, Id. in Mat. c. 26
he says elsewhere, with venerable Bede; That Jesus Christ, Id. in Ecclesia.
li. 7. c. 8.
in the room of the Paschal Lamb, has substituted the Sacrament of his Body
and Blood. That the Creator of the World, Id. de Instit. Cler. c. 31. l. 1.
and the Redeemer of Mankind, making of the Fruits of the Earth, that is to
say, of Wheat and Wine, a convenient Mystery, converted it into a Sacrament of
his Body and Blood. That the Unlevened Bread and Wine mixed with Water, are
sanctified to be the Sacrament of the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ. Then he
gives the reason wherefore our Lord chose Bread and Wine to be made the
Sacraments of his Body and Blood; and says, That it is because Melchisedek did
offer Bread and Wine; Ibid.
and that Jesus Christ being a Priest after the Order of Melchisedek, he ought
to imitate his Oblation. And teaching us wherefore the Sacrament takes the name
of the Body and Blood of our Savior, he says, with Isidore Archbishop of
Sevill, Ibid.
Because bread does strengthen the body, it is fitly called the Body of Jesus
Christ: and because Wine increases blood in the body, it does for this cause
resemble his Blood. Now both these are visible; yet nevertheless, Ibid. c. 33.
being sanctified by the Holy Ghost, they pass into a Sacrament of the Divine
Body: a Sacrament which he calls the Mystical Body of Jesus Christ, by
opposition unto his natural Body, from which he distinguishes it. It must then
be granted, that Rabanus Archbishop of Mayans, did teach quite contrary unto
what Paschas did teach.

After Rabanus, I will receive the Deposition of Amalarius Fortunatus, although
a little ancienter. It is something difficult to know who he was, and what
Ecclesiastical Dignity he enjoyed. And this difficulty is occasioned, because
some make him a Deacon, others a Priest, others an Abbot; and in fine, others a
Bishop: but the difficulty is not great, because it is most certain, he was
invested with these four Dignities, one after the other: unto which also they
added that of Archipresbyter. Let the Reader see the Preface of the 7th Tome of
the Collections of Dom Luke d'Achery; where this learned Benedictine proves
what we now say. And he alleges, besides the Manuscript Copies, Father
Sirmond, which called him only Deacon, and refutes him; the late Monsieur
Blondell, who wrote that he was also Bishop, he approves; and of Monsieur
Baluze, who speaks of him as Abbot and Archipresby^^r; although hitherto cannot
be discovered, neither the place of his Monastery, nor of his Diocese. Remy
Archbishop of Lions, and the Church of the same place, have endeavored to
eclipse his Reputation; Lib. de tr^^us Epist.
because he was not of the same Opinion with them, touching Predestination;
which Subject at that time was very hotly disputed and controverted amongst the
Prelates of France. Agobard Archbishop of the same place, has mightily
inveighed against him in a Book which he composed against Amalarius his four
Books of Ecclesiastical Offices. Ago^ard. cont. Amalar. index Chronolog. (...).
Pat. in author. 9. secul. and ma^usc. Flori.
He was no better treated by Florus, Deacon of the same Church, in a Book which
he wrote expressly against him; where he denies, amongst other things, what
Amalarius had said of the Tripartite Body of Jesus Christ, de triformi Corpore
Christi: an expression which also escaped not the Censure of Paschas Radbert;
who gives this intimation at the end of his Letter to Frudegard: Follow not the
fooleries of the Tripartite Body of Jesus Christ. De Tripartito Christi
Corpore. But as men are always men, and that they but too much suffer
themselves to be lead by their Passions, it would not be just to judge of the
Merits of Amalarius by the Testimony of his Enemies; for, not to insist upon
what is said in the Manuscripts alalledged by Dom Luke d'Achery, in the Preface
abovementioned, he is qualified with the Title of a Man most learned. And
those which after him have written of Divine Offices, mention him with honor
and great commendation. Two things may inform us in what esteem he was; The
first is, in that he was by the Emperor Lewis the Debonair sent unto Pope
Gregory, to search for Antiphonaries; Amalar. in Prolog. Antiphon.
as he testifies himself in the Preface of his Book of the Order of the
Antiphonary. The second is, That the same Emperor having assembled a Council at
Aaix la Chapel, Anno 816. he ordered a Rule to be made for Prebends, drawn
out of the Writings of the holy Fathers; that the Prebends should conform unto
it, as the Friars did unto St. Bennet's. And it was this Amalarius that, by
Order of this Prince, composed this Book; as is testified by Ademar, a Friar of
Angoulesm, in his Chronicle. Whereunto may also be added, Ademar. in Chron.
Anno 816. In Supplem. Council. Gall. p. 110.
that the same Amalarius was chosen with Halitgarius by the Council of Paris,
assembled, Anno 824. against the worshipping of Images, to present into the same
Emperor the Letter written unto him by this Assembly of Prelates. And therefore
it is, that in the Memoirs that Lewis the Debo^ur directed unto Jeremy
Archbishop of Sens, and unto Jonas Bishop of Orleans, when he sent them to
Rome, unto Pope Eugenius, upon the Subject of the Images, he thus begins; Tom.
2. Conc. Gall. p. 461.
The Bishops Halitgarius and Amalarius are come unto me, etc. Let us conclude
then from what has been said, that Amalarius was, in his time, in Esteem and
great Consideration in Church and State. Amalar. de Offic. Eccles. l. 1. c. 1.
And now let us examine what he said of the Sacrament, directly or indirectly.
After (says he) that our Savior had appeared according to his own pleasure
unto his Disciples, whom he would have to be Witnesses of his Resurrection, he
ascended up into Heaven, and became invisible unto Men; as he himself
testifies: I came forth from the Father, and came into the World; and now I
leave the World, and go unto the Father. Which is plainly to say, I made my
self visible unto men; returning unto my Father, I shall be invisible. Although
we do not see his bodily presence, yet we daily salute him in adoring of him.
Id. de Ordine Antiphon. c. 9.
And elsewhere, We cannot think of the absence of Jesus Christ without sadness.
But what he is going to tell us is yet more plain and positive, Id. de Offic.
l. 3. c. 29.
because he testifies that Bread and Wine is consecrated and made the
Sacraments of the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ. We (says he) call
Institution the Tradition which our Savior left us, when he made the Sacrament
of his Body and Blood. And to the end it should be known what he meant by the
word Sacrament, he gives us this Definition of it; Sacrament, that is, a holy
Sign. Id. l. 1. c. 15.
He says moreover, that the Sacrament is in the stead of Jesus Christ: The
Priest bows, and recommends unto God the Father that which was offered in the
place of Jesus Christ. Id. l. 3. c. 23.
He distinguishes what was sacrificed from Jesus Christ himself; and considers
what is offered, and Jesus Christ, as two different Subjects; whereof the one
serves us instead of the other; Id. l. 3. c. 25.
for it cannot be conceived that a person or a thing can be instead of it self.
He yet goes farther, and declares expressly, that that which is offered instead
of Jesus Christ is Bread and Wine; Id. de Offic. prafat. s^cunda.
and that this Bread and Wine are the Sacraments of his Body and Blood. The
things (says he) which are done in the Celebration of Mass, are done in the
Sacrament; that is to say, in representing the Passion of our Savior, as
himself commanded us; saying, As often as ye do this, ye do it in remembrance
of me. Therefore the Priest which sacrifices the Bread, the Wine and Water,
does it as a Sacrament of Jesus Christ (that is, in the place of Jesus Christ,
and represents him) the Bread, the Wine, and the Water in the Sacrament of the
Flesh and Blood of Jesus Christ. The Sacraments should have some resemblance of
the things whereof they be Sacraments. Let the Priest then be like Jesus
Christ, as the Bread and the Liquor is like the Body of Jesus Christ. These
words are easy to be understood, and need no Commentary; because every body
may perceive, without help of others, that Amalarius considers the Act of the
Sacrament as a mysterious Representation; where the Priest celebrating, is in
the place of Jesus Christ; the Bread, Wine and Water instead of his Body and
Blood, and will have a Relation of Resemblance to be betwixt these things, and
those whereof they be Sacraments; which according to some, is plainly contrary
unto the Identity taught by Paschas. Id. de Offic. l. 3. c. 26.
The Oblation (says he again) and the Cup do signify the Body of our Savior.
When Jesus Christ said, This is the Cup of my Blood, he signified his Blood;
which Blood was in the Body, as the Wine is in the Cup. And in another place;
Id. l. 4. c. 47. Id. l. 3. c. 25. Id. l. 3. c. 24. Ibid. c. 34. Ibid. c. 31.
Ibid. c. 35.
The Bread set forth upon the Altar signifies the Body of our Lord upon the
Cross, the Wine and Water in the Cup do represent the Sacraments which flowed
out of our Saviors side upon the Cross. He calls the Eucharist the Sacrament
of Bread and Wine; and says, That Jesus Christ in the Bread recommended his
Body, and his Blood in the Cup. And with Bid, that the Apostle recommends the
Unity of the Church in the Sacrament of Bread. He observes the Bread is put
into the Wine. Ibid. l. 1. c. 15.
And in the passage which gave occasion of the Censure of Paschas and of
Florus, he speaks of what is received in Communicating, as of a thing broken
into several pieces. In fine, he affirms that Jesus Christ did drink Wine in
his Sacrament. Our Savior said, I will no more drink of this Fruit of the
Vine, until I drink it new with you; which the Lesson read the second Sunday
after the Resurrection of our Lord, shows to have been done; Peter saying,
Unto us who eat and drank with him after he was risen from the dead. He will
have it, that this fruit of the Vine which our Savior drank when he celebrated
his Sacrament, was of the same nature with that which he drank with his
Apostles after his Resurrection. But besides all these Testimonies which are
commonly alleged out of the Writings of Amalarius, we have others, for which
we are beholden unto Dom Luke d'Achery, a Benedictine Friar. Rantgarius Bishop
of Noyon demanded of him, how he understood these words of the Institution of
the Sacrament; This is the Cup of my Blood of the New and Eternal Testament,
with this Addition which is in the Canon of the Mass, The Mystery of Faith.
Amalarius answers him by Letter; wherein, after having spoken unto him of the
Paschal Cup, he passes unto the Sacramental; and having alleged what St. Luke
says, Amalar. ad Rantgar. t. 7. Spicile. p. 166.
he adds, This Cup is in figure of my Body, wherein is the Blood which shall
flow out of my side, to fulfill the old Law; and after it is shed, it shall be
the New Covenant. He shows that the Cup is the Figure of the Body of Jesus
Christ; because, as the Wine of the Sacrament was contained in his Body, not to
be poured out until his death, that he shed it on the Cross for the Salvation
of Men; and in the same Letter he makes the eating the Flesh of Christ to
consist in the Participation of his Death. The same Cup (says he) is called
the Mystery of Faith, Ibid.
because he that believes that he was redeemed by this blood, and that does
imitate his passion, is profited thereby unto Salvation and Eternal Life; which
made our Savior himself to say, If you eat not the Flesh of the Son of Man,
nor drink his Blood, you have no life in you; that is to say, if you
participate not of my passion, and if you believe not that I dyed for your
salvation, you have no life in you. This is the constant Doctrine of St.
Austin. He also testifies in the following words, that he gloried in being one
of his followers: The Mystery is the Faith, Ibid.
as St. Austin says in his Letter unto the Bishop Boniface, As then the
Sacrament of the Body of Jesus Christ is after some sort the body of Jesus
Christ; and the Sacrament of his blood, his blood; so also the Sacrament of
Faith, is Faith; so we may also say, This is the Cup of my Blood of the New and
Eternal Testament; as if he should say, This is my Blood which is given for
you: he could not say more plainly, That the Cup, that is the Wine which is in
the Cup, is the Blood of Jesus Christ; as the Sacrament is the thing whereof it
is the Sacrament. And in another Letter unto one Guntard, whom he calls his
Son; and that he was something dissatisfied, because Amalarius did spit
presently after having received the Sacrament, he says unto him, Id. ad
Guntard. Ep. 6. p. 196.
that he denied not, but that we should venerate the Body of Jesus Christ above
all other Food: It is not at all likely he would have spoken after this manner,
if he had believed that what is received in the Sacrament, is the very Body of
Jesus Christ, because there can be no comparison betwixt this Divine Body, and
our Ordinary Food; but he might well say so of the Sacrament, for the which we
should have a more peculiar respect and veneration, than for our other meats;
He explains himself and shows, that he speaks not of the real Body of Jesus
Christ, but of his Typical Body, when he says, That it belongs to our Lord to
pour out his Body by the Members and Veins for our Eternal Salvation; Ibid. p.
171.
That it is the Body of Jesus Christ which may be cast out in spitting after
having received it, and whereof some part may be cast out of the mouth. Unto
all which he adds, Having so received the Body of Christ with a good intention,
I don't intend to argue whether it be invisibly lifted up unto Heaven, or
whether it remains in our bodies until the day of our Death; or whether it be
exhaled into the Air, or whether it departs out of the body with the blood, or
whether it goes out at the pores; our Savior saying, Ibid. p. 172.
Whatsoever enters in at the Mouth goes into the Belly, and from thence into
the draft; only care is to be taken, not to receive it with a heart of Judas,
not to misprise it, but to distinguish it savingly from ordinary Food. Thence
it is that he requires, That during Lent all Believers, Id. de observatione
Quadrages. p. 174.
excepting such as are Excommunicated, should receive the Sacraments of the
Body and Blood of Jes^ Christ; and that the people should be warned not to draw
near the Sacrament of the Body and Blood of Christ irreverently. I know not,
says the Protestant, if after all these Declarations, it can be doubted that
Amalarius was far from the Opinion of Paschas; Id. de offic. l. 3. c. 24. Ibid.
c. 25.
and that when he says, We believe that the plain Nature of Bread and Wine
mixed, is changed into a reasonable Nature of the body and blood of Jesus
Christ, That the Church believes it is the body and blood of our Savior; and
that by this Morsel, the Souls of Communicants are filled with a heavenly
Benediction; (which are passages alleged by the Latins to support their
Doctrine.) He meant not that they passed, or as Rabanus told us, that they are
converted into a Sacrament of his Body and Blood: And to say the truth, adds
he, I find he has so fully explained and cleared his intention, that it must
be concluded, that he believed the Sacrament is, not the Flesh it self born of
the Virgin, as Paschas taught, but the Sacrament of this holy Flesh, the Bread
and Wine by sanctification passing into this Divine Sacrament; as he said of
the Oil the People offered, Ibid. l. 1. c. 12.
That by benediction, it is converted into a Sacrament: Therefore he gives us
to understand, that this Sacrament which we receive, and that he calls the Body
of Jesus Christ, because of some likeness, as he explained himself by the words
of St. Austin, is subject unto diverse accidents, whereto the real Body of Jesus
Christ cannot be exposed, particularly of going into the place of Excrements
like other Meats. Let the Reader judge, if he please, of this Dispute and
Controversy.

Unto Rabanus and Amalarius, I will join Wallafridus Strabo, who in all
probability wrote his Book of Ecclesiastical matters betwixt the years 840. and
849. In Poemate.
which was the time of his Decease. In that he calls Rabanus his Father and
Master, it may give cause to conceive that he was of one Judgment with him; but
because mere surmises are not sufficient proof nor convincing Arguments;
Walafri. Strabo lib. de Reb. Eccles. c. 16. Bibl. p. 7. t. 10.
let us learn from his own mouth what he believed of the Mystery which we
examine. Jesus Christ (says he) gave to his Disciples the Sacraments of his
body and blood in the substance of Bread and Wine, teaching them to celebrate
it in Commemoration of his most holy passion, because there could nothing be
found more fitting then these species, to signify the Unity of the head and
his members; for as the Bread is made of several Grains, and is reduced into
one body by means of Water; and as the Wine is pressed from several Grapes, so
also the body of Jesus Christ is made of the Union of a multitude of believers.
And a little after he declares, That Jesus Christ has chosen for us a
reasonable Sacrifice for the Mystery of his body and of his blood; in that
Melchisedek having offered Bread and Wine, he gave unto believers the same kind
of sacrifice. And again, That as for that great number of legal sacrifices, Id.
cap. 18.
Jesus Christ gave us the Word of his Gospel; so also for that great diversity
of sacrifices, believers should rest satisfied with the Oblation of Bread and
Wine. As all these passages are exceeding clear, so it is very just and
reasonable they should serve for a Commentary unto others, if it had happened
that Wallafridus had spoken less clear any where else; for then should that
judicious rule of Tertullians be practiced, That the plainest things should
prevail, Tertull. de Resurrect. carn. c. 19. and 21.
and that the most certain should prescribe against the uncertain; things
which are doubtful should be judged by those things which are certain, and
those which are obscure, by those which are clear and manifest. Let us apply
this unto what Wallafridus says in another place, which the Latins forget not,
that is to say, Id. cap. 17.
That the Mysteries of our Redemption are truly the body and blood of our
Savior. And we shall find, say the Protestants, that he so explained himself,
in regard to their Efficacy and their Virtue, and of the real and effectual
communication of this Body and Blood in the lawful use of this Sacrament; and
not to say that they are substantially this Body and Blood; because that is
inconsistent with the Declaration he made just before, That the Sacraments of
the body and blood of Jesus Christ is the substance of Bread and Wine; whereas
these things accord very well with saying, that although the Sacraments are
Bread and Wine in substance, yet they are for all that, truly the Body and
Blood of Jesus Christ in Efficacy and in Virtue; because they are indeed
accompanied with the Virtue and Efficacy of his Divine Body, and of his
precious Blood; the term of truly, being opposed not unto figuratively or
sacramentally; (for that would be a contradiction, seeing he speaks of
Mysteries) but it is opposed unto untruth, as if the Sacrament were not at all
the Body of Jesus Christ; unto vainly, as if it had only the bare name; and
nefficaciously, as if it had not the virtue. And that this is the true sense of
the words of Wallafridus, it appears by the title of the Chapter, entitled, Of
the virtue of the Sacraments: in which Chapter, the more to advance the
efficacy, he, with many of the Ancients, particularly with Rabanus his Master,
and with Ratramn his Contemporary, interprets the 6th of St. John, not of the
Flesh and Blood it self of Jesus Christ, but of the Sacraments of his Body and
Blood; or, to speak with St. Fulgentius, Of the Mysteries of the Truth,
Fulgent. de Bapt. Aethiop.
and not of the Truth of the Mysteries. This is the Reasoning of Protestants.

At the same time time that Wallafridus wrote his Book, Heribald, or Heribold,
Bishop of Auxerr, was in great Reputation; but because we have that to say of
this Prelate as will give a very great weight unto his Testimony, we will
reserve him for a Chapter unto himself; and in the mean while we will say
something of Loup Abbot of Ferriers in Gastinais: who, in that he speaks
horably, of Heribold, as shall be related hereafter, may intimate that they
were both of one Judgment. But these sorts of Inferences are too weak to be
insisted upon; therefore I will seek for something in his Writings that is more
material: as in one of his Letters unto Amulus or Amulo Archbishop of Lions, in
behalf of Guenilo Archbishop of Sans, and of Count Gerrard in speaking of Jesus
Christ, Lupus Ferrati^n. Ep. 81. Id. Ep. 40.
he said, That he raised his Humanity unto Heaven, to be always present with
him by his Divinity. This that he calls Rabanus his Tutor, and rendered him
thanks for that he took care of instructing him, does no less confirm what he
said; and gives cause to think that in all likelihood Rabanus had instilled his
Opinions into him; because most commonly we embrace their Opinions, whose
Disciples we have been in our Youth; especially when they are Opinions received
by the Major part of the World. Unto which may be added what he says in the
Book of three Questions, Id. de tribus quaest. p. 208, 209. ult. edit.
which Monsieur Baluze proves to be his; to wit, That God has subjected
spiritual Creatures unto time only; but as for bodily things, he has subjected
them unto time, and unto place: and that it cannot be questioned, if it be
considered, that all bodies that have length, breadth and depth, and which are
called solid are never contained but in one place. It is evident that he means
of being contained circumscriptively, otherwise his Opposition would be
insignificant; being certain that Spirits, for instance, Angels also fill a
place; so that whilst they are here, they are not there: and this is termed to
be in a place definitively. But to be there circumscriptively, appertains only
unto Bodies; which being made up of several parts, are in such manner situated
in the place which they fill, that each part of the Body answers unto each part
of the place; St. Fulgent. ad Pet. Diac. c. 3.
It not being given unto Bodies to exist after the manner of Spirits, to use
the terms of St. Fulgentius. Seeing then that the Abbot de Ferriers speaks
after this manner of the existing of Bodies, and that he believes it
inseparable from every Corporal Creature, without excepting the Body of Jesus
Christ in the Eucharist, it follows, that he believed not this Existence after
the manner of a Spirit, which is attributed unto him in the Latin Church; nor
by consequence, the real Presence, whereupon it depends, as one of its
necessary Consequences. This is what several do infer from this passage.

The Emperor Charles the Bald, being informed that his Subjects were not all of
one Opinion touching the Doctrine of the Sacrament, thought it necessary to
consult some of the most Learned of his Kingdom, and such as were of greatest
Credit and Esteem. Amongst others which he made choice of to write on this
Subject, he chose two persons whom he esteemed very much; the one was Bertram,
or as he is called by the Writers of that Age, Ratramn; which is his true name:
and the other was John, Surnamed Erigenius, of Scotland, that is to say, of
Ireland, according to the Language of our times. Their Writings have not had
the same fate; for those of Ratramn have been preserved unto us, but as for
those of John, they were condemned and burnt two hundred years after, at the
Council of Verceill. And as they were two several Writers, so we must also
distinguish them in this History, and that we speak of each of them severally.
To begin with Ratramn, Priest of the Monastery of Corby, and afterward Abbot
of Orbais; I say, he was a Man so esteemed in his time, that all the Bishops of
France made choice of him to defend the Latin Church against the Greeks; and by
the industry of Dom Luke d'Achery, a Benedictine Friar, we have in our hands
the four Books which he composed; and are such, that when I compare them with
that written by Eneas, Bishop of Paris, in the same Century, and in defense of
the same Cause; I find as great difference betwixt them, as betwixt Light and
Darkness; or, at least, betwixt the weak Essay of some illiterate person, and
the accomplished Work of an exquisite Artist; because in truth, the Work of
Eneas is extremely weak, in comparison of that of Ratramn: I say, of that
Ratramn, unto whom the Abbot Trithemius ascribes such great Commendations in
the XV Century; and whom the Disciples of St. Austin, Defenders of the free
Grace of Jesus Christ, so much admired, when they made use of what he wrote
touching the Doctrine of Predestination. Therefore the President Mauguin,
speaking of him, said, Mauguin. dissertat. Hist. and Chron. c. 17. t. 2. p.
133. 135.
that he was a learned Doctor of the Church, Non levis Armaturae in Ecclesia
Christi Militem: Eminent in Probity, and in Doctrine; an undaunted and powerful
Defender and Protector of the Catholic Verity, against Innovators. It was this
Ratramn, whom Charles the Bald consulted upon the Mystery of the Sacrament, to
be informed by him what was the true Opinion of the Church; and who by his
Order, wrote the little Treatise, Of the Body and Blood of our Savior: The
Destiny whereof was more favorable than that of John Erigenius's Book, which
is destroyed, whereas the other is still in Being. Ep. ad Dom. Luc. d'Achery t.
2. Spicileg. praes.
I know the late Monsieur de Marca said, that the Book of John Erigenius, and
that of Bertram, or Ratramn, was but one and the same thing; and that the true
Author of it was John Erigenius, who having concealed his Name, cloaked it
under that of Bertram; but in truth, nothing can be seen weaker than the
Conjecture of this illustrious Prelate. I have often admired that so learned
and understanding a person as Monsieur de Marca should have such a thought: for
if he had taken the pains to have compared this little Treatise whereof we
speak, with the other Works of Ratramn, and with what remains unto us of John
Erigenius's, he would never have gone about to have taken it from the one, to
have given it unto the other; because the Style is wholly Ratramn's, and is
nothing like unto that of Joh. Scot: for the saying that Berengarius frequently
made mention of John Scot, and that he made no mention of Ratramn, is to say
nothing to the purpose; for it may be, that Berengarius might speak of him, and
that it might not come unto our knowledge; or if he did not speak of him, it
might be because Bertram's Book was not come to his hands, as that of John
Erigenius's was. Does it not very often come to pass that small Treatises, as
that of Ratramn's was, do at first make a great noise, but a hundred or two
hundred years after, they are, as it were, buried in Oblivion, that scarce any
has knowledge of them. And who knows but the same fate may one day befall the
great and famous Works of this illustrious Archbishop; I mean, his eight Books
of the Privileges of the Gallican Church. This great Man adds the Testimony of
Ascelin; who making Answer unto a Letter of Berengarius, does make mention of
an Interpretation given by John Erigenius unto some passages of Gregory the
First, very agreeable unto that which Ratramn also gives them; and from thence
infers, to confirm his Hypothesis, that the Book of Ratramn and of John
Erigenius was but one and the same Book, and composed by this latter. But let
me again take the liberty to say, that this is no solid Reason. John Erigenius
and Ratramn disputed against one and the same Adversary, they both pleaded the
same Cause; wherefore then might they not employ the like Arguments, and
explain after the same manner the words of Gregory, now spoken of. And to say
the truth, if the reasoning of Monsieur de Marca should be admitted, it would
follow, that Tertullian and St. Austin should be but one and the same Author,
seeing they both write, and almost in the same Terms, that Jesus Christ gave
unto his Disciples the Figure of his Body. And that moreover, it does not
appear that the Explication of John Erigenius is whole and entire word for word
in Ratramn: It is concerning these words of the ancient Latin Liturgy; We
beseech thee, O Lord, that thy Sacraments may accomplish in us what they
contain; to the end we may receive in substance what we now perform in
appearance. Ascelin, upon whose Testimony this learned Prelate does rely,
makes John Erigenius say, Specie, inquit, geruntur ista, non veritate: But the
words found in Ratramn are; Dicit quod in specie, gerantur ista, non in
veritate. See here already some difference in the Construction, and in the
Terms. Besides, we know not if John Erigenius joined unto his words this
Paraphrase, which Ratramn joined unto his; Id est per similitudinem, non per
ipsius rei manifestationem; that is to say, by resemblance, and not by
manifestation of the thing it self. It cannot then be said for certain, that
the Explication of John Erigenius is to be found verbatim in Bertram: for
although they agree both as to the Ground of the Explication, and that in
substance they expressed themselves alike; nevertheless, it cannot be denied
but that there was some difference in their Expressions. I am very sorry that
this illustrious Prelate had not always followed the truth, and that it was his
fortune sometimes to run against the constant Current and Truth of History; as
when he pretends to vindicate Pope honorius from being tainted with the Heresy
of the Monothelites, when he would make the Foundation of Churches in France to
be ancienter than indeed it is, when he undertook to derive the Institution of
Archipresbyters from the Will and good Liking of Bishops of Cities, and other
things, which it may be, may some time or other be enquired into. And to
conclude, that the Books of Ratramn, and of John Erigenius should be but one
and the same Book, against the truth of History.

Cardinal Baronius said very well, Baron. Annal. Eccles. number. 12.
That one ought to make light of what a new Writer does relate of ancient
Transactions, if he be not countenanced by the Authority of some elder than
himself. Of much greater reason then should he be rejected, when he directly
opposes the Testimony of the Ancients. Here is a Question of a matter in the
IX Century, viz. whether Ratramn wrote against Paschas: Monsieur de Marca
denies it. Is it just to believe him before a Writer of that Age, and which was
a favourer of Paschas; and whose Interest it was, by consequence, to have
suppressed the Works of Ratramn? I mean the Anonymous writer, of whom we have
formerly made mention. Paschas Radbert, says he, Anonym apud Cellot ubi supra.
abbot of Corby, affirms, under the name of St. Ambrose, that it is no other
flesh which is received at the Altar, but that which was born of the Virgin
Mary, and which suffered on the Cross, that is risen from the Dead, and which
is at this day offered for the Life of the World. Rabanus in his Letter unto
Egilon, and one Ratramn, in a Book which he composed, and dedicated unto King
Charles (that is to say, Charles the Bald) do sufficiently argue against him.
Unto this Testimony may be joined that of Sigibert in the XI Century, and of
Trythemius in the XV. besides the Witnesses of several written Manuscripts. And
after all this, conclude that the Treatise of the Body and Blood of Christ,
which we have under the name of Ratramn, is truly his; and that it was
published in the time of Charles the Bald, by whose Command he wrote it. Father
Cellot the Jesuit never made any difficulty of this matter, freely attributing
unto Ratramn the little Treatise whereof we speak; and proving by a long
Dispute, that he was the Forerunner of Berengarius, and of Calvin: and that he
openly taught, that the Eucharist is not the real Body of Jesus Christ; which
he confirms by the Authority of persons most learned in the Communion of the
Latins; Allain, Despans, de Saints, du Perron, Clement the Eighth; which all
have had this same Opinion of Bertram, and of his Book. He observes that
Cardinal Bellarmin does rank him amongst those which have disputed whether the
Eucharist is the real Body of Jesus Christ, and that it was justly put in the
Index of prohibited Books, according to the intention of the Council of Trent.
As for Sixtus de Sienna, he found it so contrary unto the Belief of the Latin
Church, that he took it to be some of the Works of Oecolompadius, which the
Protestants published in the name of Ratramn.

It is commonly said, that second thoughts are better than the first; but
Monsieur de Marca seems to go about to give the Lie unto this Maxim by his
Conduct: for in this French Treatise of the Eucharist, a little before
mentioned, and which he had composed before what we but now examined of his, he
very judiciously attributes unto Bertram this little Treatise of the Body and
Blood of Jesus Christ; and says, That he was consulted on this matter by
Charles the Bald: This is that whereto he should have held, and not to change
his Opinion without any solid Ground. And it ought not to be said with some,
that Bertram, who was a Friar in an Abbey whereof Paschas was Abbot, durst not
therefore write against him: for in the first place, who told those persons
that Bertram was yet a Friar in the Monastery of Gorby when he wrote against
Paschas, when probably he was Abbot of Orbais, and no way depending upon
Paschas. And for my part, I find much more likelihood of the last, than of the
former. In the second place, Wherefore is it that Ratramn should not dare to
write against what Paschas writ touching the Sacrament of the Eucharist, seeing
he feared not in other things directly to oppose one of the necessary
Consequences of Paschas his Opinion, and plainly to call it Heresy; as we have
fully made it appear in the 13th Chapter of the second Part of this History.

It may then boldly and without danger be affirmed, after the testimony of so
many Learned Men of the Communion of Rome, that Ratramn was an Adversary unto
Paschas: But to make this truth appear in its full luster, it is requisite to
allege some passages of this small Treatise, after having showed, that all
therein amounted to prove two things; one is, That the Mystery of the Eucharist
is a Figure, and not the thing it self; and the other, That it is not the same
Body which is born of the Virgin Mary, as Paschas did teach it was: In fine,
having first of all said unto Charles the Bald, Bertram de corp. and sanguin
Dom.
That there being nothing better becoming his Royal Wisdom, then to have a
Catholic Opinion of the sacred Mysteries, and not to suffer that his Subjects
should be of different Judgments touching the Body of Jesus Christ, wherein we
know is the Abridgment of Christian Religion, he proposed two questions wherein
the King desired to be resolved: 1. Whether the body and blood of Jesus Christ
which Christians do receive with the mouth, be made in mystery or in reality?
And 2. Whether it be the same Body which was born of the Virgin, that suffered,
dyed, rose again, ascended into Heaven, and is set down at the right hand of
God the Father? Paschas taught, That it was the same Flesh as was born of the
holy Virgin; and his Adversaries on the contrary, That it was the Figure, and
the Sacrament, and not the real Flesh.

If then Ratramn taught, That the Eucharist is the Figure, and the Sacrament of
the Body of Jesus Christ, and not the very Flesh it self, of necessity it must
be concluded, that he directly opposed the Opinion of Paschas, according to the
Declaration made us by the Anonymous Author. Id. Ibid.
As to what regards the first question, see here how it is resolved: I demand
(says he) of those that will not here admit of a Figure, and that will have
all to be taken simply, and in reality; I say, I would ask of them to what
purpose was the change made, that it should no longer be Bread and Wine, as it
was before, but the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ; for according to the bodily
appearance, and the visible form of things, the Bread and Wine have no change
in them; and if they have suffered no change, then they be nothing else but
what they were before. And a little after, Ibid.
there offers here a question, which is made by several, saying, That these
things are made in Figure, and not in reality; and so saying, they show
themselves contrary to the Writings of the Holy Fathers. And after having
alleged two passages of St. Austin, one of the third Book of Christian
Doctrine, and the other of the Epistle unto Boniface, he concludes, We find
that St. Austin says, Ibid.
That the Sacraments are other things than that whereof they be Sacraments; the
Body wherein Jesus Christ suffered, and the Blood which flowed out of his Side,
are the things; but the Mysteries of these things are the Sacraments of this
Body and of this Blood, which are celebrated in remembrance of the Death of our
Savior, not only once a year at the Solemnity of Easter, but also every day.
And although there is but one Body wherein our Savior suffered, and one Blood
which he shed for the sins of the World; nevertheless, the Sacraments take the
name of the things whereof they be Sacraments, and are called the Body and
Blood of Jesus Christ, by reason of the resemblance they have with the things
which they represent; as the Death and Resurrection of our Lord, which are
celebrated yearly on certain days, although he suffered and rose but once in
himself. Those days cannot be brought back again, seeing they are past; but the
days whereon the Commemoration of the Passion and Resurrection of our Savior
is made, are called by their names, because of the resemblance they have with
those whereon our Savior suffered and rose again, In like manner, we say our
Savior is sacrificed, when the Sacraments of his Passion is celebrated,
although he suffered but once in himself for the Salvation of the World. He
says moreover, Ibid.
that those which believe the reality, make a true confession, when they say,
That it is the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ, but that they deny what they
seem to affirm, and that they themselves destroy what they believe; for when
they say so (says he) they acknowledge that it is not what it was before; Ibid.
and that the Bread and the Wine have been changed: Now we see there is no
corporal change passed; they must then of necessity confess the change is
passed in some other regard, than in respect of the Bodies; from whence he
concludes, That they must be constrained to deny, Ibid.
either that it is the Body or Blood of Jesus Christ, which is not to be
permitted to say, nor even to think; or, if they confess that it is the Body
and Blood of Jesus Christ, seeing that cannot be, without there was a change
for the better, that this change is passed Corporally. Then it follows, that it
is passed Spiritually, that is to say, Ibid.
Figuratively; inasmuch as the Spiritual body, and the Spiritual blood of Jesus
Christ, is under the Vail of bodily Bread and corporal Wine. And to inform us
clearly of his intention, he adds, It is not that two several things exist in
the Sacrament, one whereof is Corporal, and the other Spiritual, no, but it is
one and the same thing, that in one regard, is the Element of Bread and Wine;
and in another regard is the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ; Ibid.
for in regard of what we touch Corporally, they be the Elements, or bodily
Creatures; but in regard of what they were made Spiritually, they be the
Mysteries of the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ. He also affirms, That what we
receive outwardly in the Sacrament of the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ, is
proper to nourish the Body.

And from thence, passing to the Examination of the second Question, to wit,
Ibid.
whether that which Believers do receive with the mouth daily in the Church by
the Mystery of the Sacraments, be the same Body that was born of the Virgin
Mary, that suffered, and was buried, and which sits on the Right Hand of
God: He thus explains himself; These Creatures, in regard of their substance,
Ibid.
are after Consecration, the same they were before; they were Bread and Wine,
and it is visible that they remain in the same kind, although they be
consecrated. The Change then which passes here by the power of the Holy Ghost,
is internal; what Faith beholds, does nourish the Soul, and communicates unto
it the substance of Life eternal. And again, Ibid.
The Flesh of Jesus Christ which was crucified, was made of the Flesh of the
Virgin Mary, composed of Bones and Sinews, divided by the Lineaments of
Members, furnished with a reasonable Soul, from which it received life and
motion: But as for the spiritual Flesh, which spiritually feeds the faithful
people; it is made according to what it is outwardly, of Grains of Wheat, by
the hands of the Baker; without Bones and Nerves, without diversity of Members,
without a reasonable Soul, or exercising any Life or Motion; for all that is in
it which communicates Life unto us, proceeds from a spiritual Virtue, from an
invisible Efficacy, and from a divine Benediction. Therefore it is quite
another thing in regard of what appears outwardly, from what is believed of the
Mystery; whereas the Flesh of Jesus Christ which was crucified, is not inwardly
what it appears to be outwardly, because it is the Flesh of a real Man, and by
consequence a true Body, existing in the form of a true Body. It must also be
considered, that the Body of Jesus Christ is not alone represented in this
Bread, but that the Body of the faithful people is therein figured also.
Therefore it is that the Bread is made of diverse Grains, because the Body of
the people is composed of many Believers; and as the Bread is the Body of Jesus
Christ mystically, the numbers of the people which believe in Jesus Christ are
therein also represented mystically: and as this Bread is the Body of
Believers, not corporally, but spiritually; it is also necessary to understand
the Body of Jesus Christ, not corporally, but spiritually. So also it is
commanded to mingle Water with the Wine, which is called the Blood of Jesus
Christ; and it is not permitted to offer the one without the other, because the
People cannot be without Jesus Christ, nor Jesus Christ without the People; as
the Head cannot subsist without the Members, nor the Members without the Head:
and the Water in this Sacrament bears the Image of the People. If this Wine,
sanctified by the Ministry of Priests, were corporally changed into the Blood
of Christ, it would be necessary that the Water, which is therein also mingled,
should be corporally changed into the Blood of faithful Believers; for where
there is one and the same Sanctification, there must be also of necessity, one
Operation; and where this is one and the same reason, there will also be one
and the same Mystery. Now we see there is no Change made in the Water according
to the Body; therefore by consequence it must follow, that there is no bodily
Change made in the Wine. All that is signified by the Water, in regard of the
Body of the People, is taken spiritually; all then that is signified by the
Wine, in reference to the Blood of Jesus Christ, ought necessarily to be
understood spiritually. Besides, the things which do differ in themselves are
not one and the same things: The Body of Jesus Christ which suffered, and is
risen again, was made immortal, and dies no more; Death has no more Dominion
over him; he is eternal, and cannot die: Now this Body which is celebrated in
the Church is temporal, and not eternal; corruptible, and not incorruptible; it
is in the way, and not in the Country: they do then differ, therefore they be
not the same; then if they be not the same, how is it that they call them the
real Body of Jesus Christ, and his real Blood? For if it be the Body of Jesus
Christ, and that one may truly say so, the Body of Jesus Christ being
incorruptible, impassible, and by consequence eternal. It must necessarily
follow, that this Body of Jesus Christ which is made in the Church should be
incorruptible and eternal: but it cannot be denied but that it is corruptible,
because being broken in pieces, it is divided unto Believers, which receive it;
and being eaten with the Teeth, it is swallowed down, and goes into the Belly.
What we do exteriorly is then another thing from what we believe by Faith; what
regards the sense of the Body is corruptible, but what is believed by Faith is
incorruptible. What appears outwardly is not the thing it self, but the Image
of the thing; and what the heart feels and understands, is the reality of
the thing.

In fine; for the whole Book must be transcribed, if all should be alleged
that makes directly contrary unto the Doctrine of Paschas; Ibid.
he thus concludes the whole Treatise; Let your Wisdom consider, illustrious
Prince, that we have very clearly proved by the Testimony of the holy
Scripture, and by Passages of the holy Fathers, that the Bread which is called
the Body of Jesus Christ, and the Cup which is called his Blood, are Figures,
because a Sacrament; and that there is a great difference betwixt the Body
which is by Mystery, and the Body which suffered, which was buried, and rose
again: This here is the real Body of our Savior, where there is neither Figure
nor Signification; but the evidence of the thing it self is present. The
Faithful desire to behold him because he is our Head, and because that in his
sight consists the joy of our Souls; for the Father and him are but one: which
is to be understood, not in regard of the Body which our Lord has assumed, but
in regard of the fullness of the Divinity which inhabits in Jesus Christ
God-man; but the mystical Body is a Figure, not only of the true Body of Jesus
Christ, but also of the believing People; for it bears the Figure both of the
one and the other Body of Jesus Christ; that is to say, of Jesus Christ
himself, which was crucified, and is risen again; and of the People which are
born again in Jesus Christ by Baptism, and was raised from the Dead. Unto which
may be added, that this Bread and this Cup, which are called the Body and Blood
of Jesus Christ, are a Memorial of the Death and Sufferings of our Savior, as
himself has declared in the Gospel, saying, Do this in remembrance of me:
which St. Paul expounds after this manner; As often as ye shall eat this bread,
and drink of this cup, you show forth the death of the Lord until he come. It
is then our Savior, and St. Paul which teach us, that this Bread and Cup that
are set upon the Altar, are there laid as a Figure, or Memorial of the death of
our Savior.

And as Ratramn opposed himself directly against the Opinion of Paschas, so he
also refuted the Consequence of this Belief, by opposing in his Book of the
Birth of Jesus Christ, what Paschas had written of the Delivery of the blessed
Virgin. For in this little Treatise he positively affirms the Locality, or the
Inclusion of the Body of Jesus Christ within the bounds of the place which it
occupies; whereas the Hypothesis of his Adversary imported, that it could be
in several places at the same time. In Spicil. d'Acher. t. 1. p. 333
In holding these things, says he, you wickedly utter a kind of Novelty, to
cry, that there was nothing could hinder our Savior that he should not be
born, because no Creature could resist the Creator; but that all things that do
subsist, are open and penetrable unto him. Whilst you judge so, you judge very
prudently; but when by this rule you go about to subject the beginnings of the
Birth of Jesus Christ, you plainly dogmatize, as to what regards his Power: but
as to what regards the property of the Body which he has taken, and his Humane
Birth, you stray very far from the way of Truth; for there is nothing firm,
nothing that is not penetrable unto the Power of the Will of Jesus Christ. But
as for the Humanity which he has taken, it was enclosed and shut up in the
Virgins Womb; that during the time it remained there, it was not elsewhere: but
in a short time it left the Abode of the Virgins Womb, and went forth, and
returned no more thither. What is it that he has showed by this change of
place, if it be not, that though he be omnipresent by the propriety of his
Divinity, he was but in one place according to the circumscription of his Body?
That that which is local, as it is not always every where, but it goes unto one
place when it leaves the other: so also also when he goes from one place to
another, he at the same time is not at the right hand and at the left; neither
walks he before and behind, nor above and below. So also the Savior, as he
was at one time in the Womb of the Virgin, according to the Flesh, and at
another time he was out of it; so in going out, though nothing could stop him
when he would come out, nevertheless he made use only of one way for his coming
forth; and he issued not out by all the parts of the body wherein he had been
formed. I will not here say any thing of certain Sterconaristes, which some
pretend to have been opposed by Ratramn, and not by Paschas: Others say, he was
one of this Sect himself; and others, in fine, That in disputing against it, he
varied from the true Sentiments of the Church; because we will treat of it in
examining the Testimony of Heribold.

To continue the Course of my History, I come to John Erigenius, the other
Doctor which the Emperor Charles the Bald consulted, and whom he commanded to
write upon the same Subject. He had a singular esteem for him, and lived so
familiarly with him, that some Historians have assured, that he made him eat
with him at his own Table, and lie in his own Bedchamber. I am not ignorant
how unworthily he was treated by Remy Archbishop of Lions, and by the Deacon
Florus; and that Prudens Bishop of Troys, and the Council of Valentia did
censure some Errors that appeared in some of his Books upon the Subject of
Predestination. Neither would I undertake to defend all his Expressions and
Phylosophical Notions about the state of the Blessed, and of the Damned;
neither can I but confess, that the Pen of his Adversaries have been steeped in
too smart Liquor, to tear the Reputation of this Man, unto whom Historians give
great Commendations; Gulicl. Malms. de gestis Reg. Angl. l. 2. c. 5. Apud
Usser. in Sylloge Ep. Hibernic. Ep. 24. and de Christian. Ecclesiar. success.
c. 2.
dignifying him with these two glorious Titles, of most Learned, and most holy.
William of Malmesbury assures us, That he was a very wise Man, and very
eloquent; that he translated out of Greek into Latin, at the desire of Charles
the Bald, the Hierarchy of Dennis the Arcopagite. A Translation so acceptable
to Anastatius, Library Keeper unto the Popes, that he wrote a Letter unto King
Charles which was inserted in the Preface of this Translation; wherein, after
having admired that a Man born in one of the remotest parts of the World, that
is, in Ireland, should be capable of comprehending, and of rendering this
Hierarchy into Latin, he adds, That he had heard he was a Saint: concluding,
that it was the work of the Spirit of God, which had made him as zealous as he
was eloquent. Also the fame of his Learning made him be sent for by Alfred,
King of England; where he died, Anno 883. or 84. in the Monastery of
Malmesbury, having received several Wounds by Penknives from young Men that he
instructed. The Writers also of England observe, that having been buried
without much honor in the Church where he had been slain, there shined a
miraculous Light several nights upon his Grave; which made the Friars transport
him into the great Church, and to interr him more honorably near the Altar,
with this Epitaph, which is to be seen in the History of William of Malmesbury:
Guliel. Malms. l. 2. c. 5.
Here lies John the holy Philosopher, who in his life was enriched with
mavelous Learning, and who at last had the honor to ascend by Martyrdom unto
the Kingdom of Jesus Christ, where the Saints reign everlastingly.

The same Historian said in the same place, He was esteemed a Martyr; which I
do not say by way of doubt, to do wrong unto this holy Soul. And after his
death, he was put into the Catalogue of Saints; for Thomas Fuller in his
Ecclesiastical History of England, says, that he was accounted a Martyr of
Jesus Christ; Histor. Eccles. Angl. l. 2. p. 119.
and that his Anniversary Commemoration was celebrated the 4th of the Ides of
November, in the Martyrology printed at Antwerp, Anno 1586. by the Command of
Gregory the Thirteenth. He adds, That it was Baronius that put him out of the
Martyrology out of hatred, because he had written against the Real Presence;
alleging upon this Subject, Henry Fitz Simond. in 2. Edit. Catal. S.S. Hibern.
who defends the Action of Baronius; and says, That there was preparing, even
in his time, an Apology for justifying this Proceeding.

Bishop Usher also testifies, That in the Catalogue of Saints buried in
England, drawn out of ancient English Monuments, Usser. de Eccl. Christian
success. and statu. c. 20.
by a Friar of Canterbury, in the time of Anselm; that is, in the beginning of
the XII. Century, there are these words; St. Adelm and John the Wise are
recorded to be laid in the place called Adelmisbirig; that is to say,
Malmesbury. Molanus, Professor of Divinity in the University of Lovain, has
left this in Writing in his Appendix in the Martyrology of Ussuard. John
Erigenius, Martyr, Molan. Appen. ad Usuard. littera l.
translated the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy of Dennis. He was afterward, by the
Command of the Popes, put in the number of the Martyrs of Jesus Christ: Hector
Deidonat, in his History of Scotland. Which words have been inserted in the
Appendix of the Martyrology of the Gallican Church, which was left us by the
Bishop of Thoul; having recorded in the Supplement at the 4th of the Ides of
November, the Commemoration which is made of St. John Surnamed Erigenius,
Martyr; killed at Malmesbury by some young Debauchees.

See here exactly what the Man was that wrote of the Sacrament by Command of
Charles the Bald, as Ratramn also did; as we are given to understand, by a
Letter of Berengarius, written unto one Richard, who had some Access unto King
Philip. In this Letter printed some years past, by the care of Dom Luke
d'Achery, he desires him to speak for him unto this Prince; to the end he would
be pleased to repair by his Liberality, the Losses and Damages which he had
unjustly sustained. After which he adds, Epistola Berengarii ad Richard. t. 2.
Spicil. p. 510.
If he does not do it, yet nevertheless, I shall be ready to prove by the
Scriptures unto his Majesty, and those whom he shall appoint; and to make
appear that John Erigenius was very unjustly condemned by the Council at
Verceil, and Paschas very unjustly vindicated. And afterward, To the end the
King should not reject this service of my fidelity, he may know that what John
Erigenius has written, he wrote it at the desire, and by order of Charles the
Great (he means the Bald) one of his Predecessors, who was as affectionate unto
Religious things, as he was valiant in his Expeditions, lest the folly of
ignorant and carnal men should prevail. And he commanded John, that learned
Man, to collect from the Scriptures what might check this folly. Whence it
follows (says he) that the King is obliged to take up the Defense of the
Deceased, against the Slanders of those alive; not to show himself unworthy of
the Succession and Throne of his Illustrious Predecessors, that desired this
Service of this learned Man: not to scatter Darkness over the Light of the
Truth, but to inform himself carefully in the Knowledge of the holy Scriptures.
Berengarius complains of the Condemnation of John at the Council of Verceil, in
the year 1050. because it was there his Book was read, and condemned to be
burnt, about two hundred years after he wrote it; as we are informed by
Lanfranc; who owns him to be an Adversary of Paschas, whereof he was himself a
great favourer. Therefore Berengarius wrote to him, Tereng. Ep. ad Lan^ranc.
If John, whose Judgment we approve, touching the Sacrament, be esteemed by you
to be a Heretic, you must also hold for Heretics St. Jerome, St. Ambrose, and
St. Austin; not to mention others. That which renders John Erigenius's
Testimony the more Authentic in this Debate is, for having had four Enemies;
to wit, the learned Church of Lions, Florus its Deacon, Prudens Bishop of
Troys, the Councils of Valencia and of Langres, which spared him not upon the
matter of Predestination; it is very likely they would have less spared him
upon the Subject of the Eucharist, had he differed from the Belief generally
received in the Church, upon so important a Point as is that of the holy
Sacrament.

This truth will yet be more evident, if we consider that many do believe
Prudens Bishop of Troys, and Florus Deacon of the Church of Lions, two Enemies
which his Opinion of Predestination had stirred up against him, were also
opposite unto the Opinion of Paschas, so that it happened unto those People, much
after the same manner as we have seen it has done in our days unto those
called Jansenists and Molinists; for however they be divided in the matters of
Predestination and free Grace, yet nevertheless, both the one and the other
still retain the great point of the real presence of the Latin Church: so
although Prudens and Florus did censure what John wrote of Predestination, yet
for all that they were well agreed as to what concerned the Sacrament; Prudens
indeed has writ nothing, or at least there is nothing of his come unto our
knowledge. But the Archbishop Hincmar, suffers us not to be ignorant of what
Prudens believed, when joining him with John Erigenius; against whom,
nevertheless, he observes he wrote upon the Subject of Predestination; he
says, that they both held, Hinemar. de praedest. cap 31.
That the Sacraments of the Altar are not the real Body and the real Blood of
our Savior, but only the memorial of his true Body and Blood: And when I speak
of Prudens, I speak of one of the greatest Ornaments of his Age in Piety and
Learning; and of a Man, whose memory is Annually Honored with great Solemnity:
I shall content my self with relating the character which the Bishop of Thoul
gives of him in the Martyrology of France the 6th day of April, Martyrol.
Gallican. Andr du Saussay. 5. Id. April.
At Troys is solemnized the memory of St. Prudens Bishop and Confessor: this
Saint was born in Spain, endowed with Divine Graces, and Illustrious by his
Zeal for Religion, and his knowledge of the Holy Scriptures, having been driven
out of Spain by the Saracens; and being come into France, he drew the
Admiration and Love of all men, therefore after the Death of Adelbert Bishop of
Troys, whither he had retired himself, and had given proofs of his Virtue and
Merit, he was Elected and appointed the 37th Bishop of that Church by the
common consent of the Clergy and People; being so advanced unto the Episcopal
Dignity, he shined like a Light set in a Candlestick, not unto this Church
alone, but also throughout all France, by the example of a most holy Life, and
by the splendor of Divine Wisdom; he was the Ornament and Delight of the
Bishops of his time, a Defender of the Purity of the Faith, and an Oracle of
Ecclesiastical Knowledge.

As for the Deacon Florus, he has transmitted unto us himself, evidences of
his belief in his Explication of the Mass, at least if that be the work of this
Florus Deacon of the Church of Lions, who in this Explication is sty^^^ Master
Florus; for Trithemius attributes this little Treatise whereof we speak, unto
one Florus, a Benedictine Friar in the Abbey of Trom, in the Country of Liege;
and others make its Author to be the Deacon Florus, that wrote against
Amalarius, and against John Scot upon the Subject of Predestination. This
latter Opinion seems the most likely; and the reason which makes me not to
doubt of it is, that I observe the Author of this Interpretation of the Mass,
has copied ten lines verbatim out of the Book which Agobard Bishop of Lions
under Lewis the Debonair, Son of Charles the Bald, wrote against Amalarius.
Vid. Flor. Bibl. Patr. t. 6. edit. ult. p. 171. unde Eccles. etc. Et Agobard.
contr. Amalar. c. 13. p. 115. Florus in Exposit. Missae Bibl. Patr. t. 6. p.
170.
Now there is much more probability to say, that it was written by a Deacon of
the same Church, then by a Monk of the Country of Liege; It being then evident
after this remark, if I mistake not, that this little Treatise is to be
attributed unto the Deacon Florus: Let us hear what he has designed to inform
us: The Oblation (says he) although taken from the simple fruits of the Earth,
is made unto Believers the Body and Blood of the only Son of God, by the
ineffable virtue of Divine Benediction: He seems to make a difference betwixt
the Wicked and the Good; and says, the Sacrament is made unto the latter, the
Body and Blood of Jesus Christ; but unto the former it is nothing less, because
they have not Faith: a Declaration which, as the Protestants say, agrees not
with the Doctrine of the Real Presence, by which the Eucharist is made the Body
of Jesus Christ, not only unto the Good, but unto the Wicked also. Florus
explains himself very clearly, Ibid.
when he adds, This Body and this Blood is not gathered in the Ears of Corn,
and in the Grapes: Nature gives it not unto us, but it is Consecration that
makes it unto us mystically. Jesus Christ is eaten when the Creature of Bread
and Wine pass into the the Sacrament of his Flesh and Blood by the ineffable
Sanctification of the Holy Ghost: he is eaten by parcels in the Sacrament, and
he remains entire in Heaven, and entire in your heart. He would say that the
Eucharist is naturally Bread and Wine; that Consecration makes it the Body and
Blood of Jesus Christ, which is eaten in Morsels under the Sign, which
represents him: but as to himself, he is whole and entire in Heaven, as he is
whole and entire in the heart of every Believer, in quality of a quickening and
saving Object, embraced by Faith, so to find Life and Salvation in partaking of
him, because it is he that has merited Salvation for us by his Death, and
purchased Life for us by his Sufferings. And as the Eucharist is the Memorial
of this Death and these Sufferings, Florus makes no difficulty to say, that it
is made unto Believers the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ; because in
participating of this Divine Mystery, Faith looks unto him as the only Object
of its Contemplation, Manducation, and Participation. Thus much these other
words of the same Author import; Ibid. p. 171.
All that is done in the Oblation of the Body and Blood of our Lord is
mystical: we see one thing, and we understand another; what is seen is
corporal, what is understood has a spiritual Fruit. Moreover, he says
plainly, that what our Savior commanded his Disciples to take and eat, was
Bread, He said unto them of the Bread, Take, and eat ye all of this. Ibid.
And speaking of the Cup; The Wine (said he) was the Mystery of our Redemption.
And he proves it by these words, I will no more drink of this Fruit of the
Vine. In fine, expounding these last words of the Mass, Whereby, O Lord, Ibid.
thou always createst for us all these good things, etc. which is a kind of
Thanksgiving, which in the Latin Liturgy does follow the Consecration, he
sufficiently gives to understand, that he believed not that the Bread and Wine
were changed into the substance of the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ; seeing
he speaks of them as of things which God had created from the beginning of the
World, which he makes still every year, by Propagation, and by Reparation;
which he sanctifies and fills with his Grace and Heavenly Blessing; which
himself interprets to be of Corn, and of Wine. Thus it is that many do explain
the meaning of this Author.

About the same time that the Deacon Florus wrote at Lions, Christian Druthmar
Priest and Friar of Corby, and Companion or Ratramn in the same Monastery,
composed his Commentary upon St. Matthew's Gospel; and we should forthwith see
what he wrote of the Eucharist, if Sixtus Senensis did not stop us a little
moment. This famous Library Keeper does accuse Protestants of having corrupted
the Text of Druthmar, in Reading, in the Sacrament; whereas he pretends, upon
the Credit of the Copy of a Manuscript to be seen in the Library of the
Franciscans at Lions, that it should be read, Subsisting really in the
Sacrament. The first thing we should do then, is to consider the nature of this
Accusation; for the faith of Sixtus is looked upon by many, as the faith of a
Man that approves very well of Expurgatory Indexes, and one that has laid two
other Accusations unto the same Protestants Charge, which are believed to be
false. Bibl. Sanct. in Ep. ad Pium V. Id. l. 6. Annot. 72.
One is to have corrupted and altered a passage of Ferus, a Franciscan Friar,
concerning the Temporal Power of the Pope; although Ferus his Commentary upon
St. Matthew, wherein the passage in dispute is contained, was printed the first
time at Mayans, An. 1559. with the Emperor's permission. And thereupon the
Protestants say, That it would be very unjust to accuse them with these kind of
Depravations; they which have so much complained of Expurgatory Indexes, to do
themselves what they so highly condemned in other Men. The other Accusation
consists in that he charged them with the printing a pernicious Book of
Oecolompadius, under the Title of Bertram, De Corpore and Sanguine Domini,
Ibid. in praesar.
against the truth of History; which informs us, as has been proved, that
Bertram, or Ratramn was the true Author of it. Besides, say they, Wherefore was
not this Manuscript of Lions publicly made known, to convince us without
reply, of this eminent Depravation: for it must be confessed, that should we be
guilty of so great a piece of Malice, and so horrible an Infidelity as that
wherewith Sixtus Sinensis does accuse us, we should be unworthy the name of
honest Men; and on the contrary, deserve all Men's hatred and scorn. But
besides, Sixtus his Accusation falls upon Sererius, a Lutheran Printer: had it
fallen upon any Calvinist Printer, it would have had a little more show of
truth: But that a Lutheran, that believes the Real Presence, should have taken
these words out of the passage of Druthmar, Subsisting truly in the Sacrament,
which entirely favors it, makes it appear very strange; seeing the Interest of
them of his Communion require that they should exactly be retained. Add unto
all these things, that whereunto there can be no Reply; which is, That in the
Year 1514. before Luther appeared, James Wimfelling, of Schelstad, caused
Druthmar to be printed at Strasbourg sixteen years before Sererius his Edition,
with License of Maximilian the Emperor, and the Arms of Leo the Tenth, in the
same manner Sererius had printed it, though it was by other Manuscripts; which,
as it is said, makes void Sixtus his Accusation against the Lutheran Printer,
who acted like an honest Man; and shows, that the passage should be read as
the Protestants read it, and as the latter Collectors of the Library of the
holy Fathers have given it unto us. In fine, say they, It only is requisite to
read over the whole passage with some caution, to know that the Correction of
Sixtus cannot subfist; and that by consequence, his Accusation is groundless.
And to the end the Reader might do it conveniently, I will relate it at large,
as he has transmitted it unto us: Christian. Druthmar. comment. in Matthew.
Bibl. Patr. t. 16. p. 361.
[Jesus Christ took Bread] because bread strengthens the heart of Man, and
preserves life better than any other food, he therein establishes the
Sacrament of his Love: but this property ought much rather to be attributed
unto this spiritual Bread, which perfectly strengthens all Men and all
Creatures; because it is by him that we do subsist, and that we have both Life
and Being. [He blessed it] He blessed it in the first place, because as Man, he
blessed in his own Person all Mankind; and then he gave to understand, that the
Benediction and Power of the Divine and Immortal Nature was truly in that
Nature which he had taken of the blessed Virgin. [He broke it] He broke the
Bread, which is himself; because, exposing himself freely unto Death, he broke
and shattered the habitation of his Soul, thereby to satiate us; according to
what he said himself, I have power to lay down my Life, and I have power to
take it up again. [And he gave it unto his Disciples, saying unto them, Take,
and eat; this is my Body.] He gave to his Disciples the Sacrament of his Body
for remission of sins, and preservation of charity; to the end that being
mindful of this action, they should always do this in Figure, and that they
should not forget what he was going to do for them. [This is my Body.] That is
to say, in Sacrament. [And having taken the Cup, he gave Thanks, and gave it
unto his Disciples.] As amongst all things which are useful to preserve life,
Bread and Wine are those which do most strengthen and repair the weakness of
our Nature, it is with great reason that our Savior would in these two things
establish the Mystery of his Sacrament; for Wine rejoices the heart, and
increases blood; therefore it is very fit to represent the Blood of Jesus
Christ; because all that comes from him rejoices with perfect joy, and
increases all that is good in us. In fine, like a person undertaking a great
Voyage, he leaves unto them he loves, a particular mark of his Love, upon
condition that they shall take care to keep it always, thereby to remember him:
so also God, spiritually changing the Bread into his Body, and the Wine into
his Blood, has commanded us to celebrate this mystery, to the end these two
things may eternally make us remember what he has done for us with his Body
and Blood; and that it might hinder us from being ungrateful, and unmindful of
so great and tender Love. Now because we are wont to mix Water with the Wine in
the Sacrament of his Blood, this Water represents the faithful People for whom
Jesus Christ would lay down his Life; and the Water is not without the Wine,
neither is the Wine without the Water; because that as he died for us, so also
we should be ready to die for him, and for our brethren; that is to say, for
the Church; therefore there came out of his side Water and Blood. This passage
is taken out of a Commentary, where the Author explains these words of the
Institution, This is my Body, by these others, That is to say, in the
Sacrament; to signify that the Bread of the Eucharist is not really the Body
of Jesus Christ, but only the Sacrament of it. Therefore he shows that our
Savior gave unto his Disciples the Sacrament of his Body; that he commanded
them to celebrate the Eucharist in Figure of what he was going to do for them;
that his Blood is figured by the Wine; and that in going up to Heaven, he left
them this Pledge of his Love, to the end, that during his absence, they should
always make Commemoration of his Person, and of his Sufferings. All which
things clearly show, that the spiritual Change whereof he speaks is a Change of
Use and of Virtue; to import that the Bread and Wine are changed, by the Grace
of Consecration, into the Sacrament of the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ; as
St. Isidore of Sevil, Bid and Rabanus has taught: and also changed into its
Efficacy and Virtue, after the language of Theodotus, and of Cyril of
Alexandria. Whence it is that the same Druthmar explaining these words, Ibid.
p. 360. C.
The Poor ye shall have always with you, but me ye shall not have always,
says, He speaks of the presence of his Body, because he was to depart from
them; for as for the presence of his Divinity, it is always present with all
the Elect. Ibid. p. 362. A.
And upon this also, I will no more drink of this fruit af the Vine, until the
day I drink it new with you in my Father's Kingdom. After that time of Supper
(says he) he drank no Wine, until he became immortal and incorruptible after
his Resurrection. This is the Explication Protestants give unto the words of
Druthmar.

Hitherto we have spoken of Writers of the IX. Century, out of whom it is
accustomed to produce Testimonies to prove that they opposed the Doctrine of
Paschas Radbert, excepting Heribold, unto whom we reserve a Chapter apart. But
besides these Witnesses which have deposed, there be some others whose
Testimonies may conduce to the clearing the Subject we treat of; therefore we
will make no difficulty to receive their Depositions beginning with Ahyto.
Ahyto, Bishop of Basle, was so famous for his Holiness of Life, for the Light
of his Doctrine, and for his Wisdom in managing great and important Affairs,
that Charlemain had a very particular kindness and esteem for him: whereupon,
in the Year 811. he sent him Ambassador unto Constantinople, to treat of Peace
with the Eastern Emperor; as the Annals of France, Eginhard, Author of the Life
of Charlemain; the Annals of Fulda, Herman Contract, and others do testify.
This Ahyto, who departed this Life, Anno 836. left a Capitulary, for the
Instruction of the Priests of his Diocese, which Dom Luke d'Achery caused to be
printed three or four years since; the Copy of it being sent him from Rome, and
taken from a Manuscript of the Library of Cardinal Francis Barbarini. The same
d'Achery observing also that it is to be found in the Manuscript Copies of the
Vatican Library. Now amongst many other Instructions which he gives unto his
Priests in this Capitulary, this is to be read; Anyco apud Dom. Luc. d'Acher.
Spicileg. t. 6. p. 692.
In the fifth place, the Priests ought to know what the Sacrament of Baptism
and of Confirmation is, and what the Mystery of the Body and Blood of our Lord
is; how a visible Creature is seen in the same Mysteries, and nevertheless,
invisible Salvation is there communicated for the Salvation of the Soul; the
which is contained in Faith only. Ahito speaks of Baptism, and of the
Eucharist. He distinguishes in the one, and the other, the Sign, and the thing
signified; and lays it down for certain, that in both of them alike, there is a
visible Creature, without making any distinction betwixt the Creature that is
seen in the Eucharist; and that which is seen in Baptism; it must needs be then
of necessity, That as by the Creature which is seen in Baptism, he understands
the substance of Water and Chrism; so also by that which is seen in the
Eucharist, he understands the substance of Bread and Wine; and because Baptism
and the Eucharist are two Sacraments of the New Testaments, Instituted by one
Lord Jesus Christ, and appointed to render us partakers of his Grace, Ahyto
attributes unto them both the same effect, (viz.) the Communication of Eternal
and Invisible Salvation unto those which receive both the one and the other of
these Sacraments with Faith. No other sense can be given unto the words of this
Bishop, neither can it be avoided by consequence to conclude, but that his
Doctrine was directly contrary unto that of Paschas.

Unto this Bishop of Basil, I will join another of Orleans,
Theodulphu-Aurelian. ad Magn. Senon. de ordine Baptis. c. 18.
I mean Theodolph, who in the year 817. was of the Conspiration of Bernard King
of Italy against the Emperor Lewis the Debonair; and who speaks thus in his
Treatise of the Order of Baptism, There is a saving sacrifice which Melchisedek
King of Salem, offered under the Old Testament, in Figure of the Body and Blood
of our Lord, and which the Mediator of God and Man has accomplished under the
New, before he was delivered up; when he took the Bread and the Wine, blessing
them and distributing then unto his Disciples, he commanded them to do those
things in remembrance of him; it is then this mystical sacrifice which the
Church celebrates, having left and put an end unto the Ancient Sacrifices;
offering Bread because of the Bread of Life that came down from Heaven; and
Wine, because of him that said, I am the true Vine; to the end, that by the
Priest's visible offering, and by the invisible Consecration of the Holy Ghost,
the Bread and Wine should pass into the dignity of the Body and Blood of our
Lord; in which Blood Water is mingled; either because Water flowed out of the
side of Christ with the Blood, or that because, according to the interpretation
of the Ancients, as Jesus Christ is figured by the Wine, so the People is
figured by the Water. This Prelate intimates, that Jesus Christ accomplished
under the Gospel, the Sacrifice of Melchisedek, which was a Sacrifice of Bread
and Wine; which he demonstrates by the act of our Savior; who instituting the
Sacrament of the Eucharist, took Bread and Wine, and having blessed them, gave
them them unto his Disciples, with order to commemorate him in the Celebration
of this Mystery: He declares it is the Sacrifice which the Church celebrates
offering Bread and Wine; That the Wine in the Cup signifies Jesus Christ, as
the Water does the People: And that in fine, all that befalls the Bread and
Wine by Consecration is, that they pass, he does not say into the substance of
the Body and Blood of our Savior; which he must needs have said, if he had
believed the real Presence; but he says, they pass into the Dignity of his
Body and Blood, because indeed we should consider them as his Body and Blood;
for they be in the room, and are invested with the Dignity of his Person, and
accompanied in their lawful use, with the virtue and efficacy of his Body
broken, and of his Blood poured forth. According to which he orders in his
Capitulary, Every Lords day to receive, during Lent time, the Sacraments of the
Body and Blood of Jesus Christ; Id. in capitulari c. 41.44.
and prescribes the dispositions with which one should approach unto so great a
Sacrament. Thus it is that several do understand this passage of Theodolph.

After the testimony of two Bishops, we are obliged to mention an Archbishop of
Lions, who lived in the same Century; and who in the year 834. was of the
number of the Prelates, which joining with the Children against the Father,
deprived Lewis the Debonair of Crown and Scepter; it is easy to perceive that
I mean Agobard, who undoubtedly was one of the most Learned Bishops of his
time; and whose Writings, as I conceive, have more of light and vigor; and
although he has not said very much of the Eucharist, yet we will nevertheless
judge of his belief upon this Article, both by his words and by his silence.
The better to understand of what import his silence is, it is to be observed,
that Amalarius, of whom we have insisted already, had found something amiss in
the Service of the Church of Lions, which so offended Agobard, that he wrote a
Book on purpose against the four Books of Amalarius touching Ecclesiastical
things: And he writes it with so high a resentment, that Father Chifflet could
have wished he had wrote with more moderation; And that he had dipped his pen,
Ep. ad Baluzium Agobardo praefixa.
after the example of his Predecessors, in the Blood of Jesus Christ, the Lamb
without spot, truly meek and humble in Spirit. It is then very probable, that
in the humor Agobard was, against Amalarius, he suffered nothing to pass
unreproved, except what he thought not fit to be censured, and which he
approved of himself: And indeed by reading his Book, it will plainly appear
with what exactness he examines all that dropped from the Pen of his Adversary:
Now it is most certain, he censured not any of the passages which we alleged
for proving that Amalarius was contrary to the Opinion of Paschas; can it be
believed this Man, so full of anger and revenge, and who wrote not his Book,
but to censure those of Amalarius, and yet touched not any of the testimonies
whereof we speak; if the belief of Amalarius had not been the belief of the
Church, or if Agobard had not been of the same Opinion he was, on the subject
of the Eucharist, how could it possible be, but that he would have censured
what Amalarius said. How could he have slipped so fair an occasion to have
discredited his Adversary, as a Man that prevaricated from the belief of the
Church upon one of the Capital Articles of our Religion; but further, he
alleges these words of Amalarius, which we before cited, The Bread set upon
the Altar, represents the Body of our Savior spread upon the Cross; the Wine
and Water in the Cup, do show the Sacraments which did flow from the side of
our Savior upon the Cross: Agobard. advers. Annal. cap. 21. p. 119.
but he does not there apply one word of censure. What can be inferred from
this conduct, but that they were both agreed upon this point? Now if from the
consideration of his silence, we proceed to that of his words, it is said, we
shall be confirmed in the belief of what has been said; for he testifies,
Ibid. c. 13. p. 115.
That as there is but one Altar of the Church, so also there is one bread of
the Body of Jesus Christ, and one sole Cup of his Blood. He distinguishes the
Bread from the Body of Jesus Christ, and the Cup from his Blood; as he
distinguishes the Altar from the Church where it is. Moreover he declares,
Ibid.
That the Church consecrating by these words, (he speaks of all the words of
Institution) according to the Tradition of the Apostles, the Mystery of the
Body and Blood of our Lord, he says expressly, that our Savior said unto his
Disciples, Take, and Eat you all of this: Words which the Deacon Florus
borrowed of him, with those that follow, as we observed not long ago, to prove,
that what our Savior commanded his Disciples to take and eat, was Bread. This
is what was said of Agobard.

We have already mentioned in the 7th Chapter of this second Part, an Assembly
of Bishops of the Diocesses of Roan and of Rhemis at Cressy, which furnished us
with a Declaration of their belief; but because they wrote in this same
Century, the History whereof we examine, it is just that we should here insert
their testimony; David Blundel in his Exposition of the Eucharist, said in
Chap. 18. That he separated not from Ratramn, and John surnamed Erigenius, the
greatest part of the Bishops assembled at Cressy, anno 858. with out signifying
the place where they had given marks of their belief; therefore some have
thought, he had read it in some Manuscripts: Nevertheless it is certain, that
he had a regard unto what we have alleged, and unto what we will produce a
second time, yet in referring the Reader unto the 7th. Chapter to ponder the
occasion, and the words, which be these; Council. Carisiac. t. 3. Council. Gall.
p. 129. Extr.
It would be an abominable thing, if the hand which makes by prayer and the
sign of the Cross, Bread and Wine mingled with Water, the Sacrament of the Body
and Blood of Jesus Christ, that it should after promotion unto Episcopacy,
meddle in any secular Oath, whatever it did before Ordination.

The Chronicle of Mouson, which is in one of the Tomes of the Collection of Dom
Luke d'Achery, makes mention of one Arnulph, and represents him unto us as a
Martyr. He died, as near as can be judged, about the end of the IX. Century.
And as he was at the point of death, he said unto those that were present,
Favor me by your compassionate piety and help, Chron. Mosomens. t. 7. Spicil.
page 627.
that I may receive from the hands of the Priests, the Eucharist of the
Communion of our Savior. He desires to receive the Sacrament of the Eucharist,
which truly communicates unto the faithful and penitent Soul, Jesus Christ our
Lord; which he plainly distinguishes from his Sacrament, as the thing whereof
we communicate, from the Instrument by means whereby we do thereof participate.
He did not then believe with Paschas, that the Eucharist was the real Flesh of
Jesus Christ. It is the Inference that many do make.

In the last Chapter of the first part, we treated of the Custom of mingling
the consecrated Wine with Ink; and at the end of the 8th Chapter of the Second
Part, we showed the Inferences which is said, are lawfully made from it. But
because of the Examples of this practice, which we have alleged, there is one
of the Year 844. we will make no difficulty of joining this Testimony unto the
former; yet it shall be only in the nature of a Historian which relates what
passed at Toulouse, betwixt King Charles the Bald, and Bernard Count of
Barcelonia, whom this Prince had sent for under pretense of being reconciled
unto him; but indeed, with design to kill him. See here what the Historian
says; Odo Ari^ertus inedit. in notis Baluz. ad Agobard. page 129.
The Peace having been concluded, and interchangeably signed by the King and
the Count, with the Blood of the Eucharist, Count Bernard came from Barcelonia,
unto Toulouse, and cast himself at the King's feet in the Monastery of St.
Saturnine, near Toulouse. The King taking him with the left hand, as it were,
to lift him up, he stabbed his Dagger into his side with the other hand, and
cruelly murdered him; not without being blamed for having violated Faith and
Religion, nor without suspicion of Parricide; because it was generally thought,
Charles was Son to Bernard, also he resembled him very much about the mouth,
Nature publishing thereby the Mothers Adultery. After so cruel a death, the
King descending from his Throne, reeking in blood, kicking the body with his
foot, said thus; Mischief befall thee, who did defile the Bed of my Father,
and of my Lord. This Testimony is so much the more authentic, as that it is
grounded upon the mixture which was made of the consecrated Wine with Ink; an
action which the Christians of those times blamed not: yet it is evident that
they would not have failed to condemn it as a great Crime, if they had believed
that it was the real Blood of their Savior. It is after this manner they
interpret the thought of this Historian.

CHAP. XIV.
A Continuation of the History of the IX. Century; wherein the Dignities and
Promotion of Heribold is discoursed of.

ALthough the Testimony of good men ought alike to be considered and admitted
of; nevertheless, it must be granted, that there be some persons that give
greater credit unto that which they affirm; their extraordinary Merit, or the
degree they are in above others, rendering it more authentic, or more worthy to
be believed; which is most especially done in matters of Religion, in regard
whereof, there are sometimes persons to be found, whose Depositions turn the
Balance, and do much support the Opinion in whose favor they declare. I judge
that Heribald, or Heribold, was of this number and quality; therefore we have
reserved a whole Chapter for him, to examine in the first place, the Dignities
which he enjoyed in the Church, and then his Belief upon the point of the
Sacrament. As to the first Head, Heribald, or Heribold (for the Writers of that
Age give him indifferently that Name) was a Bishop, a Dignity which every body
knows, is very considerable; and in fine, Messieurs de St. Gall. Christ. t. 2.
p. 269.
Martha reckon him to be the 36th Bishop of the Church of Auxerr; and do
observe, that he was a person of good Quality, and very much esteemed by King
Charles the Bald, in whose Reign he flourished. There is not any question to be
made, but his proper Merits were the Foundation of his Credit with this Prince.
Lupus Ferrar. Ep. 19. and 37.
Whence it is that Loup, Abbot of Ferriers, calls him, Most Excellent Prelate;
and speaks of him as of a Man endowed with a sublime and divine Spirit. But
besides the Dignity of Bishop, it may be collected by the 37th Letter which
Loup writ unto him, that he was also Principal Chaplain unto Charles the Bald.
It is the Induction which is made by Monsieur Baluze, unto whom we are beholden
for the last Edition of the Works of Loup, Abbot of Ferriers; and certainly he
does it with great reason: for by only carefully observing this Letter, one may
perceive the marks of this Dignity in the person of Heribold. In the first
place, Lupus Ferrar. Ep. 37.
Loup represents him unto us, as being entrusted with multiplicity of Affairs
that employ him continually, from which he wishes him some ease, that he might
have some time to spend in reading St. Jerome's Commentaries upon the Prophets,
whereof he sent him a Copy before he had read it himself. I know that the
Charge of Pastor and Bishop is attended with much trouble, when it is
faithfully and conscientiously discharged. Nevertheless, that continual
attendance, and multiplicity of business spoken of by Loup, cannot be
attributed unto the Office of a Bishop. And what puts the thing out of question
is, that he calls this sort of business, Public Affairs; that is to say, great
and important. Business, in a word, which the chief Chaplains were wont to
determine in the Princes Palace; as we shall see, and as Monsieur Baluze has
observed in his Notes upon his Letters.

Secondly, Loup intimates this Dignity by these words; Officii clarissimus
gradus; which imports an illustrious Degree, and something that is sublime and
eminent. In fine, he congratulates him with the many Honors conferred upon
him; Vos convenientibus cumulatos congratulor honoribus. All which things tend
only to design this eminent Dignity. And if we had not this Letter of the Abbot
de Ferriers, we could not doubt but Heribold was Principal Chaplain, because
the History of the Bishops of Auxerr, which is in the first Tome of the Library
of Father Labbe, says so in plain terms; and speaks of him as of an eloquent,
wise and circumspect person, abounding in Virtues, and full of Probity. It was
this Heribold which assisted at the Council of Tours, Anno 849. But because it
is not sufficient to know that Heribold was Principal Chaplain unto Charles the
Bald, unless we know wherein this high Office consisted; I hope the Reader will
not be offended, if I here make some little Digression to show what the Dignity
of Arch Chaplain was.

Under the second Race of our Kings, there were two Palatine Offices; that is
to say, of the Palace, and of the King's Household, which were the two chiefest
Offices of the Crown: The one of which took cognizance of all things relating
to spiritual matters, and the other of all things relating unto temporal
matters. The first was called Principal Chaplain, Arch Palatine, Chief
Chaplain, Prelate of the Sacred Palace: and the other was called Count of the
Palace; very different from those Counts which were sent into the Provinces to
administer Justice. Unto each of whose Jurisdiction there was commonly assigned
the Extent of a Bishop's Diocese. I speak on purpose of the second Race of our
Kings, because I find indeed there were Counts of the Palace under the first
Race, Hignon. in not. ad lib. 1. Marculf. p. 288.
by what the late Monsieur Bignon said in his Notes upon Marculf; where he
instanceth an Example after what manner the Kings of the first Race did judge
affairs: wherein mention is made of Andobella, Count of the Palace; and of
Clothair, Son of Clovis the Second, and Grandson of Dagobert. But as for
Principal Chaplain, I find not any until the second Race. Now, the better to
know what was the power and privileges of these two Dignities, we must consider
what Adelard, near Relation of Charlemains, and Abbot of Gorby, does inform us,
in one of Hincmar, Archbishop of Rheims his Letters; for he writes, that the
Office of Principal Chaplain, and that of Count of the Palace, Hincmar. Ep. 3
c. 19. Edi. Mog.
were the two Principal Offices of the Kings Household, That the former, that is
to say the Apocrisary, who was called the Chief Chaplain or Governor of the
Palace, had the charge, and took an account of all Ecclesiastical matters, and
of all Church Officers; and the Count of the Palace, of all secular causes and
things; so that neither Ecclesiastical nor secular persons, were permitted to
trouble the King about their affairs, until they had first advised with these
Officers, to see if their business merited to be mentioned unto the Prince; but
if it was a business whereof the King should take present cognizance, they
disposed the King to hear them honorably, patiently, and favorably, according
to each persons quality. And speaking again of Ecclesiastical judgments, which
appertained unto the Jurisdiction of the Principal Chaplain, which he designs
by the word Apocrisary; He had care (says he) of all that concerned
Ecclesiastical matters, Ibid. c. 20.
as also of differences betwixt Prebends and Monks, and generally of all
matters that were reported unto the Princes Palace, touching the affairs of the
Clergy, the King taking Cognizance only of what his chief Chaplain could not
fully determine.

And as the Count of the Palace judged of temporal matters in the Assembly of
the Peers of the Realm, and of the Bishops, as appears by this ancient
Formulary in Mr. Bignon's Notes above mentioned; so it is very likely, that the
Arch Chaplain also judged of Ecclesiastical and Sacred things in the same
Assembly; beside, that he assisted, and was present at all the Consultations
and Councils which were held in the King's Court, either touching public or
private matters. Its true, this Dignity was only temporary, and during the
King's pleasure that bestowed it; therefore Loup Abbot of Ferriers, Lupus Ep.
97.
writes unto Halduin Abbot of St. Dennis, who was chief Chaplain unto Lewis the
Debonair; We believe you will enjoy this Dignity for some time. And from thence
he takes occasion to exhort him to use it worthily, and to do Justice: And
because Bishops are determined by their Flock, where to live, and that the
Popes had already acquired great power in France, Princes did in some sort
desire liberty to withdraw them from their Churches, Council. Franc. can. 55. t.
2. Council. Gall.
to have them near their persons, and in their Houses, as we are informed by
one of the Cannons of the Council of Francford; which also shows us, that the
permission of the Synod was as necessary thereunto, as that of the Apostolical
See. In the main, This Dignity was so eminent, that if an Abbot had it, he had
the precedence of Bishops; Baluz. in not is ad Lup. p. 463. and ad Agobard p.
73. Lupus Ep. 110
as Monsieur Baluze does prove by the Capitulary of Charles the Bald: but if a
Bishop had it, he took place of Metropolitans and Archbishops, even in
Councils; because this Employment was the chiefest degree of all the Palatine
Dignities, that is, of the King's Household; Dignitatis Apex, it is the title
given it by the Abbot de Ferriers; and that the chief Chaplain was established
by God, over Sacred things, as the Church of Sans speaks unto the Abbot
Hilduin, T. 2. Council. Gall. p. 650.
in the Letter she directs unto him while he was possessed of this Dignity. And
there is no question, but the Bishops which were thereunto appointed by the
Kings and Emperors, took Precedence of Metropolitans in Synods also, because it
was in this Quality that Ebrion Bishop of Poitiers, Council. Vern. in titulo.
Conci. Mogun. in praefat. Lupus Ep. 110 Tom. 7. Spicil. Dacher. p. 175.
Presided at the Council of Vernon, Anno 844. Hildebald in that of Mayans, Anno
813. for although he was Archbishop of Cologne, yet it was as Prince Chaplain
of the Sacred Palace; and as the Master of the Churches, to speak with Loup de
Ferriers, that he there precided, and that, to the prejudice of Richolf, an
Elder Archbishop; and besides, Archbishop of the place where the Council was
Assembled; and Drogo Bishop of Metz, in the Assembly held at Ingleshem in the
year 840. for the re-establishing of Ebo Archbishop of Rheims, not any of the
Archbishops or Metropolitans thereunto gainsaying. He is there also called
Chief Palatine Prelate: yet I will not deny but I have observed, that Joseph
Bishop of Ivry, Chief Chaplain of the Emperor Lewis the Second, Son of Lothair,
and Grandchild to Lewis the Debonair, subscribed after the Envoy of the
Archbishop of Ravenna, at the Council at Rome, under Pope Leo the 4th for the
Deposition of Anastatius, not of Anastatius the Library Keeper (as the great
Vossius Father of Isaac Vossius his worthy Son, in his Book of Latin
Historians, unadvisedly supposed) but of Anastatius, a Priest of the order of
St. Marcell; yet I do not believe that this Example does prejudice the Rights
and Privileges of the Principal Chaplains, there being some reason for so
doing, Collect. Romans Bipart. part. 2. p. 111.114.
because of the presence of the Emperor Lothair, Father of Lewis, who assisted
at this Assembly; and thereunto subscribed, taking from the Arch Chaplain of
his Son, part of his splendor, and of his privilege. I will add unto all we
have said of this Dignity, two circumstances, which I suppose will not be
unwelcome to the Reader. One is, that it may be Collected from the 7th Chapter
of the Letter, which the Prelates assembled at Cressy, Council. Carisiac. c. 7.
Anno 858. wrote unto Lewis King of Germany, that the Dignity of Principal
Chaplains, decreased by little and little, that of Count of the Palace gaining
upon it insensibly; which obliged those Bishops to move for the re-establishing
of it. The other is, that the Chronicle of Laurisham, Chron. Laurisham. ad an.
805.
gives unto Eginhard, Son in Law unto Charlemain, the Quality of Principal
Chaplain. So that it may be said, that at that time, the Principal Chaplains
were married, which nevertheless, I refer unto the Judgment of others, without
interposing my own.

But having proved that Heribold was Principal Chaplain unto Charles the Bald,
and shown the importance of this Employment, we must say something of his
belief touching the matter whereof we treat. The Anonymous Author that sided
with Paschas, whom we have several times alleged, says positively of him, and
of Rabanus, that they taught, Anonym. apud Cellot. Hist. Got. Tesc. Append.
Opusc. 7. p. 541. Thom. Wald. t. 2. c. 19.52.61 ibid. c. 61.
That the Sacrament goes into the draft. Thomas Waldensis says also the same,
Heribold (says he) Bishop of Auxerr, and Rabanus Archbishop of Mayance, have
taught that the Sacrament of the Eucharist, is subject unto the place of
Excrements. Wickliff, (says he again) is of Accord with Heribold, and Rabanus
of Mayance; who taught, that the venerable Sacrament of the Altar, is subject
unto the Draft.

It is not then to be wondered at, that Rabanus dedicated his Penitential unto
him, wherein he has left marks of this Doctrine; Peter Stuart who caused it to
be Printed, giving notice, that Rabanus dedicated it unto Heribold Bishop of
Auxerr; I know that Cardinal du Perron, who had an extraordinary Genius, and
several other since following his steps, would make I know not what Sect of
Stercoranists, whereof Heribold was chief; and whose Opinions were quite
different from the Doctrine of those called Calvinists, to be adversaries unto
Paschas; but to speak freely what I think, I could wish, that great men would
act after another manner; and that they would not insist upon these sorts of
Cavils. There is here question made of the Opinion of the Adversaries of
Paschas; Will Cardinal du Perron, and those which follow this Fiction of his
Brain, tell us better than Pasehas himself what their Opinion was? Paschas told
us in the foregoing Chapter, that those People did not judge, as he did teach,
That the Eucharist was the Flesh which was born of the holy Virgin; but the
Figure and the Sacrament of that Flesh; a Figure and Sacrament filled with the
Virtue and Efficacy of this Divine Flesh; so that believing that the Bread
remaining Bread after Consecration, they also believed, that as to its
substance and matter, part of it turned into our proper substance, for the
nourishment of our Bodies; and the other part passed the way of our common
Food; which is directly, to speak plainly, the Opinion of those, at this
present called Calvinists. Now if this Belief was Erroneous, if this Opinion
was Heretical, contrary unto that of the Church, and different from the Ancient
belief of Christians, is it probable, that King Charles the Bald would have
chosen for his Principal Chaplain, by consent of the Pope, and the Synods of
his Kingdom; and that the Clergy of France would have suffered to preside over
it, a man infected with such an Opinion? Or, that Hinemar after his Death,
should call him a Bishop of venerable memory: And that there should be engraven
on his Tomb, Here lies the Body of St. Heribold. I cannot think so; but rather
that the Opinion of Heribold, and the other Adversaries of Paschas, which is
the same of the Calvinists, was the most general Opinion in the IX. Century;
and that that of Paschas, which is followed by Roman Catholics at this time,
was not approved at that time; but was opposed by all the great and learned Men
of that Age. This is what the Protestant says; and the inference he makes from
the Dignity and Belief of Heribold.

CHAP. XV.
A Continuation of the History of the IX. Century; wherein is examined the
silence of the two Popes, Nicholas the First, and Adrian the Second; with two
Observations touching the Greek Church.

IT is a thing very worthy to be observed, and which deserves serious
consideration, that the Popes Nicholas the First, and Adrian the Second; having
been Spectators of so obstinate a combat, without engaging on either side; and
having been silent in a time when they ought to speak: and seen Men's minds
divided, although unequally, upon the subject of the Sacrament; yet after all,
declared not themselves in favor of the one side or the other; and it does not
appear that they opened their mouths either to condemn or approve either of the
two Opinions. So that if the Roman Catholics do say, that they condemned not
their Doctrine in the person of Paschas; the Protestants can also affirm, That
they pronounced no sentence against their Belief, in the persons of his
Adversaries; which were incomparably more famous both in number and quality,
than the followers of Paschas; because, that instead of one or two at the most,
(at least that is come to our knowledge, which followed him) we have heard the
testimonies of Sixteen; the Principal Chaplain, Bishops, Archbishops, Abbots
and others, which in that Age, opposed themselves directly or indirectly unto
his Opinion, as being contrary unto the Belief which until that time, had been
generally received in the Church. But if after what has been said, the Latin
Church shall continue to teach, that the Belief of Protestants, which we have
proved to be that of the Adversaries of Paschas, was at that time esteemed
erroneous; then it must necessarily follow, say they, that she confess that
Nicholas the First and Adrian the Second may justly be suspected to be guilty
thereof, Decret. Great. did. 82. c. Error. Leo. I. Ep. 93. c. 15.
according to this Maxim of the Law inserted by Gratian in his Decree; That one
approves the Error whereunto he makes no opposition: And according unto what is
said by Leo the First, That he which recalls not a Man from his Error, shows
that he erreth himself. And if on the other hand, she affirms that the Doctrine
of Paschas, which is hers, was at that time acknowledged to be Catholic and
Orthodox, and the public Doctrine of the Church, she would tacitly accuse
these two Popes for having suppressed it, as Adversaries and Enemies, according
unto what is contained in the same Maxim of the Law before alleged; Decret.
Great. ubi supra.
That the Truth is suppressed when it is not defended. For to imagine that
Nicholas and Adrian had not knowledge of this great Contest, cannot reasonably
be said. The thing had made too great a noise for them to be ignorant of it.
Had there been indeed only bare verbal Disputes, this pretext might have some
color; but there having been Books written on either part, and some of them
having been composed by Order and Command of a King of France, it is nothing
probable that the Apostolical See should be wholly ignorant of the matter,
under Nicholas the First, and Adrian the Second. Wherefore then may it be said,
Did they not take part? Wherefore did they not declare either for Paschas, or
for his Adversaries? Wherefore had they not condemned the one, and protected
the others? If the Doctrine of Paschas had been the ancient Doctrine of the
Church, why did they not authorize it by their Approbations? And wherefore did
they not thunder out their Censures against that of his Adversaries? Or if the
Belief of his Adversaries were the ancient Belief of Christians, wherefore did
they not encourage it by their Power? And why did they not Anathematize the
Novelty of Paschas? This difficulty deserves to be carefully enquired into,
there being not many Demonstrations to resolve it, but only several Conjectures
and Circumstances, which I refer unto the Judgment of those that shall take the
pains of reading this Treatise.

It is said then in the first place, that although we have not positively said,
that Paschas proceeded by way of Explication, yet we have made appear, that in
all likelihood it was the way he took, not to irritate Men's Minds in proposing
his Opinion.

Secondly, that Paschas his Party had no Followers during the IX. Century; as
has been already proved. So that having but a very few, it remained, very
probably, enclosed in the Cloisters of some Friars which he might have gained
unto his Party; wherein it hid it self from the many oppositions which it
found, until some more favorable time should present, to advance and establish
it self in the World. And in fine, that the Belief of his Adversaries had the
Victory and Advantage in this Age; being generally received and practiced in
all the West. Nicholas then, and after him Adrian, considering that the Opinion
of Paschas was opposed by the most eminent Men of that Age, that it had no
Followers nor Adherents; and that after all the Opposition it found in its
first Establishment, it would not do any prejudice unto the other, they very
judiciously believed that it was the wisest course to let it fall of it self,
and to refer unto time the utter ruin of it; there being no likelihood that
being so powerfully opposed as it was, it should ever do any harm: whereas,
should they have set about censuring and condemning it publicly, it might be
feared lest it might recover strength; because it is often seen, that persons
grow stubborn against Reproofs; and more earnestly desiring the things that are
forbidden, use their utmost skill and power to obtain the Enjoyment. These, as
is supposed, were the reasons and motives of the Conduct of these two Popes in
regard of the Opinion of Paschas, in not condemning him publicly, although
they did not also approve of him.

But it was not so of the other Opinion; for they plainly did see that the
Belief of the Enemies of Paschas was a Belief publicly received by all the
World; in France, in Germany, in England, and elsewhere; and moreover, approved
by the most learned Men of the Age, publicly vindicated by Writings, supported
by the Authority of the most eminent Princes and Prelates. They could not then
be ignorant of the danger the Church was in, if this Belief were not Catholic,
nor this Doctrine Orthodox: And not being ignorant of it, it had been Charity,
and the duty also of Nicholas and Adrian to have taken notice of it, and to
have redressed it; for the case was not of two or three Friars which Paschas
had drawn unto his Opinion; but of the greatest part of the West, which was
overspread with the Opinion of his Adversaries. Had it been an Heretical and
Heterodox Opinion, and a Doctrine contrary unto the Faith of the Church, it
cannot be said but these Popes had Credit and Power enough to have opposed
themselves. For besides, that every body knows the Popes had already acquired
great Power over the Western Churches, wherein they easily caused their
Constitutions to be received; the Bishops not daring much to oppose the
Execution of their Decrees, although they found them not always agreeable unto
the ancient Canons. Besides this, I say, who knows not but they might at least
have protested against so pernicious an Opinion, have opposed what they could
unto its Settlement, and earnestly exhorted the Prelates to stop the course and
progress of so dangerous a Doctrine, to have used Anathema's and
Excommunications against the Promoters of it, thereby to have discouraged
others. Yet nevertheless, it is most certain they did no such thing. Is it not
then a manifest sign that they themselves were of this Belief, and that they
acknowledged that this Doctrine is the very same whereof the Church had ever
been in peaceable Possession, until Paschas came to disturb her in the
Enjoyment of her Paternal Inheritance. These are the Inferences made by
Protestants, from the Silence of these two Popes.

They say, the thing will appear yet plainer, if we consider the temper of
Nicholas the First, and the occasions he had; as also Adrian the Second, to
take notice of the Doctrine of the Adversaries of Paschas. Nicholas the First
was a learned Man for that Age, a daring and undertaking Man, who very much
advanced the Dignity of his See, unto the prejudice of other Churches. France
felt the effects of his Policy and Power, in that he obtained the Right of
assembling Councils, which the Kings were wont to do before; that he gave a
very great Assault unto the little power that its Prelates had remaining, and
that he began to make them receive the Decretals of the first Popes, which had
been forged by some Impostor about the time of Charlemain. It Is only necessary
to read what the late Monsieur de Marca has said in his Books of the Liberties
of the Gallican Church, Marca de concord l. 3. c. 5, 6. and l. 6. c. 28. and l.
7. c. 23.
to see what kind of a person Nicholas the First was, and what Attempts he made
against the Prelates of France and their Synods. Nevertheless, I do not find
that ever he touched the point of the Eucharist; although he had occasion
either to have reproved their shameful Compliance, or their Error. For example,
In the difference he had with the Bishops of France, first upon account of
Walfad, and some other Clerks, which had been established by Ebbo Archbishop of
Rheims, after his Deposition and Re-establishment, which was no way Canonical,
and whose Ordination was esteemed void in a Council of Soissons, in the Year
853. And secondly, upon the Subject of Rothard Bishop of Soissons, who had been
deposed by the French Prelates. Nicholas informing himself of both these
matters, and forcing our Bishops to comply with his desires, even to the
prejudice of their Liberties, and of their remaining Authority; as those know
very well that have any knowledge of the History of those times, without
reciting here the particularities of it. It need only be said, That if the
Belief of Nicholas upon the point of the Sacrament, had been different from
that of the Adversaries of Paschas, it is likely that these two Conjunctures of
matters had offered him two fair occasions of reproaching them; That as they
made no difficulty of breaking the Canons in deposing of Clerks and Bishops,
for they thought so, otherwise he could have had no pretext for re-establishing
of them; so also, they feared not violating the Rule of Faith, in so important
a point as is that of the Sacrament, either in embracing themselves a new
Belief, or in suffering it to get ground, to the prejudice of the ancient
Doctrine of the Church, which Paschas had clearly explained. Is it likely that
Pope Nicholas, who was a very learned, politic and prudent Man, should have
forgot to have made them this Reproach in the differences he had with them,
thereby to have laden them with shame; and with the more plausible show of
Justice, to have deprived them of their Rights and Privileges, in showing unto
all the World, that they had made themselves unworthy of them, because they see
the ancient Faith of Christians ruined, without making any opposition, by the
establishing of a new Doctrine, which insinuated it self into the minds of all
Men, and which was already generally received in all places? It cannot be
believed, Nicholas would have been silent in these occasions, if the Opinion of
Paschas had been the first Belief of the Church, and that of his Adversaries a
new Opinion, which they endeavored to settle in the place of the Old.

Moreover, we have made appear in the precedent Chapter, that Heribold, Bishop
of Auxerr, was Principal Chaplain unto Charles the Bald; that he could not be
so, without the consent, not only of the Synod, but also of the Pope; that is,
either of Nicholas the First, or of Adrian the Second: for in all likelihood,
it must have been under one or the other of them. And, in fine; that he had an
Opinion contrary unto Paschas, upon the Subject of the Eucharist, and agreeable
unto that of the Protestants. Is it probable, say some, that Nicholas or Adrian
would have suffered Charles the Bald to make choice of Heribold for his
Principal Chaplain, if his Opinion had been an Heretical and Heterodox Opinion,
an Opinion contrary to the Belief of the Church, as well as unto that of
Adrian, and of Nicholas? But besides, whilst Nicholas held the Sea of Rome,
there are arose a great Contest betwixt the Greek and Latin Churches, betwixt
Nicholas and Photius, Patriarch of Constantinople. Nicholas sued for the
assistance of the Bishops of France, to defend the Latins against the Greeks.
The French Prelates made choice of Bertram, or Ratramn; who by their Order,
undertook the Defense of the Latin Church against the Greek: and in the four
Books he wrote, and which are now extant, refuted the Accusations of the Greeks
against the Latins. This Ratramn, I say, which by order of King Charles the
Bald, composed a Treatise of the Body and Blood of Christ; wherein he plainly
opposes the Doctrine of Paschas, and does establish that of his Adversaries.
Is it likely, say many, that if the Belief of Ratramn had not been the Belief
of the Church, that the Bishops of France would have made choice of him to have
defended the Interest of the Latins, against the Insolences of the Greeks: or
if the French Prelates, persuaded of the same Belief, made no difficulty to
make choice of Ratramn; could it be imagined, Nicholas would have approved this
Choice, if he had been of another Persuasion in this Essential Point of
Religion? I know that Nicholas wrote unto Charles the Bald, desiring he would
send him the Latin Translation of the Hierarchy of the pretended Dennis the
Arcopagite, made by John Erigenius; who also wrote of the Sacrament by Order of
the same Prince, but after the same manner as is written by Protestant Doctors:
And that this Pope alleges for a reason, that though this John was reputed to
be very learned, nevertheless it was said, Nicolaus I. t. 3. Council. Gall. p.
352. ex Ivone.
That he had not formerly good Opinions of certain things; but those things
concerned not the Eucharist: for it is not probable, Nicholas would have spoke
so coldly, if these ill Opinions of John had been upon the Subject of the
Sacrament. Besides, he would not have failed to have demanded what he had
written, either to have condemned or approved it, as he intended to do of the
Translation of the Works of Denis the Arcopagite: And he would have demanded it
so much the more earnestly, as that there was more to be feared by the one,
than the other; I mean, by what he had written upon the Subject of the
Eucharist, than of his Translation of the pretended Denis the Arcopagite. Add
unto all this, that if any ill reports had been published of John, touching the
Subject of the Sacrament, it had been by reason of the Adversaries which his
ill choice upon the Point of Predestination had stirred him up: yet
nevertheless, it is certain, they never taxed him to have erred in this point.
It must then be concluded, that the ill Opinions mentioned by Nicholas, and
whereof the Report came unto him, concerned the matter of Predestination,
whereupon John Erigenius suffered himself to be led away unto ungrounded and
empty Conceptions, which were aggravated with some heat by the learned Church
of Lions, by Florus its Deacon, by Prudens Bishop of Troys, and by the Councils
of Valentia and of Langres: Yet these Adversaries, incensed against him, never
accused him of any ill Opinion touching the Sacrament; from whence it is
concluded, That his Doctrine in this point (directly opposite unto that of
Paschas) was the true Doctrine of the Church: Therefore neither Nicholas the
first, nor any of his Successors, did condemn it, until Leo the Ninth, who
condemned his Book to be burnt at the Council of Verseil, anno 1050. where
Berengarius was also condemned. I know also that the same Nicholas, speaking of
the virtue of Consecration, and of what it operates in the things which are
Consecrated and Sanctified, alleges for examples, the Altar, the Cross, the
Bread and Wine of the Eucharist; and that he observes, that the Altar, which
naturally is but a common Stone; and that differs not from others, becomes by
the Benediction, the Holy Table; That the Image of the Cross, which is but
common Wood before it receives this form, becomes holy and terrible unto
Devils, Nicol. 1. Ep. 2. (...). Council. p. 489.
after having received it; and that therefore Jesus Christ is represented in
it: That the Bread of the Eucharist is common Bread; but when it is
Consecrated, it becomes the Body of Christ in truth, and is said to be so; and
the Wine his Blood. But some say, these words do not prejudice the observations
we have made, because Nicholas considers the Virtue and Efficacy of the
Sacrament; and that in this regard, it is truly the Body of Jesus Christ;
because in the lawful Celebration, it possesses the full Efficacy and Virtue
of it; and as he speaks, almost as the Prelates of the Second Council of Nice
did, I desire the Reader would please to see what has been said in the 12th
Chapter; because it is supposed after that, he will be satisfied, no advantage
can be drawn from the words of Nicholas, against what has been observed in his
proceedings upon this important occasion, wherein I do not interpose my
Judgment.

And what is said of the proceedings of Nicholas the First, is also affirmed of
Adrian the Second, whose silence in most of the things spoken of Pope Nicholas,
and which we pretend not to repeat over again, does evidently prove, that he,
no more then his Predecessor, did not condemn the Doctrine of the Adversaries
of Paschas. I will only add, that in the hot contest which Adrian had with the
Bishops of France upon account of Hincmar Bishop of Laon, he never taxes them
with any thing touching the Sacrament; and what makes the thing the more
considerable is, that Charles the Bald having interposed in the quarrel, as
protector of the Cannons, and of the Authority of the Prelates of his Kingdom,
Pope Adrian commanded him to send Hincmar Bishop of Laon to Rome, condemned by
the judgment of the Gallican Church; which so highly displeased the King, that
he made him a very sharp answer, wherein he tells him, amongst other things,
that the Kings of France born of Royal Blood, Ep. Carol. Calvin. ad Hadria.
Papam. 2. in Supplem. Council. Gall. p. 269. 271, 272. 274.
are not Viceroys of Bishops, but Masters of the Kingdom. He demands what Hell
had spewed out a Law, that should impose upon Princes; and out of what dark
Cave it proceeded. He warns him not to direct any commands unto him for the
future, nor threats of Excommunication contrary to the holy Scriptures, the
Doctrine of the Ancients, the Imperial Constitutions, and Ecclesiastical
Canons. He desires he would write him no more such Letters, nor to the Bishops
and great Lords of his Kingdom; lest they should be forced to reject them with
scorn, and affront his Messengers; insomuch, as he threatens him with
Deposition, or of Anathematizing, according to the Decree of the Fifth
Universal Council. There are several other things of the like Nature in the
Letter, which is not necessary to be mentioned: What has been said, suffices
to show, that Pope Adrian could not wish a fairer occasion to tax Charles the
Bald, as Protector of the Doctrine of the Adversaries of Paschas, against whom
Ratramn and John Erigenius wrote by his command; not to speak of his Principal
Chaplain Heribold, which was of the same Opinion: Adrian does no such thing. On
the contrary, he endeavors to appease the spirit of Charles, in the Letter
which he after wrote to him; and to mitigate the anger which the first had
provoked him unto: wherein he had commanded him with Authority, to send Hincmar
Bishop of Laon unto Rome. It is said, that these proceedings do in all
likelihood justify, that the belief of Ratramn and of John Erigenius, whom the
King Protected, was the belief of Adrian himself, and of the whole Church; it
not being to be believed, the Pope would have been silent unto this Prince, who
had so touched him to the Quick, if the Doctrine which he favored, had not
been Catholic and Orthodox.

I would here conclude the History of the IX. Century, were I not obliged to
say something of the Greek Church; for at the beginning of this Age,
Nicephorus, Patriarch of Constantinople, and Successor of Tarrasius, following
the steps of the Second Council of Nice, whose Constitutions touching Image
Worship, he followed; Nicephorus I say, with the Fathers of the Council
declared, That the Eucharist is not the Image of Jesus Christ, De Cherub. c. 6.
Bibl. Pat. t. 4.
but his Body; seeing he spoke as the Prelates of Nice, the same Explication
must be given to his words, as were given unto those of the Council, and refer
the Reader unto what has been said in the 12th Chapter, if it be not better to
rank him with John Damascen, of whom we have also spoke in the same Chapter;
and to say the truth, he speaks many things which are inconsistent with the
Doctrine of the real Presence: As for example, Ibid. c. 7.
That the humane nature of Jesus Christ is not invisible; that God only can be
at several places at once; Id. de imag.
That every Body is necessarily limited, and that it fills a place; which he
applies particularly unto the Body of Jesus Christ. Id. libel. 12. capitulor.
c. 3.
The third sacred Council, says he, has declared that Jesus Christ our God,
is limited according to the Flesh, and has Anathematized those which believe
not this word. And elsewhere, Id. de imag.
having treated of the manner of Existing of Bodies, Jesus Christ (says he) is
bounded according to his humane Nature, after all the ways which we have
showed; for he has born a true Body like us, and not a supposed Body. And in a
Dispute which the same Nicephorus had with the Emperor Leo the Armenian, which
Father Combefis has published, he attributes unto the Body of Jesus Christ,
Origin. Constable. p. 176.
visibility, touch, and circumscription; to distinguish it from his Divinity;
and showing the reason why Angels cannot be in one place circumscriptively, he
says, It is because they be simple, Ibid. p. 180.
and without composition; and that they have not Bodies.

Father Combefis in the same Collection of diverse Authors concerning the City
of Constantinople, alleges a great passage of Theodorus Graptus, P. 221. 222.
touching the Eucharist; but because he teaches the same Opinion with John
Damascen, as is observed by this same Friar which has given it unto us; and as
it is easy to observe inreading of it, we will dispense with our selves in
relating of it, seeing the Reader may find what has been said of it, in the
12th. Chapter, upon the Belief of Damascen.

Leaving then this Theodorus Martyr of Image Worship, let us speak of another
Theodorus, no less affectionate than the former unto this same Worship, and
imprisoned for it. It is Theodorus Studite, whom Michael Studite that wrote his
Life, introduces thus speaking unto his Disciple, My Son, these Men, as I
find, endeavor, Apud. Baron. ad ann. Dom. 816. number. 12.
besides the other cruelties they exercise against us, to starve us to Death,
because they know it is the cruellest of all sorts of Death; but let us put our
trust in God, which can feed us not with Bread only, but with meat incomparably
more excellent; because alf Spirits subsist by his good pleasure only. And
because above all other things, the participation of the Body of our Savior is
wont to be the nourishment of my Body and of my Soul, (for the Father always
carried along with him some parcels of the quickening Body, and Celebrated the
Divine Mysteries as often as he had convenience) I will receive only this Food,
I will taste nothing else whatsoever; and what is wont to be allowed for two,
shall be for thee only. He speaks of the Eucharist as of a thing which
nourishes the Body; and which may be divided into sundry parts; which cannot
be meant of the real Body of Jesus Christ, but of his Sacrament; which is
called his Body, bebecause it has the virtue of it for the nourishing of the
Soul.

CHAP. XVI.
Of the State of the X. Century.

THe Tenth Age has exercised of late years, two good Writers, and has
afforded matter and subject unto Authors, which with much skill and industry
(each defending the cause of his party) grappled a long time about this poor
Age, either to advance the credit of it, or to show the morosity, ignorance,
and obscurity of it; they both spoke very agreeably what they intended to say;
and having thereupon reflected sharply upon each other, in the view of all
France, have not as yet decided their Controversy. If I mistake not, every
body may see that I mean the Author of the Perpetuity of the Faith of the
Eucharist, and him that answered him: The former having made a short Discourse,
which was to serve for a Preface unto the Office of the Holy Sacrament, had not
some reasons hindered the execution of this first design. The latter, at the
desire of some Godly Friends, undertook to make some Considerations upon this
little Treatise; and having in brief spoken of the X. Century, as of an
unfortunate, ignorant Age, overspread with Darkness and Errors, according to
the testimony of Historians. The Author of the Perpetuity, has insisted upon
this part of the considerations of his Adversary; and has employed all his
endeavors to restore unto this Age, all the Reputation and Glory that he
thought it had been unjustly deprived of; accusing the Ministers of disparaging
it for interest sake. The other was not silent, but having fully vindicated his
Brethren from the Accusation laid to their charge; he proves by several
Historians, and of persons the most affectionate to the Latin Church, That it
was a Leaden Age, an Iron, and unhappy Age, an Age of Darkness, Ignorance,
Superstition, and Obscurity: whereas his Adversary esteems it to be an Age of
Light, an Age of Grace and Benediction. For my particular, although I know that
he which esteems it an Age of Darkness, is supported by the Authority of all,
or at least, the greatest number of Historians which have written of it,
especially of Baronius, Gennebrard, and Bellarmine: and that so far he has not
said any thing of his own: And that the reasons of his Adversary, which
represents it as an Age of Learning and Benediction, do not appear unto me of
sufficient force to invalidate what he has established upon the report of
Historians: I will however make a third party in this rencounter, and hold the
mean betwixt these two extremes; I say, that I will not absolutely follow the
Historians, which represent it wholly dark and ignorant; nor the Author of the
Perpetuity, which represents it all light and glorious: For if I do not make it
an Age wholly Light, neither will I esteem it to be wholly Darkness: If I judge
it not to be an Age of Grace, neither do I conceive it to be one altogether
unfortunate: If it appear not unto me to be wholly an Age of Benediction,
neither does it appear to be only an Age of Malediction. In a word, if I look
not upon it to be an Age of Hillary's, of Athanasius's, of Basills, of
Gregory's, and of Ambroses; or as an Age of Chrisostoms, of Jeromes, and of
Austins; yet I do not regard it as an Age of Bareletes, of Maillards, and of
Menots. I do not liken it unto a fair Summers day, when the Heavens being free
from Clouds, the Sun shines in its full force, and communicates unto us,
without any Obstruction, his Light and Heat; but unto a Winters day, which
being dark, and the Air full of thick Clouds, deprives us of the sight of the
Sun, yet not totally of its Light; so that we have still left us sufficient to
direct us, although it may not be always enough to hinder us from stumbling. In
like manner say some, during the X. Century; the Sins of Men having made a
thick Cloud betwixt the Sun of Righteousness and them, he communicated not unto
them fully the Light of his healthful Beams, although he imparted unto them
sufficient to avoid the Errors which cannot be believed without Ruin, and to
embrace the Truth, the knowledge whereof is necessary to Salvation. What
likelihood, say some, is there, that having shed forth so much Light upon the
IX. Century, for the defense of the Truth, that Men should, on a sudden, be
plunged into Darkness: But what likelihood is there also, that the same Craces,
with the same freedom, should be continued to be dispensed unto Men, when it
was seen that they began to abuse them; and that the Flesh gaining, by little
and little, the Victory over the Spirit, they degenerated insensibly from the
truth of their Belief, and the purity of their Devotion. Nevertheless, as God
is infinitely good, and that he never leaves himself without witness of doing
good unto Men, however unthankful and ungrateful they be; so if he dispensed
not sufficient Knowledge unto the Men of the X. Century, to oppose the Opinion
of Paschas, with the same vigor as it was opposed in the IX. yet he dispensed
them so much, as to hinder it from being established all that Age; as shall be
showed in the progress of this History. But in the first place, it will be
necessary to relate what is said by William of Malmesbury, De gestis Pontific.
Anglor. (...).
of Odo Archbishop of Canterbury, who lived in this Age; He so confirmed
(says he) several persons which doubted of the truth of the Body of our Lord,
that he showed them the Bread of the Altar changed into Flesh, and the Wine of
the Cup changed into Blood; and afterward he made them return unto their
natural form, and rendered them proper for the life of Men. This is the only
Author of the X. Century that is come to our knowledge, which publicly
declared himself for the Opinion of Paschas; whereas the Historian's Relation
shows, that there were several that were of a contrary Judgment, and who had
no small inclination to profess it openly: besides, the method of this Prelate,
to make them receive his Opinion, seems unto many, to be but a story made at
random, either by Odo himself, or by the Friar which wrote the History of it;
and they heartily wish that Christians would not use these kind of Prodigies,
to prove the truth of the Doctrines of their Religion; saying, that Unbelievers
are dis-satisfied, and those which believe, and are enlightened, and that are
pious, can receive no Edification thereby. And they make no question but that
Paschas rendered his Doctrine suspicious unto most persons, by the pretended
Miracles that he made use of to establish it; because this kind of proceeding
showed plainly, that he found neither in the Scriptures, nor Traditions,
Reasons strong enough to defend it, seeing he had recourse unto these
prodigious Apparitions. But whatever this Archbishop of Canterbury could do
for the promoting the Doctrine of Paschas in England, his endeavors had not
all the success he could have wished; the contrary Doctrine which had been so
well planted in this Kingdom, until the Year 883. by John Erigenius, one of the
greatest Adversaries of Paschas, there continuing still, and being publicly
preached. In fine, Alfric, which some also esteem to be Archbishop of
Canterbury; and others, Bishop of Cride, after having been Abbot of Malmesbury;
a Man learned according to those times; in a Sermon under the name of Wulfin
Bishop of Salisbury, thus spoke of the Sacrament, In notis Vheloci in histor.
Bedae Anglo-Sax. l. 4. c. 24.
about the Year 940. The Eucharist is not the Body of Jesus Christ corporally,
but spiritually; not the Body wherein he suffered, but the Body whereof he
spoke, when consecrating the Bread and Wine, he said, This is my Body, This is
my Blood. He adds, That the Bread is his Body, as the Manna; and the Wine his
Blood, as the Water of the Desert was. If this Sermon was one of Wulfin's,
according to the Title, the Year 840. as we have computed it, does not ill
agree with it? But if it be Alfric's, we must descend lower, toward the end of
the X. Century. Apud Usser. de dhristian. Eccles. success. and statu. c. 2. p.
54.
There is another which some cite under the name of Wulfin Bishop of Salisbury,
and others attribute unto Alfric; wherein the Author uses the same Language,
This Sacrifice, says he, is not the Body wherein Jesus Christ suffered for us,
nor his Blood which he shed; but it is made spiritually his Body and Blood; as
the Manna which fell from Heaven, and the Water which flowed from the Rock. If
these two Sermons are of two several Authors, we have already two Witnesses
directly contrary unto the Doctrine of Paschas; who taught that the Eucharist
was no other Flesh but that which was born of the Virgin Mary, and which
suffered upon the Cross. But in these two Sermons the people are taught, that
it is not the same Flesh, nor the same Body which suffered, nor the same Blood
which was shed for us. You cannot but think those that said so were opposite
unto Paschas, and endeavored to ruin his Belief; and it may be also, that of
Odo Archbishop of Canterbury, if it be true that he did what William of
Malmesbury wrote a long while after; for there be a great many that think this
Relation is very suspicious. In the main, Bishop Usher observes that the words
which were but now alleged in the last Testimony, have been stolen away by
some perfidious hand, from the Manuscript which was transported from the Church
of Vigorn, into the Library of the Benedictines College at Cambridge. But
besides these two Witnesses, which show what was believed of the Sacrament in
England, there is to be seen a Sermon which was read unto the people every Year
at Easter, to preserve in their minds an Idea of the Belief which their Fathers
had left them: It is needless to transcribe it here at large; some parts of it
shall suffice; which showing that it was almost copied out of the Treatise of
Ratramn, of the Body and Blood of Christ, they will by the same means show,
that it contains a Doctrine opposite unto that of Paschas, Liber Catholic.
sermon. Anglice recitandorum ad Bedam l. 5. c. 12. edit. Anglo-Sax. and Latin.
seeing Ratramn was one of his declared Enemies. There is great difference,
says this Homily, betwixt the Body wherein Jesus Christ suffered, and the Body
which is consecrated for the Eucharist; for the Body wherein Jesus Christ
suffered, is born of the Flesh of Mary, and is furnished with Blood, Bones,
Skin, Nerves, and Humane Members, and with a reasonable Soul; but his spiritual
Body, which we call Eucharist, is composed of several Grains, without Blood,
without Bones and Members, and without a Soul. The Body of Jesus Christ which
suffered death, and which rose again, shall never die any more; it is eternal,
and cannot die: but this Eucharist is temporal, not eternal; it is corruptible,
and divided into several parts; broken by the teeth, and goes into the draft.
This Sacrament is a Pledge and a Figure; the Body of Jesus Christ is the truth
it self: We hold this Pledge sacramentally, until we do attain unto the Truth,
and then the Pledge shall be accomplished. And a little before, If we consider
the Eucharist in a corporal manner, we see that it is a corruptible and fading
Creature; but if we consider the spiritual virtue which is therein, we know
very well that there is life in it, and that it gives immortality unto those
which which receive it with Faith. There is great difference between the
invisible virtue of this holy Sacrament, and the visible form of its proper
Nature: by Nature it is fading Bread, and corruptible Wine; but by the virtue
of the Word of God, it is truly his Body, and his Blood; not for all that
corporally, but spiritually; that is to say, in virtue, and in efficacy.
Whereunto amounts what is said before. The Bread and Wine which the Priests do
consecrate, Ibid.
do outwardly offer one thing unto the eyes of the Body, and another thing
inwardly unto the eyes of the faithful Soul: outwardly it is plainly seen it is
Bread and Wine, and it is judged to be such by its form, and by its savor; and
nevertheless, they be truly after Consecration, his Body and Blood, by a
spiritual Sacrament. And to the end the Hearers should be well persuaded they
were the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ, not in substance, but in virtue, the
Change which happens unto the Bread and Wine by Consecration, is compared unto
that which comes unto Children by Baptism, and unto the Water of this Sacrament
of our Regeneration. Ibid.
The Child of a Gentile is baptized; yet it does not change its outward form,
although it be changed inwardly: It is led unto the Font full of sin, by the
disobedience of Adam; and he is cleansed from all inwardly, although he is
nothing changed outwardly. So also the Water of Baptism, which is called the
Fountain of Life, in appearance is like unto other Waters, and subject unto
Corruption; but the virtue of the Holy Ghost intervenes by Prayer, unto this
corruptible Water; and by a spiritual virtue, renders it fit to cleanse the
Body and Soul from all sin. Now we consider two things in this only Creature;
according to its true nature, it is a corruptible Water; but according to the
spiritual mystery, it has a saving virtue. It is well said, that Jesus Christ
did change, by an invisible power, the Bread and Wine into his Body and Blood;
but after the same manner that formerly he changed the Manna, and the Water of
the Rock; into this same Body, and and into this same Blood; to wit, because he
made it the Sacrament of his Body and of his Blood. And again, Ibid.
What there is in the Sacrament that gives life, proceeds from a spiritual
Virtue, and an invisible Operation; therefore the Eucharist is called a
Sacrament, because one thing is therein seen, and another thing is understood:
that which is seen, is of a bodily Species; that which is understood, has a
spiritual Virtue. And in another part of the Sermon, expounding what Jesus
Christ said of eating his Flesh, in the 6th of St. John; He commanded not to
eat the Body which he had taken, Ibid.
nor to drink the Blood which he had shed for us: but by this discourse he
meant the Sacrament, which is spiritually his Body and Blood: for whosoever
eats him with a believing heart, shall have this Life everlasting. Under the
Old Law, Believers offered Sacrifices, which represented the Body which Jesus
Christ offered unto his Father for our sins: but as for the Sacrament which is
consecrated at the Altar of God, it is the Commemoration of the Body which he
offered, and of the Blood which he shed for us; as he himself commanded,
saying, Do this in remembrance of me. I am not ignorant that in this same
Homily there is some miraculous Apparitions made mention of, whereunto
Christians had given some way, since Paschas his time. But that serves only to
confirm the Observation that was made, That although our Savior had bestowed
upon his Servants in the X. Century Light sufficient to avoid the most
dangerous Errors, yet he communicated not so great a measure unto them, as to
be safe from all sorts of Surprises in matters of Religion.

If from England, we pass into the Country of Liege, we shall there find
Folcuin, Abbot of the Monastery of Lobes; who speaking of the Eucharistical
Table, Tom. 6. Spicil. de Gestis Abbat. Lob. p. 573
says, That it is the Table whereupon is consumed the holy Body of our Lord.
Which cannot be applied unto the true Body of Jesus Christ, which by the
Confession of of all Christians, is a Subject which cannot be consumed. Of
necessity then this Abbot must needs have believed, that what was received at
the holy Table, was not the real Body of Jesus Christ, because he speaks of it
as of a thing that was to be consumed. And I am much deceived if he borrowed
not this Expression of St. Austin; who testifies, that the Sacrament is
consumed: The Bread, August. de Trinit. l. 3. c. 10.
says he, prepared for this purpose, is consumed in receiving the holy
Sacrament: What is laid upon the Table is consumed, the Celebration of Devotion
being ended. The Abbot Folium departed this Life, Anno 990. and was succeeded
by Herriger: so that they be mistaken which place Herriger at the end of the
XI. Century, because he succeeded Folium in the Office of Abbot, about the end
of the X. De Gest. Abbar. Lob. t. 6. Spicil. p. 591.
And of this Herriger it is said, That he collected against Paschas Radbert
several passages of Catholic Fathers, touching the Body and Blood of our Lord.
Molanus writes in his Martyrology of the Saints of Flanders on the 2d of
January, that a certain Author of the Life of Adelard observes, that it appears
by a Letter of Herriger's, whom he styles the wisest of Men, what Paschas was,
and how much Reputation he was of. But that hinders not, that in collecting
against him the Passages and Testimonies of the holy Fathers, upon the Subject
of the Sacrament, he declared that he did not approve of his Opinion; for
Justice ought indeed to be done unto the Merit of the person, even of our
greatest Enemies; and it was a great honor unto Herriger to write against a
Man, unto whom he gave so great Commendations; at least, if Molanus his Author
says true; for he thereby showed, that it was only Love of the Truth which
made him take Pen in hand against a Man whose Memory he honored, Ibid. p. 590,
591.
and whose Learning he esteemed. He which continued the History of the Abbots
of Lobes does exceedingly praise Herriger, as a Man whose Virtue and Learning
was esteemed, even by Strangers. He makes mention of several Books composed by
him; and observes, that some said that Miracles were made at his Grave. The
Author of the Customs of the Abbots of Gembloux, near Namur, speaks also much
in his praise, in the same Tome of Dom Luke d'Achery. Herriger had for his
Friend and Companion in Studies, Ibid. p. 519.
in the searching and Meditation of the holy Scriptures, one Hughes, who
succeeded him in the Dignity of Abbot, after Ingobrand: And it is observed that
Herriger wrote unto him familiarly, concerning some Questions. This great
familiarity, Ibid. p. 591.593.
joined with a strict society in reading, and the understanding of the holy
Scriptures, gives, if I mistake not, a sufficient evidence that they were both
of one Opinion upon the point of the Sacrament; but an Opinion contrary unto
that of Paschas, against whom Herriger assembled several Testimonies of the
holy Fathers. And as what I have now related is but a Conjecture, so I leave it
unto the Reader's liberty to think and say what he please, whilst I proceed to
continue the History of the X. Century.

In the beginning of this Century the Congregation of Cluny was instituted,
Anno 910. by the Foundation of William, Tom. 3. Council. Gall. p. 569.
Count of Auvergne, and Duke of Guien; who by his Testament, bestowed the place
of Cluny, with all its Dependences, there to erect a Monastery of Benedictine
Friars, to the honor of St. Peter and St. Paul: Which Monastery he put under
the Protection of the Pope, and See Apostolical: and he nominated Bernon to be
Abbot of it during life; but after his death, he left it to the liberty of the
Monks, to choose what Abbots they should think fit. Accordingly they elected Odo
after the decease of Bernon; Tom. 4. Spicil. p. 40.49.
unto Odo succeeded, as I suppose, Haymard, Majole unto Haymard, and Odilon
unto Majole: and it was after the death of the Abbot Odilon, who died about the
middle of the XI. Century, that the Friar Ulrick digested into a Body the
Customs of this Monastery. Cassander saw them in a fair Manuscript, and drew a
passage out of them for the Communion under both Kinds, as has been observed
in the first part; but six or seven years ago, they were printed by the care of
Dom Luke d'Achery, a Benedictine Friar. I find in these Customs several things
which make some think, that the Opinion of Paschas was not received in this
famous Congregation at the beginning of its Institution, nor in all the X.
Century. And I take notice particularly of that time, because those persons
would not deny, but that the Congregation might have changed Opinion after the
condemnation of Berengarius, not that there is any certain proof thereof; but
if it be considered that it was under the Protection of the Roman See, one may
be inclined to believe, that as soon as that See declared against the Doctrine
of Berengarius, which was that of the enemies of Paschas, this Society of Cluny
did also embrace the Opinion favored by its Protectors. But because it cannot
be perceived that there was in these Ancient Customs above mentioned, certain
passages which agreed not well with the Doctrine of the real Presence, or that
having perceived it, they dared not to take them away, it being come to the
knowledge of too many People, we therefore find them yet therein at this time;
and it is from hence we intend to draw proofs of what has been said, That this
Congregation was not at first, nor in all likelihood during all the X. Century,
of the Opinion of Paschas; and as they be the first that have produced an
instance in this matter, they endeavor to confirm the truth of it in such a
manner, which as they think, will not be displeasing unto all reasonable
persons, and unto such as as are wont to judge of things according to reason
and truth; They say then in the first place, that at the time when these
Customs were written, to wit, about the end of the XI. Century, the Bread
steeped in Wine for Celebrating the Communion, was practiced; which shows
that in all likelihood, they were not come unto this use, until after the
Condemnation of Berengarius, the fear of shedding, not having entered into their
thoughts until that time, because they believed not that what was in the Cup
was the very substance of the Blood of Jesus Christ, Unto all those to whom is
given the Sacred Body, Antiquae cons^etud. Clunica. l. 2. c. 30. p. 146. t. 4.
Spicileg.
he first steeps it in the holy Blood; because some of our Novices are so
heedless, that if they should receive the Blood apart, they would be sure to be
guilty of some great neglect.

Secondly, It was the custom in this Monastery, not to keep any part of the
Communion until the next day; but they caused to be eaten at the same time, all
that remained; which say some, would not have been done, if they had believed
that it had been the real Body of Jesus Christ, because they just before
received it in Communicating; which makes them easily believe, that the
abolishing of this Custom, Ibid. l. ^^ 13. p. 58.
which was not observed when the Friar Ulrick wrote, did follow the change of
belief; Formerly, says he, there was such care taken, that after all had
Communicated, the very Priests and Priors, which had brought whereof to
Communicate, did with a great deal of respect and caution, Eat all that
remained of the Eucharist, without keeping any part of it until next day; of
which Custom, nevertheless, little heed is taken here at present, but all is
kept that remains after the Communion.

In the third place, we therein find, that the day before the Preparation, that
is to say, on Holy Thursday, Ibid. p. 58.
There was so much of the Sacrament kept as needed for to Communicate them all;
Ibid. l. 2. c. 30, p. 140.
that it was broken and distributed as they could conveniently take it. And
elsewhere, The Cup is carefully rubbed without, fearing there should remain any
part of the Wine and of the Water; and being Consecrated, that it might be
lost. They believed then that the Wine and Water did still subsist after
Consecration; Ibid. p. 141.
for the true Body of Jesus Christ cannot be lost. And again, The Priest
divides the Host, and puts part of it into the Blood; of one half he
Communicates himself, and with the rest, he Communicates the Deacon. Ibid. p.
145.
Many think it cannot be so spoken of the glorious Body and Blood of Jesus
Christ. And then again, When the Priest has broken the Host, he puts part of
it into the Cup, according to the custom, and two parts upon the Patten, and he
covers both with the Corporal; but first of all, he carefully rubs the outside
of the Challice, and shakes it, with the same Fingers wherewith he touched it;
fearing lest that in performing the fraction, there might not remain some part
of the Body of our Lord; which cannot be spoken of the real Body of the Son of
God. And in another place, Ibid. p. 148.
it is prescribed what ought to be done: If it so happens, that there remains
ever so little of the Body of Christ, which is expounded to be a very little
crum; and as it may be said, indivisible part, like to an Atom. In fine,
treating of the Communicating sick Folks, Ibid. l. 3. c. 28.
it is observed, That the Body of our Lord is brought from the Church, that it
is broken, and that the Priest holds upon the Cup the portion that he should
bring. Now let any body judge, if a part of the real Body of Christ can be
separated from the whole, and be carried into some other place; and that after
all that has been alleged of these Ancient Customs, it ought not to be
concluded, that this famous Congregation was not always of the belief it is at
this time, in the point of the Sacrament; and that during the X. Century, they
embraced not the Opinion of Paschas. This is the Inference which persons draw
from these Customs.

But it is not yet time to have done with this Age, we must first take a view
of Italy, and of Rome it self, to be informed of Ratherius Bishop of Verona,
who departed this Life in the year 974. what the belief of the Church was in
Italy, in his time, touching the Eucharist. I do not intend here to write the
History of this Prelate, nor the Vicissitudes which happened him during his
life; for of a Friar that he was, in the Monastery of Lobes, he became Bishop
of Verona; from whence, some time after, he was expelled, and made Bishop of
Liege: but for three years only, and then he lost this Dignity. Those which
desire to be particularly informed of his Adventures, and of the Reputation
which he had acquired by his Learning, although it may be, he cannot be wholly
excused of inconstancy in his conduct, may read the Preface of the Second Tome
of the Collection of Dom Luke d'Achery; from whom we take what shall be
alleged. I will not insist upon his speaking, Ratherius Veron. Sermon. 2 de
Pasch. p. 314, 315. t. 2. Spicil. and Sermon. 3. p. 317. and alibi. Id. Sermon. 1.
de quadrag. p. 282
of giving the holy Bread, of presenting the morsel, of receiving the holy
things, and the gift of so great a Sacrament; although these expressions are
not much after the practice of the present Latin Church, no more than when he
says, That he which observes the Fast of Holy Thursday, suppeth with our
Savior; that is to say, that he receives the Sacraments of his Body and Blood,
which were instituted on that day. I will insist upon one part of his works,
wherein he plainly shows, as is pretended, that the Doctrine of the real
Presence was not yet received in his time in the Church, that is to say, after
his promotion unto the Diocese of Verona, whereof he had been twice
dispossessed; for he wrote what we are about to allege, whilst he was Bishop.
This Ratherius having cited a passage of Zeno of Verona, which restrains the
eating of the Flesh of Christ unto believers only, Id. de contempt. canon.
part. ^. p. 181.
as has been showed, he adds, As to the Corporal Substance which the
Communicant does receive, seeing that it is I that do now state the question, I
must therefore answer, and I thereunto willingly agree; for because unto him
that receives worthily, it is true Flesh, although it is seen, that the Bread
is the same it was before; and also true Blood, although the Wine is seen to be
what it was. I confess, I cannot think nor say, what it is, unto him which
receives unworthily; that is to say, unto him which dwells not in God. By
the Doctrine of the real Presence, what is received at the Holy Table, is the
real Body of Jesus Christ, unto the good and to the wicked; there is no
examining, if the proper Body of the Son of God be received worthily or
unworthily; they only say, that if this Doctrine had been in vogue in Ratherius
his time, he would not have been to seek, to know what it was the wicked did
receive in the Communion, because he could not but have known, that it is the
real Body of Jesus Christ; nevertheless, he declares positively, that he is
thoroughly persuaded, that the Corporal substance which is received in the
Sacrament, is unto Believers, the true Body and Blood of Jesus Christ; and
truly with great reason, because then the Sacrament is accompanied with all the
Virtue and Efficacy of this holy Flesh, and of this precious Blood, which is
inseparable from their Virtue and Efficacy. But as to him which Communicates
unworthily, he cannot say, nor so much as imagine what it is. He knew very well
it was the substance of Bread and Wine, for he says, That it is seen that the
Bread and Wine are the same they were before. But because the Consecration
makes them to be the Sacraments of the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ;
Sacraments which become unto Believers, after the manner as we have showed,
this Body and this Blood. He cannot conceive what they become unto the wicked;
that is to say, How one and the same Sacrament is unto some the Body and Blood
of Christ; and unto others, a bare Sacrament only.

Nevertheless, had it then been believed in Italy, as it is now believed, he
could not have doubted, but that it was both unto the one and the others, the
Body and Blood of Jesus Christ, although it produced not in all the same
effect, by reason of the variety of dispositions. Ratherius was settled, as it
were, at the Gates of Rome, as it may be said. It is not likely then that the
Church of Rome had as yet embraced the Opinion of Paschas; who taught, that the
Sacrament was no other Flesh but that which was born of the Virgin Mary; for
Ratherius could not then be ignorant of it; and not being ignorant, he would
not have put himself the question which he did, and had not yielded in
answering of it.

And as to what is said by the same Ratherius, in reproving the Excess and
Debauchery of some of his Priests, Id. Synodica ad Presbyt. p. 259.
That there are some that spewed before the Altar of our Lord, upon the Flesh
and Blood it self of the Lamb. It may easily be seen that it is an earnest
expression, to aggravate the sin of those of whom he speaks; and that the Body
of our Lord being secured from these indignities by the Confession of all
Christians, it must necessarily be understood of the Sacrament, which takes the
name of the thing which it signifies, and the violation whereof, reflects upon
him which instituted it. This is what several infer from the words of Ratherius.

I will not fear to join unto Ratherius, another Witness, which was also a
Bishop in Italy, and which is lately given unto the public: It is Atto, the
second of that name, Bishop of Verceil, Atto in capir. c. 7, 8, 9. t. 8.
Spicileg. p. 4, 5
Anno 945. I will not stand upon his prohibiting his Priests from saying
private Masses, nor in that he commands to handle decently the Bread, the Wine
and Water, without which Masses cannot be said. I will only observe what he
requires, Ib. c. 86. p. 31.
That he which honors not by Fasting and Abstinence, the day of the Passion
of our Lord, (that is to say Good Friday) may be deprived of the Joy of Easter;
and that he may not receive the Sacrament of the Body and Blood of our Lord.
The occasion, say some, required, That he should not have said the Sacrament,
but the Body and Blood, if he had believed that the Eucharist was the real Body
of Jesus Christ; for the punishment had been the greater, and by consequence,
the fitter to have retained the others in their Dury. And in one of his Letters
unto the Priests of his Diocese, going about to dissuade them from Fornication,
and to invite them unto Chastity and Continence, he represents unto them
amongst other things, what they do in the Celebration of the Eucharist. There Is
no body, add they, but may easily understand, but that it was the proper place
to allege the privilege they had of making and giving unto Communicants, the
real Body of Jesus Christ; and that there is no Bishop in the Latin Church, but
would have done so in such an occasion: But as for Atto, he speaks only of the
Sacrament; because in all likelihood, he believed not as the Latins do at this
time; for then he would not have failed to have spoken as they do; Id. Epist.
ad Presby t. p. 126
What (says he) is this wicked presumption, that he which knows that he is
still wallowing in his sins, should undertake to make, or to give unto others,
the Sacrament of the Body and Blood of our Lord Jesus. Of all that I have
hither to spoken of the X. Century, it is concluded, that the Opinion of
Paschas had not obtained a full Victory in that Age. But that of his
Adversaries, the marks whereof was found in England, Apud Usserium de success.
and statu Eccles. Christian. c. 3. p. 79, 80.
in France, in the Country of Liege, and in Italy; which was doubtless the
meaning of Wickliff, when he assured, That there was practiced in the Church a
thousand years together, the true Doctrine of the Sacrament; and that they
began to err in this point, in the year 1000. which I refer to the judgment of
the Readers.

CHAP. XVII.
Of what passed in the XI. Century.

THe Opinion of Paschas not making the progress it desired in the IX. and X.
Centuries, it found more favor in the XI. and spread farther; therefore it was
established by public Authority, but not without difficulty and opposition.
For I do not believe, that the Author of the Life of St. Genulph, who lived in
all likelihood at the beginning of the XI. Century, and which was published by
John a Bosco, a Cellestin Friar, was of this Opinion, Lib. 1. c. 6.
when he wrote of St. Genulph, That from the day of his Ordination, he passed
the rest of his Life without drinking any Wine, excepting that which he took in
the Celebration of the Divine Sacrament. It cannot be so spoke, and believe
that what is contained in the Challice is the real Blood of Jesus Christ.

Lutherick, Archbishop of Sans, who died in the Year 1032. as the Friar
Clarius, in his Chronicle of St. Peter of Sans, Tom. 2. Spicil. d'Ach. p. 742.
has observed, could not possibly be of Paschas his Opinion, because we read
this of him in the Life of Pope John the Seventeenth, or according unto others,
the Nineteenth: In the time of this Pope, Council. t. 7. p. 206.
Leutherius, Archbishop of Sans, sowed the Seed, and beginning of the Heresies
of Berengarius. Whence it is, that Helgald, in the Life of King Robert, writes,
That his Doctrien increased in the World, In epitome vitae Roberti regis.
Crescebat (says he) in seculo, notwithstanding the Threats this Prince made
of deposing him from his Dignity if he should continue to teach it.

All those which were contrary to the Opinion of Paschas, joining together to
defend their Faith; Fulbert, Bishop of Chartres, who had been consecrated by
Lutherick, had a great kindness for him, as he testifies in one of his Letters.
The Question is, to know what his Opinion was touching the Eucharist. If what
he says of the eating of the Flesh of Christ be considered, which he
represents unto us to be purely spiritual, Ep. 23.
wherein he alleges the words of St. Austin: It is a Figure which commands us
to communicate of the Passion of our Lord; and to represent unto our minds,
sweetly and usefully, that his Body was crucified and broken for us: Ep. 1. ad
Adeod. t. 3. Bibl. Pat. p. 438. A. B Post poeniten. mulierum p. 521. E.
for I do not regard the Addition that some unadvised hand has thereunto
annexed, will the Heretic say. And these others of the same Saint; Him that
dwells not in Jesus Christ, and in whom Christ dwells not, does not indeed
eat his Flesh, although he eats and drinks the Sacrament of so great a thing
unto his Damnation. Ibid. p. 522. B.
Unto which words, in all appearance, Berengarius had regard, when he said in
his Letter unto Richard; If the thing were so, how should the Doctrine of the
Eucharist come to my knowledge, which is in the Writings of Bishop Fulbert, of
glorious Memory, Tom 2. Spicil. d'Ach. p. 510.
and which some esteem to be of this Bishop; but it is of St. Austin. If it be
farther considered, that he declares that Jesus Christ is ascended into Heaven,
and that he has left us the Sacrament, Ep. 1. ad Adcodat. p. 437. C.
as a Pledge of his Presence; that he speaks of what we receive in the
Sacrament, as of a thing which is broken into very small bits, and whereof a
little portion is received; and that he distinguishes, as Ratramn did, Id.
Epist. 2. p. 440, 441.
and in the same words, the Sacrament, which he calls the body of Christ, from
his true Body. If, I say, all these things be well considered, it must
presently be concluded, that he was contrary unto Paschas. Yet nevertheless, I
would not affirm that he exactly followed the Opinion of his Adversaries; not
because he speaks of the Transfusion and Change of the Bread into the substance
of the Body of Jesus Christ: for besides that, Id. Ep. 1. p 437 438.
he calls this Change, a Change of Dignity; that is to say, of Quality, which
the Ancients often design by the name of Substance, as has been shown; he
compares the Change which happens in the Eucharist, unto that which came unto
the Manna in the Wilderness, and unto that which comes unto Men in Baptism; and
that he testifies, That there is also a Transfusion of Believers into the Body
of Jesus Christ. Ibid.
But I judge so, because he seems to me to have embraced the Opinion of Remy of
Auxerr, which was the same of John Damascen; who taught not that the substance
of the Symbols was abolished, but that they were united unto the Divinity, to
make one Body with the Natural Body of Jesus Christ; as has been fully showed.
And that these were the thoughts of Fulbert, it appears, if I mistake not, by
what he says, That the Pledge which our Savior has left us, is not the
Symbol of an empty Mystery, but the true Body of Jesus Christ, Compaginante
Spiritu Sancto; Id. ibid. p. 437.
or, as Remy speaks, Conjungente; that is to say, that the Holy Spirit unites,
joins, and knits the Sacrament unto the true Body of Jesus Christ, in uniting
it unto the Divinity. Let the Reader judge if I use any violence unto the words
of Fulbert; and if I vary from his meaning.

About the time that Fulbert of Chartres flourished, Bernon, Abbot of Augy,
wrote his Treatise of things which concerned the Mass; to wit, about the Year
1030. and Fulbert died in 1027. In this Treatise he speaks of Making and
confecrating the Body and Blood of the Lord; Cap. 1. and 2. t. 10 Bibl. Pat.
but the real Body (say some) and the proper Blood of our Savior, not being
possible to be made, because it was made a thousand years before Bernon wrote;
nor be sanctified, because it was always holy; it must of necessity be
understood of the Sacrament. Cap. 1.
And he shows it plainly, when he said, That this Body of Jesus Christ is
broken. Which cannot be understood of his true Body, which is not subject unto
this Accident; and that moreover he declares, Cap. 5.
That we are refreshed with the Wine which is in the Cup, in Type of the Blood
of Jesus Christ.

Nevertheless, the Opinion of Paschas establishing it self by degrees, Bruno
Bishop of Angers, and Berengarius, born at Tours, but Archdeacon and Treasurer
of the Church of Angers; a Dignity which in former times was not conferred, but
upon persons of Worth and Learning. Bruno, I say, and Berengarius, not enduring
that the Opinion of Paschas, which they looked upon as an Innovation of the
ancient Faith, should get possession of the minds of the people, opposed it
publicly; teaching that the Bread and Wine did not lose their substance by
Consecration, to become the real Body and Blood of Jesus Christ; but they only
became, by the Blessing of Sanctification, the Sacrament of this Body and
Blood. The truth is, Bruno, suffering himself to be overcome with fear, became
silent a little after: for, say some, it often happens upon these occasions,
that Men hearken to the Counsels of the Flesh, rather than unto those of the
Spirit. But as for Berengarius, he had more strength and courage; and opposed
himself with more Resolution and Vigor unto the settling of the Doctrine which
Paschas begun to teach in the IX. Century, but without any great success, until
the XI. wherein it also found a great many Opposers.

I am not ignorant that some Enemies of Berengarius have endeavored to slander
him, to render his Belief the more odious; but the truth is, he was reputed to
be a very learned Man, grounded in Philosophy, and the knowledge of the Liberal
Arts; and moreover, of a holy and unblameable Life. A fragment of the History
of France, from the time of King Robert, Tom: 4. Histor, Franc. de scripror.
Eccles. Platina in Joan. 15. Sabellic. Enead. 9. l. 2. Chron. tit. 16. c. 1. 20
unto the death of Philip, says, That his name was famous amongst the
Professors of Divine Philosophy. Sigebert says, That he was illustrious for
the Knowledge of the Liberal Arts, and of Logic. Platina and Sabellicus reckon
him amongst those which rendered themselves famous by their Piety and Learning.
Bergomas, in the Suppliment of Chronicles upon the Year 1049. observes, That he
passed a long time, in the Judgment of Men, to be eminent in Learning, and in
Holiness. Therefore the Archbishop Antonine declares, Tom. 2. Spicil. p. 747.
That he was very learned. And the Friar Clarius, in his Chronicle of St. Peter
of Sans, gives him these two Epithets, of Admirable Philosopher, and Lover of
the Poor. But in fine, the Belief which he maintained upon the Subject of the
Eucharist, and which was directly contrary unto that of Paschas, found the
people so disposed to entertain it, or rather, to declare openly for it, so
that in all parts it was publicly professed. And this easily persuades me,
that Berengarius did not so much infuse this Opinion into them, as he
encouraged them by his Example to publish it, by rousing them up from the
stupidness wherein they had layen for some time. For had this people believed
no more of the Eucharist than just what Berengarius had taught, this Doctrine
could scarce have made so great a progress in so little a time: but as it was
instilled into them from Father to Son, Berengarius had no sooner opened his
mouth, but that they embraced it, not regarding the fear that had till then
discouraged them, seeing the Contradiction it found in the World, whilst that
of Paschas therein received favor and encouragement. But because the Enemies
of this Doctrine have looked upon Berengarius to have been the true Author of
it, they have taxed him of infecting with the Venom of his Heresy all those
which, by his example, had the courage to make Profession of it. It is with
this prejudice that Matthew of Westminster says, Ad Ann. 1^ 87.
That he had almost infected all France, Italy and England. Matthew Paris and
William of Malmesbury say, Matt. Paris. in Willielm. II. Will. Malms. 6. in
Willielm. l. l. 3.
That all France was full of his Doctrine. So it is that Durandus of Troarn, an
ancient Monastery in Normandy, also says in a Treatise which he made of the
Body and Blood of Christ, wherein he opposes the Doctrine taught by
Berengarius: It cannot be doubted but that the Doctrine of Berengarius was the
same with that taught by several in the IX. Century, which opposed the Opinions
of Paschas, as Novelties which until then had not been heard of in the Church.
If then the Doctrine of the Adversaries of Paschas was the ancient Belief of
Christians, as we suppose has been sufficiently proved, it must be granted,
that Berengarius did not depart from it; and that those which followed him had
been of old instructed therein: Therefore, as soon as he began to bublish it,
they knew it; and without any difficulty, made Profession of it. But if
Berengarius had Friends, he also had Enemies; if he had Followers, he had also
those which opposed him. The first that attempted to write against him seems to
be Adelman, which from Theologal of the Church of Liege, became Bishop of
Bress. He had studied with Berengarius, under Fulbert, Bishop of Chartres; and
having heard what Berengarius taught of the Sacrament of the Eucharist, he
wrote him a Letter, wherein having renewed the memory of their old Friendship,
he shows, that it was reported of him that he taught, Tom. 3. Bibl. Pat. ult.
ed. p. 167.
That the Eucharist is not the true Body, nor the real Blood of Jesus Christ;
but the Figure and Resemblance. Adelman endeavors to refute this Doctrine, but
by Reasons which appear weak; and some also that do not very well agree with
his Hypothesis: but Berengarius answered him in such a manner, as he might see,
that he did not much value his Reproof, and that he was resolved always to
defend his Belief; calling that which was contrary unto him, Apud Lanfran. t.
6. bibl. Pat. p. 192.
The folly of the people of Paschas, and of Lanfranc. By which words he
shows, that he looked upon Paschas as the Author of this Novelty, and
Lanfranc as the Promoter of it; and that both the one and the other endeavored
to infuse it into the people, to the prejudice of their ancient Faith: For
Berengarius pretended that his Doctrine was the Doctrine of the Primitive
Church, and that that of his Adversaries was not known, but since Paschas his
time; who having invented it in his Cell, brought it forth in the Year of our
Lord, 818. Berengarius having thus silenced Adelman, Tom. 3. Bibl. Pat. p. 319.
his ancient Fellow-Student, Durandus Bishop of Liege, and by consequence,
Adelman's Bishop; sounded an Alarm, in a Letter he wrote unto King Henry,
against Bruno Bishop of Angers, and against Berengarius, his Archdeacon, as
against persons which taught, that the Sacrament is not the Body of Christ, but
the Figure of his Body; which this Prelate calls, Renewing of ancient Heresies.
And to show with what Spirit this Bishop was acted, he exhorts the King to
deliberate of their punishment, rather than to hear them in Councils. Moreover,
I have called this Bishop of Liege, Durandus, after Baronius, and those which
have given us the Library of the holy Fathers; but according to the truth of
the History it cannot be so, because Durandus was dead before Bruno was Bishop
of Angers. And indeed, Durandus died, Anno 1025. according to Segebert, and
Bruno attained not unto the Episcopacy until 1047. Of necessity then, this
Bishop of Liege must be some other than Durandus; and probably it may be
Dietuvin, who was made Bishop of Liege in the Year 1048. about which time, he
and Adelman might have writ the Letters above mentioned.

Durandus, Abbot of Troam in Normandy, makes some mention, at the end of his
Treatise of the Body and Blood of our Savior, of a Council assembled at Paris,
by the Authority of the King, against Berengarius and his Followers, where the
Doctrine of Berengarius, absent and unheard, was condemned: and it was there
concluded, that he, and those of his Judgment should be prosecuted in all
parts, and that they should be besieged where they should be found assembled,
to force them to renounce their Belief, or be taken and put to death; a Remedy
very contrary unto the temper of the Gospel, and unto the mildness of the
Religion of Jesus Christ. But after all, this Council of Paris is no other than
a fiction of the Author's brain. For what likelihood is there that Lanfranc,
who wrote against Berengarius after this pretended Council, would have passed
it over in silence, having so exactly mentioned all the Councils which were
assembled against Berengarius; in some of which he was present himself.
Moreover, Anonymus de damnatione Berengarii multiplici.
Father Chifflet has printed an Anonymous Author, which specifies all the
Synods wherein the Belief of Berengarius was condemned; at the last of which
himself was present at Rome, Anno 1079. under Gregory the Seventh, without
making any mention of that of Paris. Whereunto may be added, that the Date, and
Character of the time does not agree with the truth of History. Cardinal
Baronius, in his Annals, Ad ann. 1035.
thinks King Henry had thoughts of assembling a Synod against Berengarius, but
that he was hindered by the Bishop of Liege his Letters; which I cannot believe,
after all that has been said on this matter.

We are informed by Lanfranc, that in the Year 1050. Pope Leo the Ninth
assembled two Councils; one at Rome, where Berengarius, Lanfranc. de Eucharist.
Sacram. t. 6. Bibl. Pat. p. 193.
without being cited or heard, was condemned upon Letters which he wrote unto
Lanfranc, and which were read in the Assembly: The other at Verceil, in
September; where Ber^en garius was warned to appear, but he thought sufficient
to send two Clergymen; in whose presence he was condemned a second time; and
with him, the Book which John Erigenius had writ against the Opinion of
Paschas, about two hundred years before.

The Anonymous also failed not to begin the History of the diverse Condemnations
of Berengarius, by these two Councils of Rome and of Verceil. But these two
Councils hindered not but that many wrote for him, as there were many that wrote
against him; so it is expressed in Sigebert's Chronicle, Sigebert. in Chron ad
ann. 1051.
of the Edition of Mireus, at Antwerp, Anno 1608. and it might also be seen in
all the other Impressions, had not care been taken to suppress it. Many (says
he) disputed for and against him, both by Word, and in Writing.

In fine, there is in Monsieur de Thou's Library, a Manuscript Copy of the
Chronicle of Sigebert, wherein this is read; France is troubled by reason of
Berengarius of Towers; who affirmed that the Sacrament which we receive at the
Altar is not really the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ, but the Figure of his
Body and Blood: for which cause, several disputed with much heat for and
against him, by Word of mouth, and by Writing.

As for Berengarius himself, he so little valued the Anathema's of Rome and
Verceil, that he spoke very slightly of Pope Leo the Ninth, and of his See; as
it was seen formerly in Guitmond, his Adversary, before it was altered by the
Expurgatory Indexes: but that is in vain, Anonym. p. 363.
seeing Father Chifflet's Anonymous relates almost the same thing, and near
hand in the very same terms, which I will save my self the trouble of
transcribing, because they be something sharp, and full of Contempt. Victor,
Successor unto Leo, seeing that Berengarius still persisted in his Opinion, and
that he ceased not to publish it, notwithstanding the thundering of Leo's two
Councils, caused one to be assembled at Towers, Anno 1055. wherein his
Subdeacon Hildebrand, who was afterward Pope, under the name of Gregory the
Seventh, presided; and the Adversaries of Berengarius; Lanfranc, Guitmond, and
the Anonymous, before mentioned, have writ, that Berengarius there presented
himself, and dared not to defend his Cause; choosing rather to submit unto what
Rome had determined in the matter. We not having the Acts of this Synod, it
would be difficult to speak certainly of it, it not being just, wholly to give
Credit unto what his Adversaries relate of him, which does not appear to agree
with the following part of the History: For Nicholas, the Second of that Name,
was obliged to assemble another Council at Rome, five years after that of
Tours: Berengarius there appeared; and if we will believe Lanfranc, and
Chifflet's Anonymous, he dared not to defend his Belief. Chron. Cassin. l. 3.
c. 33. Sigon. de Regn. Ital. l. 9. ad An. 1059.
But how shall we reconcile Lanfranc and the Anonymous with the History of
Mount Cassin, and with Sigonius; for they observe, that his Enemies could not
tell what to reply unto his Reasons; and that they were constrained to search
in the Monastery of Mount Cassin for a Friar called Alberick, which Pope
Stephen (says Sigonius) had made Cardinal-Deacon; who being come, and not
being able to answer Berengarius his Arguments, demanded a Weeks time to answer
him: but, in fine, Threatenings having greater efficacy than their Arguments;
Berengarius being affrighted, signed the Revocation which Humbert, Cardinal of
Blanch-Selva, had Order to draw up, and which I do not here examine, because I
do not meddle with matter of Controversy, and which moreover the Latin Church
at this time does not much like of; and that it was for fear of death that he
renounced, cannot be doubted after the Testimony of Lanfranc, his great Enemy;
who thus speaks unto him in the Book he composed against him, You have in
presence of the Council, Tom. 6. Bibl. Pat. p. 189.
confessed the Orthodox Faith; not for love of the Truth, but through fear of
death.

Therefore Chifflet's Anonymous does observe a considerable Circumstance, and
which, as I think, deserves to find place in this History of Berengarius: for
he said, Anonym. ubi supra.
that Alexander the Second, which succeeded Nicholas, Anno 1061. did in a very
friendly manner, by his Letters, advise and desire Berengarius to lay aside his
Opinion, and not to scandalize the Church: But that Berengarius would by no
means depart from his Judgment, and that he had the courage to declare so much
unto the Pope by Letters. Thence it was that Gregory the Seventh, Successor
unto Alexander, gave him Audience in two Councils; as the Anonymous observes,
who assisted at the latter, assembled at Rome, Anno 1079. As for the former,
held at the same place, he mentions not at what time; but so it is, that in the
latter Council, there was drawn up another Confession of Faith, much milder and
more moderate than that which had been made in Nicholas his time; and they
obliged Berengarius to sign it. After which, Tom. 2. Spicil. p. 5^8.
Gregory gave him Letters of Recommendation; which Dom Luke d'Achery has caused
to be printed in one of the Thomes of his Collections. This Gregory, I say, of
whom 1 In vita Hildebrandi.
Cardinal Benno, and the 2 Ad Anno 1080.
Abbot of Ursperg do write; That wavering in the Faith, he made his Cardinals
to keep a solemn Fast, to the end that God would show whether the Church of
Rome, or Berengarius were in the truest Opinion touching the Body of our Lord.

And it must be remembered, that this Synod of Gregory's was full of Contests
upon this Subject of the Sacrament; there being yet a great many Prelates which
defended the Opinions of Berengarius, against the Reality of Paschas; as
appears by the Acts of this Council, related by Thomas Waldensis, and Hugh de
Flavigny, Tom. 2. c. 43. Chron. Verd. ad Ann. 1078.
in the Chronicle of Verdun, which is in the first Tome of the Library of
Father l'Abbe; who does also give us the Abridgment, with this difference, That
he assigns this Council unto the Year 1078. whereas it was held in the Year
1079. But in fine, The Acts produced by Waldensis, and what the Chronicle of
Verdon alleges, does testify that there were those in this Assembly which
affirmed that the Eucharist is the Figure of the Body of Jesus Christ.

But that nothing may be wanting unto the History of Berengarius, it is
necessary to touch upon some Circumstances which have not yet been mentioned.
In the first place, His Adversaries being enraged against him, have not feared
to charge him with some Errors touching Marriage, and Infant Baptism; as if he
taught the Dissolution of lawful Marriage, and rejected the Baptizing of young
Children; but without any other Ground than mere Report; which, as the Poet
said, is an Evil that flies, and increases in its Progress. It were to be
wished that Christians were more cautious in censuring of one another, and that
they would better consider the Love of Jesus Christ, which should not be
Censorious.

In the second place, Berengarius had to deal with Adversaries which made no
Conscience of corrupting Tradition, and the Fathers, and to deny the most
evident things. Lanfranc very confidently tells us, that there were formerly
two Heresies which proceeded from these words of Jesus Christ; Lanfranc. de
Euch. Sacram. t. 6. Bibl. pat. p. ^^3.
If you eat not the Flesh of the Son of Man, and drink his Blood, you have no
Life in you. They all believed (says he) with one common consent, that the
Bread and Wine was changed into the real Flesh and Blood of the Son of Man; but
they were not agreed who this Son of Man was. Some thought that it might be
meant of any Man whatever, whether just or sinful; and that the earthly
substance, changed into his Flesh and Blood, was received in the Remission of
Sins. Others conceived that this Son of Man was not any Man of the ordinary
sort, but a holy, just person, separated by his excellent living, from the
common sort of men, which was the Temple of God, in whom the Divinity resided:
and they confidently and heretically maintained, that the Bread and Wine of the
Altar might be changed into his Flesh and Blood. But (says he) in the time of
Pope Celestin, and of Cyril Bishop of Alexandria, the Council of Ephesus was
celebrated; where these two mortal Heresies were condemned, and the Faith was
confirmed, whereby we believe, that the Bread is changed into the Flesh that
was crucified, and the Wine into the Blood which flowed out of the side of
Jesus Christ hanging on the Cross. To see the confidence wherewith this Prelate
entertains his Readers with these two Heresies, and their Condemnation at the
Council of Ephesus, one would take his Relation for a true History; and yet it
is but a mere forged Fable: and the people of the XI Century did receive it
upon Credit, to be as true as Gospel. It is the same Lanfranc that relates unto
us as a true passage of St. Austin's, these words which had been before falsely
alleged by Paschas; Receive in the Bread what was nailed to the Cross; and in
the Cup, what issued out of the side of Jesus Christ.

Durandus, Abbot of Troarn, animated with the same Spirit, Durand. Troarn. de.
corp. and Sang Dom. p. 7
does with an unsupportable Impudence, falsify a passage in St. Austin, upon
the 98th Psalm; which says, You shall not eat this Body which you see: You
shall not drink the Blood which they shall shed that crucify me. And this
Abbot makes no more ado but to make this holy Doctor say, For you shall eat
this Body which you do see. And after this insolent Alteration, he cries out,
overjoyed with his Victory, What is there more clear and evident; You shall eat
this Body which you see?

It is by the same Principle that Guitmond, Bishop of Antwerp, Guitmund. de
veritate Euchar. l. 2. initio fere.
did formally deny that the Sacrament, in regard of its visible Species it
self, was not subject unto Digestion, nor to Corruption, nor to be eaten by
Rats: and assured, that though our eyes see it, yet it was not true. See here,
after what manner the Enemies of Berengarius did act: Let it be judged, if it
was lawful, and fit to be done by Christians.

The third, in fine, consists in discovering if Berengarius persevered in his
Belief until his death, and if he continued to teach it. William of Malmesbury,
an English Historian, says, Guill. Malmsb. hist. l. 3. c. 27.
That after having dishonored the vigor of his Youth by the defense of some
Heresies, he repented in his riper years. But because there are found in the
History of Berengarius some things which do not very well agree with the
Relation of this Historian, it will not be amiss to examine them. It is granted
that Berengarius began to publish his Opinions about the Year 1035. at which
time he must be about thirty years old; for it is not likely that he made any
great stir before that Age. He defended his Cause at Rome in the Year 1079.
that is, according to our Computation, in his 74th Year: which is directly
contrary unto what William of Malmesbury says; That after the first fire of
his Youth, he repented in a riper Age. Moreover, it appears by a Letter from
Lanfranc, unto Reginald, Abbot of St. Cyprian of Poitiers, writ very probably
in 1087. or 1088. that is, the year of Berengarius his decease, or a year
before; that the Conversion hinted at by the English Historian is but
imaginary, seeing that in this Letter Lanfranc calls him Schismatic; and
says, Epist. 50.
That he believes and teaches evil things of Jesus Christ. Besides, the
Chronicle of St. Maixant makes this Observation upon the Year 1080. Tom. 2.
Eibl. l'Abbe p. 212.
There was a Council assembled at Bourdeaux, wherein Berengarius gave an
account of his Faith. According unto this Chronicle (for which we are obliged
unto the Industry of Father l'Abbe) Berengarius did yet defend his Belief and
Doctrine a Year after the Council held at Rome, under Gregory the Seventh, An.
1079. Unto all these Considerations may be added an Anonymous Author, who
wrote, Anno 1088. which was the year of the death of Berengarius, a small
Treatise, whose Title was, De Berengarii Haeresiarche Damnatione multiplici, Of
the several Condemnations of Berengarius the Heretic: which shows, if I
mistake not, that he retained his Opinion unto his death. And Father Chifflet,
who gave us this Anonymous; does sufficiently show that he believes so, when he
says in the Preface, being offended with the Commendations given unto
Berengarius, by Hildebert, that this Anymous made his Obsequies after a more
discreet manner, Chifflet in pralat.
Prudentius ei funus duxit; to wit, in calling him Heretic unto his death. I
would then conclude, after all that has been said, that William of Malmesbury
was deceived in placing the Conversion of Berengarius after the first vigor of
his Youth, Guill. Malmsb. lust. l. 3. c. 27.
in a riper Age; and that the History of this Conversion is no more true, than
what he related unto us of Fulbert, Bishop of Chartres; that as he was at the
point of death, his House was thronged with people that flocked thither from
all parts; and perceiving Berengarius amongst the Crowd, he made a sign that he
should be driven away; protesting that there was by him a prodigious Devil, and
that he infected a great many by his tongue, and by his hand: for none of
Berengarius his Adversaries who had studied under Fulbert never taxed him with
any such thing; not so much as Adelman, his Fellow-student under this famous
Prelate. Tom. 2. Spicil. d'Ach. p. 741.
Moreover, the Friar Clarius, that lived much about this time, observes in the
Chronicle of St. Peter of Sans, that Fulbert Bishop of Chartres died, Anno
1027. but he says never a word of what is related by the English Historian,
although a Circumstance of this nature was too considerable to be passed over
in silence. And as it is evident that Berengarius did not change his Opinion in
the time that William of Malmesbury does assign, it is no less plain, as I
think, that he retained it until the last moment of his life; Apud Guill^^m.
Malmsb. ubi supra.
which he ended by a natural death, Anno 1088. And after his death, he was
honored with Epitaphs, both by Hildebert Bishop of Mentz, who speaks of him as
advantagiously as one could do of a man exceedingly recommendable for his
Virtue and Learning, for the splendor of his Parts, and for the purity of his
Conversation; and by Baldrick, Abbot of Bourgueil, Tom. 4. hist. Franc.
Quercetani.
and afterward Bishop, or rather, Archbishop of Doll; for he and his
Successors also, enjoyed the Privileges of Archbishop, until Innocent the
Third, as their Predecessors had done since the middle of the IX. Century, to
the prejudice of the Archbishop of Tours; neither the one nor the other
speaking one word of his Conversion, no more than the Friar Clarius, who wrote
his Chronicle of St. Peter of Sans, about the time of the death of Berengarius,
of whom he speaks very honorably upon the Year 1083. as if he died in that
year. Berengarius (says he) Doctor of Tours, Tom. 2. Spicil. p. 747.
an admirable Philosopher, and Lover of the Poor, flourished: He composed the
Prayer which begins; O Jesus Christ, just Judge! and afterward he ended his
days faithful, and truly Catholic. This Epitaph is read on his Tomb: it is the
Epitaph of Hildebert of Mentz, whereof he cites the two first Verses, which
contain in substance, That the World shall always admire him that it admires at
present, and that Berengarius dies without dying; to wit, by the great
Reputation which he had acquired.

In the same Century, which the name of Berengarius had made so famous, the
Author of the Chronicle of St. Maixant, speaking of De Cormarecensi Caenobio,
says, Tom. 2. Bibl. l'Abbe p. 212.
That he saw a certain Friar of this Monastery, called Literius, a man of a
wonderful Abstinence; who for the space of ten years, drank neither Wine nor
Water, but what he received in the Sacrifice; that is to say, in the Eucharist.
Judge, Reader, what was the Belief of this Writer, who declares, that they
drank Wine and Water in the Participation of the Sacrament.

But having examined what passed in the West during the XI. Century, touching
the Subject of the Sacrament, we must endeavor to find what was believed
concerning it in the Greek Church, we will begin this Enquiry by Theophilact,
Archbishop of Bulgaria, who lived in this Century under the Dukes, and under
the Commenes, Emperors of the East: the Roman Catholics and Protestants do
both make pretensions unto him, and think that he favors either of them.
Theophylact. in Matt. c. 26.
The former ground themselves upon his declaring, That our Savior, saying,
This is my Body, shows, that the Bread which is sanctified at the Altar, is
his real Body, and not the Antitype, etc. and that it is changed by an
ineffable Operation, although it appear unto us to be Bread: for because that
we are weak, and that we have an aversion unto eating raw flesh, and especially
Man's flesh, it seems to us to be but bread, but it is really flesh. Whereunto
they add another passage of the same Author upon St, Id. in Mar. c. 14
Mark, where he says almost the same thing; observing, That the Bread is
changed into the Body of Jesus Christ; and that our Lord said not of the Bread,
This is the Figure of my Body, but my Body. Id. in Joan. 6.
And a third, upon the Gospel of St. John, which amounts unto the same thing;
not to mention what he says again upon St, Id. in Mar. c. 14
Mark; That the Body of Jesus Christ is properly what is in the Golden Patten;
and the Blood, that which is in the Cup. But the others, that is to say, the
Protestants, allege, that Theophilact has explained himself very well in
making this positive Declaration; Id. in Mar. c. 14
God condescending unto our infirmities, preserves the Species of Bread and
Wine, and does change them into the virtue of his Body and Blood. Which is
exactly the Doctrine of St. Cyril of Alexandria; who said, 1 Apud Victorem in
Marc. 14. manus.
That the Bread and Wine are changed into the efficacy of his Flesh: or, as
Theodotus said before him, 2 Apud Clement. Alexan. p. 800.
Into a spiritual Virtue. So that when Theophilact said, That the Sacrament is
not the Antitype of the Body of Jesus Christ, but his true Body, and his Flesh
it self, they say, that he understood that it was not a vain and empty Figure,
without any efficacy and virtue; but not that he had any thoughts of absolutely
denying that the Eucharist was an Antitype and Figure of the Body and Blood of
our Savior, because then he should deny what his Predecessors had unanimously
affirmed: and that so indeed, the Sacrament is truly the Body of Jesus Christ,
according to Theophilact; not in substance, but in virtue and efficacy; because
he declares, that the Bread and Wine are changed into the virtue of the Flesh
and Blood of our Lord; and that although our Lord said not of the Bread, This
is the Figure of my Body, but my Body; nevertheless, his meaning was, that his
words should so be understood, according to the Explication of Tertullian, St.
Austin, Facundus, and others; who declare formally, that these words, This is
my Body, do signify, This is the Figure, the Sign, and the Sacrament of my
Body. But that the Reader may the better judge of what side to range
Theophilact, either on the Protestants, or the Roman Catholics, it will be
necessary to consider what the Belief of the Greek Church was, touching the
Sacrament, in the XI. Century: for if the Belief of the Greeks was not
conformable with that of the Latins in that Age, Theophilact cannot reasonably
be interpreted to favor the Real Presence, unless that he differed absolutely
from the Opinion generally received by all those of his Country; in which
sense, his Testimony would not be very considerable. Now I observe, that at
that time the Greeks believed, for certain, that the Communion broke the Fast;
and that what is received in the Eucharist, goes down into the Belly, and
passes into the Draft, as to its matter; which shows plainly, that they
believed it was true Bread. It is what Cardinal Humbert, who was sent unto them
by Pope Leo the IX. charge upon Nicetas Pectoratus, Humb. tom. 4. Bibl, Pat.
Edit. ult. page 245.
Perfidious Stercoranist (says he) you believe that the participation of the
Body and Blood of our Savior, breaks the Fast of Love, and Ecclesiastical
Abstinences; believing absolutely, that the Heavenly Food as well as the
Earthly, is sent out backwards by the stinking and sordid ejection of the belly.

Alger confirms the testimony of Humbert, Algerus de Sacram. l. 2. c. 1. t. 6,
Bibl. Pat. p. 320.
and declares positively, That the Greeks are of the Opinion of those which he
calls Stercoranists; that is to say, of those which hold that the substance of
Bread does remain after Consecration; and that in regard of the substance of
it, it is subject unto the same fate of our common food, which was exactly the
Opinion of the Adversaries of Paschas; and afterward of Berengarius and his
followers. Cellot in append. Miscel. opusc. 7. p. 5^
Father Cellot in his Notes upon an Anonymous Treatise in the Appendix of his
History of Gotteschal, confirms the same thing, saying, That the Error of the
Greeks consists in their saying, That the Ecclesiastical Fast is broken by
receiving of the Eucharist; and that they believe the Sacrament is digested,
and that it is evacuated, like (says he) unto the Stercoranists; which we have
in detestation. The same Cardinal de Blanch-Selva, Humbertus ubi supra. p. 247.
also reproacheth them, that they take not heed of the Crumbs of the holy Bread
which fall to the ground, either in breaking or receiving of it, whereunto he
adds, Some amongst you do eat the remainder of the Oblation like common bread,
sometimes even unto excess; and if they cannot eat all, they bury it, or cast
it into a Well. All which things do not well accord with the Doctrine, nor with
the practice of the Latins. But this is not yet all we have to say of the
Belief of the Greek Church in the XI. Century.

In the Memorials of Sigismund Liber touching the affairs of Muscovy, Printed
at Basil, Anno 1571. there is a Letter of one John, Metropolitan of Russia,
unto the Archbishop of Rome, written as near as I can judge, in this Century,
or it may be afterward; for he makes some mention of the contention betwixt
the Latins and the Greeks touching leavened or unleavened Bread. In this Letter
he very amply declares, that what our Lord gave his Disciples was Bread:
Sigismund. liber r^rum Moscovit. p. 32.
He did not give them Wafers (says he) but bread, when he said, See the Bread
which I give unto you. Leo Allatius in his Diatribe of the Simeons, makes
mention of one Simeon, prefect of the Monastery of St. Mamant in Xerocerco, who
flourished in the middle of the XI. Century, in great reputation of Holiness
and Learning. He was indeed accused of holding some errors concerning the
Vision of God in this Life, and of the Union of Believers with him; but that
hindered not, but that he was followed by most of the Greeks; the errors now
spoken of, did not regard the Sacrament, and had no relation unto the
Eucharist. Therefore although he had some Enemies, yet neither he nor his
followers were ever taxed to have erred in the matter of the Sacrament. This
Simeon, at the time that the Doctrine of Berengarius was Condemned at Verceil,
taught in the East, That the Sacrament was one thing, and that the Body of
Christ was another thing; and that those which participated unworthily of the
Sacrament, could not receive the Body of the Son of God. In fine, Allatius
making up the account of the works of this Simeon, Allatius de Simeonibus p.
163.
speaks of a certain Hymn, the title whereof was, That whosoever lives without
the knowledge of God, is dead in the midst of those which live in the knowledge
of him; and that those which participate unworthily of the Mysteries, cannot
receive the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ. It were to be wished that Allatius
had given us the whole Hymn, as well as the Argument; but however, this
Argument contains a Doctrine manifestly contrary unto that of the Latins; in
favor of whom, by consequence, it is very unlike that Theophylact should
declare, seeing he was of the Greek Church, and lived in the XI. Century, at
which time the Greeks believed and taught what is above written; yet let every
body judge sincerely and freely, without any other interest than that of truth,
which I endeavor to represent in this History, which informs us, that it was
in this Age, that they begun to introduce the Communion under one kind; and to
change the form of the Bread of the Eucharist in the Churches of the West, as
has been discoursed at large in the First Part.

CHAP. XVIII.
A Continuation of the History of the Eucharist, or the State of the XII. and
XIII. Centuries.

THe Opinion of Paschas having been in fine, publicly Authorized in the XI.
Century, there needs no farther enquiry be made, to know if it obtained the
Victory over its Adversaries, the thing being without any difficulty; the
establishing of this Doctrine being a manifest condemnation of that which was
opposite unto it; it will suffice then to understand what were the
consequences, and to what effect so many Decrees, in favor of the Opinion of
Paschas, and contrary unto that of which Berengarius and his followers, so
stoutly maintained, did work upon the minds of men; for during all the XI.
Century, the minds of Men were divided; and notwithstanding the decisions of
several Councils, there was in all parts, infinite numbers of People, which
made open profession of the Doctrine which Berengarius taught, and which was
exactly that of the Adversaries of Paschas; therefore the very Enemies of
Berengarius told us in the foregoing Chapter, That all France, Italy, and
England, was full of his Doctrine. In fine, the party which rejected the
Determination of Gregory the VII. against Berengarius, was so considerable,
that Urban the Second was constrained to condemn anew, the Opinion of
Berengarius in another Council held at Plaisance, Anno 1095. Berthold. ad aunum
1095.
as Bertholdus has observed in his Appendix unto Herman Contract; for relating
all things that were translated in this Council of Plaisance, which was
celebrated in his time, he says amongst other things, that the Doctrine of
Berengarius was there again condemned, after having been so several times
before. But as the former Determinations could not impose silence upon the
Disciples of Berengarius, I mean those which embraced the same Doctrine, which
obliged Urban to condemn them again in the year 1095. seven years after the
Decease of Berengarius; so also the condemnation of Urban the Second had not
power sufficient to silence them, seeing that in the beginning of the XII.
Century, Bruno Archbishop of Treves, expelled great numbers of them out of his
Diocese, as is testified by Monsieur de Thou, in the Epistle Dedicatory of his
History.

It is true, that instead of the year 1060. whereto he assigns the action of
this Prelate, it should be read 1106. because Bruno was not made Archbishop of
Treves, till after the year 1100. Bishop Usher makes mention of the Author of
the Acts of Bruno, who was present, and is a Manuscript to be seen in England;
and he says, that this Author speaks of Assemblies which were made in the
Diocese of Treves, by those which denied the change of the substance of Bread
and Wine, into the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ, Waldens. t. 2. c. 90.
It is about this time that Honorius, Priest and Theologal of the Church of
Autun, is said to flourish, which Thomas Waldensis alleges against Wickliff,
as a Disciple and follower of the Heresy of Berengarius, which he himself
confesses to agree with the Doctrine of Rabanus Archbishop of Mayance, and
great Adversary unto Paschas; when he says, that Honorius, est de secta
panitarum Rabani, that is to say, of the Sect of those which believe with
Rabanus, That the Eucharist is bread in substance, fit to nourish the body, but
the body of Jesus Christ in efficacy. It is true, Waldensis does not
particularly name Honorius; but he means him so clearly by the entrance of his
Treatise, and by the passages he alleges, and which is therein now to be
seen, that no body can doubt but that 'twas of Honorius he spoke. Neither do I
find, that any are at variance hereupon. The first testimony produced by
Waldensis, and which Wickliff alleged for the defense of his Opinion, Honorius
Augustod. in gemma animae l. 1. c. ^6.
is set down in these terms; It is said, that formerly, the Priests received
Flower from each House or Family; which the Greeks do still practice; and that
of this Flower, they made the Bread of our Lord, which they offered for the
People; and after having consecrated it, they distributed it unto them. The
second mentioned by Waldensis, is borrowed of Rabanus, Id. l. 1. c. 111.
and is thus read: The Sacrament which is received by the mouth, is turned into
the nourishment of the body; but the virtue of the Sacrament is that whereby
the inward Man is satisfied; and by this virtue is acquired Eternal Life. The
same Author says again, Id. ib. c. 63.
that the Host is broken, Because the bread of Angels was broken for us upon
the Cross, that the Bishop bites part of it, that he divides it into three
parts; Id. c. 64.
that it is not received whole, but broke into three bits; Ibid. c. 85.
and that when the Bread is put into the Wine, it is represented, that the Soul
of our Lord returned into his body: And he calls it, Ibid. c. 63.
to break the Body of our Lord, when he observes, That the Subdeacon receives
from the Deacon, the body of our Lord; and that he carries it to the Priests to
break it unto the People. All Men do confess, that the glorified Body of Jesus
Christ cannot be broken and divided into parts; of necessity he must then speak
of the Sacrament, which is called the Body of Jesus Christ, not by reason of
the accidents, which is never qualified with this name by the Ancients, but in
regard of its substance; therefore Honorius declares plainly, that it is
Bread, when he says, That the Consecrated bread is distributed unto the
People; and that the bread is put into the Wine. And so far he favors the
cause of the Protestants, in following the Judgment of Berengarius, and of
Rabanus, as is testified by Thomas Waldensis, an Enemy both of the one and the
other, and by consequence of Honorius. Nevertheless, there be other places in
the Treatise of this Author, from whence the Roman Catholics strive to draw
advantage; for example, from these words, The name of Mystery is used, Ibid. c.
106.
when one thing is seen, and another thing is understood; the Species of Bread
and Wine is seen, but it is believed to be the body and blood of Jesus Christ.
It is true, that all Christians confess, that the Bread and Wine of the
Sacrament after Consecration, are the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ; and the
Author not specifying, if it be in substance, as the Church of Rome does teach,
or in virtue, as the Protestants which are called Calvinists, do say; I do not
think that either the one or the other, can draw any advantage from these
words. But besides these, there be yet others which seem to be more favorable
unto the Hypothesis of the Latins; we may put in this order, what he says,
Ibid. c. 34.
That the bread is changed into Flesh, and that the Wine turns into blood; and
elsewhere, That as the World was made of nothing by the word of God, Ibid. c.
105.
so, by the words of our Lord, the Species of these things (he means the Bread
and Wine of the Sacrament) is truly changed into the body of Jesus Christ. It
must be confessed, that had we only these two last passages of Honorius, the
Latin Church would undoubtedly have cause to boast over those which reject her
belief; but that which hinders that she cannot draw all the advantage from it
she desires, is, that the Protestants rely in the first place, upon the
declaration of Thomas Waldensis, who highly condemning the Opinion of Rabanus,
and of Berengarius, as contrary unto the belief of the Latins, does
nevertheless ingenuously confess, that Honorius of Autun, followed the Opinion
of these two men, whose Doctrine he condemns. In the second place, inasmuch as
the first testimonies instanced in, could receive no favorable interpretation
for the Hypothesis of Roman Catholics, whereas the later, whereof they pretend
to take hold, may conveniently be explained in a way which might no way
prejudice the Doctrine of those called Calvinists; who say, that the conversion
and the change spoken of by Honorius, is not a change of substance, but a
change of efficacy and virtue, inasmuch as the Bread and Wine do become by
Sanctification, the Sacraments of the Body and Blood of our Lord: but
Sacraments, in their lawful Celebration, accompanied with all the virtue, and
with all the efficacy of the Body and Blood; so that for that reason it is
said, that they be changed into this efficacy, and into this virtue; according
to the language of Theodotus, of St. Cyril of Alexandria, of Theophilact, etc.
alleging, to confirm their Interpretation, Ibid. c. 106.
what is said by the same Honorius; That Jesus Christ changed the Bread and
Wine into the Sacrament of his Body and Blood; which St. Isidore Archbishop of
Sevil, venerable Bede, and Rabanus Archbishop of Mayans, had said before him;
as has been mentioned in some part of this History. And that in speaking of
dividing the Host into three parts, Ibid. c. 64.
he declares, That that which is put into the Cup is the glorified Body of our
Lord, and that which the Priest eats is the Body of Jesus Christ; that is to
say, the Church, which yet is militant here on Earth. Whence they conclude,
that seeing the Bread of the Sacrament is not, by Honorius his saying, the
natural Body of Jesus Christ: but as it is his mystical Body; that is to say,
the Church; for he makes no difference betwixt them, it cannot be it properly,
and by an Idendity of substance, as it is spoken; but only in Mystery, and in
Sacrament.

If there were only occasion to show who they were that admitted not of the
Doctrine of the Real Presence, we might here instance in Robert de Duitz, nere
Cologne; because it is certain, by the confession of both sides, that he
believed it not: but because we also search the Testimonies of those which
followed the Opinion of the Adversaries of Paschas, which was that of
Berengarius; of which number we cannot affirm that Robert was, we will leave
him as a man that was neither a follower of Paschas, nor of his Adversaries;
but a Disciple of John Damascen, and of Remy of Auxerr; teaching, as they did,
the Assumption of the Bread by the Divinity, to make by this Union with the
Divinity, one sole Body with the Body of Jesus Christ.

It is not the same with a certain Abbot, called Francus; of whom the
Centuriators of Magdebourg observe, Centur. 12. c. 5.
That he had no sound thoughts touching the Communion; affirming, that the real
Body of Jesus Christ was not in the Sacrament. One would fain know who this
Abbot was, of whom the Centuriators say nothing else; and to say truth, it is
very hard, precisely to determine it: but because positive Proofs are wanting,
Conjectures that have likelihood and probability may the better be admitted;
therefore I will not fear speaking what I think of him. I conceive then, that
it was Franco, Abbot of Lobbes, in the Country of Liege. There were two of this
name in that Monastery, one of which lived in the time of Lewis, the Son of
Charles the Bald; and he was reckoned the twelfth Abbot: but it cannot be him
we seek for, because the Centuriators place him toward the middle of the XII.
Century; therefore we must rather insist upon the other, who succeeded unto
Lambert, about the Year 1153. which is just the time designed by the
Centuriators; for Lambert succeeded unto Leonius, Anno 1140. and governed the
Monastery thirteen years; De gestis Abbatum Lob. t. 6. Spicil. p. 621 622, 628,
629, 630, 631 and 633.
so that our Franco, or Francus, was chosen in his place, Anno 1153. or 1154.
he was Head of the Monastery eleven years. And I the rather am induced to
believe, that the Centuriators speak of this Franco, Abbot of Lobbes, because
that he spoke nothing of the Sacrament, but what two of his Predecessors,
Folcuin and Hertiger, had taught before, in the X. Century; as we have declared
in writing what passed in that Age upon the Subject of the Sacrament.

In the time that Franco was Abbot of Lobbes, Gautier of Mauritania was Prebend
of Anthona; and he was chosen to go to Rome, to defend the Cause of the
Prebends of Anthona, against the Abbot Franco, for a Prebendary which the
Friars of Lobbes laid claim unto, as having been, time out of mind, in the
Disposal of their Abbots. But so it is, that this Gautier is styled in the
Continuation of the History of the Abbots of Lobbes, Ubi supra p. 631.
The most eminent, and chiefest of all the Doctors of France. Also, from
Prebend of Anthona, he became Bishop of Laon. But that matters not: See here
how he speaks of the Presence of Jesus Christ, whilst he was Bishop, in a
Letter which he wrote, touching the Mystery of the Incarnation of Jesus Christ;
and wherein, expounding these words of the 3d. of St. John; Galterus Episcopus
Laudun Ep. 2. t. 2. Spicil. p. 464.
No man ascended up into Heaven, but the Son of Man which came down from
Heaven; he speaks after this manner; By the Son of Man we are here to
understand the Word made Flesh; that is to say, the Son of God, which was
omnipresent; and not the Body and Soul, that is to say, the Humane Nature which
he had taken, and which was not yet ascended into Heaven: for the Flesh which
he had assumed, was not present in all places; but in shifting place, it went
fom one place unto another; which our Savior shows in saying unto his
Apostles, I am glad, for your sakes, that I was not there. The Angel declares
the same unto the Women; saying, You seek Jesus, who was crucified: he is
risen, he is not here. From thence it is (says he) that St. Gregory says, He
is not here by the presence of his Body, which nevertheless, was never absent,
in regard of the presence of his Majesty. And elsewhere; Id. ibid. Ep. 2. p.
468.
The Son of God (says he) is on Earth by the presence of his Divinity,
although he is in Heaven, at the Right Hand of the Father, by the presence of
his Body, and of his Divinity; which he himself declared, being ready to ascend
up into Heaven, in the presence of his Disciples; saying, I am with you unto
the end of the World. Which words St. Gregory thus expounds; The Word made
Flesh remains, and he departs: he goes in regard of his Body, but he remains in
regard of his Divinity. And in all the rest of the Epistle, he proves by
Authority of the Scriptures, and of the Fathers, the Omnipresence of the
Divinity of Jesus Christ, in opposition unto his Humanity, which he has so
represented unto us to be in one place, that it could not be at the same time
in another.

We may add unto these Witnesses, that which Father Chifflet gives us in the
Preface which he has made unto the Confession of Faith which he attributes
unto Alcuin, Tutor unto Charlemain; where, disputing against the Disciples of
St. Austin, followers of Jansenius, he says, that he might apply unto them
what Hugh Metellus, Prebend of Thoul, had said above five hundred years ago,
unto Gerland, Sacramentarian of the Sect of Berengarius: You rely upon the
words of St. Austin, Chiffict Jesuita in praefar. ad confess. Alcuin.
do not put your dependence upon them, he is not of the same Opinion you are
of, you are much mistaken: You assure us, with St. Austin, that the words of
Jesus Christ unto his Disciples are figurative, for they declare one thing
literally, and they signify another thing: you affirm what he affirmed, but
you do not believe what he believed.

It may then be concluded from what has been said; and particularly, from the
words of this Prebend of Thoul, that at the beginning of the XII. Century,
those which were called Berengarians maintained a Doctrine contrary unto that
which was established by the Decisions of Councils, which several Popes caused
to be assembled against Berengarius in the XI. Century.

But all these Testimonies are nothing in comparison of what happened in the
persons of those called Albigensis; who refusing to submit and acquiess unto
the Decission of Popes and their Councils, in favor of the Doctrine of
Paschas, separated themselves openly from their Communion; and gave their
Reasons for so doing in a Book which they published to that purpose in the
vulgar Tongue, wherein they made this Declaration of their Faith touching the
Eucharist; Hist. de Albigensis de Paul Perrin. l. 3. c. 4.
The eating of the Sacramental Bread is the eating of the Body of Jesus Christ
figuratively; Jesus Christ having said, As often as you do this, do it in
remembrance of me. This Book, as is observed by him that inserted it wholly in
his History of the Albigensis, and the Waldensis, was taken from a Manuscript,
wherein was contained several Sermons of the Barbes; so it was that those
people called their Pastors: it is dated in the Year 1120. which I find nothing
strange, when I consider that in the Year 1119. Pope Calixtus the Second
assembled a Council at Toulouse in his own presence, wherein certain Heretics
were condemned, who rejected the Sacrament of the Eucharist; that is to say,
which in all likelihood did not believe what the Latin Church believed. We are
obliged for the Canons of this Council, unto Monsieur Baluze; who has inserted
them wholly in a Book of Monsieur de Marca's, touching the Liberties of the
Gallican Church. In the third of these Canons this Ordinance is made, Apud
Marc. de Concord. l. 8. c. 18. p. 344.
We expel out of the Church as Heretics, and condemn those, who making a show
of piety, do not approve the Sacrament of the Body and Blood of our Lord, etc.
We command all Secular Powers to punish them: and we bind with the same Bond of
Excommunication those which shall protect them, until such time as they shall
repent. This Canon, as far as I see, concerns only these Albigensis; who not
approving the Doctrine of the Latin Church upon the point of the Eucharist,
separated themselves from their Communion, after it had condemned the Doctrine
taught by Berengarius, and established that of Paschas in the XI. Century,
although it had not admitted thereof before. And what confirms me in this
Opinion, is what I find in the Chronicle of St. Tron, in the Country of Liege,
touching Radolph, Abbot of that Monastery; and besides, Author of the
Chronicle; viz. That being gone to Rome in Pope Honorius the Second his time,
who was advanced to this Dignity in the Year 1125. and held the Chair five
years, he had a design to travel into another Country which he does not name;
but that he was informed, that it was infected with the Heresy of the
Sacramentarians; that is to say, the Doctrine which was condemned in the person
of Berengarius. It adds, Moreover, Tom. 7. Spicil. d'Ach. p. 493.
he understood that the Country toward which he had a design to travel, in
going farther, it was infected with the old Heresy of the Body and Blood of
our Lord. This Radolph was Abbot of Tron, Anno 1108. and he wrote his Chronicle
about the Year 1125. There was then at that time a Country, wherein Profession
was made of a Belief, contrary unto that of the Latin Church, in the point of
the Sacrament; and because this Abbot had received and approved the Decisions
of Leo, Victor, Nicholas, and of Gregory, against Berengarius, and against his
Doctrine, he calls the other Opinion Heresy; and not only Heresy, but the old
Heresy; this is the very term he uses; which shows, that the Belief which
he condemns, was no new Invention, according to the Judgment of this Author:
but that it had of a long time been much spoken of, and that it was publicly
professed by great numbers of people, especially in the Country mentioned by
him, which in all probability was the Country of Languedock, wherein the
followers of Berengarius spread and published abroad his Doctrine, immediately
after his death; not valuing the Prohibitions and Decrees of the Councils of
Verceil, of Rome, and of Tours: On the contrary, seeing they authorized, and
passed into an Article of Faith, an Opinion which they esteemed to be Novel,
and contrary unto the ancient Doctrine of Christians, they separated, and broke
off from the Latin Church; in whose Communion they had lived till that time.

These people had for their chief Conducter, Peter de Bruis; who, after having
defended and maintained this Faith and Doctrine, having preached and published
it for the space of twenty years, in Languedock, in Gascoygne, and elsewhere,
was at last Martyred and burnt at St. Giles in Languedock, by the care and
diligence of the Latin Church; preferring rather to suffer death, and to seal
with his Blood the Doctrine which he had taught, and which infinite numbers of
people openly professed, than to return unto the Communion which he had
forsaken.

After Peter de Bruis, succeeded Henry; who, with some others, defended the
Faith of these Churches, which, after his Name were called Henritians, as they
had been also called Petrobusians, from the Name of his Predecessor. It is
true, that those which had caused Peter de Bruis to be burnt, found means also
to suppress Henry, by Order of Pope Eugenius; for Cardinal Alberick, Vita S.
Bernardi. l. 3. c. 5.
Bishop of Osty, his Legate, having got him into his power, ordered matters so,
that he was never heard of after, neither could it be heard of what manner of
death he died: but we know very well that Pope Eugenius, being informed of the
great progress made by Henry, after the death of Peter de Bruis, whose
Martyrdom did only increase and heighten his Zeal for the Defense of the Faith;
we know, I say, that the Pope sent Alberick, his Legate; who, with Gaufrid
Bishop of Chartres, St. Bernard Abbot of Clervaux (who was at that time in
great esteem) with some others, Baron. ad An. 1147.
who went toward Toulouse, to pluck up these Thorns, as Cardinal Baronius
says, St. Bernard wrote beforehand unto Alphonsus, Count of St. Giles in
Languedock, who favored Henry with his Protection notwithstanding the violent
death which Peter de Bruis had suffered. Bernard. Ep. 240.
In this Letter St. Bernard says several things against the Doctrine, and the
Conversation of Henry; who, from a Friar that he was, had embraced the Opinion
and Party of Peter, his Colleague; less modest therein than Peter de Cluny, his
Contemporary, and also a great Enemy of the Albigensis, Contr. Petrobrus.
against whom he wrote under the name of Petrobusians; for he declares, that he
will suspend his Judgment of what was reported of Henry, until he was more
certainly informed of it. So that I cannot tell if it might not be applied unto
St. Bernard, In Frideric. l. 1. c. 47.
in this occasion, what was said by Otto de Frisinge; That by a mildness which
was natural unto him, he became, in a manner, over credulous. In fine, St.
Bernard being come to Toulouse, Vita Bernard. l. 3. c. 5, 6.
he bestirred himself with much success (if we believe the Author's of his
Life) having with his Sermons, attended with Miracles, instructed the Ignorant,
confirmed those which wavered, restored them which had gone astray, and
scattered the Gainsayers, who dared not present themselves before him.
Nevertheless, the consequence of matters did not answer the pretended success
of this Voyage; for Historians write, that the numbers of the Albigensis did
mightily increase after this Voyage. It is what is precisely observed by
Papyrius Masso, in his History of France: for, after having spoken of Henry,
Successor unto Peter, of the Letter of St. Bernard, unto the Count of St.
Giles, and of his Voyage unto Toulouse, he adds, Moreover, Hist. Franc. l. 3.
in Philip. August.
neither the death of Peter de Bruis, nor the preaching of St. Bernard could
hinder the progress of this Sect, etc. Toulouse, Albi, Carcassona, Beziers,
Agde, Castres, Lavaur, and almost all the Cities and Villages of Languedock had
embraced it; In Chronico.
insomuch that William de Puylaurens wrote in his Chronicle, that the
Inhabitants of Castelverd made light of the Sermons of St. Bernard, and
esteemed them erroneous.

About the same time Arnold of Bress appeared in Italy, teaching the same
Doctrine which Peter de Bruis and Henry of Toulouse did teach in France; Otto
Frising. in Frideric. l. 2. c. 20.
which is the reason that Otto de Frisinge, amongst many other things he lays
to his charge, accuses him to have bad Opinions touching the Sacrament of the
Altar: but in fine, either for that, and for the other things he taught, or for
the liberty he used in speaking against the Court of Rome, against the Clergy
and the Friars, he was burnt at Rome, Anno 1155. under Pope Adrian the Fourth,
and his Ashes cast into the River Tiber, fearing, says Otto and Guntherius,
Gunther. de Gest. Frid. l. 3. De investig. Antich. l. 1.
lest the people which followed him should honor his body, as the body of a
Martyr: and because Gerhohus Rescherspergensis, a Writer of the same Age, could
not forbear saying, That he could have wished the Church had not been guilty of
that man's blood, who might have been corrected with some milder and easier
punishment; the Jesuit Gretzer, not relishing an expression of so much Humanity
and mildness, said, Prolegom. in scriptor. cont. Valdens. c. 4.
That Gerhohus spoke of the punishment of Arnold with no little
dis-satisfaction.

Five years after the death of Arnold of Bress, according to the testimony of
Historians, Peter Waldo, a Citizen of Lions appeared; who having found whole
Countries of people separated from the Latin Church, he adhered unto them, with
those which followed him, to make but one Body and Society, by the unity of the
same Faith and Doctrine; they were no better used than the others had been: for
Waldo having declared himself publicly, in the Year 1160. I find, that in the
Year 1167. there was caused to be burnt at Vezelay in Burgundy, near unto
Lions, of which place Waldo was, some of his followers, under the name of
Donarii, or Poplicani; which is one of the names given unto the Waldensis;
which, in all likelihood, was turned by the Flemings into that of Pifles; for
so it is they were called in Flanders. The History of Vezelay places the death
of those persons, Tom. 3. Spicil. p. 644, 645.
which were seven in number, in the Year 1167. I know that all are not agreed
of the time wherein Waldo began to appear, and that some make it to before the
time we have mentioned. Nevertheless, because the commonest and most received
Opinion agrees, that he appeared about the Year 1160. we refer it thereunto, as
to the most probable Epoch, and that which is most generally consented unto by
Historians. But if all agree not of the time, neither do they agree of the
personal Qualities of Waldo; some representing him to be stupid, ignorant and
unlearned; and others, on the contrary, not denying him to be well learned. In
this diversity of Opinions, it appears very reasonable to prefer the testimony
of those which lived near that time, before such as wrote a long while after;
especially, seeing there is nothing that should render the former to be
suspected: Therefore it is, that in this occasion I give the preferrence unto
Reynerus, of the Order of preaching Friars; because he flourished in the XIII.
Century, about ninety years after Waldo began to preach. So that if he lived
but twenty years after, then Reynerus wrote seventy years after his death.
Besides, Reynerus was a declared Enemy of the Waldensis, against whom he wrote;
there is no likelihood then that he would flatter Waldo, Contra Valdens. c. 5.
nor attribute unto him what was not his Right. Now see what he says; The Sect
of the Poor of Lions, which were also called Leonists, began thus: Some of the
chiefest Citizens of Lions being one day together, it happened that one of them
died suddenly, in presence of the rest; which struck such a terror into one of
the Company, that immediately he distributed great treasures unto the Poor, so
that very great multitudes of people followed him, whom he taught to profess
voluntary poverty, and to imitate Jesus Christ and his Apostles: and having
some competent knowledge of Letters, he taught them the New Testament in the
Vulgar Tongue. It is a sign, that if he understood not Greek, he, at least,
understood Latin enough to expound the Latin Translation into the Language of
the Country. Of this Waldo they were called Waldensis; and of the City of
Lions, of which he was, Leonists, or the Poor of Lions, as before they had been
called Petrobrusians, from Peter de Bruis; and Henritians, of Henry: and of
some other Doctors they had, they were called Arnoldists, Esperonists,
Josephists, Lollards: others at several times, in several places, and on
several occasions, have called them Albigensis, Tholousians, Picards, Poplicani
or Pifles, Bogomiles, Bulgarians, Patarians, Insabatas, Gazarians, Turlupians;
and by several other names.

As for their Doctrine and Belief, even those which have an aversion and hatred
for their name and memory, do testify that it was conformable unto that of the
Albigensis. The Waldensis, says Mariana, are the same with the Albigensis,
Mariana pr^f. in Lucam Tud.
seeing the Doctrine both of the one and the other, contains almost the same
Articles; neither were they much distant in time one from the other: and
therefore it is, that Emery, of the Order of preaching Friars, and Inquisitor
of the Kingdom of Arragon, did not reckon the Albigensis amongst the other
Heretics; which I observe to have been done by other Authors of that Age, for
the same reason. Gretzer, who hated them no less than Mariana, speaks also in
the same manner: Episc. praeixa scriptor. cont. Valdens. c. 1.
There is a difference betwixt the Albigensis and Waldensis (says he) in
regard of the name, but not of the thing it self. And in his Prologomenies upon
the the same Writers, he testifies, That there is no doubt, but the Tholousians
and Albigensis, condemned, Anno 1177. and 1178. were no others but the
Waldensis. Neither does Monsieur de Thoul make any difference betwixt them, in
the sixth Book of his History. Which suffices to show, that the Waldensis, as
well as the Albigensis, had an Opinion contrary unto the Latin Church, upon the
point of the Sacrament, seeing we fully proved it in regard of the Albigensis;
from whose Belief and Faith, the Waldensis did nothing differ. What they say,
may be read in a Treatise entitled, The spiritual Almanac; where they give an
account of their Faith; particularly, upon the Subject of the Sacrament: for
they say in plain terms, History of the Waldensis and Albigensis, of Paul
Perrin, l. 1. c. 6.
That the bread which Jesus Christ took in his last Supper, which he blessed,
which he broke, and gave his Disciples to eat, is in its nature true bread; and
that by the Pronoun This, is shown, this sacramental proposition, This is my
Body: not understanding these words identically, of a numerical Identity; but
sacramentally, really and truly; and not measurably. And afterward; The eating
of the sacramental bread, Ibid.
is to eat the body of Jesus Christ in figure. Which is just the Language used
by the Albigensis, in the Year 1120. as has been showed. But besides their own
Confession, we have the Testimony of their very Enemies; which suffer us to
make no question but that they opposed themselves against the Decrees of
Councils held under several Popes, against Berengarius. Radulphus Ardeas, an
Author of the XII. Century, or of the XI. makes this Observation, Hom. in Dom.
8. post Pentec.
They say that the Sacrament of the Altar is mere bread. Caesarius of
Heisterback, In Dialog.
They blaspheme the Sacrament of the body and blood of Jesus Christ; Contr.
Vald. c. 6.
to wit, because they did not acquiesce unto the determinations of the Latin
Church. And Reynerus, They say that the Body of Jesus Christ is but bread; but
the proper body, they call that the true Body of Jesus Christ. De erroribus
Begehard.
Conradus de Montepuellarum, Prebend of Ratisbon, They blaspheme (says he)
against the Sacrament, saying, That the true Body of Jesus Christ cannot be
contained under so small a quantity of bread: and against the Priests; calling
them, through derision, Contra Vald. c. 8.
God-makers. Evrard of Bethune says the same; They are so far from saying,
that what Christ called his Body, is his Body, that they deny it, Contra Vald.
c. 11.
as Successors of Judas. Ermengard wrote somewhat to the same effect, touching
the same Waldensis: it is the same Slander which is made against them by Guy of
Perpignan; Lib. de haeres.
saying, That they denied that the real Body and Blood of Jesus Christ was
under the Sacrament of the Altar. Tom. 2. c. 19.
And Thomas Waldensis, speaking of Bruno and Berengarius; They erred (said he)
like those. He observes, moreover, That when the Host was lifted up, they
lifted their eyes up unto Heaven; saying openly, that they worshipped the Body
of Christ where it was, Contra Vald. c. 10.
and not where it was not. Coussard, a Divine of Paris, speaks of them also in
these terms, They say that the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ is not the real
Sacrament, but consecrated bread, which is called the Body of Jesus Christ by a
Figure; as it is said, that the Rock was Christ. Therefore the Inquisitor
Emery, Director. part 2. q. 14.
charge it upon them as an Error, when they said, That the Bread is not
transubstantiated into the true Body of Jesus Christ, nor the Wine into his
Blood. And because the Albigensis and Waldensis, to show that they could not
conceive that the Eucharist was the real Body of Jesus Christ, were wont to
say, that how big soever it had been, it could not subsist still; because the
numbers of Communicants would have consumed it since the time they participated
thereof. Peter de Vaux-Sernay writes, that they taught publicly, and infused
this Doctrine into the ears of the simple. Hist. Albigens. c. 2.
That the Body of Jesus Christ, if it had been as big as the Alps, had been
consumed long since, and reduced unto nothing, by those which eat thereof. And
I find in the Chronicle of the Senonian Monastery, at the Mount de Vauge, in
the Diocese de Toul, that a Person of Quality, upon that very consideration,
rejected the Doctrine of the Real Presence and Substantial Conversion; for
being sick of his last Sickness, at the end of the XII. Century, they going
about to persuade him that the Sacrament was the real Body of Jesus Christ:
Tom. 2. Spicil. p. 405.
And how (says he) can that be? For if this Body were as big as a great
Mountain, it would have been eaten by the people a thousand times. There be
some which observe also that Berengarius was wont to jest by the like words at
the Confession of Faith which they would have him make, and wherein they made
him confess amongst other things, Petrus Clunia. contra Petrobrus.
That the Body of Jesus Christ is truly handled by the hands of the Priests,
that it is broen and eaten by the teeth of Believers. I will join unto all
these Considerations, that we find in the History of Roger de Hoveden, by the
relation of Peter, Cardinal of St. Chrysogan, and Legate of Pope Alexander the
Third, in France, touching his proceedings against the Waldensis at Toulouse;
and principally, by the Declaration of Henry, Abbot of Clervaux, upon the same
Subject; That one of the eminentest amongst them, called Peter Moran, being
pressed to declare ingenuously what he believed concerning the Sacrament of the
Altar; answered, Apud Baron. ad An. 1178.
That the holy Bread of Life Eternal, consecrated by the Ministry of the
Priest, and by the word of our Savior, is not the Body of Jesus Christ. A
Declaration which fully justifies that it was the true Belief of the Albigensis
and Waldensis; and shows that they were deceived which said, that they did
not deny that the Eucharist was the true Body of Jesus Christ, but when him
that celebrated and consecrated was sinful and unworthy to consecrate: for they
denied it simply and absolutely, without enquiring into the good or bad
qualities of him that officiated. And the most considerable Doctors of the
Latin Communion do confess, that they had the same Belief that Berengarius had
of the Sacrament: and it cannot justly be any way questioned, after all the
many Testimonies which have been instanced.

It is true that the Albigensis and Waldensis have been taxed and charged with
many reproaches, and there has been many grievous Accusations laid to their
charge, both referring unto their Doctrine and their Manners. As to their
Doctrine, I think that their Belief ought to be judged according to their
Confessions of Faith; which being public Declarations of their Opinions, makes
all the Accusations contrary thereunto, to be void; because we cannot judge of
the Faith of a Society, and of a Communion, but by the Confession which it
makes; to the prejudice whereof, nothing more can lawfully be charged upon it.
It seems to me to be the true means, certainly to judge of the Belief of those
of whom we speak, and of the Accusations which have been laid to their charge.
Peter of Cluny, writing against the Petrobrusians, that is to say, against the
Disciples of Peter de Bruis, or against the Albigensis, says, That the report
is, Peter Cluny contra Petrobrus.
that they believe neither in Jesus Christ, nor in the Prophets, nor Apostles;
and that they deny the Old and New Testament, that they reject the whole Canon
of the Scriptures. Which, nevertheless, I will not believe (says he) nor
accuse them of things so uncertain. Which Proceeding so far appeared very just
and reasonable; for a Christian's Charity should not be suspicious. And, in
fine; see here what they declared in the Year 1120. Hist. of Albing. by Paul
Perrin c. 1. l. 3.
forty years before Waldo appeared. It is evident (say they) both by the Old
and New Testament, that a Christian is obliged by the Commandment enjoined him,
that he should depart from Antichrist: which they prove by sundry passages of
Esaias, Jeremiah, Ezekiel; of Leviticus, Numbers, Exodus, Deuteronomy; of St.
Matthew, St. John, and the Revelations. The report was also, as the same Peter
de Cluny says, That they denied that little Children, under a reasonable age,
could be saved by the Baptism of Jesus Christ. Nevertheless, I only can find
this in their Confession; Ubi supra c. 4.
What is not necessary in the Administration of Baptism, are the Exorcisms,
blowing, the sign of the Cross upon the breast and face of the Infant, the Salt
which is put into the mouth, and the Spittle put into their ears and nose, etc.
And about eighty or ninety years after Waldo began to appear, Reynerus, one of
their greatest Enemies, Cap 5. and 3.
gives them this Testimony; They commonly have by heart the Text of the new
Testament, and good part of the old; they have the old and new Testament
translated into the vulgar Tongue; and so they do teach and learn it. I saw and
heard one of their Peasants, who repeated, word by word, the Book of Job; and
several others of them, who repeated perfectly all the New Testament. And
elsewhere; Cap. 4.
all other kind of Sects (says he) are monstrous, by reason of the Blasphemies
which they audaciously offer against God: but as for the Sect of the Leonists (
that is to say, the Waldensis) they have a great appearance of piety, because
they live uprightly and justly in the sight of Men, and have a sound Belief for
all that concerns God, and of all the Articles which are contained in the
Creed. If those people had good and sound thoughts touching God, and a right
Belief of all the Articles of the Apostle's Creed, as their very Adversaries do
confess, as well as their own Confession of Faith, it is impossible they should
either be Arians, or Manicheans. It must then be said, that those which charged
them with both these Heresies, were very ill informed of their Belief. And to
say the truth, Reynerus, their Persecutor, has spoken so much in their
commendation, that he sufficiently warrants them from the impiety of Manes, and
the Heresy of Arius. Also in the same Treatise, he carefully distinguishes
them from the Catharians, and Manicheans; Cap. 6.
for he says, That there was not in the whole World above four thousand
Catharians, Men and Women; but as for the Believers, they were without number:
for so it is he calls the Walaensis; Cap. 1. and 12.
as also does Pilichdorphius, who wrote against them; and observes that the
Waldensis rejected several Sects of Heretics which were then in the World.
Hist. Albin. c. 2. In Prol. chron.
And Peter de Vaux-Sernay, and William de Puy-Lawrans, Authors of that Age,
make a difference betwixt the Albigensis and the Waldensis, and the Manicheans
and Arians. Thence it is that neither Pilichdorfius, nor Bernard, Abbot de
Fon-caude, nor Emery, do not accuse them of Manicheism, nor of Arianism, in the
List of the Errors which they impute unto them, which consists chiefly in
denying most of the Doctrines of the Latin Church, which the Protestants do
also reject. Certainly William de Newbridge, although their great Enemy,
clears them from all suspicion of these two Impieties; Rerum Angl. l. 2. c.
13.
when speaking of the Albigensis under the name of Publicans, which passed from
Gascoygne, into England, he says, Being examined by order upon the Articles of
their Faith, they answered very well as to what regarded the Essence of the
chief Physician, but ill as to the Remedies whereby he is pleased to heal
humane Infirmities; that is to say, the Divine Sacraments.

All these considerations makes me not approve the proceedings of Mariana and
of Gretzer, who, to make believe that these Christians were really guilty of
the abominations of Manes, and the Blasphemies of Arius, have changed the title
of certain Authors which they have published, and which have written not only
against the Albigensis and Waldensis, but also against others; for instance,
Luke (...) Tude had given this Title unto his Book, Of the life to come, and of
Controversies of Faith. But Mariana, to make the Readers believe this work only
regarded the Albigensis, has given it this Title, In Ep. ad Carvajalium
Cauricus Episcop.
Against the Error of the Albigensis; And in his Letter unto Carvajalius, I
purpose (says he) to publish Luke de Tude his Dispute against the Heretics of
his time, that is to say, the Albigensis (for this Sect was strong in the days
of Luke:) Reynerius had thus entitled his Book, A Treatise touching Heretics:
And Gretzer has given it this inscription, Against the Waldensis; Although the
Author does testify that he writes also against others; which were of
Opinions different from those of the Waldensis: And whereas Everard de Bethuna
was content with this Title, Antihaeresis, that is to say, against Heresies. In
which Treatise he refutes chiefly the Mannicheans without naming them; the same
Gretzer has made no scruple to entitle it, Against the Waldensis; Bernard de
Fon-caude gave this name unto his Treatise, Against the Waldensis, and against
the Arians; so evidently distinguishing in that manner, the Waldensis from the
Arians; but Gretzer contented himself with this only, against the Waldensis. In
fine, Ermingard had placed this Title to his Book, Against the Heretics which
believe and say, that this World and all visible things are not the work of
God, but of the Devil; that is to say, against the Manicheans; and Gretzer has
placed over each page, against the Waldensis. But this kind of conduct is so
far from rendering those people more odious, according to the intention of those
which do it, that on the contrary, it serves to justify them; and to make the
reproaches which they have been charged with, to pass for malicious slanders. I
will not here insist upon their taxing the same Albigensis and Waldensis, of
denying Marriage; because, besides their positive Declaration on this matter,
their very Enemies confess, that they do even condemn the abuse and
intemperance of Marriage; so it is that Reynerus their persecutor speaks, who
had often assisted at their Examinations; Cap. 5.
They condemn Marriage (says he) in saying, that married persons sin mortally,
if they marry without hopes of begetting Children. Coussard also makes this
remark, They say that Marriage is sworn Adultery, Coussard. fol. 60.
if it be not accompanied with Continency; that is to say, if the bounds of
reasonable moderation and natural usodesty be not observed.

Wherefore then, may it be asked, were the Albegensis and Waldensis accused by
some of being Manicheans? for what appearance is there that they should have
been accused of this cursed Heresy, if they had been no way guilty of it? Unto
this the Protestants, which undertake to defend their Innocence, will not fail
to answer, that it happened unto them as it did unto the primitive Christians,
who were charged with grievous crimes, and unheard of wickednesses, although
the World was never blessed with more pure and innocent Souls. The thing
appears sufficiently by the testimonies of their very Enemies; who were
constrained to confess they were neither Manicheans, nor Arians; but only
Adversaries of the Doctrine and Worship of the Latins; and so their Innocence
it self is sufficiently vindicated, if it were so that we could not discover
the motive of these Accusations. Nevertheless, it is very probable they were
induced to lay these Accusations unto their charge, because there was in their
time in France, and elsewhere in the West, great numbers of Manicheans,
Catharians, Arians, and other Heretics; so that inhabiting many times in the
same places, some through ignorance, as the common people; and others through
Malice, as the Doctors; made no difficulty of charging them with the Impieties
of these Heretics, who lived at the same time, and in the same places: And it
was so much the easier to make the people believe it, in seeing these Heretics
to be opposite unto the Latin Church, as well as the Albigensis and Waldensis,
although by very different motives: that they easily thought they had been all
united together against her; and by consequence, of the same Belief, and of the
same Opinion. It is true, that the same Authors which wrote against the
Albigensis and the Waldensis, whom we have already mentioned, wrote also
against the Catharians, Manicheans, Arians, and other Heretics; which shows
that there were considerable numbers of them at the time that they wrote
against the Waldensis. And as for the Catharians and Manicheans in particular,
we cannot doubt but that Italy, France and Germany was infected with them, Ad
An. 10 22.
after what several Historians have written. Nicholas Vignier reports in his
Ecclesiastical History, the Testimony of a certain Author, who writes, that
these Catharians, or Manicheans had passed from Bulgaria and Slavonia, into
Italy; and says, that they were very numerous in Lombardy; from whence they
passed afterward into France. Wherefore, about the Year 1017. some of them
were put to death at Orleans, in the presence of King Robert, and of Constance
his Wife, after Judgment being given by the Prelates, assembled in that City
for retrieving these miserable Creatures from their impieties; but it was in
vain, for they therein persisted to the last gasp, excepting one of them who
was a Clergyman of Orleans, and a Nun; which acknowledged their error: but as
for all the rest, especially two Priests of the same City, Stephen and Lisoius,
they were burnt alive; which, if my memory fail not, is the first Execution
unto death practiced against Heretics, ever since what had been done against
the Priscilianists, in the days of St. Martin, Bishop of Tours, in the IV. Tom.
2. Spicil. p. 670, 671, etc.
Century. Dom Luke d'Achery has inserted in one of the Tomes of his
Collections, the Acts of this Synod of Orleans held against the Manicheans.
Several Historians make mention of this Execution; and have observed, that ten
of the Prebends of the Church of Holy Cross of Orleans, who seemed to have more
piety than the rest, were chiefly comprised in this Condemnation. Tom. 2. Bibl.
l'Abbe p. 180, 181.
Amongst others, the Friar Ademar, who wrote his Chronicle at that time, and
who, besides these Manicheans at Orleans, makes mention of several others which
were discovered at Toulouse: and he observes with other Authors, that there
were great numbers of them in several Countries in the West. But I cannot tell
but the knowledge of another Assembly, convocated against the Manicheans, is
due unto Ademar; Ibid. p. 184.
for thus he speaks at the end of his Chronicle, Of late Duke William assembled
at Charrou a Council of Bishops and Abbots, to suppress the Heresies which the
Manicheans went dispersing about. And Herman Contract writes, upon the Year
1052. Hom. Domin. 8 post Trinitat.
that the Emperor Henry caused several to be hanged at Goslar. And Radolphus
Ardens, at the end of the XI. Century, does in his Sermons at Again in Guyen,
vigorously pursue the Manicheans. The Manicheans then, to reassume our
History, being in so great numbers in France, in the time of the Albigensis and
Waldensis; these latter might, through ignorance or malice, be charged with the
Errors of the former.

But having shown what the Enemies of the Waldensis and Albigensis wrote of
their Doctrine, and what they themselves declared in their Confessions, it will
be requisite to say something of their Life and Manners. If we enquire of
Reynerus, their Persecutor, Cap. 7.
he will informs us, That they were to be known by their life, and by their
words; because they were modest and civil in their manners, without pride in
their Apparel; which was neither vile, nor over-costly. That to avoid lying,
swearing and fraud, they gave not themselves much unto Merchandising: that they
had no great desire of gathering much Wealth, contenting themselves with things
necessary: that they were sober and chaste; not frequenting Taverns not Dances,
nor other vanities of this nature: that they suffered themselves not to be
overcome with passion: that they labored continually, and were always employed
in teaching others, or instructing themselves: that they spoke but little, and
modestly: that they would not suffer jesting, nor sharp reflections; avoiding
indiscreet words, censusuring, lying and swearing. And another Author without
name, which wrote against them, whom the Jesuit Gretzer has printed with
Pilichdorfius, testifies of their Teachers, whom he calls Arch-Hereticks: That
they showed them the good examlpes of Humility, Liberality, Chastity, Sobriety;
of Peace, Mildness and Charity. Therefore others have left upon Record, ^^cob.
de Repiria in coll^crand. de urb. ^olos. Gaill de Podio ^aurent. prolog. Chron.
in the Eccle^iastical Histo^^ of Nicholas Vignier, upon the Year 1^^6 Cap 4.
That they were so respected, that they were not made to watch, nor to pay
Taxes; and that when any military person traveled with them, he needed not to
fear being injured by his Enemies. William Paradin, in his Annals of Burgundy,
says, That he had read some Histories which cleared the Albigensis from all
the crimes which had been laid to their charge; affirming, that they had not
been guilty of them, and that they never did any thing but reprove the Vices
and Abuses of the Clergy.

With this Doctrine and Conversation, the Albigensis and Waldensis spread
abroad into all parts; which made Reynerus, their Eenemy, say, That of all the
Sects which is, or has been, there is none more dangerous unto the Church than
that of the Leonists, or Lyonists (for so they were called, from the City of
Lions, from whence Waldo went out) because it is the ancientest; for some say,
it has been ever since the days of Sylvester; and others, from the days of the
Apostles; and because also it is of the largest extent, there being scarce any
place but that they are to be found. But it must not be imagined that they were
suffered to live long in peace in the places of their habitation. In fine, the
Waldensis were expelled out of Lions; whereupon they were constrained to seek
for refuge; some of them in the Valleys of Dauphin and Piedmont, and others in
Picardy; from whence they passed afterward into Bohemia: in which places they
subsisted for several Ages, notwithstanding the violence of sundry
Persecutions; Fol. 2.
as is fully represented by Dubravius, and Claud de Cecil, Bishop of Turin.
There is (says the latter) above two hundred years that this Heresy has
subsisted in this Diocese, particularly in the farthest parts of it, and near
the Straits of the Alps which divide France and Italy; as well in the King of
France his Dominions, as in the Territories of the Duke of Savoy. And the
former, upon the Year 1160. It was (says he) at this time that the Heresy of
the Piccards began to flourish under an ill Planet, to the end that none should
think that that which of late has made so great a progress in Bohemia, is any
new thing. He calls the Waldensis, Piccards; because, after having been driven
away from Lions, several of them, and Waldo himself (as some do report) retired
themselves into Picardy; from whence they were called Picards, as they had been
called Albigensis, from the Country of Albi; where they remained and subsisted
until the latter end of the XIII. Century, notwithstanding the furious attempts
made by Princes and Prelates against them; as appears by Paul Perrin's History
of the Albigensis, Lib. 2. c 11.
which proves it by authentical Evidences; one of which, amongst the rest, is
dated in the Year 1281. as it is found in several other Authors, who make
mention of several Croisada's raised against the Albigensis, and the Waldensis,
during the greatest part of the XIII. Century.

But as we write the History of the XII. Century, we may not forget two
considerable circumstances. First, That in that Age, Stephen, Bishop of Autun,
began to use the word Transubstantiation: and because there were two Bishops of
Autun of this name, in the same Age, the first of which was advanced unto this
Dignity in the Year 1112. and the other in the Year 1160. or thereabouts, it is
not exactly known which of the two it was that began to make use of this term.
In fine, one or the other of them said, De Sacram. Altaric. c. 13.
That the Oblation of Bread and Wine is transubstantiated into the Body and
Blood of Jesus Christ. Yet nevertheless, Lombard, Master of the Sentences, his
Contemporary, and of the same Opinion in the main of the Doctrine, L. 4. did.
c. 11.
dared not to determine of what nature this Conversion is; either formal, or
substantial, or of some other kind. The other circumstance which deserves to be
considered is, that at the end of that Century, Hubbert, Archbishop of
Canterbury in England, and Legate of Pope Celestine, caused a Synod to be held
at York; where, amongst other things, he commanded that when any sick persons
were to be communicated, that the Priest himself should carry the Host, Rog. de
Hoved. in Rich. II.
clothed with Priestly Habits suitable unto so great a Sacrament, with Lights
born before it, unless there were some cause to the contrary: and it is whereof
we shall have further occasion to speak in the last part of this History.

Now let us examine what passed in the XIII. Century, at the first beginning
whereof, Stat. Synod. c. 5. t. 6. Bibl. Pat.
Odo, Bishop of Paris, made in one of his Synods certain Constitutions
concerning the Sacrament; as, Of the manner of carrying it unto the Sick, Of
the Adoration of those which met it; Of keeping of it in the best part of the
Altar, Of locking it up safe, with several precautions, in case it happened
that any part of the Body or Blood of Jesus Christ should fall to the Ground,
Ibid. in praeceptis communibus praecep^o, 23, 24.
or if any Fly or Spider should fall into the Blood. But because most of these
things do relate unto the Worship, we will omit speaking of it, until we come
to consider wherein Christians made their Worship and Devotion, in regard of
the Sacrament, chiefly to consist. I shall only say, that it was with Odo, as
it happened unto several others after the Condemnation of Berengarius: I mean,
that they retained several ancient expressions, although the Doctrine was
changed; and that since this Change happened, which is pretended to be at the
beginning of the IX. Century, by Paschas, and to have been established by
public Authority in the XI. by some Popes in their Councils; these kinds of
expressions do not very well agree, as many say, with the Belief of the Latins.
For example; this precaution of Odo; If there falls to the Ground any part of
the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ: because, say the Protestants, the Fathers
might very well say so, seeing they believed that the Eucharist was Bread and
Wine in substance, and the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ in Sacrament, and in
virtue. But as for the Latins since Berengarius, they believe that it is the
real Body and Blood of Jesus Christ; therefore they cannot reasonably say, that
any part of it falls to the ground, because the substance it self of the Body
and Blood of the Son of God is not subject unto any such accident.

Some Years after, that is to say, in the Year 1207. Amalarick, or Amaury of
Chartres, was in great esteem for his Learning, as Gaguinus reports, in his
sixth Book of the History of France; and he teaches, amongst other things,
That the Body of Jesus Christ was not any more in the Bread of the Altar than
in any other Bread, or in any thing else; denying Transubstantiation; as
Bernard of Luxemburg, Lib. 4. ad Ann. 1215.
Prateolus and Alphonso de Castro have observed; and after them, Gennebrard in
his Chronology. It is true, he was accused of denying the Resurrection of the
Dead, Heaven and Hell; and of believing several other things which were not
justifiable: but because these Accusations are brought by those which approved
not his Judgment touching the holy Sacrament, the Reader may judge what credit
they ought to have against the memory of this Man, whilst I shall observe that
Pope Innocent the Third, in his Council of Lateran, in the Year 1145. condemned
Amalarick, even after he was dead; and if we believe Gaguinus, he died of grief
for having been forced to retract, but upon another Subject than that of the
Sacrament, whereof this Historian makes no mention; neither does Innocent the
Third declare for what Error it was that he condemned him. Cap. 2.
We reject also (says he) and do condemn the most pernicious Tenent of the
wicked Amaury, of whom the Father of Lies has so blinded the Understanding,
that his Doctrine ought rather to be accounted an Extravagance, than a Heresy.
After which, they fell upon the Ashes of this Man; for his Body, Gaguin. ubi
sapra.
which had been buried behind St. Martin's Church in Paris, was dis-interred,
and burnt.

The same Innocent the Third, in the same Council, approving the word
Transubstantiation, which Stephen, Bishop of Autun, had invented, and the thing
designed by the word, made this Decree; Cap. 1.
The Body and Blood of Jesus Christ are really contained under the Species of
Bread and Wine, in the Sacrament of the Altar; the Bread being
transubstantiated into the Body, and the Wine into the Blood. I say, Innocent
made this Decree, because, in effect, that was practiced in this Council, which
was not usually practiced in Councils before. I mean, that the Prelates of the
Assembly had not the liberty of giving their Voices and Consent; seeing they
neither proposed, nor deliberated, nor gave their Opinion, nor made any
Constitutions, which are there in great numbers: but they were presented unto
the Council ready cut and dry; it not appearing that the Advice of the Assembly
was taken upon each of them, as is usually done in all free and lawful
Councils. Matthew Paris, an English Historian, speaks in these terms; Ad Ann.
1115.
Every body being assembled at the place abovesaid, and each one, according to
the custom of general Councils, having taken his place; the Pope having first
made a Speech of Exhortation, there were sixty Articles read in open Council,
which seemed tolerable unto some, and burdensome unto others. Godfrey, a Friar
of St. Pantaleon at Cologne, said, That there was nothing worthy of memory
acted in this Council, if it were not, that the Eastern Church submitted it
self unto the Church of Rome; which had not been heard of before. Nauclerius
and Platina, in the Life of Innocent the Third, say the same, seeing they
write, Ad Ann. 1115.
That several things were there put into deliberation; but yet, nevertheless,
nothing was clearly nor openly determined. After all, the Decree of Innocent,
in favor of the Real Presence, regarded not only Amaury of Chartres, who
taught the contrary, but also the Albigensis; as Binnius does confess in his
Notes upon this Council, and as I do infer from a Conference which the Legates
of Innocent the Third had nine years before, with some of the Pastors of the
Albigensis, in the City of Montreal, near Carcassona; where Arnold Hot, which
spoke in behalf of the Albigensis, History of Al(...) by Paul Per^in. l. 1. c.
2.
proposed this Thesis; That the Mass and Transubstantiation were the inventions
of men, and not the Command of Jesus Christ and his Apostles. The Acts of this
Conference were seen, and in his possession that wrote the History. But in
fine, Innocent the Third, seeing he could not prevail over those people by
Dispute and Argument, he had recourse unto more violent Remedies; I mean,
public and downright Persecutions; even so far as to grant unto all such as
would take Arms against them, and destroy them, the same Indulgences which were
granted unto those which crossed themselves for the recovering of the Holy Land
from the Turks: Council. Lateran. sub Innocen. (...). c. 3.
That the Catholics (says he) that cross themselves for the exterminating of
Heretics, shall enjoy the same privileges and Indulgences, which is given unto
those which go to the Recovery of the Holy Land. Tom. 7. Spicil. p. 210.
And Dom Luke d'Achery, in one of the Tomes of his Collections, has given us
the Sentence of the Council of Lateran, or rather of Innocent, by advice, as he
says, of the Council, wherein he grants unto the Count de Mountford all the
Lands which the Crusado had taken from the Count of Toulouse, Tom 2. Spicil. p.
610. 612. 619.
and from the Albigensis; especially the Cities of Toulouse and Montauban, as
being most infected with this Heresy: according unto which, he assembled and
held a Council at Avignon, in the Year 1209. by Hugh, Bishop of Ries in
Provence, his Legate: where it was concluded, that the Heretics should be
expelled, according to the Oath which he caused the Consuls of Montpellier to
take the same year; Ibid. p. 611 etc. and p. 63^, etc.
the which was again renewed in a Council held at Toulouse, Anno 1228. and in
another at Albi, Anno 1254. Which shows plainly, that Languedock was still
full of Waldensis and Albigensis, as well as several other parts of Gascoygne.

I pass over at this time the Ordinances of Honorius the Third, Successor unto
Innocent, and of Gregory the Ninth, which took Honorius his Chair, touching the
Adoration of the Host; nor of the Institution of the Feast of the Sacrament, by
Urban the Fourth; because we shall be obliged to speak of it in the Third Part
of this Work. But I will insist upon the consideration of one thing which I
cannot pass over in silence, without prejudicing this History: it regards Guy
le Gross, Archbishop of Narbonna; who going to visit Pope Clement the Fourth,
formerly his intimate friend, being at his Court, and there discoursing with a
man of Learning, could not forbear declaring unto him his Opinion touching the
Eucharist, which was directly contrary unto Transubstantiation; whicy Pope
Clement having understood after his Return, wrote unto him, and represented,
that he was of an ill persuasion, and that he must recant it. And it appears by
this Pope's Letter, that the Archbishop maintained, that this Opinion was very
common amongst the Doctors of Paris. The Letter was taken from the Register of
Manuscript Letters of Clement the Fourth, about fourteen years ago. Aubertin, a
Protestant Minister, inserted it in the third Book of his Latin Treatise of the
Sacrament, it being communicated unto him by one of his friends; and I having
been informed of late by a person of good Reputation, who saw it before it was
published by Aubertin, that it is for certain in the Register, I will make no
scruple of representing it here in our Language, that the Reader might judge of
what consequence it is in regard of the matter which we examine. See here then
what Pope Clement wrote unto this Archbishop. In Registr. m^nuscript. Ep^^^
Clement. ^^.
The more sincere our love is unto you, the more we have been touched in
hearing certain things of you, which agree not with the gravity of your Office;
considering especially that they endanger your Dignity, and your Honor. I
write unto you familiarly, and unknown unto any body, excepting him that writes
the Letter, to let you know that I am informed, whilst you were in our Court,
and discoursed with a certain Doctor touching the Sacrament of the Altar, you
said unto him, that the Body of our Lord Jesus Christ was not essentially in
the Eucharist, no otherwise than the thing signified is in the Sign: And that
you said, moreover, that this Opinion is in great esteem at Paris. This
discourse being secretly whispered amongst some persons, and being at last come
to our knowledge, I was much troubled at it; and I could scarce believe that
you would have spoken things which contain manifest Heresy, and which are
contrary to the truth of this Sacrament, wherein Faith does operate with so
much the more benefit, as it surpasses Sense, captivates the Understanding,
and subjects Reason under its Laws. Therefore I counsel you not to be wiser
than you should: and not to impute to the Doctors of Paris, Opinions which they
believe not; but that you humbly confess, and firmly believe what the Church
believes, and what the Saints preach and teach, viz. That the Body and Blood
of Jesus Christ, although he be locally in Heaven, is truly, really and
essentially, under the Species of Bread and Wine, after the Priest has
pronounced the sacred words, according to the usage of the Church. And if by
hazard you remember him or them, unto whom you have said it, revoke it either
verbally, or by writing, to the end that those which suppose that you believe
what ought not to be believed of this great Mystery, might harbor no ill
Opinion of you. At Viterba, the 5th of the Calends of November, Anno the 3d.
that is, of his Popedom; which answers unto the Year of our Lord, 1268. This
Prelate being disheartened at the reading of this Letter, and fearing the loss
of his Office and Honor, denies having spoken what the Pope taxed him with;
and under obscure and intricate terms, made profession of believing what the
Church of Rome believed concerning this Mystery; yet in such a manner, that he
says certain things which agree not very well with this Doctrine, In Registro
Epist. Clemen. supra cit. Ep. 519.
and which seem to testify that this Archbishop of Narbona dared not freely to
declare his thoughts. The Body of Jesus Christ (says he) is understood four
several ways: 1. It is so called in regard of the resemblance, as the Species
of Bread and Wine, and that improperly. 2. It is taken for the material Flesh
of Jesus Christ, which was crucified and pierced with a Lance, and which was
first taken from the blessed Virgin: and this signification is proper. 3. For
the Church, or for its mystical Unity. 4. For the spiritual Flesh of Jesus
Christ, which is Meat indeed. And it is said of those which eat this Flesh
spiritually, that they do receive the truth of the Flesh and Blood of our
Savior. This Prelate makes a difference of the spiritual Flesh of Jesus
Christ which he proposes as the Food of Believers, from the Flesh of our Lord,
taken properly, and in its true signification: I cannot tell if his Opinion and
Judgment may not thereby be determined; which I leave unto others to do.
Whereas it is read in the Pope's Letter unto this Archbishop, that he said
that his Opinion, contrary to the Doctrine of the Real Presence, was famous and
frequent at Paris, it is not without great probability, if it be considered
that two years after, that is to say, Anno 1270. which was the year of the
death of St. Lewis; Stephen, Bishop of Paris, condemned, by advice of the
Doctors of Divinity, those which held, 1. That God does not make the Accident
to subsist without its Subject, Tom 4. Bibl. Pat. p. 924.
because it is of his Essence, that it should be actually in its subject. 2.
That the Accident without a Subject, is not an Accident, unless it be
equivocal. 3. That to make the Accident be without the Subject, as we believe
it is in the Sacrament, is a thing impossible, and implies a Contradiction. 4.
That God cannot make the Accident to be without the Subject, nor that there
should be several dimensions together. Maxims which being inconsistent with
Transubstantiation, declare, if I mistake not, that those which held them were
far from believing it; which I refer to the judgment of the Reader, contenting
my self in warning him, Tom. 2. Spicil. p. 795. anno 1236.
that instead of the Year 1227. which is marked at the beginning of this
Anathema, it should be the Year 1270. that about thirty years before, to wit,
the Year 1236. there were taken in diverse parts of France, Flanders,
Champaigne, Burgundy, and other Provinces, great numbers of Waldensis, under
the names of Bulgarians and Pifles; and that all those which would not renounce
their Faith were burnt alive, and their Goods confiscated, as the Chronicle of
St. Medard of Soissons does testify; where it is observed, that before that
time it was so practiced for three whole years together, and that the same
course was held the five years following without intermission; to wit, until
the Year 1241.

What I have now said of the Letter of Clement the Fourth, unto the Archbishop
of Narban, and that of this Prelate unto the Pope, and of the Condemnation of
certain Maxims which were condemned by Stephen, Bishop of Paris, will receive
much light from the History of what passed in the University of Paris in the
Year of our Lord, 1304. And see here what it is.

John of Paris, of the Order of Preaching Friars, that is, of Dominicans,
taught a manner of existing of the Body of Jesus Christ in the Sacrament of the
Altar, different from that which was commonly received in the Latin Church. He
does not indeed condemn the manner of existing of the Conversion of Bread into
the Body of Jesus Christ, which was the Opinion generally received amongst the
Latins; but he pretends that it is no Article of Faith, not having been
determined by the Church no more than that which he meant to establish; and
that therefore it was at every bodies free choice to embrace either the one or
the other, although he judged his safest, and subject unto less inconveniences.
And he makes it consist in the Assumption of the Bread by the Divinity, and in
that the substance of Bread remains in the Sacrament.

Thereby he explains the Retractation they made Berengarius make under Nicholas
the Second; to wit, That the Body of Jesus Christ is broken by the hands of the
Priest, and ground by the teeth of Believers; not only in Sacrament, but in the
verity it self. And he explains it in saying, that this should be understood by
the Bread which was taken by the Divinity; although that by a Communication of
Idioms, what befalls the Bread, should be attributed unto the Body of Jesus
Christ. It is by this same Communication of Idioms that he explains these
words; The Bread is the Body of Jesus Christ, the presence of Jesus Christ in
the Sacrament, and the eating of his Flesh: for he pretends that the glorified
Flesh of our Savior cannot be eaten, it being immortal. Caro Christi
glorificata non est manducabilis, impassibilis existens. And answering this
Objection which might be made against him, That if the substance of Bread
remained in the Sacrament of the Altar, as he did teach, it would follow that
it should be adored with the worship of Latrie, which would be more Idolatry:
he says, it would be Idolatry, if the Bread were adored in its own form (that
is to say, in it self;) but that there is no Idolatry, being adored in another
(that is to say) in the Divinity, which has taken it and has united it unto
it self.

But what I find more remarkable in this History is, that the Faculty of
Divinity of Paris did not condemn the Sentiment of this Doctor; on the
contrary, it formally declared, that it held for a probable Opinion both the
one and the other manner of making exist the Body of Jesus Christ in the
Sacrament. I say, that which John of Paris established, and the other which
depended on the change of the substance of Bread into the substance of the Body
of Jesus Christ; that it approved of both the one and the other; saying
nevertheless, that neither of these two ways had yet been determined by the
Church, and that neither of them, by consequence, was an Article of Faith: that
if this Doctor had spoke otherwise, he had spoke amiss; and that those which
speak otherwise, do not say well; and that whosoever should affirm
definitively, that either the one or the other of these two manners of the
presence of Jesus Christ in the Sacrament should precisely be esteemed matter
of Faith, that is, that it is a point of Faith, should incurr Sentence of
Excommunication.

And the more particularly to satisfy the Reader's curiosity, I will recite in
proper terms the Title of this little Treatise of John of Paris, his design,
his protestation, and the Judgment of the Faculty of Divinity; to the end he
may consider what was in that time the disposition of Christians in the West in
regard of the Sacrament; and how the most famous of all Faculties of Divinity
did esteem that the Church had not yet determined any thing touching the manner
of the presence of Jesus Christ in this Mystery. But first of all, I must
inform the Reader, that what we are going to allege, was taken out of a
Manuscript which is in the Library of St. Victor of Paris; the which is well
known unto several persons which have seen it as well as my self; and has for
Title what follows.

Determinatio Fratris Johannis de Parisus Praedicatoris, de modo existendi
corpus Christi in Sacramento Altaris, alio quam sit ille quem tenet Ecclesia.

Intendo dicere veram existentiam and realem cor^oris Christi in Sacramento
Altaris, and quod non est ibi solum in signo, and licet teneam and approbem
illorum solennem opinionem, quod corpus Christi est in Sacramento Altaris per
conversionem substantiae panis in ipsum, and quod ibi maneant accidentia sine
subjecto, non tamen audeo dicere quod hoc cadat sub fide mea; sed potest aliter
salvari vera and realis existentia corporis Christi in Sacramento Altaris.

Protestor tamen quod si ostenderetur dictus modus determinatus esse per sacrum
Canonem, aut per Ecclesiam, aut per Concilium generale, aut per Papam qui
virtute continet totam Ecclesiam, quicquid dicam volo haberi pro non dicto, and
statim paratus sum revocare, quod si non sit determinatus, contingat tamen
determinari, statim paratus sum assentiri.

Judicium Facultatis Theologiae. In praesentia Collegii Magistrorum in
Theologia dictum est, utrumque modum ponendi corpus Christi esse in altari,
tenet pro opinione probabili, and approbat utrumque per -- and per dicta
sanctorum, There wants a word in the Manuscript.
dicit tamen quod nullus est determinatus per Ecclesiam, and ideo nullum cadere
sub fide, and si aliter dixisset, minus been dixisset, and qui aliter dicunt,
minus been dicunt, and qui determinate assereret alterutrum praecise cadere sub
fide, incurreret sententiam Canonis Anathematis.

But that nothing may be wanting unto this History, the Reader may take notice,
if he please, that the Bishop of Paris, assisted with some Bishops; and with
the Faculty of the Common Law, did condemn the Opinion of this Doctor of whom
we speak: he made his Appeal unto the Pope, and went to Rome to make good his
Appeal. Being there arrived, Judges were assigned; but before any Judgment was
given, he died. So it is we are informed by the Continuator of the Chronicle of
William de Nangis, which is found in a Manuscript in the Library of St. German
de Pres; whence I have taken what concerns the History of John of Paris, and
which I will represent in the words of the Author which continues this
Chronicle unto the 1368. and who speaks thus upon the year of our Lord, 1304.

Frater Johannes de Parisiis ordinis fratrum Praedicatorum, Magister in
Theologia, vir admodum literatus and ingenio clarus, circa veram existentiam
corporis Christi in Sacramento Altaris, novum ponendi modum introducere
conatur, dicens videlicet non tantum hoc esse possibile commutatione
substantiae panis in corpus Christi, verbo adesse suppositum ipsius mediante
corpore quod est pars humanae naturae: verum etiam hoc esse possibile per
assumptionem substantiae panis vel panietatis in Christo, nec credebat communem
modum ponendi quem communis doctorum tenet opinio esse necessario tenendum, seu
ab Ecclesia determinatum; quinetiam praedictus possit teneri tanquam popularis,
and fortasse, ut dicebat, magis rationabilis and congruens veritati Sacramenti,
and per quam magis salvatur apparentia circa species sensibiles remanentes,
caeteris Theologiae doctoribus contrarium astruentibus, I think Primum should
be read here, rather than Secundum.
secundum modum tanquam ab Ecclesia determinatum, praesertim per decretalem
Papae de summa Trinitate, and fide catholica firmiter credimus necessario
tenendum, ac secundum tanquam veritati fidei and etiam Sacramenti dissonum
merito reprobandum; examinata itaque opinione praedicta dum ea quae dixerat
retractare nollet, sed magis videretur pertinaciter sustinere, a Guillielmo
Parisiensi Episcopo de consilio fratris Egidii Bituricensis Archiepiscopi
provecti Theologi, and Magistri Bertrandi de Sancto Dionysio praesellenti
doctore, and Aurelianensis Episcopi, ac Guillielmi Albianensis Episcopi, necnon
and doctorum in jure canonico pariter and duorum ad hoc specialiter vocatorum,
perpetuum super hoc silentium dicto fratri sub poena excommunicationis
impositum est, lecturaque pariter and predicatione privatur: Verum cum ob hoc
ad sedem Apostolicam appellasset, auditoribus sibi datis in curia, sed infacto
negotio de medio sublatus est.

It appears by what has been said, especially by the Judgment of the Faculty
of Divinity, that it was not believed at the beginning of the XIV. Century,
that the Doctrine of Transubstantiation was an Article of Faith,
notwithstanding the Decree of Innocent the Third, at the Council of Lateran,
Anno 1215. and no more but a probable Opinion: and that it was in every bodies
free liberty to follow it, or not. Which will not a little confirm the
Protestants in the belief they are in, that the Doctrine of the Real Presence
did not pass into an Article of Faith, until the Council of Trent; after the
Ordinances whereof, they esteemed that there was an indispensable necessity of
separating from the Communion of the Latins; and will make them at the same
time say, that this sole Consideration which we have made upon the History of
John of Paris is sufficient entirely to ruin the foundation of the two famous
Books which have appeared of late years, wherein they have pretended to show
that Transubstantiation has always been esteemed in the Church to be an Article
of Faith. And there is no question but they are much confirmed in this
Sentiment, when they shall see that the Cardinal d'Aylli, which assisted at the
Council of Constance, at the beginning of the XV. Century, speaks of
Transubstantiation, as of an Opinion; and also says, that it cannot be clearly
inferred from the holy Scriptures, nor, as he thinks, from the determination of
the Church, that the substance of Bread does not remain in the Sacrament:
nevertheless, he embraces the Opinion that holds so, as that which is most
favored by the Church, and which is most generally received amongst the
Doctors. Petrus de Aylliaco Cardin. Camerac. in 4. sent. q. 6.
See here his words; Quarta opinio and communior est quod substantia panis non
remanet, sed simpliciter desinit esse. Ejus possibilitas patet, quia non est
Deo impossible, quod illa substantia subito desinat esse, quamvis non esset
possibile creata virtute. Et licet ita esse non sequatur evidenter ex
Scriptura, nec etiam videre meo ex determinatione Ecclesiae; quia tamen magis
favet ei, and communi opinioni sanctorum and doctorum, ideo teneo eam.

But having reported what passed in the West during the XII. and XIII.
Centuries touching the holy Sacrament, according unto our method, it will not
be amiss to say something touching the Eastern Church. Genebrard in his
Chronologies makes mention of a certain Friar called Basil, of whom he
observes, That he re-established the Error of Berengarius; for although he
speaks of the year 1087. nevertheless, Ad annum 1087.
according to the testimony of Zonarus, reported by Cardinal Baronius, he
dogmatized for the space of 52 years, we may put him into the number of the
Authors of the XII. Century. It is true, the same Zonarus reports in Baronius,
that the Emperor Alexius Comeneus caused him to be burnt as an Impostor; so
that if he was put to death for the Opinions which Genebrard imputes unto him
touching the Sacrament, it cannot reasonably be doubted, but the Greek Church
was in the XII. Century, of the same belief that the Latin Church was of; But
seeing this man was accused of several Impieties, Apud Baron. ad annum 1118. N.
27.
as of denying the Trinity, of rejecting the Books of Moses, of teaching that
the World was made by wicked Angels, that Michael the Archangel was Incarnate;
of denying the Resurrection, and of holding many other things alike wicked and
abominable: I suppose that as the Protestants can draw no advantage in favor
of their Opinion from the belief of this man, if it be true that he believed
what Genebrard relates of him; so in like manner, have the Roman Catholics no
cause to boast of his Condemnation, which was grounded upon several Impieties,
which sufficiently declare that he was a Manichean. Leo Allatius represents
this Basil as Chief of the Sect of the Bogomiles, whose Heresy was composed of
that of the Manicheans and Messalians; and what this Author says of them, may
be seen in the second Book De perpetua consensione Orientis and Occidentis,
cap. 10. p. 636.

But at the beginning of the XIII. Century, the mind of the Greeks was
extremely agitated upon the subject of the Sacrament, some affirming, that the
Mysteries were corruptible; others justifying the contrary. The reason of these
latter was, because the holy Sacrament is a Commemoration of our Lord's being
risen again for us; alleging to this purpose, some passages of the Fathers,
which seemed to favor their Opinion. But the others, on the contrary, denied
that the Sacrament was a Confession of the Resurrection of Jesus Christ,
saying, it was only a Sacrifice, and by consequence, he was therein
corruptible, as before his Passion, and without Life and Soul. I said that the
Spirits of men was much agitated at the beginning of the XIII. Age; for the
Dispute had already been begun, even in the XII. Century.

Therefore Zonarus a Greek Friar who lived at that time, I mean in the XII.
Century, speaks of it in one of his Letters, and resolves the question in
embracing both parties. In notis Vulcanii ad Cyril. Alexandr. t. 6. libr.
adversus Antropomorp ex Zonara, ep. 32. L. 3. de robus gestis Alexii.
He said, That the Bread is the Flesh it self of Jesus Christ mortal and
buried; and for this reason it is corruptible, ground and broken to pieces by
the Teeth; but that afterward being chewed, eaten, and gone down into the
Stomach, as it were into a Sepulcher, it becomes incorruptible, because the
Body of our Lord remained not long dead and buried, but rose again soon after.
As for Nicetas Choniates, who wrote just at the beginning of the XIII. Century,
and that makes mention of this Dispute; he sufficiently testifies, that the
Patriarch Camaterus embraced the Opinion of those which maintained, that the
Mysteries were corruptible. I shall not examine which of the two parties were
most reasonable; for to speak my thoughts plainly, those people strove in vain
and to no purpose, after curious questions, fit rather to engender strifes and
quarrels, than to edify and instruct Christians. I shall only desire the
Reader seriously to consider, if either or both of these Opinions, can agree or
hold with the Doctrine of the Latins; for those which held that the Mysteries
were incorruptible, allege for their reason, That the Sacrament is a
Confession and Commemoration of the Resurrection of Jesus Christ, instead of
saying that it is the glorified Body it self of our Lord: And the others which
affirm that it is corruptible, say, That the Bread of the Sacrament is the dead
Flesh of Jesus Christ; which cannot be in the reality of the thing, because all
Christians do confess, that our Lord dies no more; and that his state of Death
and Crucifiction, has been past above XVI. Ages ago; whereby may be judged the
disposition of Zonarus, which held of both sides, and of the strange manner
wherein he explains himself.

I know not if I should make mention of one Samonas Bishop of Gaza, who is
placed in the XIII. Century; for all do not receive his testimony, which is
wholly favorable unto that of the cause of the Latins, seeing he says in a
Dispute against Achmet a Sarrazin, Tom. 12. Bibl. patr. p. 524, 525, 526.
touching the Eucharist, That the Bread and Wine are not the Antitypes of the
Body and Blood of Jesus Christ, but that they are by Consecration changed into
the real Body and Blood of Jesus Christ; and that the Division which is made,
(to wit, by means of breaking it) is of sensible Accidents. Were there nothing
to be objected in the Nature of a Witness, it could not be denied but this
Greek Bishop was of the Belief of the Latin Church. But the Protestants do deny
that ever there was any such Dispute; affirming, That no Author has made any
mention of this Samonas, because at that time there was no Greek Bishop at
Gaza, nor in all Pallastine, being possessed by the Sarrazens, having expelled
the Latins; which had before settled Bishops of their own Language. And in fine,
because the greatest part of this Writing was taken word for word from the
Dispute of Anastatius the Sinaite, against the Gaianites; whereof mention has
been made in the History of the VII. Century. Whereunto may be added, that this
pretended Samonas, speaks formally of the Union of the Bread and Wine, unto
the Divinity, which is just the Opinion of John Damascen; as also what he
says, Ibid. p. 525.
that the Bread and Wine is taken, that is to say, that the Divinity joins and
unites them unto it self.

All the Protestants do not indeed say, that there was not any Greek Bishop in
all Pallastine in the XIII. Century; but they all agree to say, That it belongs
to the Roman Catholics to prove that there was at that time at Gaza a Greek
Bishop called Samonas, seeing they produce him as a Witness; and is such a
Witness as no Writer makes any mention of.

In the same Tome of the Library of the Holy Fathers, there is a Confession of
Faith made by Nicetas in the XIII. Century in favor of those which should be
converted from Mahumetism unto the Religion of Jesus Christ, wherein he says,
Tom. 12. Bi^^. Patr. p. 53^.
That Christians do sacrifice Mystically, Bread and Wine; and that they
participate thereof in the Divine Mysteries. He adds nevertheless, That he
believes, they are also truly the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ, having been
changed by his Divine Power in a Spiritual and Invisible manner, above and
beyond all Natural comprehension, only known unto himself. And it is so also
(says he) that I intend to participate thereof, for the sanctifying of Body
and Soul, for Life Eternal, and for inheriting the Kingdom of Heaven. This
Author says, That what Christians sacrifice and receive at the Holy Table, is
Bread and Wine; that this Bread and Wine are in truth the Body and Blood of
Jesus Christ, having been changed by his Divine Power, not unto all
Communicants indifferently, but only for them which Communicate with a true and
sincere Faith: Let the belief of this man be guessed at, after all this.

But now I call to mind that I had almost forgot two Witnesses of the Greek
Church of the XII. Century; one of the Ages, whose History we examine in this
Chapter, to wit, Euthymius and Zonarus; In Matthew. 26.
The first says thus, Our Lord did not say, These are the Signs of my Body and
of my Blood; but he said, This is my Body and Blood. And again, As our Savior
Deified the Flesh which he assumed supernaturally, so also he changes these
things into his quickening Body. Words which Roman Catholics mightily prize and
value, thinking that they favor their Hypothesis. But it must not be concealed
also, that in another Treatise, Euthymius testifies, that he follows the
Opinion of Damascen touching the Sacrament; alleging to this effect a great
passage out of his 4th Book of Orthodox Faith. Panopl. part 2. titul. 21.
Now the Opinion of Damascen was neither that of the Roman Catholics nor the
Protestants, as has been showed in the 12th Chapter. And Euthemius seems to
assure so much in the words but now alleged, when he compares the change
befallen unto the Bread and Wine of the Eucharist, unto that happened unto the
Humane Nature of Jesus Christ, when it was taken into the Unity of one person
by the Eternal Word; besides that in the same place, whence both the mentioned
passages were taken, he said, That not the nature of the things proposed should
be considered, but their virtue; which shows, that he believed with Damascen,
that the substance of the Symbols do remain.

As for Zonarus, another Greek Friar; we have already seen how he embraced as
well the side of those which held that the Mysteries were corruptible, as those
which supposed them to be incorruptible; besides, he expounds elsewhere the
32. Canon of the Council in Trullo, In Council. 6. in Trullo can. 32.
The Divine Mysteries, (says he) I mean, the Bread and the Cup, represents
unto us the Body and Blood of our Savior; for giving the Bread unto his
Disciples, he said, Take, Eat, This is my Body; and giving them the Cup, he
said, Drink ye all of it, This is my Blood.

CHAP. XIX.
An Account or Narrative of the XIV. and XV. Centuries.

DUring the Papacy of Boniface the VIII. who had so great a contest with Philip
the Fair, one of our Kings, there was in Italy great numbers of Waldensis, who
were called Fratelli, because they styled themselves Brethren, as the Primitive
Christians, who frequently so denominated themselves, where it was, that the
whole Body of the Church was called the Brotherhood; and what induces me to
believe that these Fratellis were Waldensis and Albigensis, many of whom
retired themselves into the Valleys of Piedmont, at the time that Waldo and his
Adherents were driven away from Lions, is, that an uncertain Author which wrote
against them, when they were most spoken of, and which is Printed with
Reynerius and Pilichdorffius, observes amongst other things, that they called
themselves Brethren; Bibl. Patr. t. 4. edit. 4. p. 819.
By this and other Writings (says he) it is necessary to prevent the Heretics
the Waldensis, etc. amongst them they call the Heretics, Brethren. It is then
of the Waldensis, in all probability, that Platina, Secretary unto the Popes,
does speak in the life of Boniface the VIII. when marking the year 1302. that
is to say, the second year after the Institution of the Jubilees by Boniface,
In Bonifacio VIII.
There are some that write that at that time, Boniface caused to be
dis-interred and burnt, the Body of one Herman, which was reputed at Ferrara to
be a Saint, 20 years before; but having made a strict inquiry into his Heresy,
I am inclined to believe, that he was of the number of the Fraticelli, which
Sect increased very much at that time. In Clement. V.
And in the Life of Clement V. at Novara, (says he) Dulcin and Margret
invented a new Heresy, which allowed Men and Women to cohabit together, and to
satisfy their filthy lusts. These were called Fraticelli. Clement set about
suppressing of them, and speedily dispatched thither Soldiers, under the conduct
of an Apostolical Legate, who finding them settled in the Alps, destroyed them,
some by the Sword, some by Famine, and some by Cold and other Cruelties. And as
for Dulcin and Margret, being taken alive, they were dismembered; and having
burnt their Bones, the Ashes was flung into the Air. Decad. 2. lib. 9 ad ann.
1307.
Blondus says the same with Platina. Sabellius writes, that some seem to make
a distinction from these latter and the former; but in the main, speaking of
those which were called Fratelli, Fraterculi, Fratricelli, whom as he says,
were spread abroad into several Cities of Italy, in some whereof, there was
some remaining in his time, that is to say, Enead. 9. l. 7.
in the last Century: He reproacheth them of Nocturnal meetings, putting out of
Candles, unlawful lying together, the cruel murder of Children, begotten and
born in these Criminal Copulations: In a word, all that was charged upon the
Primitive Christians, although the most innocent and pure of all mankind, as
has been observed in our First Part; and according unto what is said by
Minutius Felix in his Octavius. Whereto might be added what is written by
Monsieur de Thoul, in his History, that the same Crimes were imputed unto the
Protestants of France, when they separated themselves from the Communion of the
Latins. I say then, to return unto those which were called Fratelli, that if
they were Waldensis, as it is most probable they were; without great injustice,
the testimony of Sabellicus, a late Author, ought not to be preferred before
Authors of the same Age, and their Enemies, who in the precedent Chapter, as
has been showed, have declared very favorably of their Life and
Conversations, what aversion soever they had against them. And as touching
their Faith, they fully acquitted them from all suspicion of Arianism, or of
Manicheanism; and declared, that they had sound and good Opinions as to what
regarded the Essence of God, and all the Symbol of the Apostles Creed. But let
us yet see what this Anonymous Author will tell us, which but now informed us,
Bibl. Patr. Tom 4. part 2. p. 8. 19, 820.
that they called one another Brethren; for having observed, That they preached
in private, unto a few persons, in some Corner of a House, and for the most
part by Night, (in all likelihood to avoid persecutions) he adds, That they
pronounced pernicious Doctrines against the truth of the Roman Church, under a
pretext and show of sweet and holy Doctrines, etc. Therefore although they
teach some truths, as these, That it is not lawful to Steal, nor commit
Adultery, nor Slander, nor Cheat, nor Lie, etc. yet they instill amongst these
gilded Sentences, the wicked poison of Heretical Articles, which have been
condemned by the Holy Church of Rome; they seduce the ignorant, hinder Souls
from Salvation, and introduce infinite Evils. And proceeding afterward to the
particularizing these Heretical Articles condemned by the Church of Rome, Ibid.
p. 820, 821, 825, 827.
they are found to be the same which are disowned by the Protestants at this
day; for instance, The Invocation of Saints, Humane Traditions, Indulgences,
and some others; as we were informed in the foregoing Chapter; and by their
Confessions of Faith, and by the Testimonies of Writers of their times, their
Adversaries, That they believed of the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, the very
same that those called Calvinists do believe of it. I do not here say any thing
of the Bull which Clement the V. made for the observation of the Feast of the
Sacrament, Instituted by Urban the IV. nor of the Institution of the
Procession, because I shall be obliged to speak of them when I come to treat of
the Worship.

I will only observe, that besides the Waldensis and Albigensis, there was at
Herbipolis, about the year 1340. one Conrad Hagar, who as appears by the Bull
of Otho, Bishop of the place, as Hospinian observes, confessed that during the
space of 24 years, Hist. Sacram. l. 4. c, 13. catalog. testium verit. l. 18.
he had believed and taught, that the Mass was not a Sacrifice, that it was not
profitable unto the Quick nor the Dead; and that therefore no body ought to
Celebrate it.

But that was nothing in regard of the noise which John Wickliff, Doctor in the
University of Oxford, and Professor in Divinity, made in England about the
middle of the XIV. Century. The Friar Walsingham who hated him mortally, for
having spoken freely against those of his Order, and who represents him as
having many followers at Oxford, and elsewhere, charge him amongst other
things of teaching, In Edwardo III ad an. 1377 T. 2. c. 19. and 20.
That the Eucharist after Consecration, is not the real Body of Jesus Christ,
but the Figure. And Thomas Waldensis, He believes absolutely (says he) that
the Natural Bread remains in the Eucharist; and that after a kind of Figurative
Speech, it is the Body of Jesus Christ; that the Body of Jesus Christ is only
in Heaven, as to its nature and substance, and in the Sacrament figuratively;
as John Baptist was said to be Elias, the Rock Christ; and the seven Ears of
Corn, seven years. And Widford, which undertook to refute Wickliff, by order of
Thomas, Archbishop of Canterbury, lays down for the first Article he intended
to handle, In sasciculo rer. expetend. and sugiend. p. 96. Apud Usser de
success. and statu Christ. Eccles. c. 3.
That the substance of Bread remains upon the Altar after Consecration; and
that it cease not to be Bread. And Wickliff affirmed in a Manuscript Treatise
of Thomas Waldensis, which was in the hands of Dr. Usher Archbishop of Armagh,
and Primate of Ireland, That from the beginning of the XI. Century, all the
Doctors had erred in the point of the Sacrament of the Altar, except
Berengarius and himself, and their followers. It must then be granted, that the
Doctrine of John Wickliff upon the subject of the Sacrament, was the same with
that of Berengarius; and by consequence, directly contrary unto that of the
Latin Church; a Doctrine, which according to the testimony of Walsingham, he
taught publicly, in his Lectures, in his Sermons, and in his Writings;
maintaining, as is elsewhere showed by this English Historian, That after the
Consecration made by the Priest in the Mass, In Richard H. and ad an. 1282.
the Bread and Wine does therein remain as they were before. Pope Gregory the
IX. had indeed condemned the Doctrine of Wickliff as Heretical, in the year
1377. and had certified so much by Letters unto the University of Oxford, unto
the Archbishop of Canterbury, the Bishop of London, and unto King Edward
himself, commanding them to order matters so, In Richardo II.
That Wickliff should be apprehended and put into prison: But Walsingham, who
every where Vomits Thunder and Lightning against him, testifies, that the Bulls
of Gregory had no effect; the University having consulted whether it should
receive these Bulls honorably, or reject them with scorn, the Archbishop of
Canterbury, and the Bishop of London, carrying themselves very negligently and
coldly, either of their own inclination, or by reason of the People, which
favored him, or it may be for both together; as for the King, we do not find
that the Popes Letters made any Impression upon his spirit; In Epist. ad Mart.
V.
on the contrary, this Historian informs us, That the Lords and Princes of the
Kingdom did favor Wickliff: Which Thomas Waldensis interprets of the King
himself, and of his Son, of the Duke of Lancaster, and several other great
Lords of the Kingdom. Therefore it is not to be wondered at, if Walsingham says,
That the Princes and great Lords protected him; the which he repeats over again
in the Life of Edward the Third. And he observes in that of Richard the Second
upon the year 1381. that he seduced great numbers throughout the whole Kingdom,
and that he had Agents which he employed therein, he neglecting no opportunity
himself on his own part. Amongst those which sided with him, In Richardo H. ad
an. 1381
he makes mention of one William, which preached at Leicester on Palm Sunday,
That the Sacrament of the Altar was true Bread after Consecration. And as the
Bishop of Lincoln disposed himself to punish him in depriving him of the
liberty of Preaching, the People appearing in his behalf, so affrighted the
Bishop, that he durst proceed no farther against him. After which, he mentions
several other Learned Men that professed the same Faith, and which Preached it
boldly and publicly; not only in the Cities and Villages, but also at the
University of Oxford, on the Eves of Holy Days; particularly Nicholas Hertford,
Chancellor of the University, Ibid.
and a certain Prebend of Leicester, All these (says he) and several others
their Adherents, published their sin like Sodom, and did not hide it; and not
being content to have evil Opinions touching the Catholic Faith, and other
points wherein they erred, they drew the People into the Precipice of their
Error, by public Sermons.

William, Archbishop of Canterbury, seeing that infinite numbers of people
departed daily from the Communion of the Church of Rome, assembled his
Suffragan Bishops, and some other Assistants, which, as Walsingham says, had
not followed after Baal; with several Professors of Divinity; and in this
Assembly, caused to be condemned twenty Propositions of Wickliff's: who,
notwithstanding this Condemnation, did not forbear teaching and writing as
before; as is testified by Thomas Waldensis. Prolog. t. 2. doctrine. 12.
But it may not be passed over in silence, that amongst these Propositions of
Wickliff, which were condemned, the first of which denied Transubstantion, the
seventh imports, That God ought to be subject to the Devil: a most horrible
Proposition, which I think, could not proceed out of the mouth of any man that
bears the name of a Christian: Therefore it is but charity, not too easily to
give credit to these kinds of Accusations, without having convincing proofs of
it. Of all Wickliff's Works, Vid. l. 2. c. 13. and l. 4. c. 3.
there is but one printed that I know of, entitled Trialogus: Now in this
Treatise there is contained several things which absolutely destory this
devilish Proposition. Moreover, if Wickliff presented unto the English
Nobility, assembled in Parliament at London, the Propositions now spoken of, as
the Friar Walsingham does testify; Is it probable, that having a design to
invite them to embrace his Opinions, as the same Historian does intimate, he
would have proposed such a Thesis, which had been sufficient to have
exasperated them against him; and rather have made them his Enemies, than his
Protectors? Neither do I find that Widdeford, who reports and opposes all
Wickliff's Articles, which Thomas, Archbishop of Canterbury, the Pope's Legate,
condemned four years after, in a Synod at London; I say, I cannot find that he
makes any mention of this blasphemous Proposition, That God should obey the
Devil. Let the Reader give his Judgment thereupon; as for my part, I will
prosecute the course of my History, in saying, that Wickliff departed this life
in the Year 1385. in the Parish of Lutleworth, whereof he was Curate, after
having composed and written several Books and Treatises; for Eneas Silvius, who
was afterward Pope, under the name of Pius the Second, Cap. 35.
writes in his History of Bohemia, That it was supposed they were above two
hundred Volumes. The Friar Walsingham, 1 Ad an. 1387.
who was his sworn Enemy, by reason of the Thesis which he published against
the Friars, describes his death in such a manner, as sufficiently expresses
his passion and resentment; 2 In Ricard. II. ad an. 1385.
grounding his relation upon hearsay, As it is reported: Nevertheless, he is
not ashamed to say, that he died distracted, and that he was damned; In hist.
Bohem. c. 35.
quite contrary unto John Hus; who, by the relation of Eneas Silvius, That he
had rendered himself famous by the reputation he had acquired by a holy and
pious life: for he often said in his Sermons, Ibid.
That he desired to go after his death, unto the same place where the Soul of
Wickliff was gone: making no doubt but that he was a good and holy man, and
worthy of Heaven.

The Doctrine of Wickliff did not expire with his person; for Nicholas
Herreford, Doctor in Divinity, defended those which were his followers, and
which professed the Doctrine which he had taught, as 1 In Ricard. II. ad an.
1387.
Walsingham does write; 2 Ad an. 1389. in Hypodigm. Neust. and ad an. 1395.
which he represents unto us to have been in very great numbers, under the name
of Lollards, in all that Age: And does moreover observe, that most of the
English Prelates connived at what they taught; so that being besides, favored
by several persons of Quality, they made open profession of their Faith, so
far, as they affixed publicly upon the Doors of St. Paul's Church, in London,
certain Theses which were no ways favorable to the Doctrine of the Latin
Church, nor to its Clergy.

At the same time there were several Waldensis at the Straits of the Alps,
which divide France and Italy; as we are informed by 1 Contr. Vald. fol. 2.
Claud de Cecill, Archbishop of Turin, and of a Bull of Clement the Seventh,
granted at Avignion, against them, in the Year 2 His Bull is in the Chamber of
Accounts at Grenoble.
1380. and put in Execution by one Francis Borelli, Inquisitor of the Order of
preaching Friars; who persecuted them cruelly for several years, and put many
of them to death. I know not whether the University of Paris intended not to
speak of the same Waldensis, in the Letter which it directed unto Charles the
Sixth, in the Year 1394. 3 Tom. 6. Spicil. p. 97.
complaining, amongst other things, That the Heretics which have already began
to appear, finding none to punish them, do make great progress; and not only
scatter abroad there pernicious Heresies publicly, but also in private.

The XV. Century proved more fatal unto the Waldensis and Lollards in England;
for from the first year, the Persecution was begun against them, in pursuance
of an Act of Parliament which gave power to put them to death, if they recanted
not their Religion; as 4 In Hypodig. Neustr. ad an. 1401. and in Henrico IV.
Walsingham does testify. But notwithstanding all this they lost not their
courage, nor abandoned the Doctrine they had until then professed. On the
contrary, the 5 In Henr. IV.
same Historian observes, that the year following they proposed several
Thesis's, but privately, for fear of the punishment which had been appointed;
Theses, which were nothing favorable unto the Doctrine of the Roman Church,
which renewed the Persecution against them; during which, several of them were
burnt alive; which this Friar says, was done in the Years 1410, 1414, 1417.
even insulting after a most unchristian manner, at the death of these people,
as did also Thomas Waldensis; who speaking unto King Henry the Fifth, does
mightily commend the continual punishments which was inflicted upon them; In
Prolog. t. 2. doct. 11. and ad initium prologi.
saying, That Prince proceeded according to the Command of Jesus Christ; who
nevertheless, requires not Consciences to be forced, but persuaded; and whose
Gospel is made up of love, and of mildness.

But whilst these things were acting in England, there was in Bohemia infinite
numbers of people that made open profession of the same Doctrine, for which the
Lollards were persecuted in Great Britain; for besides the Waldensis, which had
retired themselves thither a great while before, by reason of the Persecution
stirred up against them in Picardy; as Dubravius, Bishop of Olmuz, informed us
in the precedent Chapter. At the beginning of this Century, there was made in
that Country a considerable Separation from the Roman Church, according to the
Testimony of the same Dubravius, and of Eneas Silvius, in their Histories of
Bohemia. It Is true, this Separation was not alike in all; for some only desired
the Restitution of the Cup unto the people, being of accord in all other points
with the Latins; and those, for this reason were called Calixtins: but as for
the others, they disowned the same Doctrine of the Communion of the Latins,
which the Waldensis and Wickliffites had opposed, and did still oppose; and
because, as some allege, these latter joined themselves unto the Waldensis,
which had been settled a long time in this Kingdom, and used to assemble
themselves in the Mountain of Tabor, they were called Taborites; as Dubravius
has observed. But let us hear what this Prelate intends to say touching this
Separation; when having spoken of the Jubilee celebrated at Prague, in the Year
1400. he adds, Unto this time the Christian Religion, Lib. 23. hist. Bohem.
which had been once received by the Bohemians, with all the Ceremonies of the
Apostolic See, had continued steadfast in Bohemia, in its purity; but after
that time, it began to faulter and decline, as soon as John Hus, which in the
Language of the Country, signifies a Goose, began to make a noise amongst the
Swans; and by his sound, to conquer the sweetness of their singing, by the
assistance of a Faction which made it self considerable. In fine, the progress
was so great, that he writes, That the Taborites so ordered matters, Ibid. l.
24.
that in the City of Prague there rested no sign of the ancient Catholic
Religion. Also the Friar Walsingham testifies, that the Emperor Sigismond
returned from Constance, into his own Territories, after the Council had
elected Pope Martin the Fifth, In Henr. IV.
To employ all his strength to ruin the Enemies of Religion, and the Heresy of
the Lollards, which were mightily increased in the Kingdom of Bohemia, by the
lukewarmness and support of his elder Brother. Dubravius proceeds farther;
for after the Coronation of Sigismond at Prague, Ubi supra l. 26
he proposes the Tenets of the Taborites, but after a manner that is not
exactly conformable unto their Confession of Faith; by which, nevertheless,
their Belief ought to be judged; because it is in those public Acts, that for
the most part is declared what is believed in matters of Religion. And treating
of Moravia, upon the Year 1421. he observes, that Country was not then infected
with the Heresy of the Taborites; but in that same year, they began there to
establish themselves; Renewing (says he) the ancient Error of the Picards (
that is to say, of the Waldensis) to wit, that none ought to kneel unto the
Sacrament of the Altar, because the Body of Jesus Christ is not there; having
ascended up into Heaven, both in Body and Soul; and that there remains only the
Bread and Wine. I know very well that the Bishop of Olmuz charge them in the
same place, of teaching that the Bread and Wine of the Eucharist is such Bread
and Wine as each particular amongst the people may take with their own hands:
that the hand of the Priest is no more worthy then that of a private Lay
person: And to vomit (says he) other Blasphemies against the real Body of
Jesus Christ. But because the quite contrary does appear by their Confession of
Faith, I know not whether it would be reasonable to admit of this Accusation,
coming from the Pen and hand of an Enemy.

Eneas Sylvius, Cap. 35.
who was afterward Pope Pius the Second, speaks of those people at large in
his History of Bohemia: he relates several things of them, agreeing with the
Doctrine of the Protestants, but he also mentions other things which the
Protestants do not approve; the which, in all probability, were unjustly
imputed unto them, because there is not the least sign of it to be found, Cap.
10, 11, 12, 13. ^bi supra.
neither in the Confessions of Faith made by the Waldensis, inserted by Paul
Perrin, in their History; nor in that of the Taborites; Which, by the testimony
of Eneas Sylvius, had embraced the impious and wicked Sect of the Waldensis. Of
necessity then, their Belief must be the same with the Protestants, because
that of the Waldensis did agree with it, as may be judged by all that has been
hitherto spoken. But in fine, the Question is, to know the Belief of the
Taborites touching the holy Sacrament: but what can better inform us, than
their own Confession of Faith, drawn up in the Year 1431. by John Lukavitz;
wherein they declare, Confess. Tabor. Joan. Lukavits
that their Belief touching the Eucharist is, That the Bread remains in its
nature true Bread; and that it is the Body of Jesus Christ, not by a material
Identity, but Sacramentally, really and truly. Then they reject the Opinion of
those which say. That the same Body of Jesus Christ which is in Heaven, is also
in the Sacrament, Ibid.
with all its essential and accidental Proprieties; Because (say they) this
would be a means to presuppose, that the substance of Bread should cease to be,
and that it should be converted substantially into the Body of Jesus Christ.
Moreover, they formally deny the Adoration of the Eucharist.

If John Hus was of the same Opinion of those which were called Taborites, it
must be owned, after so express a Declaration as they made, that he opposed the
Doctrine of Transubstantion. If we give credit unto what is reported in the
Acts of the Council of Constance, we cannot question but that he was contrary
unto this Doctrine. In fine, The Council does condemn thirty Articles of John
Hus; in the 1 Council. Constant. sess. 15.
twenty fifth whereof they make him say, that he does approve of forty Articles
of Wickliff's; the 2 Ibid. sess. 8.
three first whereof are directly contrary unto Transubstantiation. Moreover,
there is to be found in the Proceedings made against him, that he had preached
and taught, 3 Ibid. sess. 15.
That after consecrating the Host at the Altar, the material Bread did remain;
that the substance of Bread remains after Consecration, and that the Opinion
which the Church holds of the Sacrament of the Body of Jesus Christ, is
erroneous. Therefore Pope Martin the Fifth, Ad finem Council. Constant.
in his Bull of Approbation of the Council, does not fail of representing John
Hus, as approving the Articles of Wickliff, before spoken of. Ibid.
He declares also, that Jerome of Prague was of the same Judgment; that is to
say, in an Opinion contrary unto the Church of Rome: which the Council does
also observe, in the twenty first 1 Ibid. sess. 21.
Session. And Gobellin Persona, Official of the Diocese of 2 Cosmodrom. a tat.
6. c. 95.
Peterborough, who lived at that time, thought that he ought not to say the
contrary, after the Declaration of the Pope, and of the Council. But if we
consult the Works of John Hus, printed at Noremberg, Anno 1558. with his
Martyrdom; and that of Jerome of Prague, for so it is that their death is
therein styled; we shall find that he always believed the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation, and that of Concomitance: and the reading of Wickliff's
Works, for whom he had an extraordinary kindness; calling him always,
Evangelical Doctor; could never make him alter his mind, nor work upon his
spirit the same effects which it wrought upon the Taborites. In fine, in his
Treatise Of the Blood of Jesus Christ, against the false Apparisions of it,
which at that time was frequently published in all parts, he said, Tom. 1. fol.
155
That the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ is in the Sacrament, truly and really,
after what manner soever it ought to be here below in the Church; that is to
say (as appears by the scope of the whole Discourse) invisibly, and not
visibly; as the Autors of these miraculous Apparations would have it be
believed. And in the same Treatise, Ibid.
he accuses of Incredulity those which believed not what he said of the
presence of Jesus Christ in the Sacrament. He supposed, Ibid.
That Accidents do subsist without their subject in the Sacrament: confesses
that there is no contradiction in saying, That the Body of Jesus Christ is here
sacramentally, Ibid. p. 156. Ibid. p. 158. Ibid. fol. 161.
and at the same time in Heaven locally. He affirms for truth, that his Blood
is truly and really in the Sacramen: confesses, That Jesus Christ is hidden in
the Sacrament. And amongst many Inconveniences which he fears these feigned
Apparitions of the Blood of Christ might produce, Ibid. fol. 162.
he puts this down as the fifth; That it may be, there are some which question
whether the Blood of Jesus Christ be in the venerable Sacrament, because it
does not visibly appear unto them. And a little after, he says, That we adore
the Body and Blood of of Jesus Christ, which is at the right hand of his
Father, and in the venerable Sacrament made by the Priests. The same man
writes in his Treatise of the Body of Jesus Christ, Id. t. 1. fol. 164.
That the Doctrine of Berengarius is a great Heresy. He receives for a true
testimony of St. Austin's, a passage of Lanfranc, a sworn Enemy of Berengarius,
which the Canonist Gratian cites in his Decree, under the name of St. Austin.
In a word, in this little Treatise, he embraces and follows all that the
Latins believe of the Sacrament of the Altar. And that it should not be
imagined that he changed his Opinion, it is to be observed, that amongst
several little Treatises which he composed during his Imprisonment at
Constance, Cap. 2. p. 32. t. 1
there is one, Of the Sacrament of the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ, written,
Anno 1415. wherein he teaches the same Doctrine; Ibid.
declaring moreover, That all that the Church of Rome believes of the venerable
Sacrament, ought to be believed. That he had preached this Doctrine from the
beginning, unto that day. And in fine, Ibid. fol. 49. Ibid. fol. 40. c. 3
That he believed Transubstantiation: And (says he) I never taught, that the
substance of material Bread remained in the Sacrament of the Altar. He adds a
little after, That the Body and Blood of our Savior remains in the Sacrament,
as long as the Species of Bread and Wine do subsist. In another little
Treatise, wherein he examines whether Lay-persons should receive under both
kinds, he lays it down for a truth, That the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ is
under both species of the Sacrament; that is to say, that he is entirely under
the species of Bread, and entirely under that of Wine. He that writ the History
of John Hus, particularly, the conflicts he was to suffer at Constance, and at
the which he says he was present; Tom. 1. fol. 9.
reports a public Testimony of the University of Prague, touching the purity
of the Belief of this man; wherein is declared, that Hus had denied the things
whereof he had been accused unto the Pope; especially, that he had ever taught,
That the material substance of Bread remained in the Sacrament of the Altar.
The Author also reports, Ibid. fol. 12.
that John Hus was heard in open Council, the 7th of June; and that he
confessed, That the Bread is transubstantiated; and that the Body of Jesus
Christ, which was born of the Virgin Mary, which suffered, and was crucified,
etc. is truly, really, and wholly in the Sacrament: And, as a certain English
Man said, that Hus disguised his Opinion just as Wickliff had formerly done in
England; he answered, That he spoke sincerely, and from his heart. Which need
not much be questioned, when it must be observed, Tom. 2. so. 344.
that Hus was a man full of candor and sincerity. It is related in the acts of
his Passion (for that is the Title given them in his Works) that these things
but now mentioned, and others of the like Nature, are reported of him. But
besides these proofs, there is also found amongst John Hus his Letters, Number.
65. Tom. 1. fol. 8.
a very favorable testimony given by the University of Prague unto him and
Jerome, after their Death, that is to say, the 23d. of May, Anno 1416. and in
Number. 66. a Summary of the belief of the Comminalty of Prague, composed of the
followers of John Hus, wherein they formally establish the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation, and the Concomitants, saying, That Jesus Christ gave unto
his Disciples his Body and Blood, miraculously hid under the Species of Bread
and Wine. Ib. number. 66.
And alleging a passage under the name of Leo, which imports, That the Blood
is received with the Body under the species of Bread; and the Body with the
Blood under the species of Wine; that nevertheless, the Blood is not eaten
under the species of Bread, as the Bread is not drank under that of Wine. I
will add (to conclude) unto all these considerations, two other circumstances:
In the first place, that the Taborites, which had a great Veneration for John
Hus, although they were of a contrary Judgment unto him upon the point of the
Sacrament, mention him often in their Confession of Faith upon the Articles
which he either held or favored; but upon the point of Transubstantiation they
allege nothing of his. In the second place, that in regard of Wickliff, who
was much esteemed by Hus, he declares positively in his Writings, against
Stephen Palets, his greatest Enemy, Tom. 1. p. 264. A.
that he did embrace what there was of truth in the Writings of John Wickliff,
Doctor in Divinity; not because he said it, but because it was agreeable unto
the Holy Scriptures, and unto Reason; but if he taught any Error, he intended
not to follow him nor any one else therein. And in full Council, Ibid. fol. 13.
being charged with the 40 Articles of Wickliff, condemned by the Fathers of
Constance, he said, that he adhered not unto Wickliffs Errors; confessing
nevertheless, that he could have wished the Archbishop of Prague, had not
condemned them after the manner that he had condemned them; declares, Ibid.
fol. 13. B.
that he never obstinately defended them, although he approved not that they
should be condemned, before that the Justice of their condemnation was showed
by reasons taken from the Holy Scriptures; In fine, he defends himself
particularly upon each of these Articles, limiting, explaining, or
distinguishing them, without any heed being thereunto given by the Council; and
what there is besides very strange in the business, that answering in his
Writings unto the Objections of his Adversaries, which had been before of his
side, but were become his Enemies, Tom. 1. so. 255. and 265. and p. 292. unto
fol. 321.
he never touches the Article of Transubstantiation; yet it is not likely,
that having been his Friends, they could be ignorant of his Opinion upon this
weighty point, nor that they could have been silent, if John's belief had been
contrary unto that of the Church of Rome.

As for Jerome of Prague, besides the intimate friendship which was betwixt him
and John Hus, which continued until their Death, as it had been carefully
improved in their life, especially by the conformity of their Faith and
Manners, there is to be seen in the same Works, a Discourse, wherein the Author
says the same of Jerome, Tom. 2. so. 356.
which he had done of Hus; for he writes, that one of his Adversaries having
said there was a report, That he believed that the substance of Bread remained
upon the Altar, he made this answer, I believe the Bread is at the Bakers, and
not in the Sacrament of the Altar. Poggius Florent. ad Leonard. Aretin. in
fascicul. rerum expeton. and fugiend. fol. 152.
Which agrees very well with what is written by Pogge the Florentine, unto his
Friend Leonard Aretin; Jerome (says he) being examined what he believed
touching the Sacrament, answered, That by Nature it was Bread, but at the
instant of Consecration and afterward, it was the true Body of Jesus Christ,
that he believed it to be so, and all the rest according as the Church
believed. And some body having replied, it is reported that thou teach that
the Bread remains after Consecration; he answered, the Bread remains at the
Bakers house. This is the sum of the belief of John Hus, and of Jerome of Prague
touching the subject of the Sacrament. Nevertheless, the Council of Constance
caused them to be burnt alive; they endured this punishment with wonderful
patience, according to the relation of Pogge the Florentine, an Eye witness,
and of Eneas Sylvius, which speaks thus, They both dyed very contentedly, and
drew near unto the Stake as cheerfully, as if they were going unto a Banquet,
without letting fall a word as might express any thing of grief or sorrow; when
the Flames began to seize them, they sang a Hymn, the sound whereof could
scarce be stopped by the noise of the Fire. It is said, That never any
Philosopher suffered Death so constantly as these Men endured the punishment of
the Flames. The Death of these two Men served only to confirm the Taborites in
their Opinions, and inspired them with Zeal for its defense, and of making
public and open profession thereof in Bohemia; not but there was found in
other parts those which professed the same Doctrine; for Baleus reports upon
the relation of Thomas Gasconius, and of Leland, that in the year 1457.
Reginald Peacock, Bishop of Chichester in England, Had ill Opinions touching
the Sacrament, and that he maintained the Doctrine of Wickliff; Centur. 8.
Auth. 19.
but that he was compelled to renounce, and moreover was deprived of his
Bishopric. It is very probable he had followers in his Diocese, yet they were
cautious in declaring themselves, for fear of being troubled. It was otherwise
in Bohemia, the profession of this Doctrine being more free, by reason of the
great numbers of persons which had embraced it, and which had separated
themselves from the Communion of the Latin Church. If we credit Historians,
King George Pogebrack, who in the Year 1455. succeeded Ladislaus, Son of
Albert, became Protector of the Taborites; that he embraced this Party, and
afterward drew upon himself the Excommunications of two Popes; Pius the
Second, and Paul the Second. I will not here insist upon the Commendations
which some of these Historians give him for his Virtue, Justice, Prudence and
Integrity: neither do I intend to examine the differences which he had with
these two Popes; against whose Anathema's he defended himself, as well as
against the Enemies which he had engaged against him, unto his death, which
happened in the Year 1471. I shall content my self to observe, that the
Historians, which represent him unto us as a Taborite, and Protector of the
Taborites, are grossly mistaken: which may warn us not too easily to give credit
unto all that they report. In fine, we have a Letter of this Prince, unto
Mathias, King of Hungary, his Son in Law, dated in the Year 1468. which Dom
Luke d'Achery, a Benedictine Friar, has lately published; the reading whereof
informs us several things. In the first place, that the Doctrine of the
Taborites and Waldensis of Bohemia, if it were so, that there were any of the
ancient Waldensis still remaining, Tom 4. Spicil. p. 415.
was such as we have represented. It must be granted (says he) if we will say
things that are more true than apparent, that several Errors have flourished in
this Kingdom touching the Sacrament of the Eucharist; Circa remanentem panis
Sacramentalis (sic enim illi nuncupabant) upon their teaching that the Bread of
the Sacrament remained, and that it was converted into the substance of the
Communicant. In the second place, that this Prince was not a Taborite, but a
Calixtin; because he desired to communicate under both kinds, as he had always
done, after the example of his Father, his Mother, and his Grandmother; but
that in all other points, he was agreed with the Latin Church. Thirdly, It may
be gathered from this Letter, that the Taborites, whose Doctrine he styles to
be erroneous, were not kindly used by this King: Ibid. p. 415.
therefore in the Apology which they made in the Year 1508. under the name of
Waldensis, against the Doctor Augustine, they complained that some of their
Brethren suffered great miseries under King George Pogebrack, by reason of
their Opinion touching the Article of the Sacrament. Unto George Pogebrack
succeeded Ladislaus, Son of Casimir, King of Poland; whom the Bohemians, (says
Ritius) chose for their King, De regno Hungar. l. 2.
upon condition that he would suffer the Hussites (he makes them all one with
the Taborites) to enjoy their Liberty of Conscience; which he did until the
latter end of this XV. Century. But at length, the malicious Accusations of
their Enemies having prevailed over the Spirit of Ladislaus, In fasciculo rerum
expeten. fol. 81. Dubrav. hist. Bohem. l. 32.
as appears by the first Letter they wrote unto this Prince, to inform him,
that it was nothing but false calumnies, whereby they endeavored to
mis-represent them unto him. They were forbidden all sorts of Assemblies, both
public and private. They were commanded to shut up the places where they were
wont to make their Assemblies; not to preach nor teach their Doctrine any more,
neither by word, nor by writing; and in a certain time to conform themselves,
either unto the Calixtins, or unto the Roman Church. This Edict occasioned two
Letters which they wrote unto Lagislaus, with all the humility and respect as
was due unto the Majesty of their Prince and Sovereign; wherein they complained
of so great severity, and of condemning them before they were heard. And the
more to excite him to have compassion on them, they joined their Confession of
Faith unto each of these Letters; declaring what was their Belief of the
Sacrament. In the first, written, Anno 1504. they say, That they believe that
the Bread which Jesus Christ took, which he blessed, broke, and the which he
said was his Body; that it is his Body: which they explain more particularly in
the second, which they wrote the year following: We believe and confess that
the Bread is the natural Body of Jesus Christ, and the Wine his natural Blood,
sacramentally. And because the Doctor Augustine charged them with having
confessed Transubstantiation in their Writings, they do protest that they did
not write so; Contr. binas litter. Doctor. Augustine, ann. 1508. in fasciculo
supra nominato.
For (say they) this Confession has no foundation in the words of our Savior
Jesus Christ; which said nothing of the Real Presence, neither under these
species, nor in this, nor of this, nor with this. Besides, they reject the
Adoration of the Sacrament; and there also they declare, That Jesus Christ is
no longer personally upon Earth, and that they expect him not until the day of
Judgment; giving no credit unto those which show his person here below. And a
little after they declare, That Jesus Christ promised his Disciples to be with
them spiritually, by the participation of his Body and Blood; and in the
Sacrament, in virtue, with the testimony of his holiness. Whereupon, they
allege the words of St. Austin; Donec seculum finiatur, sursum est Dominus,
sed tamen hic etiam nobiscum est veritas Dominus, corpus enim in quo resurrexit
in uno loco esse oportet. And there also they deny that the Body of Jesus
Christ is in several places at once. In Prologom. de Vald. c. 8.
It would be difficult, and even impossible to declare what was the effect of
these Apologies, seeing the Historians are therein silent. Only the Jesuit
Gretzer makes this Observation; The Waldensis preserved themselves a long time
in Bohemia, Gesner. in Bibliothec.
and to this day they cannot be quite rooted out.

It was about the same time, that one Paulus Scriptoris, Professor in
Divinityin the University of Tubinge, was banished, for having in his Lectures,
spoken against the common Belief of the Eucharist.

But this is not all yet; for the Waldensis of Provens and Piedmont present
themselves, and oblige us to speak of them. As the Persecutions were violent in
France against those people in the XII. and XIII. Centuries, and particularly
in the latter, wherein the Popes published several Croysado's against them,
they were, in fine constrained to disperse themselves; and in this dispersion,
considerable numbers of them retired themselves into Provens, and toward
Labriers and Merindol, where they preserved themselves until the Reign of Lewis
the Twelfth; at which time they were persecuted by the Friars and Inquisitors,
who brake in violently upon them by force and Arms; saying, That they should be
exterminated like so many Witches and Sodomites; whereby they were necessitated
to desire the protection of this Prince; who, the better to be informed of the
truth of matters, Carolus Molilinae in Monarch. Franc.
sent thither one of his Masters of Requests, called Fumee, and a Doctor of
Sorbon, a Jacobin, called Parvy, who was his Confessor. They visited the
Parishes and Temples of those people; where they found neither Images, nor
Ornaments for the celebrating of Masses, nor any marks of the Ceremonies of the
Church of Rome: and having strictly examined, and informed themselves of the
crimes charged upon these Albigensis, they found not as much as the least
appearance thereof. On the contrary, it was clearly made evident unto them,
that those of Merindol, and others which made profession of the same Faith,
were strict observers of the Lord's Day; that Infants were baptized by them,
according to the practice of the primitive Church; and that they were well
instructed in the Law of God, and in the Apostles Creed. The King, having
received the Report of Fumee and Parvy, affirmed with an Oath, Ibid.
That these Waldensis were the best and honestest people of his Kingdom. All
this hindered not their Enemies from undertaking again to accuse them of several
Crimes in the Reign of Francis the First, unto whom they presented a Confession
of their Faith in the Year 1544. to justify their Innocence. Therein they
explain themselves upon the Article of the Sacrament, just as the Protestants
do at this present.

But it is time to pass from Provens, into Piedmont. Claude de Cecil, Advers.
error. and sectam Valdens. fol. 1, 2, 7, 8, 9, 10, 20, 61.
Archbishop of Turin, has already informed us, that the Waldensis had settled
themselves in the passage of the Alps, within his Diocese, upwards of two
hundred years before he wrote against them, and he wrote above a hundred years
ago; that they had continued there until his time, preaching publicly, and
defending their Doctrine in Disputes against their Adversaries. This Prelate
acknowledges, that in writing against them, he undertakes a difficult task,
seeing that Popes and Princes have employed all means imaginable against them,
without ever being able to make them renounce the Profession and Belief which
they embraced. He grants, that the covetousness of the Clergy, and their ill
conduct, was the occasion of those people's separation. He reckons up most of
the Articles of their Belief, which are found to agree with those which are
received and professed by Protestants. Ibid. fol. 55, 56
It Is true, he does not speak positively of the Sacrament, it may be because he
will not stand to examine what the most knowing amongst them said of this
Article; seeing they are things so high and mysterious, that the greatest
Divines are scarce able to understand, and much less to teach them; blaming
moreover those of the Latin Church, who writing against these Waldensis,
troubled themselves in vain about the difficulties which attended the subject
of the Sacrament.

As for their life and manners, this same Prelate renders them this testimony;
Ibid. fol. 9.
Excepting only (says he) what they teach against our Belief, and our
Religion, they lead a purer and more innocent life than other Christians do.
Ibid fol. 4.
And speaking of the holy Scriptures, he says, That they believe only what is
contained in the Old and New Testament: Ibid. fol. 10.
Therefore he declares, That he will cite nothing against them, but what is
contained in the holy Canon, which themselves (says he) do allow of.

But besides the testimony of this Bishop, Apud Thuan. hist. lib. 6.
Monsieur de Thoul mentions some others, which are no less favorable unto
them. In the first place, That a person of Quality in Provens, in Francis the
First his time, mentions them as people which were very constant in serving
God, and of paying the King and Lords, in whose Territories they lived, the
Tribute and Sums due; not failing in the Obedience due unto them. Ibid.
Secondly, he alleges that of William du Bellay, Lord of Laugay; who in the
relation he made of them unto Francis the First, according to the Order which
he had to that purpose: These Waldensis which, says he, had been in Provens
about three hundred years; he could not charge them with any thing, but some
points touching Religion, and which was common with them and the Protestants;
as not kneeling unto Images, of not offering them Candles, nor any thing else,
not praying for the Dead, and of celebrating Divine Service different from the
Church of Rome, and in the vulgar Tongue, and some other points of this nature.
Which is the reason that Cardinal Sadolet, unto whom they sent their Confession
of Faith, agreeing with that of the Protestants, Apud Thuan. hist. l. 6.
declared freely, That the other things laid to their charge, beside the Heads
contained in that Book, were nothing but things forged, to render them odious,
and mere fooleries. And Monsieur de Thoul himself, Ibid.
who mentions some of the things which they believed, of the same which
Protestants do; acknowledges, That they had been charged with other things
concerning Marriage, the Resurrection of the Dead, the state of Souls departed.
From these Waldensis are lineally descended, from Father to Son, those which in
the Alps, whether in France, or in the Territories of the Duke of Savoy; at
Cabriers, and at Merrindoll in Provens, make profession of the Protestant
Religion, of whom we have no thoughts of speaking, nor of extending any farther
this History, because that Luther began to appear in Germany, Zuinglius in
Switzerland in the Year 1517. Farrel at Geneva, Anno 1535. and afterward
several others in other places; which have all opposed the Tenet of
Transubstantiation, although they agreed not all about the Article of the
Eucharist. So that I should here conclude the History of the Doctrine, and of
the Alterations which have thereupon ensued, were I not obliged to speak
somewhat of other Churches, besides that of the West.

There is in the Library of the holy Fathers, a Liturgy of the remainder of the
ancient Christians in the Mountains of the Kingdom of Mallabar, in the
East Indies; Missa Christian apud Indos t. 6. Bibl. Pat. p. 142.
where they speak after this manner; Our Lord Jesus Christ, in the night in
which he was betrayed, took the holy Bread into his holy hands, listed up his
eyes unto Heaven, and gave it unto his Disciples; saying, Take, eat ye all of
this Bread; this my Body.

The Church of Ethiopia expresses the Sacramental words in such a manner, that
they make a metaphorical and figurative proposition, as the Roman Catholics
and Protestants do confess; for she says, 1 Literae Aetheop. Jesuit. Alphon.
ann. 1626. edit. Roman. an. 1628.
This Bread is my Body.

As for the Armenians, if we believe Guy of Perpignan, and Thomas Waldensis,
they do deny Transubstantiation: 2 Uterque apud Vald. t. 2. c. 30.
They teach (say they) that the Consecration being ended, the Body of Jesus
Christ is not really under the species of Bread and Wine; but only in
resemblance, and in figure: and that Jesus Christ did not transubstantiate
really the Bread and Wine into his Body and Blood; but only in type, and in
figure. One may lay what stress they please upon the testimonies of these two
men, which may be looked upon but as of one, seeing the one transcribed it from
the other. As for my part, I shall only say, that I take the present Armenians
to be so grossly ignorant, that they scarce know what they do believe of this
Mystery.

Prateolus does positively teach the same thing; De haeres. l. 1. haer. 67.
which is also confirmed by the testimony of Thomas Herbert, an English man;
which had been so informed upon the place; as he declares in the relation of
his Voyage of the Translation of Mr. Wick fort.

What I say of the Armenians, I may almost say of all the Greeks in general;
for it cannot be denied but they be fallen into very great ignorance of the
Mysteries of Christian Religion, and have corrupted their primitive Faith by
many Alterations. Nevertheless, Learning having flourished a long time amongst
them, their ignorance is not so very great, as that of other Christian
Communions of the East. They have had but very few that have written since the
Ages which we have examined in the precedent Chapter: yet have they had some
few; as Nicholas de Methona, Nicholas Cabasilas, Mark of Ephesus, and Jeremy,
Patriarch of Constantinople. As for Bessarion, I do not put him into the
number, because he turned unto the party of the Latins; who, to requite him,
honored him with a Cardinals Cap; whereas the others died in the Communion of
the Greek Church. If you would know of them what they believed of the
Eucharist, they will answer, That the Bread and Wine are changed into the Body
and Blood of Jesus Christ; and that after Consecration, they are his Body
Blood: And so far the Roman Catholics have cause to believe they be of their
side. But it must be confessed also, that they say things which do not agree
well with the Hypothesis of the Latins; and which make the Protestants
conclude, that the change whereof they speak, is not a change of substance, but
of virtue and efficacy: for, not here to repeat what is said by Euthymius in
the foregoing Chapter, In Matthew. 26.
That the nature of the things offered is not to be considered, In exposit.
liturg. c. 32. and 43 t. 2. Bibl. Pat. Graeco-Lat.
but their virtue. And without insisting upon Cabasilas his regarding the Body
of Jesus Christ in the Sacrament as dead and crucified for us; which by the
confession of all Christians, cannot be true in the reality of the thing, but
only in the signification of the Mystery: nor in that he says that all those
unto whom the Priest gives the Communion, do not receive the Body of our Lord.
De Corpore and sanguin. Christi. ibid.
Nicholas de Methona does formally affirm the Union of the Symbols unto the
Divinity; which is exactly the Opinion of Damascen; an Opinion which, as has
been showed, does presuppose the Existence of the Bread and Wine. Jesus Christ
(says he) does this (that is to say, communicates unto us his Flesh and Blood)
by things which are familiar unto Nature, in joining unto them his Divinity;
and saying, This is my Body, This is my Blood. Jeremy, Patriarch of
Constantinople, says as the others, That the Bread is changed into the Body of
Jesus Christ: But he adds, Respon. 1. c. 10
That Jesus Christ, for all that, did not give the flesh which he carried, unto
his Disciples, to eat. And elsewhere, Ibid. c. 7.
That the Grace of the Holy Ghost does spiritually sanctify our Souls, and our
Bodies are sanctified by the sensible things; to wit, the Water, the Oil, the
Bread, the Wine, and the other things sanctified by the Holy Ghost. Which
language agrees better with Damascen, whom he cites in his second Answer, than
with the Latins; because the first preserves the substance of Bread and Wine,
but the latter quite destroys it.

The Cardinal of Guise being at Venice, had a Conference with the Greeks; and
amongst several Questions that he asked them, he demanded of them what they
believed of the Sacrament: Cum Sigismundo Libero de rebus Moscovit. Basileae
1571.
See here the Answer they made him; We believe and confess, that the Bread is
so changed into the Body of Jesus Christ, and the Wine into his Blood: that
neither the Bread, nor the accidents of its substance do remain, but are
changed into a divine substance. Were there no more but this in the Answer of
the Greeks, it might be said, either that they did not well understand
themselves, or that, through complaisance unto the Latins, amongst whom they
lived, they allowed the change of the substance of the Bread in such a manner;
nevertheless, that to show that they followed not the Opinion of the Roman
Catholics, they say, That the very accidents do not remain; which is
inconsistent with the Doctrine of Transubstantiation. But because in this
Answer they allege as well the words of Theophelact upon Mar. 14. by which he
declares, That the Bread and Wine is changed into the virtue of the Flesh and
Blood of Jesus Christ: as also several passages of Damascen, some of which have
already been examined in the 12th Chapter, to strengthen their Belief and
Opinion; we are obliged to believe, that the change whereof they speak is quite
different from that of the Latin Church.

It is true that scarce any of them explained themselves as fully as Cyril of
Lucar, Patriarch of Constantinople; who a little above thirty years ago, said,
Cyrillus Constantinop. Patriarch. confession. fidei c. 17.
We believe that the other Sacrament which our Lord did institute, is that
which we call Eucharist; for the night wherein he was betrayed, taking Bread,
and blessing it, he said unto the Disciples, Take, eat; this is my Body: And
taking the Cup, he gave thanks, and said, Drink ye all of this, it is my Blood
which is shed for you; Do this in remembrance of me. And St. Paul adds, As
often as ye eat of this Bread, and drink of this Cup, ye show the Lord's death.
This is the plain, the true, and lawful Tradition of this admirable Mystery; in
the administration and knowledge whereof, we confess and believe the true and
certain presence of our Savior Jesus Christ; to wit, that which Faith teaches
and gives unto us, and not that which Transubstantiation, rashly and
unadvisedly invented, does teach. If I would write the History of this
Patriarch, I should be obliged to speak of his Country; I mean of the Isle of
Crete, now Candia; of the great affection he had unto Learning, the mavelous
progress he made therein during his stay in Italy; of the Voyage which he made
^^to Alexandria, to visit the Patriarch Miletus, his Countryman, unto whom he
succeeded after his decease, having received a thousand marks of his kindness
and friendship during his life time; of the vigorous resistance which he made
by order of this same Miletus, in the Year 1592. and the following years,
against the Latins, who used all their endeavors to take off the Russians and
Moscovites from the Communion of the Greek Church; of his Voyages into Germany,
where he visited several of the Protestant Universities: into Holland; where he
became acquainted with Grotius, and Cornelius Haga: Into England; from wence he
returned unto Alexandria, unto his Patriarch Miletus; who dying, had his dear
Cyril for Successor. I should also mention the Voyage which he made unto
Constantinople whilst he was Patriarch of Alexandria; the good success which he
had there, of meeting his friend, Cornelius Haga, Ambassador from the States
General of the United Provinces; the design then in hand of making him
Patriarch, the difficulties which interposed therein, and his Return unto
Alexandria, from whence he was again called, in the Year 1621. to be installed
in this Dignity, unto the general satisfaction of the Greek Church. The great
persecutions and troubles which the Latins stirred up against him; and how,
notwithstanding all their Artifices and endeavors, he preserved his Dignity of
Patriarch of Constantinople, although with some difficulty, by reason of the
malice of his Enemies, from the Year 1621. unto the Year 1638. at which time
they got some opportunity to strangle him: and several other notable
circumstances wherewith his life was attended. But because in this place I
consider him only as a Patriarch of the Greek Church, which spoke of the
Eucharist in the Confession of Faith which he composed, and communicated unto a
Synodal Assembly, convocated at Constantinople, in the Year 1629. although
several years before he had made several acquainted with it, and had also left
a Copy of it with the Bishop of Leopolis; from whence it was sent to Rome. I
shall content my self only in observing, that this Confession of Faith found
different Receptions. The Protestants rejoiced, in as much as it is exactly
agreeable unto their belief. The Armenians finding it contrary unto them in the
point of Predestination, and of Free Will,; rejected it, as being forged by the
Protestants: and there were some amongst the Latins which did so too. But at
last, all the World was disabused, and every body was constrained to own, that
it was truly made by the Patriarch. And how can it be questioned, after being
refuted by Caryophylus, and two Councils, where it is said it was condemned;
the one under Cyril of Beroe; who, by the violent death of the other Cyril,
became the peaceable Possor of the Patriarchship; and who, in the Year 1639.
assembled a Synod at Constantinople, wherein he caused the Confession now spoke
of, to be condemned. And the other under Parthenius; who, having driven out
Cyril of Beroe, in the Year 1641. had it also condemned in 1642. As to the
Refutation of Caryophylus, it cannot reasonably be thought to contain the
Opinions of the Greek Church; because that although he was a Greek by Nation,
yet he was a Latin by Religion; Programmate poster.
having been bred up at Rome from his Infancy, as Nihusius does confess. And as
for the two Councils, if they be received to be Councils of the whole Greek
Church, for legitimate Councils, where all things were done in due form; in a
word, for true Councils, it must be granted, that the Doctrine of Cyril of
Lucar, the same with that of the Protestants, had not time to be settled amongst
the Greeks; but the Protestants do not yield at the sight of these two
Councils, which they suppose to be only forged by the Latins. In fine, There
was lately communicated unto me a Treatise of a learned Man of this Communion,
which proves by many strong Arguments and Reasons, that these two Councils were
only fained by the Latins; which I intend not to determine: but I shall only
say, that there is one thing in this History which much surpriseth me, which
is, that Parthenius, under whom the latter of these Councils was to have been
assembled, in the Year 1642. was driven out by another Parthenius, unto whom
Leo Allatius, a Greek, Latinized, and Library Keeper of the Vatican, gives this
testimony, De perpet. consens. Eccl. Orient. and Occident. l. 3. c. 11.
of having been Disciple to Cyril of Lucar, and a great favourer of the
Calvinists: from whence they fail not to infer, that the Doctrine of Cyril was
not extinguished with his person; as neither do they spare to say, that if the
Greek Church did believe the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, there would signs
of it appear in the Decrees of their Councils, as well as in those of the Latin
Church; in their Liturgies, Catechisms, and in the public and authentical
pieces touching their Religion; which yet they pretend is not to be seen. They
add also, that the Greeks believe that the Communion breaks the Fast; that the
Eucharist is digested, and goes into the draft, with other common meats, as
has been showed in the 17th Chapter. They observe, that they receive the
Sacrament standing; that they do not bow unto it when it is carried unto (...)
folks; that they have not dedicated unto it any particular Holy day, nor
Processions; that they do not expose it in public, neither in their
rejoycings, nor in their sorrows; that they have not composed any particular
Office and Prayers, to celebrate its praises; and, in a word, that they do
nothing of all which the Latins do, to express the Adoration which they give
unto it. Therefore Arcudius, a Latinized Priest, of the Isle of Corfu, all in a
passion, demands of Gabriel of Philadelphia, wherefore, the the Consecration of
the Gifts being ended, That the Priest does not bow his head, nor adore, nor
prostrate himself, nor give any show of honor? Wherefore is it that he does
not light Candle, nor sing any Songs nor Hymns unto the Sacrament; making unto
it neither reverences, nor bowing of the head; nor of the knee, not honoring
it by bowing down unto the ground; and not so much as saying unto it, Lord,
remember me in thy Kingdom. Besides, I think that the Greeks in general are at
this time so ignorant, that they are not very capable of giving an account of
their Faith, touching the holy Sacrament. So that, if I mistake not, it would
be no difficult matter for persons any thing ingenious, whether Protestants or
Roman Catholics, to make them to embrace and believe either of the two
Opinions.

But it is now time to treat of the Worship; which is to be the Subject of the
latter part of this History.

THE HISTORY OF THE EUCHARIST.
Part III. Wherein is Treated of the Worship of it.
AFter having seen and considered the manner how the Ancient Christians did
Celebrate their Eucharist. and what they said and believed of this August
Sacrament, with all the Changes and Alterations which have thereupon ensued,
and the many Disputes and Contests which have frequently happened in Europe, from
Paschas until Berengarius; and from Berengarius, until the great separation of
the Protestants. The method proposed by us, necessarily requires, that we
should employ this Third Part in examining the Worship, I mean, to consider the
dispositions and preparations which should go before the Celebration of the
Sacrament, and of the inclinations and motions of the Soul of the Communicant,
either toward God and Jesus Christ, or in respect of the Sacrament it self;
that we should examine the great question of Latrie; and that we should
endeavor to discover what the Church has from time to time required of those
which approached unto the holy Table, to participate of this adorable Mystery
of our Salvation. For it must not be imagined, that these first Christians
which abounded with Zeal and Piety, contented themselves in Celebrating this
Divine Sacrament with indifferency, and merely for fashion sake, and only to
declare what they believed of the Nature of the Symbols, of their use and
employment; and that they omitted the necessary preparations both for
celebrating, and for worthily partaking thereof. In fine, the abode which I
made in the Country of Ecclesiastical Antiquity; and the inspection which for
some years I made into the Records and Registers which contain the Laws and
Customs of this great Empire, have informed me, that this great and sublime
Mystery, is not Celebrated; and that none presume to Communicate, without great
preparation, devotion, and respect: And that the People of that Country made
the actions of Jesus Christ, (celebrating his Sacrament, and that of the
Apostles in Communicating the model of their Celebration; whereunto,
nevertheless, in process of time, they added several Ceremonies which had not
been used at first) and the words of this same Savior, the foundation of their
Doctrine, and of their Faith, upon this important Article of Religion. They had
also considered the Commemoration that the Lord, and afterward his Apostle,
commands us to make of his Person and of his Death; and the proof and
examination which this latter requires of us, as the fountain and principle of
all the dispositions necessary for Celebrating and for Conimunicating. Having
therefore treated at large of the two first Heads, we are indispensibly obliged
to treat of the third point, thereby to finish and complete this History: And
because the Celebration precedes the Communion; and that the actions of him
that Celebrates, goes before them of the Communicant, we will first treat of
the preparations incumbent upon him which does Celebrate the Holy Sacrament.

CHAP. I.
Of the Preparations which precede the Celebration.

WHen Jesus Christ did Celebrate his Eucharist, the Evangelists do not mention
that he prepared himself by any Ceremony; they only declare, That after the
Supper of the Passover was ended, he took Bread, and that having prayed unto
his Father over this Bread, he broke it, and distributed it unto his Disciples.
I only say, that at the very instant, there is no question to be made, but that
he lifted up his Soul unto his Father, to beseech him that he would make this
Sacrament which he went about to Institute for a Seal of his Covenant, saving
and efficacious unto his Children, unto the end of the World: And that taking
the Bread to make it a sign of his Body, he did it with that reverence, which
of it self showed, that he went about doing something that was of great weight
and moment. The Evangelists, nor St. Paul, make no mention at all of any
preparation accompanied with many external Ceremonies; our Savior designing to
institute this Mystery with much plainness and simplicity, agreeable unto the
Nature of the Gospel; the Worship whereof was to be wholly Spiritual and
Divine, according unto what Jesus Christ said unto the woman of Samaria, That
God is a Spirit, and he must be worshipped by them which serve him, in spirit
and in truth. About six or seven score years after, the Conductors of the
Christian Churches used no other Ceremony in the Celebration of the holy
Sacrament; for St. Justin Martyr, St. Justin Martyr. Apol. 2.
who gives an ample description of the exterior form of Celebrating the
Sacrament, which was observed in his time, prescribes no other preparation unto
us on behalf of the Pastor before the Sacrament, but only that when the Sermon
made unto the People, was ended, reading some portion of the holy Scriptures,
he made a prayer unto God; and that when prayer was finished, the Believers
having saluted each other with the kiss of Charity, there was presented unto
him Bread, Wine and Water, over which things, he prayed unto God to Consecrate
them; and the People having answered Amen, the distribution was made unto the
Communicants by the Ministry of the Deacons.

Nothing can be seen more simple, nor more agreeable unto the Institution of
this Sacrament, then the manner that was used in Celebrating of it in the days
of St. Justin, seeing there is no mention made of any preparation made by him
that Celebrates, in order unto this holy Action, being content to prepare and
dispose himself thereunto in private, by ardent and zealous prayers unto God,
that he would be pleased to enable him by his Grace to Celebrate this Venerable
Sacrament, with the Gravity, Reverence, and Devotion, befitting so illustrious
a Monument of his great kindness and love: But this great simplicity was not to
the liking of those which came after; They thought God was to be served with
more pomp; and that the splendour of outward Ceremonies, would advance the
Dignity of the Mysteries of his Religion. It often happens, that we think God
is like our own selves; and that because we naturally love outward pomp, and
are exceedingly inclined unto Pageantries, we fondly conceit that it is the
same with the Almighty; and that the Service which we address unto him, would
be much more acceptable for being beautified and enriched with a great many
Ceremonies, and attended with many mystical actions, into which deep search
must be made, to understand their sense and meaning. This is indeed the Spring
and Original cause of all those which in process of time have been introduced
by Men in the Celebration of the Sacrament of the Eucharist: But because we
here only enquire into those which Celebrate, and of the preparations which
they ought to make for this holy Action, we must, to prosecute our design,
consider what is happened in this preparation since Justin Martyr. In the
Constitutions which go in the Apostles names, there is a Liturgy for the
Celebration of the Eucharist; wherein, after Prayers unto God for the
Catechumeny, the Energumeny, and the Penitents; for those which are ready to
receive Baptism, and for the faithful. And after having dismissed all those
which by the Laws of the Church could not be present at the Celebration of
Divine Mysteries, the Deacons did present upon the Altar, Constit. Apostol. l.
8. c. 12.
the Oblations unto the Bishop, having a Priest on each hand of him, and a
Deacon at each end of the Altar, with Fanns, to hinder any Fly, or other little
Creature, from falling into the Cup: Then the Bishop, with the Priests, pray
unto God with a low voice; then he puts on a rich Vestment, and standing by the
Altar, he makes the Sign of the Cross, and says unto the People there present,
The Grace of God Almighty, the Love of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the
Communication of the holy Spirit, be with you all; and those which be present
answer with one accord, And with thy Spirit. The Bishop says again, Lift up
your hearts; unto which the People reply, We do unto the Lord; and the Bishop,
Let us give thanks unto the Lord; It is just and right, say the People. After
which, the Bishop addressing himself unto God, says, That it is just and right
to praise him; showing in a long Discourse, the motives and reasons of this
praise, taken either from the Nature of God and his works, whether of the
Creation and Preservation of his ancient People, or from the redemption and
sending Jesus Christ into the World for our Salvation; which discourse he
concludes by the History of the Institution of the Sacrament; from whence he
proceeds unto the Consecration after the manner of the Greeks. And this is in
short the substance of the preparations which this Liturgy does propose unto us
on the part of him which does Celebrate. Dionys. Arcopag. de Eccles. Hierarch.
c. 3.
In that of the pretended Dennis the Arcopagite, the Bishop makes his prayer
near the Altar, causes Incence to be burnt, and goes round the place of the
Assembly; returning unto the Altar, he begins to sing Psalms, all the Clergy
singing with him. After which the Deacon reads some part of the holy
Scriptures; which being ended, the Catechumeny, the Energumeny, and the
Penitents, are made to go out: Then the chief amongst the Deacons, together
with the Priests, put the Bread and Cup of blessing upon the Altar. After a
general Hymnologie of all the Church, the Bishop prays, gives the blessing
unto those which are present, which salute each other; and having with the
Priests, washed his hands, he Consecrates the Divine gifts. But because one of
the circumstances of this preparation, is the burning of Incense, let us
endeavor to discover as near as may be, the time when Christians first began
to introduce this Ceremony into the service of their holy Religion. Tertullian,
who wrote at the end of the second Century, and the beginning of the third,
does sufficiently testify, that Christians, in that time, were wholly ignorant
of the use of it, and that perfumes were not used in their Worship; for
speaking of prayers, which they presented unto God for their Emperors; Tertull.
in Apolog. c. ^^. See Athanag. who reiects it besore T^rtul. in Apol. for
Christian. p. 13 and Clement Alexandrin. in his Stromates, p. 717. and 719.
I cannot (says he) demand these things but of him who I know will grant them
unto me, as it is he only in whose power it is to grant them, it is unto us
only that he will give them; because we are his faithful Servants, which adore
and Worship him alone, and offer unto him the fattest and best Sacrifice, which
he has commanded to be offered unto him; to wit, prayer, proceeding from a
chaste body, a pure Soul, and from the holy Spirit; and not grains of Incense
of small price, not drops of that Arabian Tree, not two spoonfuls of Wine, nor
the blood of an O^ ready to dye of Fat. And in the same Treatise he declares,
That if the Christians made any use of Incense, it was in burying of their
Dead: Id. ibid. c. 42. Vide de Idolat. c. 11. and ad scapul.
We do not buy any Incense, (says he) if the Aratian Merchants do complain,
let them know, that there is more of their Commodities employed, and with
greater profusion, in burying Christians; then in perfuming the Images of the
Gods. And elsewhere he makes the true use of Incense to consist in driving away
ill Odours; Id. de coron. c. 10.
When I go into any place (says he) and smell an ill savor that offends me, I
cause a little Incense to be burnt, but not with the same Ceremony, the same
disposition, nor the same pomp, Advers. Gent. l. 7.
as it is burnt in the Temples of Idols. Arnobius at the end of the third
Century, if not the beginning of the fourth, does in such sort press the
Gentiles for their causing Incense to be burnt unto their Gods, that there is
no likelihood he would have treated them as he did, if the Christians had used
it in any of their Ceremonies, and especially in the Celebration of the
Eucharist; or at the least he would have represented, that there was very great
difference betwixt the one and the other, in regard that what the Gentiles did
unto the honor of Idols, Christians did unto the Honor of the true God: He
does nothing of all this; he contents himself in deriding the blindness of the
Gentiles, and to show them that it was ridiculous in them to undertake to offer
Odours and Perfumes unto their Gods. And Lactantius, Epitom. c. 2.
his Disciple, does he not positively say, That God does not require of us
neither Sacrifices nor Perfumes.: Orat. ad coetum c. 12.
And Eusebius introduces the Emperor Constantine, saying, That the Sacrament is
a sacrifice of thanksgiving, wherein is not desired, neither a smell of
Incense, nor a burning Brand. St. Austin himself, who died in the year 430.
seems wholly to reject the use of Incense in God's Worship, In Psalm. 49.
We (says he) are in safety, we are not obliged to travel into Arabia to get
Incense; we do not cause the greedy Merchant to unfold his Ballots, In Psalm. 50.
God requires of us a sacrifice of praise and of thanksgiving: And elsewhere,
Do not make provision of Perfumes which comes from without, but say, O God what
I dedicate unto thee is in my heart, with the praises which I will render unto
thee. And, if I mistake not, In Psalm. 65.
St. Hillary understood it so when he said, We are informed in the Book of the
Psalms what is meant by Perfumes, Let my prayer come before thee like Incense;
signifying, that by Perfume is to be understood Prayers. St. Ambrose in his
Commentary upon the Gospel according to St. Luke, speaks of perfuming Altars,
in expounding what is said of Zacharias the Father of St. John Baptist, That
his Lot fell to offer Incense. But because he says in the same place, that
Jesus Christ is sacrificed, which cannot be literally true, all Christians
confessing that he is not really sacrificed in the Eucharist, I suppose the
safest and best way is mystically, and in a spiritual sense to understand St.
Ambrose his Discourse, especially seaing the Declaration which St. Austin has
made, who is later then him: Therefore I make no question, but the answer of
the Martyrs Fostin and Jovita, made unto the Emperor Adrian, as Molanus reports
it in his Supplements of Ussuard's Martyrology, is forged and false; for after
the railing Speeches which they make against the Emperor, and speaking unto his
person, he makes them say, Die Feb. 15.
We will cause no Incense to be burnt to the honor of thy Gods; but we offer
continually Incense and Sprinkling unto God our maker. We find in the Library
of the Holy Fathers, a prayer of St. Hypollitus touching the end of the World,
and Antichrist. Besides the title of Martyr, they also give him that of Bishop;
and at this time, they will needs have him to be in the first place, Bishop in
Arabia, and afterward Bishop of Port in Italy; although St. Jerome does witness
in his Treatise of Ecclesiastical Writers, That he could not find of what place
he was Bishop. If that prayer was really of Hypollitus, it may seem to
intimate, that the Greek Church in his time, that is to say in the third
Century, used Perfume and Incense in its Service and Worship; for speaking of
the harm which Antichrist shall do at the end of the World, he says amongst
other things, That the Churches shall mourn and lament, Bibl. Pa^^ ^. 2. Graeco
Lat.
because there shall be no more Oblation, nor Incense, nor Worship pleasing
unto God. Not but it may very well be said, that the Author designed only to
represent the Worship of Christians, by terms borrowed from the service of the
Law, without being necessary to infer, That they did really employ Incense and
Perfumes in the Worship of God. But if we should take what he says in a
literal sense, I do not suppose there could any great stress be laid upon it;
And to speak the truth, there are so many things in this small Treatise which
are so unworthy of the true St. Hypollitus, that I should be very loath to
attribute them unto him. St. Jerome, its true, reckons amongst his Works, a
Treatise of Antichrist; but it is evident it cannot be the same which is now
extant; for it is entitled, A Prayer of St. Hypolitus, Bishop and Martyr; of
the End of the World, of Antichrist, and of the second coming of our Lord Jesus
Christ. Moreover the same S. Jerome, in his Catalogue of Ecclesiastical Writers,
observes, That he had made a Sermon in the praise of Jesus Christ; and that the
Author says in this Sermon, That he repeated it in the presence of Origin. Now
it is most certain, that in Origen's time the Greeks knew not what Perfumes and
Incense meant in their Worship; for Expounding these words of Levit. 24. Thou
shall put pure Incense upon each Row, (that is to say, of the Shewbread) he
speaks in such a manner as sufficiently shows, that Christians had not then
admitted the use of Incense into their Worship, Hom. 13. in Levit. c. 24. tom.
1. p. 106. I.
Do not imagine (says he) that Almighty God has commanded nor appointed in
his Law, to bring him Incense from Arabia; but this is the Incense which he
requires Men should offer unto him, and wherein he finds a sweet smell and
savor, to wit, Prayers proceeding from a pure heart, and from a good
Conscience, the sweet smell whereof ascends up unto him.

I allow that Origin here departs a little from the literal sense, in respect
of the Law; but his language does clearly evidence, that Incense and Perfumes
were not then received into the Worship of the Eastern Christians. Let us then
own, that this use was introduced into the Greek Church after Origen's days,
who departed this life toward the latter end of the third Century; and by
consequence, the Canons; which falsely bear the Apostles names, have been made
since that time; seeing therein it is ordained to offer Perfumes for the
Celebration of the Sacrament.

And because it appears by the prayer of the Emperor Constantine, at the
Assembly of the Saints, or in the Church of God, whose words have been already
alleged, that even the Eastern Christians did not use Perfume in the
Celebration of their Eucharist, for the greatest part of the IV. Century; at
least, when they celebrated it at the Tombs of Martyrs; I cannot tell but it
ought to be granted, that the fourth pretended Canon of the Apostles was made
since Constantine's time, who departed this life in the year of our Lord, Canon
Apost. 4.
337. for see here what it enjoins: That nothing else should be offered at the
Altar but of the first Ears of Corn, Grapes, Oil for the Lights, and Incense
for the time of the holy Oblation. And as it is the first testimony of the
Greek Fathers, wherein there is mention made of Perfume in the celebration of
the Sacrament, that of Hypollitus not being to be credited; and being,
moreover, capable of being conveniently interpreted of an Allegorical Perfume,
it must be granted, that the Latins received the use of Perfumes later into
their Worship than the Greeks, seeing St. Austin does not make any mention of
it in the V. Century; for I take little heed of the second Decretal of Soter,
wherein Women are forbidden to bring any Perfume unto the Altar; because this
Decretal, and all them of the other Popes, until Siritius, are the Works of an
Impostor.

When I say, that the Latins have received the practice of Incense and Perfume
later than the Greeks, I conclude that these latter followed the Ordinance of
the pretended Canon of the Apostles; which, in all appearance, was not made,
but very forward in the IV. Century. And nevertheless, it is not certain, that
the Greek Church put this Ordinance in execution presently after it was made.
In fine, the first true and candid passage of Antiquity, after the fourth Canon
of Apostles, wherein there is mention made of offering Incense; or as it is in
the Greek, good Odours; Act. 3. Council. Chalced.
is a Request of Ischyrion, Deacon of the Church of Alexandria, presented unto
the Council of Chalcedon, assembled, Anno 451. against Dioscorus, his Bishop;
Act. 5. t. 4. Con. cil. p. 102, 103.
and afterward at Constantinople, under Agapet, and under Menna, in the Year
536. there is mention of assembling in the Church with Flambeaus and Perfumes;
but it is not positively affirmed, that it was to celebrate the Eucharist, no
more than the action of the Friar Zozimus, Hist. Eccl. l. 4. c. 7.
reported by Evagrius, in his Ecclesiastical History; saying, That after having
deplored the ruin of Antioch, which he had foretold, he demanded a Senser; and
having filled the place where he was with Perfume, he bowed himself to the
ground, to appease the wrath of God by his prayers. The same Historian,
speaking of the Presents which Chosroes, King of Persia, offered unto the
Martyr Sergius, Ibid. l. 6. c. 20.
he forgets not to speak of a Golden Senser for celebrating of the Sacrament;
which happened at the end of the IV. Century, where he concludes his History.

I have expressly spoken of legitimate, and not forged Writings; because I am
not ignorant, that in the Liturgies attributed unto St. James and St. Mark,
there is to be seen the custom of Perfume, and of Incense, at the time of
celebrating the Sacrament: and there be also Prayers for dedicating it unto
God. But for as much as the Learned, as well Roman Catholics as Protestants,
do confess, that either they were not the Works of these Servants of God; or if
they be, that they have received many Alterations, and that things have been
foisted into them, unknown unto the first Christians; nothing hinders but we
may in this number include the use of Incense; there being no likelihood that
it would have been so late received into the Church, if it had been practiced
by an Apostle, and an Evangelist.

What I say of the Liturgies of St. James and St. Mark, I say also of that
attributed unto St. Peter; wherein we observe the same thing. Which example the
Christians would not have failed to have observed, had all the Liturgies
appeared from the beginning.

As for the Liturgies of St. Basil, and St. Chrysostom, I would not so
positively affirm, that what is therein mentioned of the Oblation of Perfume
has been therein inserted since the death of the Authors; for although that
several things have been thereunto annexed, and many things altered, and that
there be several which even believe, that which goes under St. Chrysostom's
name, is not his; but of a more recent Author. Nevertheless the Canon of the
Apostles, which prescribes the use of Incense in the celebration of the
Sacrament, having been composed before either of these two Doctors of the
Church, I shall refer it unto others to decide this difficulty, although St.
Basil, upon Psalm. 115. rejects the Oblation of Incense; and I shall content my
self in saying, that if these two Liturgies are truly St. Basil's and St.
Chrysostom's, and if what is therein said of the Oblation of perfume, has not
been thereunto added since their death, there is great cause to wonder that
there is no mention at all made of it any where else, in the Works of Authors
of the times before the Council of Chalcedon; at least, I have not observed
any, even in St. Cyril of Jerusalem; Mystag. 5.
who describing particularly enough the form of the celebration of the
Sacrament, and the dispositions thereunto requisite, speaks not a word of the
Oblation of Incense. He says indeed, that a Deacon gives Water to wash his
hands that officiated, and unto the Priests that be with him; that the people
are exhorted to give each other the Kiss of Charity, to lift up their hearts on
high, to give thanks unto the Lord; that there is mention made of Heaven and
Earth, of the Sea, the Sun, Moon and Stars; and generally, of all Creatures, as
well reasonable Creatures as Brutes, of visible and invisible, of Angels and
Archangels, of Virtues, Dominions, Principalities, Powers, Thrones, and
Cherubims which cover their faces; especially those which were seen by the
Prophet Esaias; and which cried one to another, saying, Holy, holy, holy is the
Lord God of Hosts. And after being so sanctified, they pray unto God, that he
will be pleased to send his Holy Spirit upon the Gifts proposed, that is to
say, the Bread and Wine; the Consecration whereof, the Greeks make to depend
upon this Prayer: but as for the Ceremony of Incense, which we enquire after,
the least sign of it is not to be found in the whole Catechism. As for the
pretended Denis the Arcopagite, which gave occasion unto this whole Enquiry; he
began not to appear, at soonest, until the end of the V. Century, or the
beginning of the VI. at which time, the Perfumes and Incenses were practiced in
the Service of the Greek Church. Tom. 6. Bibl. Pat.
I know very well, that in the Liturgy which goes under the name of St. Cyril
of Alexandria, in the Library of the Fathers, there is Prayers made for those
which furnished the Oblations and Sacrifices; the Bread, Wine, Oil and Incense,
and the Vessels used at the Altar. So that if it were truly his, the
introduction of this practice amongst the Greeks should be before the Council
of Chalcedon, because Cyril was deceased before the Council was convocated. But
it being very uncertain whether it were Cyril's, or whether he was the Author
of it, or that it has retained its purity, we have not ill assigned unto the
Council of Chalcedon the first restimony of this custom amongst the Greeks,
after the Ordinance of the Canon of the Apostles. It Is true, the Request of
Ischyrion Deacon of the Church of Alexandria, wherein it is spoken of, and
which is contained in the third Action of this Council; seeming to presuppose
the establishment of this use, but of no long time, it may without any
inconvenience be said, that it began to be practiced about the time of the
assembling of this Council; and probably at Alexandria, rather than elsewhere,
Council. Chalced. Act 3. t. 3. Council. p. 247. ult. edit.
according to the Testament of a certain Lady, called Peristerie; who at her
death, bequeathed great treasures unto the Church, unto Monasteries, Hospitals,
and unto the Poor of the whole Province; and also provision to supply the
Oblation of Perfume; as may be gathered from this Request, as also from the
time of the death of this Lady, which was whilst Dioscorus was Bishop; and
after the death of Cyril. But in as much as this custom of offering Incense
unto God at the time of celebrating the Eucharist began to be introduced into
the Eastern Church in the V. Century, as near as I can judge, the Reader will
not be offended that I here represent the Prayer which was made unto God, in
presenting him the Perfume: for although it be expressed in diverse terms,
according to the diversity of Liturgies; nevertheless, because all these
Prayers amount in substance unto the same thing, this here will be sufficient.
It is in the Liturgy of St. James; I mean, Liturgia S. Jacobi.
in that which goes under his name; O Lord Jesus Christ, Word of God, who
offeredst thy self upon the Cross, as a holy Sacrifice unto thy God, thy
Father, and thy King; which art that Coal of two natures, which did touch
with Tongs the lips of the Prophet, and did cleanse him from his iniquities;
touch also our Understanding: Ours, I say, who are sinners, and purify us from
all uncleanness: and grant, we may present our selves pure and holy at thine
Altar, to offer unto thee a Sacrifice of Praise: And receive of us, who are
unprofitable Servants, this present Perfume, in an Odor of a sweet savor.
Change the ill savor of our Souls and Bodies into a sweet Odor, and sanctify
us by the sanctifying virtue of thy Holy Spirit; for thou art the only Saint
which sanctifies, and communicatest thy self unto the faithful. And unto whom,
with thy Father, and thy good, holy and quickening Spirit, appertains the Glory,
both now, and for ever, Amen.

As for what regards the Latin Church, it is no less difficult, precisely to
determine the time when Perfume was first offered in the Celebration of the
Sacrament. It may very well be inferred from what has been alleged of St.
Austin, that this practice was not received in his days in the West; at least,
in the Church of Africa; I say, not in the Church of Africa: for I find in the
Life of Boniface the first, Contemporary with St. Austin, this Ordinance; That
no Woman, or Nun, In lib. Pontific. t 1. Council. p. 884.
should touch nor wash the sacred Corporal, nor cause to be burnt any Incense
in the Church, saving the Deacons only. I know, the Pontifical Book, from
whence this Life is taken, is a Book upon which no solid foundation can be
laid: those which have any knowledge of Ecclesiastical Antiquity, make no
esteem of it. And the Impostor that forged the Decretals of the first Popes,
has made Soter to make a Decrete in the II. Century, like unto that of
Boniface in the V. but for all that, I would not so absolutely deny the truth
of the Ordinance of Boniface, as I would that of Soter; for although the
Pontifical Book is not always to be believed, nevertheless, it cannot be said
as positively, as of the Decretal of Soter, that it is forged. There is but one
thing that sticks with me, and is the reason that I cannot give credit to the
Decrete which is to be seen in the Life of Boniface: It is, that in all the
Books of Sacraments of Gregory the First, nor in those of Ecclesiastical
Offices of St. Isidore, Archbishop of Sevil, there is no mention at all made,
to the best of my remembrance, touching the Oblation of Perfume. It is not so
of the Book called The Roman Order, wherein there is express mention made of
it; as also in Amalarius Fortunatus, who lived in the IX. Century: but as for
the Roman Order, all are not agreed of its age; most thinking it was written
toward the end of the VIII. Century, and some, in the XI. After all, in
admitting the Decrete of Pope Boniface the First, it will follow, that the use
of Perfume and Incense in the Worship and Service of Religion, was not received
by the Latins before the V. Century, if it be certain that it was then it self
received.

In a Book which treats of Divine Offices, which Melchior Historpius caused
to be printed, together with the Roman Order, there is several Prayers for
consecrating and blessing the Censer and the Incense; of each it will suffice
to relate one. I say, in the first place, for the Censer; in blessing whereof,
this Prayer is made unto God. Tom. 10. Bibl. Pat.
O Lord God, who, at the time that the Children of Israel were devoured by
fire, by reason of their Rebellion, thou were pleased to hear the prayers of
thy High Priest Aaron, standing betwixt the Dead and the Living, and offering
thee Incense, and saving the people out of the midst of the fire; bless, we
pray thee, this Censer: and grant, that as often as we therein offer Incense
unto thee, we may become a Temple of a sweet savor, acceptable unto thy Christ.

And for the Perfume and Incense; Ibid.
O Almighty Lord; God of Abraham, of Isaac, and of Jacob; send upon this
Creature of Perfume, and of Incense, the strength and virtue of thy savor; to
the end it may serve for a protection and defense unto thy Servants, to hinder
the Enemy from entering into their hearts, and there fix his abode and
residence; through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

And in the Pontifical; Pontific. Romans par. 2. fol. 136. 2 Venise 1582.
O Lord God Almighty, in whose presence does stand with trembling, the Army of
holy Angels; whose service is wholly spiritual, and full of zeal; be pleased to
behold, bless, and sanctify this Incense and Perfume, to the end that all the
failures, the infirmities, and all the stratagems of the Enemy, smelling its
savor, may fly away, and depart from thy Creatures, which thou have ransomed
with the precious Blood of thy Son, never to be wounded by the biting of the
wicked Serpent; through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

But because that which is called the Apostles fourth Canon joins unto Incense,
the Oil for the Lights or Lamps, at the time of celebrating the Sacrament, it
will not be amiss to enquire into the first Original of this Custom, as we have
done into that of Incense. To this purpose the Reader need not expect that we
should treat of the primitive Christians making use of Lamps and Candles in
their Assemblies, because every body knows they did not use them for Ceremony,
but through pure necessity; being forced to assemble in the night, and early,
before daylight, for fear of Persecution. From thence did proceed the unjust
slanders wherewith they were charged in Minucius Foelix, of causing the Lights
to be extinguished, the more greedily to satisfy their Lusts, and sensual
Appetites. Neither will I speak of the Wax Candles and Flambeaus which were
used on Easter Eve; nor stand to show when their use began, not only on this
occasion, but also in Feasts and Funerals, as well as unto the honor of
Images. These things may probably be answered at some more convenient time: for
the present, we must limit our selves within the matter which concerns the
Sacrament, whereof we write the History; and by consequence, only consider the
use of the light of Lamps and Candles in that which relates unto the Worship
and Service of God.

Tertullian accounted it as a great Superstition in the Gentiles, for using
Candles and Flambeaus in the day time; and says, Christians do not so; Apolog.
c. 35.
We (says he) do not burn daylight with Candles and Flambeaus. And he says
so upon account of what was acted by the Pagans upon Holy Days, and public
Rejoycings; particularly, unto the honor of the Emperors. But elsewhere he
speaks in a manner which gives plainly to understand, that the Christians of
his time did not at all admit, for Ceremony, the use of Candles, Flambeaus, or
other Lights, in the Worship of their Religion: so that if they made use of
any, it was only during their Nocturnal Assemblies; their Enemies not suffering
them to meet together in the day time. Let them (says he) every day light
Flambeaus (he speaks of what was done in the Temples of Idols) which are
absolutely in darkness. De Idol. c. 15.
Let them which are threatened with eternal fire, fasten Laurels at their doors,
that they might afterward burn them; for these tokens of darkness, and these
forerunners of pains and punishments become them very well. Could a Christian
have spoke after this manner against a Heathen Superstition, if in his Religion
he had practiced the use of Lights and Flambeaus? He would have spoke in
another manner; and would have rested satisfied to have shown, that if
Christians admitted of this custom amongst the Ceremonies of their Religion, it
was unto the Honor and Glory of the true God; whereas Pagans did it unto unto
the honor of their Idols, and their false Divinities. And writing unto his
Wife, In c. 6. lib. 2. ad uxor.
She will (says he) be incommoded with the smell of Incense at all the
Solemnities of the Emperors, at the beginning of every new Year, and of each
Month. She will depart out of the house, whose door shall be set with Laurels
and Candles. Upon which words, Monsieur Rigaut does fully prove, that the
ancient Christians would not suffer that the Pagans should fasten Laurels at
their doors, nor that they should light Flambeaus in day time. And that they
had it in detestation, as things consecrated unto the honor of false Gods, as
things injurious unto nature and reason, and as the sign of some place of fresh
debauchery.

The same Tertullian demands again in his Apologetick, Apolog. c. 46.
If there be any one that forces a Philosopher to sacrifice, or to swear, or
needlessly to light Flambeaus at Noonday. And Arnobius directing his discourse
unto the Gentiles, Advers. Gent. l, 5. p 77. ult. ed.
Your Gods (says he) like men, look for things they have lost, and run through
the World with Flambeaus, when the Sun shines in its luster.

In the Council of Eliberius, in Spain, assembled, as is supposed, Council.
Eliber. c. 35. p. 37.
in the Year 305. there is found two Canons which concerns the Subject in hand:
The first contains these words; We forbid that Candles should be lighted by day
time in the Churchyard, for the Souls of Saints should not be disturbed. Those
which obey not this Ordinance, shall be suspended from the Communion of the
Church. In the other, this may be seen; We have thought good that those which
are troubled with unclean Spirits should be baptized: if they are Believers,
and in danger of death, let the Sacrament be given unto them; forbidding them
to light Candles publicly. And if they do it contrary to this Prohibition, let
them be deprived of the Communion. But this Council being assembled in a time
when the Persecutions against the Christians were not wholly ceased, let us
examine if, after the Empire was fallen into the hands of Christian Princes, in
the person of Constantine the Great, whether the Church acted otherwise than it
had done before.

Lactantius Firmianus was Tutor unto Crispus, Son of this Emperor, Instit.
diviner. l. 6. c. 2.
if we examine him on this matter, he will tell us, That God has created so
clear and pure a Light for the use of Man, that he stands in no need of
Flambeaus. He does deride the Heathens, That they made Lights unto God, as if
he were in Darkness; and makes this formal declaration, That it cannot be
believed that that man is in his right senses, which offers the light of
Candles and Flambeaus, unto him which is the Author and Dispencer of Light. And
St. Cyril of Jerusalem, which flourished at the end of the 4th Century, lays it
down as a part of Idolatrous Worship, Mystagog. 1.
To light Candles, and to burn Incense near unto Fountains and Rivers; without
saying a word of justifying Christians in the use of Candles and Flambeaus in
the exercise of their Worship; which in all probability he would not have
failed to have done, if this practice had been publicly received into the
Church; not but that they were made use of either on Easter Eves, to dissipate
the darkness of the Night, as Gregory Nazianzen speaks; Orat. 2. de Paschat.
or when Prayers were made, or Psalms sung before day, as is observed by St.
Epiphanius; Lib. 3. in fine compendiar. doct^.
There is (says he) always prayers at Church in the Morning, Psalms also is
there sung by Candlelight.

But it matters not what was done by Christians when they assembled in the
Night, there being a kind of necessity which permitted them not to do
otherwise; the question is, to know at what time they began to introduce the
use of Candles and Flambeaus into the Service and Worship of their Religion,
and to make it one of the Ceremonies of the Celebration of their Sacrament, We
have already seen that the 4th of the Canons attributed unto the Holy Apostles,
ordains, To offer Oil for the Laiminaries: But the date of these Canons being
very uncertain, we can conclude nothing certain nor positive of the beginning
of this Ceremony; besides, that it may be said this Decree seems only to regard
Nocturnal Assemblies, or at least the Eves of Easter, which necessarily
required the help of Candles, Lights and Flambeaus; unto which time may be
referred the Miracle of Narcissus Bishop of Jerusalem, who seeing the Oil to
fail in the Lamps, converted Water into Oil, L. 6. c. 9.
according to the report of Eusebius in his Ecclesiastical History: And the
Canon of the Apostles joining the Oil unto the Incense, and mentioning the time
of Celebrating the Sacrament, it is probable, he desires that both of them
should be used. Histor. l. 6. c. 8.
Socrates makes mention of certain silver Crosses invented by St. Chrysostom,
whereupon was set Wax Lights; but he declares in the same place, that it was
for the Hymns which was sung in the Night time, unto the honor of Jesus
Christ, whilst the Arrians dishonored him by others which were agreeable unto
their Heresy and Impiety. Sozomen says, Histor. l. 8. c. 8
That the Catholic and Orthodox sang their Hymns, in causing to be carried
before them, Crosses of Silver whereon there was Light Flambeaus; so this makes
nothing to our subject, no more then the using of Lights at the Feasts and
Funerals of Christians, in the days of Gregory Nazianzen and St. Chrysostom, in
token of their joy, for the belief they had of the blessedness and repose of
the Dead; what they did in Celebrating the Birth day, or the day of the Death
of Martyrs, which the Ancients termed their Birth day, does approach nearer the
matter which we examine; for St. Chrysostom witnesses, T. 1. hom. 71. de S.
Phoca.
that they lighted Flambeaus upon those occasions. Nevertheless, because Pagans
were wont to use the same Customs in their Feasts and public rejoycings, Orat.
2. in Julianum, quae est 4.
Gregory Naxianzen does prohibit Christians to use that practice, Let us
Celebrate (says he) the Feast, my Brethren, not with spruceness of Body and
sumptuousness of Apparel; let us not strew the way with Flowers, nor make a
show before our Doors; and let us not make our Houses shine with visible light;
for so it is that Pagans do Celebrate the Feast of the New Moon. Yet not long
after, some introduced the Custom of lighting Flambeaus unto the honor of
Martyrs; I say, some few, for it was not practiced by all the Church, but she
was content to tolerate it to comply with the weakness and ignorance of those
which did it. St. Jerome, Disciple of Gregory Nazianzen, who departed this life
Anno 420. declares himself so fully on this matter, that he leaves us no
difficulty therein; for writing against Vigilantius, Tom. 2. advers. Vigilant.
c. 3.
Priest of Barcelona, who approved not this Custom, he says amongst other
things, We do not light Flambeaus at Noonday, as you do maliciously accuse us,
but it is only done by this means to supply the darkness of the Night, and to
watch by the assistance and favor of the Light, to the end we should not sleep
with you, in darkness; but if any do it for the honor of the Martyrs, by
reason of the ignorance and simplicity of Lay persons, or indeed of some devout
women, of whom it may truly be said, I confess they have a Zeal for God, but
not according to knowledge; what prejudice is all this unto you: And because
Vigilantius charged such People with Idolatry, St. Jerome to excuse them,
shows, that there was a great deal of difference betwixt what the Pagans did,
and what was practiced by these Christians; Ibid.
That (says he) was done unto Idols, therefore it ought to be had in
detestation; but this is done unto Martyrs, therefore it may be allowed; for in
all the Eastern Churches, besides the relics of Martyrs, when the Gospel is to
be read, Lights are set up in day time, not to dissipate darkness, but for an
expression and sign of joy. It must then be granted, that the practice of
Lights and Flambeaus began not to be introduced into the Worship of Christians,
until the V. Century; and not then neither into the whole Church universally,
but only in the Eastern Churches, when they went about reading the Gospel;
which some did for the honor of Martyrs, being the effect of an ignorant
Devotion, and destitute of true knowledge, according to the Opinion of St.
Jerome; and the Exhortation directed by St. Chrysostom unto his Auditors, in the
place abovesaid, of crossing the Sea with Flambeaus, to go to the Sepulcher of
the Martyr Phocas, tending only to express their holy joy, for the advantage
they had of possessing the Relicts of this Martyr, which had been Transported
from Synopius unto Constantinople. But after all, it appears by St. Jerome's
Discourse, that those of the West had not yet admitted of this Ceremony; and
that it was not practiced neither in the Eastern Church, but at the time of
reading the Gospel. Erasmus makes this Annotation upon the passage of St.
Jerome, It seems St. Jerome believed it was a Superstitious thing to light
Flambeaus to the honor of Saints; and that none should be used but for the
convenience of such as were to be employed in the Night season; whereas at this
time, the principal part of Worship is made to consist in the Lights: But it
appears, this Custom was tolerated in that Age, rather than approved. Time
changes many things. In fine, we do not find any mention of it in the
Liturgies which go under the names of St. Peter, St. James, and St. Mark, nor
even in that attributed unto St. Basil; but only in that of St. Chrysostom,
that is to say, in that commonly attributed unto him, but which cannot be his,
but of some Author much later than that Golden Tongue of the Ancient Church;
or, if referring it unto St. Chrysostom, it may not truly be said, That it has
received great changes and alterations: In the number of which, may well be put
the place where there is mention made of Candles and Flambeaus; which yet I
will not positively affirm, being very probable this Custom was introduced by
degrees into the Church, after St. Jerome's time, Act. 5. t. 4. Council. page
102. and 103.
who died 13 years after St. Chrysostom; which was the reason that in the
Council of Constantinople, under Agapet and Menna, Anno 536. Candles were
joined unto the Incense and Perfumes for the public Prayers, which were to be
made in the Church, and if I mistake not, for the Celebration of the Sacrament
it self; but if in that place it concerned not the Celebration of the
Sacrament, as I think it cannot be denied, that the use of Flambeaus on this
occasion, was introduced before into the Eastern Church, seeing the reading the
Gospel, mentioned by St. Jerome, for the which Candles were lighted in day time
in the Eastern Churches, related in all likelihood, unto the Celebration of the
Sacrament, and was as it were a part of it. It Is true, that his limiting this
practice unto the Eastern Churches, imports, that the Churches of the West did
not yet observe it. But in fine, they introduced this same Ceremony into their
Worship; but to know precisely the time, is something difficult.

In the life of Pope Sylvester, Lib. Pontifical. t. 1. Council. page 251.
who held the Pontificial Chair in the days of Constantine the Great, there is
mention made of several sorts of Works and Flambeaus, which he gave unto the
use of the Light in the Church; but because they might be given to supply the
darkness of the Night, or to serve only for Decency and Ornament; not to insist
upon the little credit which the Pontifical Book that contains the Life of
Silvester does deserve, we cannot procure from so great a number of Lamps and
Flambeaus, any light for finding what we look after; although we are not
ignorant that there were some Churches in the IV. Century, especially in the
East, where was seen Lamps lighted even in day time, as in that spoken of by
Epiphanius, at the end of his Letter unto John, Ep. ad Joan. Hierosolym.
Bishop of Jerusalem, which might also happen to be in the West; but we enquire
for the use of these Lamps and Flambeaus at the Celebration of the Sacrament.
St. Austin, contemporary with S. Jerome, but a little younger than him, exhorts
his Auditors to offer according to their ability, little Candles, Sermon. de
Tempor. 215.
and Oil for the Lights; He does not positively say it is for the time of
Oblation, I mean for the Celebration of the Sacrament; But this Sermon is none
of St. Austins. It is a mended, and patch't piece of St. Eloy's, De rectitudine
Catholicae Conversationis; besides, that in the 7th Sermon De temporibus, at
least if it be his, he declares that it is for the Lights of the Night. The 4th
Council of Carthage, assembled Anno 398. if the Title be true, declares, that
the Acolyte receives a Candle from the Archdeacon, Can. 6.
in his Ordination, To the end he should know that it was his Duty to light the
lights of the Church: but he does not particularly explain himself of the use
of these Flambeaus, I suppose then, to reconcile St. Jerome with the rest, it
must be said, that the use which we examine touching the use of Flambeaus, at
the time of Celebrating the Sacrament, began to be observed in the Western
Churches in the days of St. Austin, that is to say, in the V. Century. Liber
Sacrament. in Sabbato Sancto. p. 70. and 71.
And what inclines me to think so, is first, That in the time of Gregory the
first, it was practiced in the Celebration of holy Baptism, as it may be seen
in his Book of Sacraments; whence it may be inferred with great probability,
that it was also practiced in the Celebration of the Sacrament. Secondly, St.
Isidor Archbishop of Sevil, who lived in the same time with Gregory, although
he dyed several years after him, speaks formally of it, Lib. 7. Etymol. c. de
Clericis.
as of a thing already established, Those (says he) which in Greek are called
Acolytes, are those which in Latin we call Linkbearers, because they carry them
when the Gospel is read, or when the Sacrifice is offered; for then they do
light Candles and bear them, not to dissipate darkness, because the Sun shines
at that time, but to express our joy, thereby to declare under the Type of a
corporal Light, that Light spoken of in the Gospel, That he is the true Light,
which enlighteneth every man which comes into the World. Since which time,
most of those which have treated of Divine Offices, have not failed to speak of
it, and therein to seek, as well as in all other things, some mystical
signification; so that it would be but lost labor, any farther to follow the
traces of this Ceremony, which was even at that time generally received amongst
the Greeks and the Latins, in the East and in the West. Therefore may be seen
in the Roman Order, and elsewhere, several prayers for blessing of Torches,
Candles and Flambeaus, which are not necessary here to be inserted: One shall
suffice for all; Ordo Roman. t. 10. Bibl. Patr. p. 24.
O Lord Jesus Christ, bless this Wax we beseech thee; and therein pour by the
virtue of thy heavenly Cross, a heavenly Benediction: to the end, that by the
Sign of the Cross, it might receive of thee, who have given it unto men to
scatter the darkness of the Night, such a force and benediction, that in all
places where it shall be lighted, or set, the Devil should avoid, tremble, and
fly for fear, with all his Imps, from those places and habitations; and that he
may no more attempt to molest and seduce those that serve thee.

But having discoursed of the use of Lamps, Candles, and of Incense; the Author
of Constitutions called Apostolical, obliges us to speak somewhat of the Sign
of the Cross, because in his Liturgy of the Eucharist, he represents the Bishop
making of it, when he addresseth himself unto the celebration of the Sacrament.
It is most certain, that the Ancient Christians often made the sign of the
Cross, at least since the end of the II. Century, as Tertullian informs us; but
before him, I do not remember to have observed it: a practice those Christians
opposed unto the reproach which the Gentiles made them of believing in a Man
that had been put to death upon a Cross; so that by this sign, they would
manifest unto their Enemies, that they were not ashamed of their crucified
Jesus: So it is that St. Cyril of Jerusalem explains himself, when he said, If
after being crucified and buried, Catech. 4.
he had remained in the Grave, then we should have cause to be ashamed: but he
is risen, and ascended up into Heaven. And elsewhere, Id. Catech. 13
Arm your selves against the enemies of this Cross; plant for a Trophy against
all opposers, the Faith of the Cross: And when you engage in disputing with
Unbelievers touching the Cross of our Savior, first of all make the sign of
the Cross, and you will put to silence your gainsayers: Be not ashamed to
confess the Cross of Jesus Christ, that is to say, of him that was crucified.
But how frequent soever the Sign of the Cross was amongst Christians, I cannot
find, that during the three first Centuries, they commonly used it in the
public Service of Religion; and as I only treat at this time of the Sacrament,
I shall only say, that the first places wherein there is any mention of the
Sign of the Cross in the celebration of this Divine Sacrament, are the
Liturgies of the Apostolic Constitutions, as has been declared in this
Chapter: And this Treatise could not have been written, but at the beginning of
the IV. Century; those attributed unto St. Peter, St. James, and St. Mark, are
not as I conceive, any Elder, having many things in them unknown unto the first
Christians. As for the Liturgy of Justin Martyr, written in the II. Century,
there is not one word mentioned of it, but what I dare not assure of the Sign
of the Cross, to wit, that it does not appear in the celebration of the
Sacrament during the three first Centuries, I shall not fear to affirm of the
use of material Crosses, because there were not yet any used in the Church;
therefore Tertullian reckons expressly amongst false Opinions, Apolog. c. 15.
and 16.
that some Pagans entertained of the object of the Adoration of Christians,
Minut. in Octav.
the fancy of those which thought, That they were Worshippers, or Admirers of
the Cross; and in Minutius Felix, Cecilius in his Invective against Christians,
having said, That some persons esteemed that the cursed Wood of the Cross, was
part of their Ceremonies. Octavius, that excellent defender of Christianity,
answers, As for Crosses, we neither care for them, nor Worship them. And it
is very probable that Christians began not to use Crosses, until after it was
believed, that Hellen Mother of Constantine, had found the true Cross of Jesus
Christ, in the year 326. But if we yet draw nearer unto the Sacrament, we shall
not find any Cross therein used, during all the time which has been spoken of,
nor yet later; for it does not appear, neither in the Liturgy of St. Justin
Martyr, nor in those which go under the names of St. James, St. Peter, and of
St. Mark: Nor in fine, in those of the Apostolic Constitutions of St. Cyril of
Jerusalem, and of the pretended Dennis the Arcopagite. But although the Author
of this last, lived not at soonest, but at the V. Century, I know not whether
it may be said, that the use of Sign of the Cross was not practiced in the
public action of the Sacraments of the Church, seeing the contrary appears in
the Writings of St. Chrysostom, Hom. 55. in Matthew. p. 487. Vide t. 5. quod
Christ. sit Deus page 840. and t. 6. de adorat cruc. p. 615.
When (says he) we be regenerated (that is to say Baptized) the Cross is
there; and when we are fed with the mystical food, and when we receive
Ordination, and whatever else we do, this Victorious Symbol does still
accompany us. But before this excellent Doctor, who departed this life Anno
407. I do not find that Crosses were employed in the Service and Worship of
Christians; and besides, the passages of St. Chrysostom may be understood of
the Sign of the Cross only, and not of the Cross it self, especially if the
passages are understood in their full compose and extent.

Besides these things which have been examined, the Original whereof we have
endeavored to discover, there be some others which have been hinted at; as for
instance, diverse Hymns, as well regarding the Clergy, as the People; the
reading the holy Scriptures; several prayers; the turning out of the
Catechumeny, the Energumeny, and the Penitents; whereto we may add, in regard
of the Greeks, the preparing the Oblation; that is to say, the Symbols of Bread
and Wine upon the Table of Proposition; the carrying of these gifts unto the
Mystical Table, to be Consecrated; whereof we say nothing now, having treated
thereof at large in the first Part of this History. As also of the time, the
place, and of the Vessels necessary unto Celebration: Whereunto may be joined
the Ceremony of Vestments, appointed unto this use, whereof I find no mention
at all made before Pope Sylvester, who held the Pontifical See at the beginning
of the IV. Century; that is, from the year 314 until the year 336. For in his
Life there is mention made of Dalmaticks for the Deacons, Tom. 1. Council. p.
258.
and of a certain Cloth wherewith their left hand was to be covered. The Author
of the questions upon the Old and New Testament, in the works of St. Austin,
but before his time, Tom. 4. in append. q. 46. p. 436. Tom. 1. Council. p. 729.
Hom. 83. in Matthew. Liturg. Chrysostom.
speaks also of the Dalmaticks which Deacons used in his time. The 41 Canon
of the 4th Council of Carthage, does formally prescribe them the use of the
Cope during the reading of the Gospel, and at the time of Oblation only. St.
Chrysostom makes mention of White Vestures in the celebration of the Sacrament;
and in the Liturgy which goes in his name, may be seen the prayers made unto
God, whilst he that Officiates is putting on the holy Vestments; an action
which is not omitted by the Author of the Apostolic Constitutions, as has
been before showed. According unto which St. Jerome observes, Lib. 1. advers.
Pelag. c. 9. p. 565. Ep. 3.
that all the Clergy have White Vestures when the Eucharist is celebrated, and
in his Letter unto Heliodorus upon the death of Nepotian, he says, that
Nepotian at his death bequeathed him the Coat which he used in doing the
functions of a Priest. Since which time, in the Life of St. Gregory, by John
the Deacon; and in the Authors which have treated of Divine Offices, there is
frequent mention made of these Priestly Habits; for it cannot reasonably be
referred unto this custom, what Policrates said of St. John, That he bore a
Golden Plate upon his forehead, as the High Priests of the Jews did.

But all that is nothing in comparison of what is seen in the Latin Church; for
there is to be seen six several sorts of Vestments, or if you will Ornaments,
which belong unto the Priests which Officiate, and eight or nine unto the
Bishop; and there is not one of them, but they have searched some mysterious
signification for it, and whereunto they have destined a particular
Consecration; not to insist of the diversity of colors which are there to be
seen, nor of the sundry occasions which sometimes require one, sometimes
others; and the practice and use is esteemed so necessary, that if it be ever
so little neglected, the celebration of Mass is in a manner counted imperfect.
Those which desire particularly to inform themselves of these things now hinted
at, may but read what Durandus Bishop of Mende, and the President Duranti have
writ on this subject. For it shall suffice me here to observe that Jesus Christ
and his Apostles, unto whom we may join the Christians of the first Ages, did
not celebrate the Eucharist but in their ordinary Apparel. Therefore
Wallafridus Strabo wrote in the IX. Century, that Priestly Vestments were
multiplied in time, unto the degree they were then in: For in the first Ages
(says he) Masses was celebrated with ordinary Apparel, Lib. de reb. Eccles. c.
24.
as it is said that several in the Eastern Churches do still practice: Lib. 1.
Gemm. amm. c. 89.
And Honorius of Autun said about 400 years ago, That the Apostles and their
Successors, did celebrate the mysteries in their ordinary Clothes, and with
Challices of Wood.

As for the bowings of the Body before a Crucifix, no more then before an
Image, and before an Altar, which is so frequently practiced amongst the Latins
by those which say Mass, I see no footsteps of it, neither in the constitutions
which are called the Apostles, nor in St. Cyril of Jerusalem, no, nor in the
pretended Dennis the Arcopagite; whose Writings could not see light before the
end of the V. Century, although all of them have very exactly represented that
which was observed in their times in the celebration of the Eucharist; from
whence I infer, that what is to be seen in one part of the Liturgy attributed
unto St. Chrysostom, to wit, That he that celebrates turns himself toward the
Image of Jesus Christ, with bowing of the body, is not of this holy Doctor: but
that in all likelihood it was foisted into the Liturgy since the contests of
the Greeks about the subject of Images; and what confirms me in this thought
is, that the favorers of Image Worship have not alleged these words, not so
much as the Deacon Epiphanius in the second Council of Nice, although he
answers unto some passages of this Father which the Iconoclasticks had cited
against this Worship. What might be alleged from a Homily which is in the
works of St. Chrysostom, and has for Title, That there is one only Lawgiver
of the Old and New Testament, is of no moment, because this Homily is none of
his, as has been long since remarked by Fronton du Duke a Learned Jesuit, who
labored with great success upon the works of this incomparable Writer.

The Muscovites, Apud Eusebius. Hist. l. 5. c. 24. Vide Lit. Cassander.
although they be of the Religion of the Greeks, yet they seem to celebrate the
Sacrament with less Ceremony than the Greeks; the Armenians much like these
latter; and the Abyssins, although they have no want, yet methinks have not so
many as the Greeks nor Armenians: But to see a very great number, you need only
have recourse unto what is done by the Latins, in the Roman Order, in the
Mychrology, in the Pontifical in the Ceremonial of Bishops, and in the Book of
the Sacred Ceremonies of the Church of Rome, which are more or less in number,
according to the days and persons which celebrate, especially when it is the
Pope himself that says Mass; whereas by the testimony of Gregory the first, and
of several others, the Apostles only repeated the words of Institution, with
the Lord's prayer; which simplicity, Amalarius Fortunatus, a Writer of the IX.
Century, heartily desired: Lib. 3. de divin. office in praefat.
It would suffice (says he) without Singers, without Readers, and without all
the other things practiced in the celebration of the Sacrament, that the Bishop
or Priest, should pronounce the blessing to consecrate the Bread and Wine, to
the end the People should be nourished for the salvation of their Souls, as the
Apostles did at the first beginning of Christianity. By which words he shows,
that he found the celebration of this Mystery too much clogged with Ceremonies;
as also St. Austin found that all the Christian Religion was, 500 years before
Amalarius; for he complains, That Religion is burdened with heavy yokes, Ep.
119. c. 19.
so that the state of the Jews is more supportable. But now it is time to
consider the preparations of the Communicant; having examined those of him
which Celebrates.

CHAP. II.
Of the Dispositions necessary for the Communion: And first, Of the
Inclinations of the devout Soul, in regard of God, and of Jesus Christ.

WHen our blessed Savior did distribute the Bread and Wine of his Eucharist to
his Apostles, he said unto them, Do this in remembrance of me; which his
Apostle does extend to the Commemoration of his Death, and of his Sufferings: a
Remembrance which draws after it all the good and holy dispositions which the
Communicant should have toward God and Jesus Christ. And these Inclinations
proceed from several Idea's which this saving remembrance does stir up in our
Souls, at the time in which we do prepare our selves for the participation of
this adorable Mystery of our Salvation: For although the Sacrament was
instituted principally for remembering the death of our Savior; nevertheless,
because his Death is inseparable from his Incarnation, Resurrection and
Ascension, so it is that we approach unto the holy Communion, after having
meditated on all these great and sublime Mysteries; every one of which
produces in our Souls dispositions somewhat different; as having diverse
objects, and several encouragements; the which, nevertheless, are all heavenly,
and all divine, and all which do tend unto one mark, and unto one end; which
is, the Glory of God, and of Jesus Christ, and the eternal Salvation of our
Souls. And to say the truth, this Sacrament cannot represent unto our eyes all
these great and wonderful objects, but that it opens unto us at the same time,
a wide Field for our Meditation to enlarge upon, from the Incarnation of the
eternal Word, even unto his second coming to Judgment: and we cannot finish
this glorious course, without having all the dispositions which God requires,
and all the preparations which he desires of us. This will plainly appear, if
we do severally reflect upon all the Idea's which the remembrance of our
Savior, and of his Sufferings, do present unto our Souls, and what the Fathers
have said upon each of them; and if we also feel the divine motions which will
necessarily flow from the Christian Soul. For example; The holy Fathers have
considered the Eucharist, as a Memorial, a Symbol, an Image, and a Sacrament of
the Incarnation; or, as the Doctors of the Greek Church speak, of the Economy
of Jesus Christ; that is to say, of that free and merciful dispensation which
inclined him to take our Nature in the Womb of the blessed Virgin Mary, by the
miraculous operation of the Holy Ghost; which is what St. Justin Martyr would
say, when he observed, Contr. Try. phon. p. 296.
That the Lord commanded us to make the Bread of the Eucharist in remembrance,
in that he was made Man for those which should believe in him. It was also the
thoughts of Eusebius, Demonstr. l. 8. a Genesi.
That Jesus Christ gave unto his Apostles the Symbols of his divine Economy,
commanding them to make the Image of his true Body. And it cannot be any way
doubted but it was on this same consideration that Pope Gelasius said, De
duabus in Christo nature.
That we do celebrate in the Action of the Mysteries, the Image and resemblance
of the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ; and that we must believe of our Lord
Jesus Christ that it self which we profess in his Image, which we there
celebrate, and there receive; that is to say, that we should be persuaded of
the truth of his Flesh and Blood, the Symbols and Sacraments whereof we do
receive at the holy Table. It is just what St. Leo intended to express by these
words, which were addressed unto the Eutychians; You should communicate at the
holy Table in such a manner, Sermon. 6. de jejun. 7. mensis. page 86.
that you may not in the least doubt of the truth of the Body and Blood of
Jesus Christ. It is whereunto also attends all the passages of the Fathers,
which prove either against the Eutychians, or against the Docetes and the
Putatifs, the truth of the Flesh of Jesus Christ by the Eucharist, as the
existence of a thing is proved by the Image, and by the Figure which represents
it; Dialog. 2. p. 84.
because according to Theoderet's saying; There must be an Arch-type of the
Image, because the Painers, which imitate Nature, do represent the Images of
things which are seen. From whence he draws this Conclusion; If the divine
Mysteries are the Figure of a true Body, then the Body of our Lord is now also
a true Body; not changed into the nature of the Divinity, but filled with the
divine Glory. A Reasoning for the most part like unto that of Tertullian
against Marcian; for having expounded these words, This is my Body, by these
others; That is to say, Lib. 4. advers. Marcion. c. 40.
the Figure of my Body: he adds, That it would not have been a Figure, if there
had not been the truth of a Body, or a true Body. And indeed, this Idea of the
Incarnation of our Lord was in such a manner imprinted in the minds of
Communicants, that the last Prayer of St. Basil's Liturgy begins thus. O Jesus
Christ, our God; Bibl. Patr. t. 2. Graeco-Lat.
we have accomplished and finished, according to our power, the Sacrament of
thine Economy and Dispensation. This Meditation, which represents unto us
the horror of sin, the sad condition we were in, the fearful Gulf wherein we
have precipitated our selves, the Love of the Father, the tender Charity of the
Son, the admirable work of our Redemption, the great Mystery of Godliness, God
manifest in the Flesh, fills us full of Gratitude unto God. And if unto the
Idea of his Conception and Birth, we join that of his Life, therein to
contemplate the purity of his Innocence, the glory of his Miracles, the
splendour of his Virtues, the efficacy of his Doctrine, and the shame of his
Sufferings, we shall therein find so great joy, so great comfort, and so great
pleasure in the contemplation of this divine Scene, that we shall be insensibly
transformed into the same Image, from Glory unto Glory, to speak with St. Paul;
that is to say, from Holiness to Holiness.

But if the holy Fathers considered the Eucharist as an Image of the
Incarnation of Jesus Christ, they have also more especially considered it as
the Memorial of his Death and Sufferings. That was it which was designed by St.
Justin Martyr, when he said, That Jesus Christ commanded us to make the Bread
of the Eucharist in remembrance of the death which he suffered for those,
Contr. Tryph. p. 259.
whose Souls are cleansed from all sin. And Tatian, who had been at the School
of this excellent Master, Diatess. t. 7. Bibl. Pat.
observes, That the Lord commanded his Apostles to eat the Bread and drink the
Eucharist, because it was the Memorial of his approaching Suffering and Death.
It was also in the same Contemplation that St. Austin spoke, 1 L. 83. quaest.
q. 61.
Of celebrating the Image of his Sacrifice, in remembrance of his Passion, 2
Id. contr Faust. l. 20. c. 21.
of celebrating the Sacrifice of our Savior by a Sacrament of remembrance; and
3 Id. l. 3. de Trinit. c. 4. De fide ad Petr. c. 19.
to receive the Bread and Wine of the Eucharist in remembrance of the death
which he suffered for us. It is the constant Doctrine of the ancient Doctors of
the Church; of Eusebius, St. Chrysostom, Theodoret; of Eulogius, Patriarch of
Alexandria, and others; particularly of St. Fulgentius; who speaking of the
Eucharist, said, That it is the Commemoration of the Flesh which Jesus Christ
offered, and of the Blood which he shed for us.

This Remembrance brings into our minds diverse Ideas, which do all contribute
unto the sanctifying of the Communicant. In the first place, an Idea of the
strict Justice of God; who not being able to pardon us, without first receiving
a satisfaction; chose rather to abandon his own Son unto the most bitter, and
sharpest of all torments, and unto the most shameful death, than to see us
perish eternally. Therefore the Apostle says, That God appointed him from all
Eternity, Romans 3.
to be a Propitiation, by Faith in his Blood, thereby to declare his
Righteousness: that is to say, according to the Interpretation of Origin; That
God in the fullness of time, In Romans 3.
and in these last Ages, has showed his Justice, and has given for a Savior,
him which he had appointed, to make a Pripitiation for our Offenses; for God
(says he) is just; and being just, he could not justify Sinners; therefore he
would have the Redeemer to interpose, to the end that those which could not be
justified by their own Works, might be saved by believing in his Name.
Secondly, The Idea of our sins, which had rendered us Slaves unto the Devil, and
unto Death: In Ps. 95.
for Mankind (says St. Austin) was held Captive under Satan, and were subject
unto Devils. And that of the goodness of God, and of his great love toward
men; John. 3.
For he so loved the World, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever
believed in him, should not perish, but should have eternal Life. Whence it is
that St. Bernard said, That he gave him unto us, Sermon. 1. de advent. Domin.
because his compassion is great, his mercies are many in number, and his love
is abundant. It was the Humiliation of Jesus Christ, and the exceeding
greatness of his Love, which moved him to die for us. It was the thought of St.
Austin, when he said, Con. duas Epist. Pelag. l. 4. c. 4.
Jesus Christ was pleased to undergo death for us, that is to say, the
punishment of sin, without sin; for as he only was made the Son of Man, to the
end that we should become the Children of God; so also he alone suffered the
punishment for us, not having deserved it, to the end that by him we should
obtain forgiveness, without having deserved it; because that as we deserved no
good, so also he on his part merited no evil: he bare our punishment, not being
guilty, thereby to cancil our Obligation, and to put an end unto our
punishment. In fine, the Remembrance whereof we speak, represents unto us the
infinite price of his Blood for our Redemption: Eusebius. demonstrat. l. 1.
For it is this great and inestimable price (says an ancient Bishop) which,
according to the testimony of the Prophets, was to redeem the Jews and the
Gentiles; this Sacrifice for the whole World, this Offering for the Souls of
all Mankind, this pure Hostage for all Sins, this Lamb of God, of whom the
Prophets have said so many things, and by whose divine and mystical Doctrine,
we all, which were Gentiles, have found forgiveness of sins; and all those
amongst the Jews which have hoped in his Name, deliverance from the Malediction
of the Law. All these Considerations create in our Souls a holy and religious
dread of offending a God, whose Justice is so severe, and whose tender mercies
also are so great (a God, who being of right our Judge, chose rather to become
our Father, and to save us by his Grace, when he might justly have punished us
in his Anger) a mortal and irreconcilable hatred against all sin and
wickedness; a firm resolution of warring against it, and never to lay down Arms
until we have overcome it; a true and hearty reliance of flying unto the
merciful Throne of our Savior, an ardent Zeal for his Glory, an absolute
renouncing of the World, and of our own selves, to the end, not to live but
unto him only, seeing he has so lovingly shed his Blood for our Salvation; and
for a fullness of felicity, so ardent a love for this blessed Redeemer, that
each faithful Communicant may say in that blessed moment, with the Spouse, I am
my Beloveds, and my Beloved is mine.

Moreover, the same holy Doctors of the Church have contemplated the Sacrament
as a Memorial of the blessed Resurrection, Basil. de Bapt. cap. 3. p. 581.
saying, that we participate thereof, To put us always in remembrance of him
which is risen again for us. This Remembrance assures us, that the object of
our hope, of our confidence, and of our faith, Romans 1.
is not Man only, but that he is God also; for he was declared to be the Son of
God, by the Resurrection from the Dead. He assures us, that his Satisfaction
was accepted of his Father for our discharge, and that it had the virtue and
power to appease his wrath, and to reconcile us unto him. From thence it is,
that the Apostle says not only, Romans 4.
That he was delivered for our sins; but also, That he rose again for our
Justification. And in fine, he assures us, that this Resurrection, which
justifies us before God, should show its efficacy in the death of our Old Man,
and in the crucifying the Flesh and the Lusts thereof; Romans 6.
For we are buried together with him in his death by Baptism; that as Jesus
Christ is raised from the dead, by the glory of the Father, so also we should
walk in newness of life. And if we would know what this Resurrection is, which
St. Paul requires of a Christian, St. Ghrysostom will inform us, Hom. 10. in c.
6. Romans
That it is a holy Conversation which proceeds from the change of Manners,
the death of Sin, the restoring of Righteousness, and the entire ruin of the
old Life, to establish one that is new, and wholly Angelical. Therefore it is
that Theodoret, interpreting these same words, In c. 6. Romans
gives us this excellent Lesson; The Sacrament of Baptism teaches us to fly
from sin, for Baptism is a type of the death of our Savior; now by it you
participate with Jesus Christ of death, and also of the Resurrection: you must
then lead a new life, and agreeable unto him, of whose Resurrection you have
been made to participate.

Unto the Remembrance of Christ's Resurrection, these holy Doctors join also
that of his Ascension and Glory; therefore it is they say, Gaudent. tr. 2. tom.
2. Bibl. Pat.
That the Sacrament is the Viaticum of our journey, wherewith we are nourished
by the way, until we come unto him at our leaving this World; a pledge of his
presence, and a portraict of his passion, until he comes again from Heaven. And
in preparing our selves for the Sacrament, we cannot make this reflection, but
that we must bewail his absence; but yet comforting our selves with this
persuasion, that he is sitting on the Throne of his Father, as Lord of Heaven
and Earth, the Master of all things, and the Monarch of the whole Universe.
That it is from thence that he sends forth his Commands into all the World,
that he dispenses the Treasures of God, that he defends his people, that he
protects his Church, and that he restrains the pride and insolency of his
Enemies: but that we must at the same instant be raised with heavenly thoughts,
divine motions, and spiritual affections; to be lifted up unto him by holy
ejaculations, and to contemplate him shining with Glory in Heaven, after having
meditated on him; all covered with shame upon Earth, and nailed upon the Cross
in Mount Calvary, for the expiating of the sins of Men, and for the work of our
Redemption. Therefore the holy Fathers desire we would become like unto Eagles,
Chrysostom. Hom. 24. in 1. ad Corinth.
To fly up unto Heaven, that we should have nothing of Earth in us, that we
should not bend downwards, that we should not wallow in the love of the
Creatures; but that we should incessantly fly toward the things above, and
that we should steadfastly behold the Sun of Righteousness, with an earnest
sight, and piercing eyes.

In fine, the ancient Liturgies do not from all these Commemorations, separate
that of his second coming. Which makes us think of that great and last day,
wherein the Dead shall be raised, wherein the Books shall be opened, and
wherein shall be the universal Judgment, to cast the Wicked into Hell, and to
receive the Good into the felicity and glory of Heaven; then there shall be no
more want of Sacraments: for, as Theodoret says, In 1 ad Corinth. c. 11.
After his second coming, we shall have no farther need of the signs and
Symbols of the Body, because the Body it self will appear: but until that time,
the Celebration thereof is absolutely necessary, according to this Observation
of the Author of the Commentaries upon the Epistles of St. Paul, attributed
unto St. Jerome, In 1 ad Corinth. c. 11.
That we have need of this Memorial, during all the time which shall pass,
until he be pleased to come again.

So that all the Idea's which we have considered do help to form in us Acts of
Faith, Repentance, Hope, Charity, Humility, Gratitude, Sanctification,
Holiness, Justice, Innocence, Purity, Joy, Consolation; and generally, all
those of Piety, and devout Christianity; and by consequence, all the motions
and dispositions which the Soul of a worthy Communicant ought to have toward
God and Jesus Christ. Now let us see those which it should have in regard of
the Sacrament it self.

CHAP. III.
Of the Motions and Dispositions of the Communicant in reference to the
Sacrament.

AS the remembrance which our Savior commands us to make of him, and of his
death, when we receive the Sacrament, comprehends all the Qualifications which
we ought to have in regard of God, and of Jesus Christ, so also the Examination
required by St. Paul contains all those which we ought to have in regard of the
Sacrament: 1 Cor. 11.
Let every one (says he) prove his own self. But it is not sufficient to say,
that the Apostle enjoins Communicants unto this Examination; we must also know
wherein it does consist; to this purpose, I say, that what St. Paul requires of
us is an act whereby we must search our hearts, look into every corner of it,
whereby we examine every part of our Soul: we must assure our selves of the
state wherein it is; whether Faith has therein taken its place, whether Hope
lifted us up in expectation of the happiness promised, and whether the Love of
Jesus Christ, and of our Neighbor, therein unfolds its virtue and efficacy. In
a word, it is an act whereby we discover whether we be fitting to approach unto
the holy Table; for in coming thither, we protest that Jesus Christ is our
Master, and our Lord; that it is he which has redeemed us by his Blood, and
that has purchased Life for us by his Death. And as the Apostle enjoyneth this
Law unto all Communicants, it may be said that this Trial does consist in the
serious and sincere Examination which every one makes of his Conscience, to
know in what state and disposition it is. Whence it may be gathered, that it
desires no Witnesses, but that it should be done in private, and in secret, in
the presence of God only; for there it is that the Sinner calls himself to an
account, that he reflects upon his life past, that he condemns his wicked
actions, that he groans under the thoughts of his sins, that he deeply mourns
for the greatness of his offenses, that he cleanses his heart, and purifies
his Soul by the tears of Repentance, and by the working of a true Contrition.
But because the Latin Church defines in the Council of Trent, whose Decretes
are to be considered as the Confession of Faith of the Latin Church, Sess. 13.
c. 7.
That the custom of the Church declares, that the necessary proof is, that how
contrite soever the sinner feels himself, he ought not to approach unto the
holy Eucharist, without having first made his sacramental Confession; that it
must of necessity be made; that without it, one receives this Sacrament
unworthily, unto his death and condemnation. We are obliged to enquire what was
the Conduct of the ancient Church in this occasion; for it is not my intention
to examine the matter of Confession in all its parts, but only in that which
concerns my subject. To do it in some order, it must be observed, that the
Council of Trent restrains the necessity of this Confession before
communicating, unto those which feel themselves guilty of mortal sin; Council
Lateran. c. 21.
whereas Innocent the Third had thereunto subjected, without any distinction,
all those which had attained the age of discretion, In. 3. Thom. q. 80. art. 4.
in his Council of Lateran, Anno 1215. Secondly, That Cardinal Cajetan does not
believe Confession absolutely necessary unto the Communion, if one have a real
Contrition; saying, This necessity is not founded neither upon the Commandments
of God, nor of the Church, nor upon the Law, nor natural reason. In the third
place, That here is not question of public sins which fell under the Canons of
public Penance, because those sins excluded those which were guilty of them
from receiving of the Sacrament; unto which they were not admitted, until they
had fulfilled the time of their laborious Penance; which presupposed
Confession, or at least, the Conviction of those sins which indispensibly
obliged sinners to undergo the Laws, and bear the yoke of this Penance. Here is
the Question of the necessity of the Confession of the Latin Church, which
comprehends all mortal sins universally, without dispensing with any body from
confessing them in private unto a Priest, before they approach unto the
Communion. Thereupon I say, that if it be true, as all the World does agree,
that the Communion was very frequent in the primitive Church; insomuch as some
do think, that they communicated every day. It is very hard to conceive how
twelve Apostles could suffice to receive the Confessions of the Believers of
the Church of Jerusalem; Act. 2.41. and 4.4.
I will not say, every day, but even once a Week, after the Conversion of eight
thousand persons in two Sermons by St. Peter. What I say of the Church of
Jerusalem, I say also of the Church of Rome, Apud Eusebius. hist. lib. 6. c. 43.
toward the middle of the III. Century; for Cornelius, its Bishop, witnesses
in Eusebius, that it was already so increased, and so rich, that it maintained
the number of fifteen hundred persons; Widows, Orphans, and poor impotent
folks; and that the rest of the people was an innumerable multitude. Yet
nevertheless, to serve all this great people, he had but forty six Priests, and
himself, which made up the forty seventh. Now I cannot tell whether it was
possible they could hear the Confessions of thirty or forty thousand Believers,
whereof this Church in all probability was composed, and to hear them once or
twice a Week; for in all appearance, that was the least that they did
communicate. I do not see how they could do it so much as once in a fortnight.

But this is not yet all; Let us see if the Examination requisite, in order to
receive the Communion, does principally consist in Confession. Origin speaking
of lifting up the eyes unto Heaven in Prayer, or of looking down to the Earth,
as the Publican did, refers it unto the Conscience of each Believer; and
declares in these words, that it is the same as to the participation of the
Sacrament; In Joan. t. 23. p. 252. K.
Let every one (says he) judge himself as to these things, and let a man
examine himself; and so let him not only eat of this Bread, and drink of this
Cup, but also let him lift up his eyes unto Heaven, and let him pray, in
prostrating and humbling himself in the sight of God. He refers both the one
and the other of these two things unto the Judgment of Believers, without
making any difference betwixt them: According unto which he declares
elsewhere, That Pastors have not power to excommunicate Believers, Homil. 2.
in. Judic. p. 212 and in Matt. tract. 35. p. 121.
and to deprive them of the participating of divine Mysteries, but when they be
guilty of public sins, which be known unto the whole Church.

We yet descend lower; Hom. 28. in 1 ad Cor. c. 11.
St. Chrisostom will tell us, in expounding the words of St. Paul, Let a man
examine himself, and so let him eat; he does not command one to examine the
other, but to examine himself; making a Judgment which the people know not of,
Hom. 8. de poenitent. quae est 56. t. 1. p. 700.
and an Examination which may be without Witnesses. And elsewhere St. Paul
says, Let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of that Bread, and drink
of that Cup: He did not discover the Ulcer, he showed not the Accusation in
public, he appointed not Witnesses of the Crimes; Homil. de beat. Philog quae
est 31. t. 1. p. 401.402.
Judge your selves secretly in your Conscience, in the presence of God only,
who beholds all things, make a search of your sins; and furveying your whole
life, refer the Judgment unto your Understanding: amend your faults, and so
draw near unto the holy Table with a pure Conscience, and participate of the
holy Oblation. And in another place he commands only to abstain from sin; Let
him keep himself from defrauding other men, from slandering, and from all sorts
of violences. He requires we should sincerely promise unto God, not to commit
any sin. And in fine, after having exhorted his hearers to be reconciled unto
their Brethren, Hom. 27. in Genes. page 358. t. 2.
If we do so (says he) we may with a safe Conscience approach unto this holy
and terrible Table, and boldly recite the words contained in the Prayer (the
Initiated know what I mean:) therefore I leave it uuto every ones Conscience,
to see how we can repeat them with safety at this fearful time, after
fulfilling the Commandment. He speaks of this Clause of the Lord's Prayer,
Forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us. St.
Austin, a little younger than St. Chrysostom; Sermon 46. de Verb. Dom. c. 4
in one of his Sermons of the words of our Lord, alleged by Bid, refers unto
the Conscience of each Communicant the Examination which is necessary before
coming unto the Table of the Son of God. In 1. ad Cor. c. 11. v. 28.
And Pelagius, in St. Jerome's Works; The Conscience (says he) must be first
tried if it accuses us of any thing: and accordingly, we should either offer
or communicate.

We may yet proceed farther, and enquire of the Doctors of the VIII. and IX.
Centuries, whether they required those which were to communicate, Capit. 44. t.
2. Council. Gall. p. 22.
to confess unto a Priest before they received the holy Sacrament. Theodolph,
Bishop of Orleans, made his Capitularies in the year 797. if we credit Father
Sirmond: in one of them he prescribes unto the people of his Diocese the manner
of Communicating, and the inclinations they should bring unto so great a
Sacrament; but he speaks not one word of Confession. The Council of Chalons
assembled in the Year 813. made a Canon which has for its Title, Council. Cab.
2. can. 46. t. 2. Council. Gall. p. 318.
Of the care which should be taken in receiving of the Eucharist. In reading
this Title it came into my mind, that the Fathers of the Council might happily
have comprised Auricular Confession in the preparations which they commanded;
yet nevertheless, I do not find therein any such thing: they only warn, That a
great deal of care must be taken in participating of the Body and Blood of our
Lord, and take care that we do not abstain from it too long, lest that should
turn unto the ruin of the Soul; and that if one partake thereof indiscreetly,
we should fear what the Apostle says; Whosoever eats and drinks
unworthily, eats and drinks his own Damnation. A man ought therefore to
examine himself, according to the Command of the same Apostle; and so eat of
this Bread, and drink of this Cup; that is to say, to prepare himself for the
receiving of so great a Sacrament in abstaining some days from the works of the
Flesh, and in purifying of his Body and Soul. Hincmar, Archbishop of Rhemes,
who died toward the end of th IX. Century, uses the same method when he
represents unto Charles the Bald the Preparations necessary for worthy
receiving the Sacrament; Opusc. 1. c. 12. t. 2. p. 101, 102.
He desires that every one would judge himself, to the end that the trial being
made in the heart, the thought should serve for an Accuser, the Conscience for
a Witness, and fear for an Executioner. Then, that the blood of the Soul should
fall by tears: And in fine, that the Understanding should give such a sentence,
that a man should judge himself unworthy of participating of the Body and Blood
of our Savior: And several other things which he proposes, without speaking
any thing of Confession. But by degrees, Confession established it self
infensibly amongst the Christians of the West; and at length, Innocent the
Third authorized it by a Decree at the Council of Lateran, in the Year 1215. at
which time the Albigensis and Waldensis had separated themselves from Communion
of the Latins. The most part of all Christian Communions have no such Law as
the Latins, that obliges them unto Confession before receiving the Communion;
for example, the Abyssins, or Ethiopians, the Armenians, the Nestorians.
Confession, it is granted, is used in the Greek Church, which is of a large
extent; but it is so little practiced, that their Bishops and Priests do scarce
ever confess; De concord. l. 4. c. 2.
as Arcudius, a Greek Latinized, does inform us. And as for the Protestants,
every body knows they have found this Yoke of the Latins too heavy to bear. But
if the holy Fathers have not hitherto demanded private Confession before coming
unto the Table of our Lord, they do require other dispositions, without which
they forbid us approaching unto it. It is in this sense that St. Chrysostom
condemning the practice of those which came unto the Sacrament as it were by
Rancounter, and by custom, at certain times, which they looked upon to be more
solemn; he shows them that it is not the time that makes us any thing the
more worthy to receive; but that it is the purity of the Soul, the holiness of
our life, the innocence of our Conversation: Chrysostom. Hom 3. in c. 1. ad
Ephesians. p. 1050, 1051.
It is not (says he) the Epiphany, nor the Lent, that renders us worthy to
approach unto the holy Sacrament: it is the sincerity and purity of heart:
therewith draw near at all times; and without them, never come unto it.
Consider with what care, and with what respect the Flesh of Sacrifices was
eaten under the Law; What caution did they not use, what trouble were they not
continually at to purify themselves to that purpose? And you, approaching unto
a Sacrifice which the very Angels behold with a religious reverence, you think
it is sufficient to prepare your selves unto so solemn an action, by governing
your selves according to the course of the Season. Consider the Vessels which
are employed for the Celebration of this Sacrament; how clean they be, how
bright and shining they be: yet nevertheless, our Souls should be cleaner, more
holy, and more resplendent than these Vessels; seeing that it is only for us
that they be prepared. And in another place, speaking of seldom and often
receiving the Sacrament, Id. Hom. 17: in Ep. ad Heb. p. 1872.
We regard not (says he) neither those which communicate often, nor those
which communicate seldom; but those which communicate with a sincere
Conscience, a pure heart, and an unreprovable life. Let those that are in this
condition always draw near; and those which are not, let them not so much as
once draw near; because they only draw upon themselves the wrath of God, and
make themselves worthy of Condemnation, of pains, and of punishments, which
should not seem strange unto us: for as Meats which are wholesome of themselves.
being received into a diseased Body, there causes a disorder, and an entire
corruption, and becomes the Original of some disease; so it is the same of
these terrible and venerable Mysteries, when they be received into Souls which
be indisposed. And because the holy Fathers considered that this august
Sacrament, which gives life unto some, gives death unto others; that is to
say, unto those which receive it unworthily: and that if it be full of
consolation unto holy Souls, it is also full of terror unto the wicked. They
have spoken of it as of a terrible and fearful Sacrament, because, according to
the saying of the same St. Chrysostom, Whilst the death of Jesus Christ is
celebrating, Hom. 21. in Act
a dreadful Sacrament is represented: God gave himself for the World. From
thence came the Exhortation addressed unto the people in the ancient Liturgies,
to call them unto the Communion; Draw near with fear: August. l. 3. de doctr.
Christ. c. 16. and in Ps. 21. Hom. 2. Id. qu. super Evang. l. 2. q. 38. p. 152.
t. 4.
And in fine, should not we be seized with a holy fear, accompanied with a very
great respect, to participate of the death of our Savior, to eat his Passion
in eating his Supper; as St. Austin speaks; and to lick, as he says again, his
Sufferings in the Sacraments of his Body and of his Blood. But if this warning
was given unto Communicants, they were told also in inviting them unto the holy
Communion, Holy things are for the Saints. Whereupon St. Chrysostom makes this
reflection; When the Deacon cries, Hom. 17. in Ep. ad Hebr.
Holy things are for the holy, it is as if he said, Let not him draw near which
is not holy: he does not say only, him which is free of sin, but him that is
holy; for it is not barely the remission of sins which renders a man holy, but
it is the presence of the Holy Ghost, and the abundance of good works. And St.
Cyril of Jerusalem, Mystag. 5.
The holy things (says he) are proposed to be sanctified by the coming of the
Holy Ghost; and you are also holy, having received the Gift of the Holy Ghost.
And so holy things agree very well with those that be holy; therefore German,
Patriarch of Constantinople, observes in few words, in expounding these words
of the Liturgy, 1 Theoria rerum Eccles. t. 2 Bibl. Pat. Grec. vel Lat. p. 407.
That God takes pleasure in giving holy things unto those which be pure of
heart. And then the Sacrament does not a little contribute unto the
augmentation of this purity, according unto what is spoken by Theophilus,
Archbishop of Alexandria; 2 Ep. Pasch. 2.
That we break the Bread of our Lord for our Sanctification. And Pope Gelasius,
3 De duab. not. Christ.
That the Sacraments of the Body and Blood of our Savior renders us partakers
of the divine Nature. And to say the truth, 4 In Anaceph.
There is in the Bread a virtue that quickens us, as St. Epiphanius does
testify. Moreover, the Sacrament effecting in regard of our Souls, what a good
Medicine does operate in regard of our bodies, there is no question to be made,
but when the ancient Doctors of the Church have contemplated it under this
Idea, but that they intended that Communicants should at the least use as much
care and caution unto the reception of this divine Medicine, as we are wont to
take when we intend to purge our Bodies: for when we intend to take Physic, we
live the day before within some bounds, and are careful not to surcharge the
Stomach, that it might operate with more ease and profit for the purging out of
peccant humors. In like manner when we are to present our selves at the holy
Table of the Church, we should prepare and dispose our Souls to receive this
saving Remedy, the virtue and efficacy whereof shows, and makes it self to be
felt, in healing the spiritual Maladies wherewith we are naturally oppressed.
This was in all likelihood the thoughts of Hillary, Deacon of Rome, when he
said, Apud Ambros. in c. 18. 1. ad Cor.
That although this Mystery was celebrated at Supper, yet it is not a Supper,
but a spiritual Medicine which purifieth those which come unto it with
devotion, and which do receive it with respect. Besides, the Sacrament having
been instituted to give unto us the Communion of our Savior Jesus Christ,
because that in participating of this visible Bread, one eats spiritually the
Flesh of Christ, to speak with St. Hom. 27.
Macarius; is it not just that we should purify and sanctify our Souls to be
the Palace and Temple of this merciful Savior; to the end that there
delighting to make his abode and residence, he might spread abroad his Graces,
his Blessings, and his favors, and that he may incessantly apply unto them the
fruits of his death; wherein they find their life, their joy, their comfort,
and their salvation. In fine, The Sacrament being to be unto us a Symbol of
Unity, a Band of Charity, and of Peace, according to the constant Doctrine of
the holy Fathers; they desired that Believers should maintain a holy Concord
amongst themselves, and a perfect Union, that they should be careful of
preserving the Unity of the Spirit in the Band of Peace; and that they should
put on unto each other bowels of pity and of Charity, as the Apostle speaks.
Therefore they would not receive Oblations of those which were not reconciled;
and not accepting them, they admitted them not unto the Sacrament; for the one
necessarily depended upon the other. Therefore they warned Believers, at the
time of the Communion, to salute each other, and to give each other the holy
Kiss mentioned by St. Paul in one of his Epistles. Mystag. 5.
The Deacons cry (says St. Cyril of Jerusalem) embrace, and mutually kiss each
other; and then we salute one another: But do not think that it is such a kiss
as common friends do give unto each other when they meet in the public place.
This Kiss does unite Souls, and makes them hope a perfect forgetfulness of what
is past: it is a sign of the uniting of spirits, and not retaining the memory
of injuries any longer. And therefore also it is that our Savior Jesus Christ
the Son of God said, When you bring your Gift unto the Altar, and that you
there remember that your Brother has ought against you, leave there thy Gift
before the Altar, and go first be reconciled with thy Brother, and then come
offer thy Gift. This Kiss then is a Reconciliation, and by consequence is holy.
And it is of this Kiss St. Paul speaks, when he said, Greet one another with
a holy Kiss; and St. Peter, Salute each other with a Kiss of Charity. And they
believed this Union so necessary, that without it, as they thought, one could
receive no benefit by the Sacrament, how much soever other ways one was
addicted unto good works. Whence it is that St. Chrysostom, after having
exalted the virtue and efficacy of this holy Kiss which uniteth Souls,
reconciles Spirits, and makes us all to become one Body, he exhorts his
Auditors strictly to unite their Souls by the Bands of Charity, to the end they
might with assurance enjoy the Fruits of the Table which is prepared for them;
he adds, Although we abound in good works, Chrysostom. de praed. iud. t. 5. p.
465.
if we neglect the Reconciliation of Peace, we shall reap no advantage for our
Salvation.

All the Liturgies come to our hands, make mention of this Kiss of Charity
which Believers gave each other before the Sacrament, and which St. Paul calls
a holy Kiss, and St. Peter, a Kiss of Charity; many of the ancient Fathers do
also make mention of it. Indeed, the time of kissing each other was not alike
in all Churches; in some it was given before the Consecration of the Symbols,
and in others just at the time of communicating; but however, it was the manner
to salute each other before approaching unto the holy Table. And this custom
continued a very great while in the Church, but at length it insensibly
vanished, at least, in the West; and the Latins have put instead of this mutual
Kiss, that which they call, Kiss the Peace; which is a kind of little Silver
Plate, or of some other matter, with the Image of Jesus Christ, or the Relics
of some Saint, which is offered unto each person to kiss; a custom not very
ancient, seeing it was never heard of until the end of the XV. Century; Lect.
81.
for then it began to be introduced into some Churches in the West, as is
observed by Gabriel Biel, in some of his Lessons upon the Canon of the Mass.
Besides, it is not said in the Liturgies, whether this Kiss was given
indifferently amongst Men and Women: Lib. 3. c. 32.
I only observe in the Books of Ecclesiastical Offices of Amalarius Fortunatus,
who wrote in the IX. Century; and in the Rational of Durandus, Bishop of Mende,
L. 4. c. 53. extr.
who lived in the XIII. that it was not then given in the Latin Church, but
amongst persons of the same Sex; I say, that Men kissed each other, and also
Women the like.

And because all these dispositions are not the fruits of Nature, but Gifts of
the Grace and Mercy of God, the ancient Christians addressed themselves unto
him by devout Prayers, to the end he would be pleased to bestow upon them what
they wanted; that is, the preparations necessary to communicate savingly and
worthily. Cassander has collected several of these Prayers; but they being
penned variously, according to the motions of the Devotion of the Communicants,
we forbear inserting them in this place, to endeavor to discover, in
prosecuting our design, whether the holy Fathers, which have required these
dispositions before drawing near unto the holy Table, have also required that
the Communicants should adore the Sacrament in the Act of communicating.

CHAP. IV.
Wherein the Question of the Adoration of the Sacrament is examined.

WEll to explain a matter, and to give it the full demonstration which it
requires, the nature of the question must first of all be plainly stated,
because it is thereupon most commonly that the clearing of it does chiefly
depend. Being therefore to treat of so weighty a Subject as that which now
offers it self, the first thing we should do is, carefully to put a difference
betwixt Jesus Christ himself, and his Sacrament; for the question is not,
whether Jesus Christ ought to be worshipped; all Christians are agreed upon
this point: But whether the Sacrament should be adored, that is to say, that
which the Priest holds in his hands, and which is commonly called the Hostie,
and the Sacrament; for it appears to me, that the Council of Trent has agreed
this to be the true state of the Question, Sess. 13. c. 5.
when it defined, That there is no doubt to be made but all the Servants of
Jesus Christ should render unto the holy Sacrament in the act of Veneration,
the worship of Latry which is due unto the true God. It must then in the first
place be acknowledged as an unquestionable Truth, that Jesus Christ is an
Object truly adorable, and that his Flesh it self deserves that we should
render it the highest Religious Worship, by reason of the privilege it has of
being united into one person with his eternal Divinity. When therefore the holy
Fathers speak of adoring Jesus Christ in the participation of the Sacrament,
they say nothing whereunto the Protestants do not acquiesce, as well as the
Roman Catholics; for say they, in coming unto the holy Table, one cannot
meditate of the infinite love he had for us, send our thoughts unto Mount
Calvary to consider the precious blood which he there shed, make reflection
upon the Throne of Glory where he is sitting with his Father; nor ever so
little cast an Eye upon that ineffable goodness which inclines him to
communicate himself unto us by means of the Sacrament; but that the Soul of the
faithful Communicant, humbles it self in his presence, and does truly adore
him. An adoration unto which may be referred what is said by Origin, or at
least the Author of some Homilies that are in his Works. What we read (says
he) in the Gospel, Hom. 5. in diverse. t. 2. p. 285.
ought not to be passed over by us as a thing of small importance; That the
Genturion said unto Jesus Christ, I am not worthy that thou should enter
under my Roof; for at this time Jesus Christ does yet enter under the Roof of
Believers by two Figures, or after two manner of ways; viz. When holy men,
beloved of God, which govern the Churches, enter under your Roof, then our Lord
does enter by them; and you should believe that you receive our Savior: When
also you receive the holy and incorruptible Food, the Bread of Life, I say, and
the Cup, you do eat and drink the Body and Blood of our Savior; and then our
Lord does enter under your Roof. Humble your selves therefore, and in imitation
of the Centurion, say, Lord I am not worthy that thou should enter under my
Roof: for wheresoever he enters unworthily, he there enters for the
condemnation of him which receives him.

He says, That our Savior enters under our Roof by his Sacrament, after the
same manner as he there enters by his Ministers; and that we should humble our
selves in receiving as well his Servants, as his Sacrament: to the end this act
of humility may be a mark of the adoration which we give unto him which has
instituted the one, and which sends unto us the others, confessing that we
are not worthy of this favor. St. Ambrose and St. Austin express themselves so
fully, that the Reader will find no difficulty to penetrate into their meaning;
for see here what is said by the first, Ambros de Spir. S. l. 3. c. 12
We adore the Flesh of Jesus Christ in the Mysteries. He puts a difference
betwixt the Mysteries, and the Flesh of Jesus Christ, which he makes to be the
Object of our Worship in the act of communicating. I will not now insist upon
the manner of Jesus Christ's being present in the Sacrament, because that has
been treated of at large in the Second Part; I only produce the testimonies of
Ancient Doctors, which speak of adoring our Savior when we communicate, to the
end not to divert the Examination we are to make of the Adoration of the
Sacrament. Therefore we will join unto St. Ambrose, St. Austin, who says, Let
no body eat the Flesh of Jesus Christ, In Psalm. 98.
until he has first adored him.

How, say some, is it possible St. Austin should teach that the Sacrament
should be adored, seeing he so formally denies it in one of his Letters; for
speaking of things sensible and corporeal, I mean of Creatures whereof the
Scripture makes use to represent things Spiritual and Heavenly, he says, That
they ought not to be adored; although we should draw Images and Resemblances of
the Mysteries of our Salvation; and he puts in the rank of these signs which we
should not adore, Ep. 119. ad Januar. cap. 6.
The Water and Oil of Baptism, the Bread and Wine of the Sacrament; without
saying any thing more particularly for the one than the other.

It is unto Jesus Christ that he desires we should address our Adoration,
without speaking one word of the Sacrament, by means whereof he communicates
unto us his Flesh: I know not whether any other Interpretation can be given
unto the words of S. Chrysostom: Homil. 24. in 1. ad Corinth.
You do not only see the same Body which was seen by the Wise man; but you also
know the virtue, and all the dispensation of it, and are not ignorant of the
things which he did and accomplished. Being well informed of all these
Mysteries, let us then stir up our selves, let us be seized with astonishment,
and let us testify yet greater respect then was showed by the Wise men. It is
evident, that this respect and veneration has reference unto the Body of Jesus
Christ, as the Adoration of the Wise men had; which adored him when they saw
him in the Manger at Bethlehem, as Communicants adore him, when they see him
not in himself, but in his Sacrament, whereof he grants them the favor to
participate. All the World does confess that Jesus Christ is not any more
visible unto the Eyes of Men since his Ascension into Heaven. I think that it
is so also are to be understood the Adorations spoken of in a Liturgy which is
attributed unto St. Chrysostom, but cannot be his, the Author being much
younger than him. There be some also which attribute it unto John the Second,
called the Mute, Patriarch of the same Church, but about 200 years after St.
Chrysostom; and yet neither is it very certain that it is of this John. To
conclude, the Copies are very different; for in that amongst the works of St.
Chrysostom, there is no mention made of Adoring but once, when the Gospel is
carried, and when it is lifted up; because then the Choir says, Tom. 4. p. 9^3.
Come let us Worship and kneel down before. Jesus Christ; excepting that the
Priest and Deacon bow the Head, in several places in the Liturgy, before and
after the Consecration; and that the People are once warned to bow the Head to
give thanks unto God. In liturg. c. 7.
Cassander represents another unto us in his Liturgies, of the version of Leo
Tuscus, wherein there is no mention of Adoration; but is not so of two others
which we have, one in the Library of the Holy Fathers, and the other in the
Ritual of the Greeks by James Goar of the Order of Preaching Friars; for in
both these there is frequent mention made of Adoring. It is true, these sorts
of Adorations are there practiced before the Consecration and after; which
plainly shows they were addressed unto God, and unto Jesus Christ; because
the Bread and Wine, by the Doctrine it self of the Church of Rome, are not to
be adored until after Consecration. The thing will appear yet plainer, if we
consider the prayers which be there made when they dispose themselves unto the
Communion. Tom. 4. obser. Clarys^st p. 618.8. (...). Pat. t. 2. Gree-Lati^. p.
^1.
Lord Jesus (says the Priest) behold us from thy holy habitation, and from the
Throne of thy Glory, and come sanctify us, thou who art in the Heavens sitting
with thy Father, and art here present with us in an invisible manner, be
pleased to give us by thy powerful hand, thy pure and unspotted Body, and thy
precious Blood; and by us unto all the People.

This prayer, as every body sees, has for its Object Jesus Christ Reigning in
Heaven, and present unto his faithful Communicants, by his Eternal Divinity,
and by the participation of his Grace. Besides that, Erasmus (whose Translation
comes nearer the Greek, then that which is in the Library of the Holy Fathers,
and which we have followed, because it is better liked by some Roman Catholic
Doctors) has Translated these words, Ibid.
Be pleased by thy powerful hand to give us thy pure and immaculate Body, and
thy precious Blood. In like manner, when the Priest, the Deacon, and the People
do Worship, it is in saying three times, Lord; or as it is in the Ritual of the
Greeks, O God have mercy upon me who am a sinner: which words do show that this
Adoration does address it self unto God only, who is therein expressly
mentioned. I say the same of the prayer which the Priest makes in taking the
holy Bread; when bowing his Head before the holy Table, he says, I confess
that thou art the Christ, Ibid. p 32.
the Son of the living God, which did come into the World to save sinners,
whereof I am chief, etc. After which, he beseeches him that he will vouchsafe
to enter into his Soul filled with Passions; and into his Body polluted with
sin. It cannot then be questioned but this prayer has reference unto Jesus
Christ, and not unto the Sacrament, which cannot enter into our Souls; whereas
our Savior does therein enter; and into our Bodies also by the virtue of his
Grace, and by the efficacy of his holy Spirit, for the sanctifying of them
both; of which Sanctification depends their Salvation and their Life. As for
the Deacons adoring when he comes unto the Communion of the Cup, in saying,
Ibid p. 8^3.
I come unto the King Immortal; it can admit of no other Interpretation: for I
do not here examine what was the belief of the Ancient Church upon the point of
the Sacrament, I only inquire what the Ancients have said of the Adoration of
Jesus Christ in the Act of communicating, not to confound the Adoration of the
Master, with the Adoration of the Sacrament. Therefore unto all the passages
which have been alleged, I will yet add two others, unto which, if I mistake
not, the same Explication ought to be given. The first is taken from a fragment
of the life of Luke the Anchorite, who lived in the X. Century; wherein is read
these words, You should sing Psalms which are suitable unto this Mystery; In
auctar. Francis. Combef. t. 2. p. 986.
and according to the Greek, Typical Psalms, and which do represent it, Or, the
Hymn called Trysagion, with the Symbol of the Creed; then you shall three times
bow the Knees, and joining the hands, you shall with the mouth participate of
the precious body of Jesus Christ our God. It is easy to see that these three
Genuflections, have relation unto him to whom the Trysagion was sung, that is
to say, unto God, the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, of whom they begged Grace to
communicate worthily. I place in the same rank the History of St. Theoctista,
who having lived 35 years in a wilderness in the Isle of Paros, desired a
Huntsman whom she met by accident, that he would the year following bring her
the Sacrament; Apud Metaphrast. in vit. S. Theoctist. c. 13.
which the Huntsman having done, the Saint cast her self upon the ground,
received the Divine Gift; and wetting the ground with her tears, she said, Lord
now let thy Servant depart in peace, because mine eyes have seen the Savior
which thou have given us; or, as Cardinal du Perron has translated, Because
mine eyes have seen thy healthiness. After what way soever these words are
taken, nothing else can lawfully be gathered, but that this Maid being
transported with a holy joy, in that God was pleased to give her the benefit of
participating of this Divine Mystery, of the enjoyment whereof she had been so
long deprived; she profoundly humbles her self in his presence, in rendering
thanks for procuring her so great a benefit, and so sweet and solid a
Consolation; not to speak of Cardinal Baronius his often undervaluing
Metaphrastus, who relates the life of this Saint. But besides this first
consideration, we must make a second, which is no less important to the
clearing of the matter whereof we treat. It concerns the Greek Verb (...),
which does not barely signify to Adore, but also Venerate, and respect; the
Roman Catholics, and the Protestants do confess it so; yet that does not
hinder but that we will produce some Instances of the latter signification,
because the former finds no Obstruction; 1 Lib. 1. ep. 136. and lib. 4. ep.
27.
Isidor of Damicta speaks in this sense of the adorable Gospels, a term which
he uses again in speaking of the Sepulcher of Jesus Christ, which he calls
(...), and the 2 Tom. 4. Council. page 107. E.
Clergy of Apame in the lower Syria, speaking of Temples in general, in the 5th
action of the Synod held at Constantinople under Agapetus, and under Menna,
applies also unto them the term now in question, as also the Emperor 3 Novel.
6.
Justinian does unto Baptism; 4 Homil. 4. de ascens. Chr. tom. 6.
St. Chrysostom unto the Feast of Easter, 5 Homil. 49. in Matt. p. 439.
and unto the person of John Baptist. It is also in the same signification this
word must be taken when it is applied unto Emperors and Emperesses, which are
sometimes called Adorable, that is, worthy of respect and veneration; as even
in the Acts of the 6 Part. 1. page 26.27. tom. 3. Council. and p. 28.29.
Council of Chalcedon: And even there also is mention made of the 7 Ibid. p.
26.27.
adorable Altar, and of the adoration of Venerable places; and so in an
infinite number of places which need not be recited. This word then having
diverse significations, it is but just and right, when it is found in discourse,
to explain it according to the Nature of the subject then in hand; for example,
if there be mention of the three persons of the blessed Trinity, it must
necessarily be translated by that of adoring, because the Father, the Son, and
the Holy Ghost, be objects worthy of our Adoration: but if things truly Sacred
and Religious are spoken of, but yet nevertheless are not (to speak in a proper
sense) adorable, it is to be translated by venerated, and respected; for by
this means it will be easy to resolve and clear all the difficulties which
seem to entangle this matter; according unto which, if any of the Ancients
treating of the Bread and Wine of the Eucharist, make use of the term which we
examine, it will not be difficult unto us to understand, that his design is not
that we should adore them, but only that we should venerate them, and that we
should respect them as Sacraments, which Jesus Christ has instituted for the
saving of our Souls; especially if this Writer does formally declare, that the
Bread and Wine do not change their Substance by Consecration. In acting by this
principle, we need only hear Theodoret, to understand what he means to say unto
us, Dialog. ^. p. ^5.
The Mystical Symbols (says he) do not change their own nature after
Consecration; but they remain in their former substance, in their first Figure,
and in their first shape; they are visible and palpable, such as they were
before; but it is conceived by the understanding, that they are what they have
been made, and they are believed, and venerated, ((...)) as being what they are
believed to be. Theodoret does positively testify, That the Consecration does
not take from the Symbols of the Eucharist, their Substance, their Form, nor
their Figure: Besides, he assures in the same place, that they be Images, and
mystical Symbols, whereof the Body of Jesus Christ is the truth and the
Original. And elsewhere he says, Dialog. 1.
That our Savior has honored the visible Symbols, with calling them by the
name of his Body and Blood; not by changing their Nature, but in adding Grace
unto Nature. After declarations so formal and positive, say some, the Greek
word cannot be translated by, Adore, but by Venerate; else it must be said that
Theodoret is fallen into the highest excess of folly, to adore what he
confessed was but Bread in its proper nature and substance; but because we are
obliged to judge more favorably of him, the word (...) must be translated, are
venerated, are respected, and not are adored; They also think the Reader will
be very much confirmed in this Opinion, if these other words of this Author be
considered, writing in another Dialogue against the Eutychean Heretics, and
speaking thus unto them, Dialog. 3. p. 127.
If the Body of Jesus Christ seem a vile thing unto you, and inconsiderable,
how is it that you do nevertheless esteem his Figure to be venerable and
saving; for how can an Original, whose Type is venerable, (...), and worthy of
Honor, be it self vile and despicable. They observe, that these words do also
manifestly show, that there is not here meant a true and proper adoration, but
a veneration, honor and respect; such as is due unto holy and sacred things:
And that he speaks also of venerating the Symbols, in the nature of Figures,
which he distinguishes from the Archtype, and from the Original; an opposition
which justifies that the words of Theodoret cannot at all be understood neither
here, nor in the former testimony of a relative Adoration, such as some do
ground in relation to Images; as if this ancient Doctor did teach a real
Adoration of the Symbols of the Sacrament, but so as it terminated in Jesus
Christ, instead of terminating in the Symbols themselves. And in fine, there be
learned men amongst the Latins which do so explain themselves. But some others
do think that this Explication does require to be made more plain; for say
they, if it be only meant, that in communicating we should adore Jesus Christ,
prostrate, and as it may be said, become vile in his sight, as we do with
reverence take his Sacrament, there is no Christian but will agree thereunto;
although it is not, as they think, the meaning of Theodoret; but if they intend
this relative Adoration should so terminate in Jesus Christ, as that the
Symbols should also have their part, it is to establish the quite contrary of
what is said by Theodoret, who leaves only a Respect and Veneration to be given
unto the Sacrament. And what they say of Theodoret, they say in like manner of
all others which have spoken of the Adorable Mysteries, of the Adorable
Communion, and also, of adoring the heavenly Gifts; for they think, Contr.
Hermog. c. 22.
that because one expression is used, that therefore the same Interpretation
must be given, as when Tertullian said, I adore the fullness of the Scriptures;
that is to say, I reverence and admire it, I have a veneration and respect for
it. And St. Basil of Seleucia, 1 Orat. 30. in illad faciam vos piscat. hom.
That Rome, vailing her Diadem, adored the preaching of the Cross; 2 Tom. 3.
Bibl. Pat. p. 81.
to intimate that she received it with respect, and with veneration. Whence
also it is, that St. Jerome, in his Preface unto the Easter Epistles of
Theophilus, Bishop of Alexandria, speaks only of receiving the holy things with
veneration; a veneration which he makes to be common, and of the same nature
with that which is given unto Chalices, Vails, and other things which are used
at the Celebration of the Eucharist, or as he speaks, At the Passion of our
Savior; intimating that these things should be venerated with the same Majesty
as the Body and Blood; that is to say, the Sacrament: for he did not mean to
include in the same kind of veneration, the true Body of Jesus Christ, and the
holy Vessels; but the Sacrament of this divine Body; unto which Sacrament he
yields no Adoration, but a common Veneration, the same as unto the Lining, and
unto the Chalices of the holy Table. Thus do these last argue and discourse.

After these two considerations, we may with more ease examine the matter
whereof we are to write the History; I mean, the Question of the Adoration of
the Sacrament. And because, according to the Advertisement of St. Cyprian, That
heed must be taken unto what Jesus Christ did do; and that what he did in
celebrating his first Sacrament should serve as a Model and rule unto what
Christians should do after him in the Celebration of theirs; it is absolutely
necessary to look back unto him, to begin our Examination and Enquiry. I say
then, in the institution of this Sacrament which is exactly described unto us,
I find that our Savior, having broke the Bread which he had taken and
consecrated, gave it unto his Disciples; saying unto them, Take, eat; and that
he also in like manner commanded them to take the Cup, and drink of it: but I
do not find that he commanded them to adore neither the one, nor the other. But
if we do not find that he commanded them to adore what he gave unto them,
neither do we read that the Apostles did adore the Eucharist. The Evangelists,
which have so exactly transmitted unto us the History of this Institution, in
so exactly marking all the Circumstances of it, speak not a word of the holy
Apostles adoring of it: On the contrary, they represent them unto us in a
posture which does not well agree with an act of Adoration; for they were
almost lying along upon their sides, on little Beds round the Table, according
to the manner of that time. Moreover, if Jesus Christ had commanded his
Disciples to adore what he gave them in the distribution of his Sacrament, and
if the Disciples had indeed adored it, it is very likely, say some, that the
Rulers of the Jews would have known it by Judas; and knowing it, they would not
have failed to have urged it as a capital Crime against Jesus Christ: for as
they searched only some specious pretext to condemn him, they would never have
failed embracing this, which was very plausible, and would have accused our
Savior of having adored Bread and Wine; and the rather because amongst them,
worshipping of Creatures was held for an unpardonable crime; at least, after
their return from the Babylonian Captivity.

But besides what has been said, the disorder of the Church of Corinth in St.
Paul's time, affords us, say they, a convincing Argument of the same thing.
This divine Apostle condemns the Corinthians irreverence in the celebration of
this august Sacrament: he endeavors to make them ashamed of it, and to show
them, that their Conduct in this occasion was quite contrary both unto the
working of Charity, and the rules of holy Discipline, such as the Discipline
amongst Christians should be; yet nevertheless, to return them unto their duty,
and to persuade and inspire them with the respect due unto so great a
Sacrament, he does not say a word unto them of its Adoration, the consideration
whereof had been of very great moment, and capable of producing in the Spirits
of these disorderly Christians, other thoughts than those which they showed at
the time which they were to participate of this divine Mystery.

St. Luke, in the Acts of the Apostles, which contains the History of the
Infant Church, does observe several times, that Believers assembled to break
Bread; that is to say, to celebrate the Eucharist; but he never said that the
Sacrament was to be adored.

But it may be that the Christians which immediately followed the Age of the
Apostles, had upon this Subject other discoveries than those which the
Scriptures inform us of; and that they can inform us of things we know nothing
of. St. Justin Martyr, which flourished about fifty years after the death of
St. John, does in his second Apology exactly and amply describe the whole
action of the Sacrament, and all that was therein practiced in his time, on the
behalf of him which celebrated, and also on their parts which did communicate;
the Oblation of Bread, Wine and Water, which was presented unto the Pastor when
Sermon and Prayers were ended; the Consecration which was performed by him, by
Prayers and Thanksgivings unto God; the Amen, which was answered by Believers;
the distribution and communicating of the things which had been blessed and
consecrated; and in fine, the Charities and Alms-deeds made by particular
persons, and which was as the Crown and Seal of all this holy Action. But in
all this description we do see no mark of the Worship of Latry, nor of any
religious Worship, either commanded by the Pastors, or practiced by the People
toward the Sacrament, although that this glorious Martyr had twice treated of
the Sacrament in this Apology; as has been declared in our first part. And
this Representation which St. Justin gives unto us of the Eucharist in his
time, I mean, of the Celebration of this Sacrament, answers not ill unto what
himself observed in his Dialogue against Tryphon; That Christians in all places
made the Eucharist of Bread and Wine, and yet never speaks of adoring it; and
unto the silence of other Authors of his, and the following Age; because in all
their Writings they are silent upon this matter, although it be of the greatest
moment in Religion. I speak of St. Ireneus, of Clemens of Alexandria,
Tertullian, St. Cyprian, and of Origin; who, very far from enjoining this
Adoration, give not the least appearance to imagine that it was practiced,
neither in the passages where they speak of the Eucharist, nor in others where
they seem to be indispensably obliged to say something of it. As for example,
Tertullian in his Apologetick, where he promises to discover, Cap. 39.
and to demonstrate what does concern Christian Religion; and where he makes so
excellent and rich a description of the Agapes, and of the Assemblies of those
primitive Christians; he says only, Ep. 10, 11, 12, 13.
That they do there eat as persons which remember that they are obliged to
serve God all night. And St. Cyprian, treating of those which had fallen in the
time of Persecution, and being assisted by the Recommendations of Martyrs,
would needs communicate before they had accomplished the time of their Penance,
does all he can to exaggerate the crime of these overhasty persons, and to
justify his severity and his rigor; yet nevertheless, he does not touch, far
or near, the point of Adoration; which however, would have vindicated the
justice of his Conduct, and the temerity of those insolent persons. But
besides, we are so far from finding any thing in the Writings of these ancient
Doctors abovenamed, that does in the least favor the Adoration which we
examine, that on the contrary, they therein deliver certain things which have
been already cited elsewhere, as do absolutely alienate from the Spirit of
Communicants all thoughts of Adoration. as when St. Ireneus represents the
Oblation of the New Testament by an Oblation of Bread and Wine, of the first
Gifts of God which gives us Food of the first of his Creatures. Clement of
Alexandria; That what Jesus Christ gave his Disciples to drink was Wine; that
the Eucharist is divided into several parts, that each Communicant takes a
part, and that one eats sufficiently of the Bread of the Lord. Tertullian; That
the Eucharist is a figure of the Body of Jesus Christ. St. Cyprian; That what
our Savior did call his Blood, was Wine. And Origin; that the Eucharist is
Bread in substance; that according unto what it has of matter, it descends
into the Belly, and from thence into the place of Excrements.

The Adoration now in question does not appear in the Liturgies which go under
the names of St. Peter, St. James, and St. Mark, nor in that which is in the
Book of the Apostolical Constitutions, nor in the Writings of the pretended
Dennis the Arcopagite, which has treated expressly of the Celebration of the
Sacrament. It must be confessed that it is a wonderful thing if this religious
Adoration had been in use, that neither one nor another should say any thing of
it, the action being of moment sufficient not to be forgotten in such ample and
exact descriptions, as those be which are contained in these Liturgies; for as
for that Apostrophe which is read in the Liturgy of the forged Dennis the
Arcopagite, Hierarc. Eccl. c. 3. p. 245.
O most divine and holy Sacrament, unfolding the Vails of Mysteries wherewith
thou art symbollically environed, discover thy self clearly unto us, and fill
the eyes of our Understanding with thy mavelous and always resplendent Light:
This Apostrophe, I say, if we believe the Protestants, makes nothing for the
Adoration of the Bread and Wine of the Sacrament, no more than does this other
of St. Ambrose unto Baptism, the first Sacrament of the new Covenant; Tom. 3.
in Luc. lib. 10. c. 22.
O Water which have washed the Earth sprinkled with humane Blood, that the
figure of Sacraments should precede! O Water, which have had this honor to be
the Sacrament of Jesus Christ! Establish the Adoration of this Symbol of our
spiritual Regeneration. Nor this which is made unto the Chrism in the Roman
Pontifical, the Adoration of this Ointment or Liquor; Part. 3. de offic. fer.
5. in coen. Domin.
I salute thee, O holy Chrism. These are Apostrophes and discourses addressed
unto inanimate things, as if they had life; and unto signs, as if they were the
things themselves which they signify, and which they represent, and instead
whereof they are in a manner set, as they communicate unto us all their virtue,
and all their efficacy. It is just so Pachymeres understood the Apostrophe of
the pretended Arcopagite, in his Paraphrase of his Writings; even alleging, to
make good his Interpretation, the like Apostrophe of Gregory Nazianzen unto the
Christians Easter; In locum Dionysii p. 268.
He speaks (says he) unto it as if it were alive, and that very properly. As
also the great Divine, Gregory; But thou, O great and holy Easter. And he gives
this reason for it; that as well Easter, as the Sacrament, do represent, and
are Jesus Christ sacramentally; For (adds he) our Easter, and this holy Mystery
is our Lord Jesus Christ himself, unto whom the Saint directs his discourse, to
the end that he should open the Vails, and that we might be filled with his
excellent Light. In fine, Pachymeres had reason to back is Interpretation with
the example of Gregory Nazianzen, who speaks unto Easter as if it were endowed
with sense and reason; O Easter (says he) great and holy Easter, Orat. 42. p.
696
the Purifier of all the World; I speak unto thee as if thou were alive;
according to the Translation of Billius, very agreeable unto the Original: and
that is the reason that his Commentator Nicetas, makes this Observation; These
words, O great Easter, have reference unto the Feast it self, as if it were
alive: Which is so much the easier done, because in these sorts of occasions,
he that speaks, lifts up his thoughts unto the Object signified, after the
same manner as he directs his speech unto the sign which represents it, and
unto which he attributes things which do not agree properly but unto him which
is represented: as in this place where Gregory Nazianzen applies unto the
Feast, that which is due but unto Jesus Christ only; I mean, the washing away
the sins of the World: but he attributes it unto the Feast, as unto the day
whereon the thing was done; even as when the Latins say unto the Crucifix, That
it has reconciled them unto God; although they confess, That it is unto the
Crucified alone that they are obliged for these benefits.

St. Cyril of Jerusalem and St. Catech. Mist. 5 Sermon. 83. de diverse.
Austin have been careful very exactly to explain unto their Neophites, or new
Baptized, the principal things which were practiced in this divine Service. And
they observe, that after Consecration of the Symbols, the Lord's Prayer was
said, and the Priest cried, Sancta sanctis, Holy things be for the Holy: the
Believers gave unto each other the Kiss of Peace; and they were invited unto
the Communion by these words which were sung, Taste and see how good the Lord
is. As soon as the Consecration is ended (says St. Austin) we say the Lord's
Prayer, which you have learned and said: after this Prayer, is said, Peace be
with you; and Christians give each other the holy Kiss. They were also told of
Sursum Corda, Lift up your hearts; of Gracias agamus Domino Deo nostro, Let us
give thanks unto the Lord our God: and of the washing of hands: but amongst all
these Instructions, I do not find any one touching the Adoration of the
Sacrament. It is true, St. Cyril will have his Communicant approach unto the
holy Table, not with hands stretched out, nor his fingers open; but in
supporting the right hand with the left, that he should receive the Body of
Jesus Christ in the hollow of his hand; or, as he speaks some lines before, The
Antitype of the Body of Jesus Christ; that he take care that not a crumb of it
fall to the ground: and having in this manner communicated of the Body of Jesus
Christ, he should approach unto the Cup, having the Body bowed in way of
Adoration, or Veneration. But besides, say some, St. Cyril does not desire of
his Communicant this inclination of body for Reception of the other Symbol
which he represents unto us, and does call it the Body of Jesus Christ, such as
some crumbs whereof may fall to the ground: it is that the Cup, unto which he
desires he should draw near with this inclination of Body, contains a Liquor,
the moisture of which, and the humidity remains, as he says, upon the lips:
which cannot be said of the proper Blood of the Son of God. The posture then
which he prescribes for receiving of the Cup must necessarily be understood,
not of an act of Adoration, which he does not teach, in any part of his
Catechisms, unto his Neophites; but according to our second Consideration, of
the Veneration and respect which we ought to have for so great a Sacrament; the
Greek word used by St. Cyril being to be understood by that of veneration and
respect, because he speaks of an Object which is not adorable with the
Adoration of Latery; that is to say, of the Sacrament: and that besides, he
would not have said barely, Approach with a little bowing the body; but he
would precisely have commanded to have adored it before receiving of it; this
action being of too great moment to speak so indifferently of, and not to have
commanded it after a more exact manner. I will ad unto all these reasons, that
St. Cyril requires nothing of his Communicants but what what St. Chrysostom
does require of his also, and yet in stronger terms of his Catechumeny, when
the time of their Catechizing was expired, that they presented themselves to be
baptized; In illud simile est regnum coelor. patrifamil. t. 6. p. 550.
When you shall (says he) come into the Closet of the holy Spirit, when you
shall run into the Marriage-Chamber of Grace, when you shall be near unto that
terrible and also desirable Pool, prostrate your selves as Captives before your
King, cast your selves all together on your knees; and lifting up your hands
unto Heaven, where the King of us all is sitting on his Royal Throne; and
lifting up your eyes unto that Eye which never slumbers, use these words unto
that Lover of Mankind, etc. Is not this approaching unto Baptism in a way of
Worship and Adoration, as St. Cyril desired one should approach unto the holy
Communion? And yet Christians never inferred from the words of St. Chrysostom,
that the Water of this Sacrament of our Regeneration was to be adored. But what
I say of the water of Baptism, the same Chrysostom requires we should also do
of the hearing of the Word of God; The King himself (says he) will not have
his Diadem upon his head, In illud ne eleemos. vestr. sac. t. 6. p. 528.
but lays it aside, in reverence unto God speaking in the holy Gospel. What,
(says he) I know his Dignity, which has given me mine: I adore his Kingdom,
which has been pleased to make me reign. And to say the truth, we owe the same
respect and veneration unto the Word of God, and to his Sacraments, which we do
owe unto him which is the Author of them, by giving him the Sovereign Adoration
which we are obliged to render him at all times, especially when we hear his
Word read and preached, and when we participate of his divine Sacraments.

If we descend yet lower than St. Austin, we may inform our selves of what has
been practiced in the Church since his death, upon the Subject of the Adoration
of the Sacrament; for we have in the Works of St. Ambrose, two Treatises
touching the same matter, made in the behalf of those newly initiated; of
which, the latter, entitled, Of the Sacraments, is more ample than the other.
We have that of Ecclesiastical Offices, composed by St. Isidore, Archbishop of
Sevil; the Book of Sacraments of Gregory the First; that made by Maximius,
Abbot of Constantinople, expounding very mystically all the Action of the
Sacrament. German, Patriarch of the same place, also employed himself upon the
same Subject; and has at large all that long History of Ceremonies practiced
in an Age which had already departed very much from the simplicity of the
primitive times. The Book, called The Roman Order, does also examine all the
particulars of the public Service practiced in the Church of Rome. We have in
the IX. Century the Treatise of Rabanus, Archbishop of Mayans, of the
Institution of Clerks; that of Ecclesiastical Offices of Amalarius Fortunatus;
that of Walfridus Strabo, almost under the same Title; that of Florus, under
the name of Explication of the Mass. In fine, we have several other Treatises
of the manner and order that ought to be observed in the Celebration of the
Mass, or of the Eucharist, which Hugh Mainard, a learned Benedictine, has
caused to be printed with the Books of Sacraments of Gregory the Great; as that
he took from the Manuscript of Ratold, Abbot of Corby, about the Year 986.
Another from the Library of du Tillet, and which he says, is the Roman Order
of the Year 1032. and a third of the Priory of Saluse in Normandy, of the
Prebends of the Order of St. Austin, about the Year 1079. But in all this we do
not find one word of the Adoration of the Sacrament, no more than the
Interpreters and Commentators of the History of the Institution of it; which
are not a few.

Moreover, the expressions of the ancient Doctors of the Church will not a
little contribute unto the illustrating of this matter; for if they had a
design to have Christians worship the Sacrament before receiving of it, or at
the instant of communicating, methinks they should have spoke in a manner and
way which should have possessed them with thoughts and dispositions suitable,
and which should have made them to conceive of it the same Opinion which one
has for an Object which is truly adorable. Nevertheless, instead of so doing,
I find their Instructions tended rather to divert, than to incline them unto
this Homage. In fine, I cannot comprehend that the people could dispose
themselves unto the Adoration of the Eucharist, when they heard the holy
Fathers unanimously call it Bread and Wine, even in the very act of Communion.
Wheat, the Fruit of the Vine, the Fruit of the Harvest, and the like things.
They testify it is Bread which is broke, positively affirm that it is Bread
and Wine; Bread which nourishes our Bodies, which is inanimate, which is
digested, the substance whereof remains after Consecration: in a word, Bread,
subject unto the same accidents with our common food. For these are so many
formal Declarations which these holy Doctors have made unto us in the second
Chapter of the second Part. Must it not be confessed that they very ill
instructed the people which God had committed unto their charge, if the
Sacrament is a Subject to be adored, because all these plain and formal
expressions served only to estrange the Mind from the Idea of this Sovereign
Worship of Religion, in making them conclude it was nothing but Bread and Wine
in regard of their nature, but otherwise the Sacraments of the Body and Blood
of Jesus Christ. And what confirmed them the more in this thought is, that the
Fathers never warned them to take their words figuratively, when they say that
the Eucharist is Bread and Wine; but when they call it the Body and Blood of
Jesus Christ, they use many precautions, as has been showed in the third
Chapter, saying, that almost all do call the Sacrament his Body; that our
Savior has honored the Symbols with the names of his Body and Blood, that
they be his Body and Blood, not simply and absolutely; but after some sort
being so called by reason of the resemblance, because they be the Sacraments,
the Signs, the Figures, the Memorials of his Person and Death, and that they
are in the stead of his Body and Blood. What need all these Limitations and
Illustrations, if their design had been that the people should have adored the
Eucharist; for you would say, that they seem to be afraid that they should take
it for an Object worthy of this Worship and Homage, so much care is taken by
them, to make them comprehend what sense they should give unto their words,
when they say that it is the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ, a precaution
absolutely inconsistent with the intention and thought of inspiring unto them
the Doctrine of Adoration. This is the reasoning of those which admit not of
the Adoration of the Sacrament.

But if from the consideration of the words of the holy Fathers, we pass unto
that of several things which were practiced by the ancient Church in regard of
the holy Sacrament, and which has been examined by us in the first Part, we
may draw Inferences, by the help whereof we shall the easier discover the truth
of what we do examine. For example, the Christians for several Ages, made use
of Glass Chalices in the Celebration of the Sacrament: They gave the Sacrament
for a long time unto young Children, although very incapable of the act of
Adoration. They obliged Communicants to receive it in their hands; they
permitted them to carry it home along with them unto their houses, and to keep
it as long as they pleased, even to carry it along with them in their Travels,
without ever finding that they gave it any particular Worship whilst they kept
it locked in their Chests or Closets. They sent it unto the Absent, and unto
the Sick, without any Ceremony; not only by Priests and Deacons, but even by
Laypersons; by Men, Women, and young Boys. Bishops, for above three Centuries,
sent it unto each other in token of Love and Communion, without any noise, or
giving it any homage or honor by the way, and without the peoples assembling
in the ways by which it passed, to receive it, as an Object of their Service
and Adoration. They also sometimes communicated, without any scruple of
Conscience, after Dinner or Supper; and so mingled the Eucharist with their
other food. Were not this to answer very ill unto the sovereign respect which
one should have for a Divinity one adores, to mingle it in the same Stomach
with ordinary food, and to communicate standing, as they did.

But besides all these Customs observed in the Ancient Church, see here others
also observed by them, and which have been considered by us in treating of the
exterior form of Celebration: In some places what was left of the Eucharist
after Consecration, was burnt in the Fire; in other places it was eaten by
little Children, which were sent for from School. The Sacrament was employed to
make Plasters; it was buried with the Dead; and sometimes, Ink was mingled
with the Consecrated Wine; and then they dipped their Pens in these two mixed
Liquors. Can it be imagined, say the Protestants, that Christians so zealous as
they were, should Adore the Sacrament, seeing it was employed by them unto uses
so far distant from this Adoration, and so contrary unto the Worship which is
due unto God: All these Customs, could they consist with a Worship of this
Nature, and with this Sovereign respect which is due only unto the sole object
of our Devotion, and of our Religion, let the Reader judge. And the better to
judge hereof, let him compare the conduct of the Ancient Church, in this
particular, with that of the Latin Church since the XI. Century; for these
kinds of oppositions do not a little contribute unto the Illustrating the
matters now in question; practices so different upon the same subject, not
proceeding but from diverse principles; nor such various effects, but from as
different causes. I ought not to pass in silence the custom of this same
Church, in turning out of the Assembly all those that could not or would not
Communicate; I speak of the Catechumeny, the Energumeny, and the Penitents;
which could not be admitted unto the participation of this Divine Sacrament:
and of those amongst Believers which voluntarily deprived themselves of it; for
it is most certain, that all those which remained in the Assembly did
communicate, both great and small, as has been showed in the first Part of
this Book: And nevertheless, if besides the use of the Communion, for which
they confessed the Eucharist had been instituted, they believed that the
Sacrament was an object of Adoration. What did they mean in forbidding those
People which were not in a state of communicating, the acts of Piety and
Christian Humility: A thing so much the more strange, that the Holy Fathers
believed for certain, that prayers made unto God at the time of celebrating the
Sacrament, were more efficacious, then those made unto him at other times, by
reason of the Commemoration which is there made of the Death of Jesus Christ;
in whose Name, and for whose Merits, we pray unto him. By what principle and
motive were they deprived of the fruit and comfort which they might receive
from the homage which they would have given unto God at that blessed moment?
The sinner addressing himself unto the object of this Worship and Adoration, I
mean unto the Sacrament, would have prayed unto it with a flood of tears, and
with sincere marks of his Repentance and Contrition, to grant him pardon of his
sins, and to seal the Absolution of them unto his Soul. The Energumeny would
have implored the assistance of his holy Spirit for his deliverance from the
slavery of the Devil. The Catechumeny would have presented unto him his prayers
for the augmentation of his knowledge, and to be e're long honored by being
Baptized into his Church; and then afterward to be admitted unto the holy
Sacrament. And in fine, the Believer in the sense of his unworthiness, would
have prostrated himself in its presence, and would have ardently prayed unto it
to bestow upon him better dispositions, in approaching another time unto the
mystical Table, there to receive the pledges of his consolation and salvation.
Is it probable, say some, if these Christians had held the Eucharist for an
Object deserving the highest Adoration, that they would have used so severe and
rigorous a Discipline, which no way savoured of the meekness and love of Jesus
Christ, against these several sorts of People? Is it not more likely that they
would have endeavored to have comforted them, in representing, that if they
were debarred for some time, from the participation of this great Sacrament,
that yet they had the comfort of adoring it, and of rendering it their homage,
and the acts of their Piety and Devotion, in an occasion wherein God showed
himself more propitious unto men; and wherein he answers more favorably unto
their prayers and desires. But they were fo far from doing so, that they turned
them out without any pity, at the time they were to celebrate this Divine
Sacrament; from whence the Protestants infer, That they did not look upon it as
an object of Adoration.

But as they argued against the Adoration of the Sacrament upon what was done
by the Primitive Christians, so do they also argue against it by what they did
not do, and yet that which is very religiously practiced by the Latins; for the
Latins do not fail to expose and show the holy Sacrament in public rejoycings
or calamities: they adore and invoke it, when they undertake any thing which is
considerable, and the execution whereof seems difficult. They cause it to be
adored by their new Converts, and by their Penitents; by the former, that they
should give it thanks for their spiritual regeneration; and by the others, to
make atonement for their sins in its presence. They make little Images of it,
and do consecrate them: they address unto it their Vows, their Prayers, and
their Thanksgivings; but in the Ancient Christian Church nothing of all this
was seen, neither any Miracle of the Host being Worshipped by Beasts, as is
related in some Writers of the Latin Church, to have frequently happened, which
confirms them the more in the belief they have, that for more then ten Ages,
the Church did not Worship the Eucharist. Whereunto they also add, that the
Primitive Christians neither caused Incense nor Candles in day time, to be
burnt unto it, as we have showed in the Chapter wherein we endeavored to
discover the beginning of these two Customs, which is attended with a third,
amongst the Latins, I mean that of Flowers, which are used either in a way of
Garlands, or otherways, unto the honor of the Sacrament, particularly the day
called the Holy, or the Feast of God; and nevertheless, Athenagoras does
include under the same condemnation, the use of Incense, Leg. pro Christian.
of Odours and Flowers in the Service of God: The Creator (says he) and the
Father of all things, has no want of Blood, of Fat, of Flowers, nor of
odoriferous Perfumes, because he needs nothing, and is himself a very sweet
Odor, and desires nothing out of himself; and that the greatest Sacrifice
which he requires, is, That we should know him. In the Dialogue of Minutius
Foelix, Page 10. ult. ed.
the Pagan Cecilius reproacheth ours, That they do not Crown their Heads with
Flowers, and that they perfume not their Bodies with Odours. Which Octavius,
the Advocate for the Christians, does not deny; and he only replies, That
Christians do not disallow the use of Flowers, Ibid. p. 30.
yet it is in such a way, as that they do not wear them upon their Heads.
Pardon us, says he pleasantly, if we Crown not our Heads with Flowers; we are
wont to smell the Odor of them with the nose, and not with the hinder part of
the head, nor with the hair. Pedag. l. 2. c. 8. p. 179.
It is whereunto amounts also what is said by Clement of Alexandria, when he
condemns the use of Flowers, as fit only for Banquets, and for Debauchery;
alleging, even presently after, these two or three words; Adorn not my head
with a Crown. He is content we should enjoy the sweet smell of Flowers, Ibid.
p. 180.
which are so plentiful in the Fields; But to make a Crown of them, to put them
on the head, Ibid.
and to wear them as an Ornament about or in the house, Ibid. p. 181.
he cannot suffer it; saying, That does not become a wise and sober person. He
adds, That those which be crowned with Flowers do neither enjoy the beauty of
them by the eyes, nor the scent of them by the nose, although that is their
true and natural use. He observes that it was but of late that the Luxury of
the Greeks had invented this use of Crowns of Flowers; Ibid. p. 182.
from whence he concludes, That the Disciples of Jesus Christ should abstain
from them, because they are consecrated unto Idols; that they ought not to be
used for Conscience sake, and that the lively Image of God should not be
crowned as dead Idols are crowned. He says moreover, That it is not at all
reasonable, that those who have been taught that our Savior was crowned with
Thorns, should have their heads crowned with Flowers; Ibid. p. 183.
by derision to insult over his venerable Passion. In fine, he observes, That
if in matter of Flowers, something should be granted unto pleasure and civil
Recreation, Christians should satisfy themselves with the smell of Flowers;
but that they are not permitted to be crowned with them. Tertullian is no less
express than the rest, nor no less severe in condemning these sorts of Crowns;
for answering the reproach made against Christians, of not bringing any profit
unto the Trade of the World, and of the fault which was imputed unto them for
not using Flowers, Apolog c. 42.
see here what he says; I buy no Flowers to make a Crown to go round my head:
What need you care what use it is that I make of the Flowers that I shall buy
in the Market? I fancy they are better when they are loose, unbound and
several, without any order, than to have them made up like a Crown: when they
are in that condition, we are wont to put them unto the nose, and to smell
them. Let them which wear them on their heads consider which is properest: to
smell them by the hair, or by the Organ of smelling. Id. de Cor. c. 2.
And elsewhere he proposes the practice of all Christians; Not one of which
(says he) wears a Crown on their heads; at least, if they are not in danger of
being thereby to be known; that is to say, when there is no danger of being
known to be a Christian by refusing to wear a Crown, and of being led unto
punishment by Persecutors which might know them by this mark; for then the
Flesh being weak and frail, many may be found, who for fear of punishment,
would comply with this practice: Ibid.
but laying aside the fear of danger, there was not one that did not reject the
use of wearing Crowns on the head: All Christians (says he) did practice so;
that is to say, did wear no Crowns of Flowers upon their heads; from the
Catechumeny, unto the Confessors and Martyrs; Ibid. c. 5.
and even unto those also which bowed in times of Pers^cution. He shows, That
Flowers are for the sight or smell: that it is no less contrary to Nature to
take the smell of Flowers by the head, than to receive the sound of an
Instrument by the nose; and that all that is contrary to Nature, is amongst men
counted monstrous; Ibid. c. 9.
but that amongst Christians it also deserves the Title of Sacrilege against
God, the Author and Governor of Nature. And a little after, What Patriarch,
(says he) what Prophet has been ever heard to be crowned? Ibid.
He concludes precisely, That the Servants of God should not be crowned; and
that Christians are not permitted to wear any other Crown, but a Crown of
Thorns, after the example of Jesus Christ. And because (says he) you may
object unto me, Ibid.
that Jesus Christ was crowned, you may be answered in a few words; that you
are permitted to be crowned also after the same manner. In fine, having
confessed that Idols, and the Dead, Ibid. c. 10.
were crowned amongst the Pagans, he declares, That it is a very unseemly
thing to make of the Image of the living God, the Image of an Idol, and of a
dead person. There be those which infer from this discourse of Tertullian's, as
well as from the passages of Athenagoras, Minutius Foelix, and of Clement of
Alexandria; in the first place, that the Clergy of their times did not wear nor
use Crowns, as those of the Roman Church do at this time. Secondly, That
Garlands and Crowns of Flowers made in honor of the Sacrament, was not in use;
and that there were no Priests seen crowned with Flowers when they celebrated
this Mystery, as is to be seen amongst the Latins on the day of the Feast of
God, when the Host is carried in solemn Procession. Orat. 2. in Julian. quae
est. 4.
I know not how Gregory Nazianzen could absolutely have forbidden Christians of
strewing the Street with Flowers at the Celebration of their Holy Days, had the
use of Flowers already been introduced into the Worship of their Religion,
without telling them that it was sufficient to employ them in the Assemblies,
unto the honor of the Eucharist; Sermon. 2. de Pentecost.
and whether St. Chrysostom would have addressed this Exhortation unto his
Auditors on a day of Pentecost; I conjure you by the consideration of all the
benefits so liberally bestowed upon us this day, that we also celebrate the
Feast, not in crowning our doors, but in preparing our Souls, and in rendering
them beautiful with the Ornaments of virtue.

But besides all that we have hitherto observed on the Subject of the Adoration
of the Sacrament, there be others which deserve a particular Consideration; As
the Elevation to excite the people unto the Adoration of the consecrated Host;
the Sound of the Bell to give warning to the people of it. As also the Holy
Day, and Procession of the Sacrament. As touching the Elevation, we have
treated amply thereof in the ninth Chapter of the first Part; where we have
showed that the Elevation, whose scope is the Adoration of the Sacrament, was
never at all practiced in the Latin Church before the XIII. Century: So that
the Reader may look back upon what has been said in that Chapter, without
being at the trouble of repeating it over again in this place. It shall suffice
to relate the Constitutions which the Popes made about that time, to incline
the people unto the Adoration of the Host. The first is, that of Honorius the
Third, who was Pope in the Year of our Lord, 1216. which is conceived in these
terms; That Priests should often teach their people, that at the Celebration of
Mass, when the Host is lifted up, they should kneel with respect; and that they
should also do the like when the Priest carries it unto any sick person.
Gregory the Ninth, which succeeded him, Anno 1227. invented the ringing a Bell,
to warn the people to fall down on their knees to adore the consecrated Host;
Decret. Greg. IX. l. 3. tit. 41. de Celebr. Miss. c. 10. sane. Nauclerus ad
Anno 1240. Crantzius. Saxon. l. 8. c. 10. Decret. Clem. l. 5. tit. 3. de haer.
c. 3. ad nostrum.
ordering, That when the Flesh and Blood of Christ is made, and at the
Elevation of the Host, there should a Bell ring, to the end that all which hear
it should kneel down, and join their hands in adoring the Host. From thence it
was that Pope Clement the Fifth, at the beginning of the XIV. Century, did
condemn those which taught, 3 That when the Body of Jesus Christ was lifted up,
men need not stir, nor give unto it any homage. He speaks of the Sacrament, the
Adoration whereof was not approved by those persons. From thence it is also
that in the Breviary, the Priest who says Mass, is so precisely warned to kneel
down and worship the Host after pronouncing these words, This is my Body; and
to show it unto the people, that they also might worship it: In Missali Orat.
ante Miss. signat. f. 1111.
and also does reiterate the same Warning as touching the Cup. From thence (in
fine) proceeds the Prayers which be addressed unto the Sacrament; I devoutly
adore thee, O hidden Divinity, who art truly veiled under these Types: I wholly
submit my heart unto thee, because it fails in my meditating of thee: My
Sight, Touch, and Taste are deceived in regard of thee; and it is in the
hearing only that any confidence can be laid. I believe all that the Son of God
has said, and there is nothing truer than this Word of Truth. The Divinity
only was hid upon the Cross, but here the Humanity is also veiled,
Nevertheless, in believing and confessing both the one and the other, I beg of
thee what the penitent Thief desired. I do not see thy Wounds, as did St.
Thomas; however, I confess thou art my God. Enable me to believe always in
thee, to put all my trust and confidence in thee, and to love thee. O Memorial
of the death of our Savior; Bread of Life, which give Life unto Mankind,
grant that my Soul may live on thee, and that it may always find delight and
sweetness in thee. O divine Pelican, Jesus my Lord, I am unclean: wash me, and
cleanse me with thy Blood; one drop whereof is sufficient to save the whole
World from all Impiety. O Jesus, whom I now behold veiled; I beseech thee that
thou will be pleased to grant what I so earnestly beg; that is to say, that
beholding thee with open face, I may become happy by the sight of thy Glory.
And this other, I salute thee, Light of the World, Gloss. ad decret. Greg. l.
3. tit. 41. de Miss. celebr. c. 10. sane.
Word of the Father, true Hosty, living Flesh, perfect God, true Man.

It must not be forgot that just at the beginning of the XIII. Century, a few
years before Honorius the Third had made his Constitution for the Adoration of
the Sacrament; Odo, Bishop of Paris ordained, Statut Synod. c. 5. t. 6. Bibl.
Pat.
That the people should often be exhorted to bow the knee before the Body, as
before their Maker and Lord, as often as they should see it pass before them.
This Prelate caused several precautions to be added unto this Decree, in case
it should happen that any part of the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ should
fall to the ground, or that any Fly or Spider should chance to fall into the
Blood. It Is true, Odo was not the first that prescribed these kinds of
precautions; for from the VIII. Century, somewhat of this nature is to be seen
in a Penitential, attributed unto Pope Gregory the XIII. which held the Chair,
according unto Bellarmine's computation, from the Year 731. unto the Year 741.
I say, this Penitential is attributed unto him; for it is not very certain that
it is his: but in fine, it is in this Book, which is inserted in one of the
Tomes of the Councils, Tom. 5. p. 471.
that Precautions like unto those established by Odo, Bishop of Paris, are to
be seen. And it is, as I conceive, of this Penitential Book, De Consecr.
distinct. 2. c. si per negligentiam.
attributed unto Gregory the Thirteenth, that the Canonist Gratian has taken
the words he cites in his Decrete, under the name of Pope Pius the first, who
lived about the middle of the II. Century. In fine, besides that they agree
much better with the time of Gregory, than with that of Pius, who as yet was
ignorant of these kinds of Precautions. The words related by Gratian, as spoken
by Pius, are at this day to be found verbatim, in the Penitential, given us
under the name of Gregory the XIII. The first Christians were careful that no
part of the sacred Symbols of the Eucharist should fall to the ground; but we
do not find that they made any Ordinance touching what might, through neglect,
fall to the ground, of the Bread and Wine of the Sacrament: that was an effect
of after Ages; which being in process of time become infinitely more scrupulous
than former Christians, became also more liberal of their Decrees and
Constitutions, especially in what concerned the Sacrament of the Eucharist:
insomuch that Hubert, Archbishop of Canterbury, and Legate of Pope Celestine,
made this Decree at the end of the XII. Century, never regarding the simplicity
with which the Sacrament was sent unto sick people in the first Ages of
Christianity; Apud Roger. de Hoveden in Richard. I.
That Priests, as often as there is need to communicate the Sick, should
themselves carry the Host in their Priestly Habits, suitable unto so great a
Sacrament: and that Lights should be carried before it, if stormy Weather, the
badness of the Ways, or some other reason does not hinder. Odo, Bishop of
Paris, did moreover ordain, That all persons should kneel down unto it when it
passed by; which, if my Memory fail not, is the first Decree made for adoring
the Host; yet it must not be imagined that the Adoration of the Sacrament was
not at all practiced in the Latin Church before this Ordinance of Odo, which
was made in the beginning of the XIII. Century. There be some which think that
it was established by Durandus, Abbot of Troarn, in the XI. Century, a little
after Berengarius had declared himself against the Dostrine of the Real
Presence. But if Durandus made no mention of the Adoration of the Sacrament, as
in effect there be those which refer his words unto the blessed Humanity of our
Redeemer, whereof he makes mention in the same place, and unto which they
pretend that the act of Adoration should be addressed, according to the design
of this Abbot; it cannot be denied but Alger formally taught it in the XII.
Century: De Sacram. l. 2. c. 3.
for as to what we read in the ancient Customs of the Monastery of Cluny, That
all those which meet the Priest, Lib. 3. c. 18. t. 4. Spicil. p. 217.
bearing the Body of the Lord unto a sick person should demand Forgiveness; I
do not see that all do explain this action after one manner. Dom Luke d'Achery,
which caused them to be printed, understands it of Adoration; having caused
this little Annotation to be put in the Margin; That is to say, that they
should prostrate and adore. Others say that these words, Demand Pardon, do only
signify that those which meet the Sacrament should demand Forgiveness, either
of the Priest, the same as in communicating; Ibid. l. 2. c. 30. p. 145.
for they all demanded Pardon of each other, and kissed the Priest's hand
before they received the holy Sacrament; or of God, in consideration of the
death of Jesus Christ, Ibid. l. 1. c. 13. p. 58. etc. 38. p. 92.
whereof the Sacrament is a Memorial. Whereunto they add, that the same was
practiced in this famous Assembly, when the Cross was uncovered on Good Friday,
and the day called The Exaltation of the Holy Cross, and that the Pardon which
they asked upon these two occasions is distinguished from Adoration. Moreover
they say, that in the thirtieth Chapter of the second Book of these Customs,
wherein is exactly represented what was practiced in those times in this famous
Monastery, in the Consecration, and in the Communion of the Eucharist, there is
not one word said of the Elevation of the Host. Whence they infer, that they
did not practice the Adoration of the Sacrament which in the Latin Church, for
some Ages past, does immediately follow the Elevation of it. After all, should
the words in question be applied unto the Adoration of the Host, no other
consequence could from thence be drawn but this, to wit, that in the XI.
Century, at the end whereof, was collected together in three Books, all these
ancient Customs, this Adoration began to be practiced; that is to say, after
the Condemnation of Berengarius, although there was no Decree for it until the
XIII. Century.

And as before the XIII. Century, there was no Decree made touching the
Adoration of the Sacrament, so also before that time there was no Holy Day
dedicated unto its honor; from whence the Protestants do not fail to make
their advantage against the Adoration of the Eucharist; saying, That if this
Adoration had been practiced in the ancient Church, Christians would not have
referred it unto Urban the Fourth, the care of instituting the Feast of the
Sacrament; which he did in the Year 1264. But it is not sufficient to know that
Urban the Fourth did institute this Holy Day in that Year, if we do not also
know that he was inclined thereunto by the desires, and upon the Revelations of
certain Women of the Country of Liege; particularly of a Nun called Eve, unto
whom he wrote a Letter upon this Subject, and another unto all the Bishops; the
which is contained in the Bull of Clement the Fifth, in the third Book of
Clementines, tit. 16. as we are fully informed by John Diesteim Blaerus, Prior
of St. James of Liege, which he composed, after having made, as he says, an
exact enquiry of what had passed in this Institution. And to inform the Reader
of the nature of these Revelations, he adds, That the first of these Women,
called Juliana, in praying, perceived a mavelous Aparition; viz. The Moon, as
it were at Full, but having some kind of Spots: Whereupon she was divinely
inspired that the Moon was the Church, and that the Spot which appeared therein
was the want of a Holy Day, which as yet was wanting. So that she received a
Command from Heaven to begin this Solemnity, and to pubish unto the World that
it ought to be celebrated. He says moreover, That this Juliana having
communicated her Revelations unto one Isabella, this Isabella, knowing the
troubles Juliana was in upon this Subject, she desired of God by earnest
Prayers, that he would impart unto her the knowledge of these things; and that
going to visit Eve, a Nun of the Church of St. Martins of Liege, she no sooner
kneeled down before the Crucifix, but being ravished in mind, she was showed
from Heaven, that this particular Holy Day of the Eucharist had always been in
the Council of the Sovereign Trinity, and that now the time of revealing it
unto Men was come; for she affirmed, that in her Ecstasy, she saw all the
Heavenly Host demand of God by their Prayers, that he would speedily manifest
this Solemnity unto the wavering World, to confirm the Faith of the Church
Militant.

I am not ignorant but that there be some which would attribute the cause of
this Institution unto a Miracle of Blood, which, as they say, fell from an
Hosty in the hands of a Priest, as he sang Mass.

But Besides what Diesteim, and after him, several others have related unto us;
we have, touching the first cause of this Institution, the Declaration of Urban
himself, which made it: For in the Letter which he wrote unto all the Bishops,
inserted in the Bull of Clement the Fifth, he thus speaks; We have understood
heretofore, being in a lower Office (that is to say, when he was Archdeacon of
the Church of Liege) that it was revealed unto some Catholics (which were the
three Women mentioned by Diesteim; Juliana, Isabella, and Eve) that such a Holy
Day was to be generally celebrated in the Church. And in that which he wrote
unto Eve; We are sensible, Daughter, that your Soul has desired with great
desire, that a solemn Holy Day of the Body of Jesus Christ might be instituted
in the Church, to be celebrated by Believers unto perpetuity. This is the
ground and foundation of this Feast, and the true cause of its Institution,
even according to the Testimony of the Life of Juliana, the first of these
three Women; a Testimony whose proper terms is related by Molanus, in his
Martyrology of Saints in Flanders, on the 5th of April.

But how great soever the Authority of Popes at that time was in the West, the
Decree of Urban was not observed in all Churches, by reason of the newness of
the thing; therefore Clement the Fifth caused it to be published again about
fifty years after, as the Gloss upon the Decretal of Clement the Fifth, wherein
that of Urban is inserted, expressly observes. But notwithstanding all this, it
was not hitherto kept as Diesteim informs us, in the ninth Article of his Book;
Although (says he) the Apostolical Commands touching the Celebration of the
new Holy Day of the venerable Sacrament has been addressed unto all the
Churches, yet so it is nevertheless, that none of the Churches were careful to
give Obedience thereunto, excepting the Church of Liege; which, as soon as it
had with honor received the Apostolical Nuncio, with the Bulls, the Decretals,
and the Office which he had brought; presently, as a dutiful Daughter, gave
Obedience thereunto; rejecting the Office which the Virgin Juliana caused to be
made, and using that which had been composed by Thomas Aquinas. And so ever
since those Bulls came, the Diocese of Liege, and no other else, has
solemnized this Holy Day, until the days of our Lord, Pope John the Twenty
second, who lived in the Year of our Lord Jesus Christ, 1315. who published all
the Constitutions of Clement, and sent them unto the Universities.

And now if it be demanded of Urban, Clement. lib. 3 tit. 16. si Dominum.
what profit was made by this Institution, he will answer, That this Holy Day
properly belongs unto the Sacrament, because there is no Saint but has its
Holy Day, although there is remembrance had of them in the Masses, and in the
Litanies. That it must be celebrated once every year; particularly, to confound
the Unbelief and Extravagance of Heretics, to make a solemn and more
particular Commemoration of it; to the end, to frequent Churches with more and
greater Devotion; there to repair by attention, by humility of Spirit, and by
purity of heart, all the defaults wherein we have fallen in all the other
Masses, either by the disquiet of worldly cares, or by the dullness and weakness
of humane frailty, and there with respect to receive this Sacrament, and to
receive increase of Graces. Almost the very same thing is to be seen in the
Breviary of the Latin Church.

The Feast of the Sacrament was attended by Procession, wherein the Host is
born with Pomp and Magnificence. Diesteim says, Offic. fir. 6. infra Oct.
Corp. Christ. lect. 4. and 5.
that it was Pope John the Twenty second which introduced this custom: But
Bossius in his Chronicles; and after him, Genebrard, in his Chronology, Book
IV. place it much later; and say, that it began a hundred years after the
Institution of the Holy Day, to be practiced at Pavia; from whence it spread it
self abroad into all the Western Churches, and especially at Angers, where
Berengarius had been Archdeacon. Upon which, several observe, that this
Institution is directly contrary unto the practice of the ancient Church; that
very far from carrying in Procession the sacred Symbols of the Body and Blood
of our Savior, did administer them, the Doors shut, even from the III.
Century; and concealed them not only from Unbelievers and Idolaters, but even
also from the Catechumeny, which were made to go out when this divine Sacrament
was to be administered. They add, that this Procession was very ill resented by
many persons that lived in the Communion of the Roman Church. In fine, Queen
Catherine de Medicis wrote unto the Pope in the Year 1561. as Monsieur de Thoul
relates in his History, to demand of him, Thuan. Hist. l. 28.
That the Holy Day of the Body of Jesus Christ, which had been newly invented,
might be abolished, because it was the occasion of many Scandals, and that it
was no way necessary; for (said she) this Mystery was instituted for a
spiritual Worship and Adoration, and not for Pomp and Pageantry. And George
Cassander, in his Consultation addressed unto the Emperors, Cassand. Consult.
de circumgest. Euchar.
Ferdinand the First, and Maximilian the Second; The practice (says he) of
carrying publicly the Bread of the Sacrament in public pomp, and often to
expose it unto the sight of all the World, seems to have been introduced and
received not very long ago, contrary unto the practice and intentions of the
Ancients: for they had this Mystery in so great veneration, that they suffered
none so much as to see or receive it, but the Faithful, whom they esteemed to
be Members of Jesus Christ, and such as were worthy to partake of so great a
Mystery; therefore before Consecration, the Catechumeny, the Possessed, the
Penitents, and in a word, all those which were not fit to receive, were by the
voice of the Deacon commanded to withdraw, and were turned out by the care of
the Door-keepers. This practice therefore of thus carrying this Bread ought to
be abolished, without any prejudice unto the Church; on the contrary, it would
receive great advantage thereby (provided the thing were prudently done) seeing
it is but a late thing; and that without this Procession, the honor of the
Sacrament is nothing lessened, and may still at this time be discontinued,
seeing for the most part, this Ceremony seems rather for Pageantry and Show,
than for the peoples Devotion. By reason whereof (continues he) Albert Crantz,
a man of very great Judgment, does commend in his Metropolis, Nicholas de Cusa,
Legate in Germany, to have taken away the abuse which was committed in too often
carrying about the Sacrament of the Eucharist in Procession upon Holy Days; and
commanded that it should not be carried out in public, but betwixt the Octave
of the Feast dedicated unto the Sacrament: And Albert adds a memorable reason
for it; Because (says he) the Heavenly Master instituted this Sacrament for
Use, and not for Ostentation. And as for the Feast it self, it is certain it
was instituted by Urban; not to carry the Sacrament in Procession, but to make
the Assembly the greater; and to the end Men should so well prepare themselves
by works of Piety, that they might on that day participate of this precious
Sacrament, and receive it with respect; for it is what the words of the Decree
do import; and if the Institution were duly kept, I think there would be
nothing absurd in it.

The silence of the Gentiles, and the ancient Disputes of Christians against
them, and of theirs against the Christians, does very much contribute unto the
Illustration of the question which we examine. We have seen in the 9th. Chapter
of the second part, that the Pagans as well as Heretics, had a particular
knowledge of all that was believed and practiced in the Church; and that there
was scarce one of our Mysteries but they opposed, and upon which they made not
some opposition against Christians. But they never disputed against them upon
the point of the Eucharist; even not then it self, when the holy Fathers
reproached them of adoring things which might be stolen away, and which must be
kept under Lock and Key; things which sometimes was given in pawn. From whence
several do infer, That the Adoration of the Sacrament was not practiced amongst
these Christians; there being no probability that the Gentiles would have
spared them upon the Adoration of the Sacrament, which is subject unto all
these inconveniences wherewith they charged their false Divinities. They
farther observe, In octav. Orat. pro contra Graec.
That when Minutius Foelix and Tatian, called it an impious and ridiculous
thing to adore what one sanctified; the former said unto them, You adore the Ox
with the Egyptians, and you eat him afterward. And that Theodoret wrote,
Minut. Foel. Ibid. Quaest. in Genes. 9.55.
That it is the greatest folly in the World, to adore that which one eats. They
observe, I say, that these Pagans would not have been without a reply, had the
Church at that time given unto the Sacrament the Sovereign Worship of Religion,
seeing it had been very easy for them to have retorted back these shameful
reproaches upon this Object of their Adoration; and to say unto them, that they
had not justice to condemn them for that which they eat, seeing that Christians
did the very same thing: And because they never replied this unto the Church,
it is concluded, That the Church did not adore the Sacrament. And what does the
more confirm these People in this Opinion, is, That the Heathens of these times
do not fail to reproach the Latins, That they do eat the God which they
Worship, as has been represented in the 9th Chapter of the second Part, above
recited.

St. Austin establishes this Maxim, Sermon. 12. de Diverse.
That the God which the Christians Worship, cannot be showed with pointing the
Finger. Do not dispute with me I beseech you (says he) and do not importune me
in asking me, What is the God that I adore? for it is not an Idol toward which
I may point my Finger and tell you, That is the God which I adore: Neither is
it a Planet, nor a Star, nor the Sun, nor the Moon, that I may stretch out my
hand toward Heaven and show you, That is the God which I adore. He also
applies this Maxim particularly unto Jesus Christ Incarnate: Sermon. 74. de
Diverse. Sermon. 120. de Diverse.
Whilst (says he) we are in this Body, we are absent from the Lord; and if it
were called in question or denied, and that we were asked, Where is your God?
we are not able to show him. Jesus Christ is always with his Father, as to the
presence of his Glory, and of his Divinity; As to his bodily presence, he is
now above the Heavens, at the right hand of his Father; but he is in all
Christians by a presence of Faith. It is in this sense that St. Cyril of
Jerusalem said, Catech. 14.
He is now absent in regard of his Flesh; but he is present in the midst of us
in Spirit. The Protestants hence do draw this induction, that these Maxims are
inconsistent with the Adoration of the Sacrament; and that they cannot
reasonably be established by persons which make the Eucharist an Object of
Divine Adoration, because it cannot be denied, but that the Sacrament is a
visible Object, which is apprehended by our senses, and by consequence, an
Object which can be showed with the Finger; and of which it may be said, See
there the God which I adore.

They also pretend that the Holy Fathers Disputes against the Ebionites, and
the Docetes, two Sects of Heretics: the former of which said, That Jesus
Christ was but a mere Man; The others, That he had only a shadow of a Body:
They pretend, I say, that the silence of the Fathers, upon the subject of the
Adoration of the Sacraments in disputing against these Heretics, is an evident
proof that it was not adored in the Ancient Church; because, if it had been
adored, they would have urged this Adoration both against the one and the
other: because one adores not the Body of a common Man, nor an imaginary Body,
and which has nothing of a true Body, but a deceitful appearance. It is also
what is farther inferred by some amongst them, from the silence of the same
Fathers in their Disputes against the Aquarians, which celebrated the Eucharist
with Water only; saying, They could not dispense themselves from alleging this
act of Adoration; to represent unto them, that the Consecration not being to be
performed with Water only, they would be guilty of the crime of Idolatry, to
adore common Water as if it had been the Blood of Jesus Christ, whatever
intention they might have had otherwise. They say the same of the Canon made by
the third Council of Braga, Anno 675. against those which Consecrated Milk
instead of Wine in the Holy Cup; the Fathers satisfying themselves in saying,
that the Institution of our Lord admitted not to celebrate with Milk;
nevertheless, say the Protestants, if the Church had practiced the Adoration of
the Eucharist, had not that been the fit time to have spoken of it; and to have
showed, That those which did celebrate the Sacrament with Milk, caused the
Church to be guilty of Idolatry; because the People adoring the Cup, could not,
in effect, adore any thing but Milk. How comes it to pass, say they again, that
this public Service of Religion, this Adoration of the Sacrament, was never
alleged to overthrow Nestorias; who said, in speaking of the Humane Nature of
Jesus Christ, That he could not adore him which had been an Infant of two
Months old, and which had sucked the Breasts.

As for the Greek Church, I cannot tell how (after all that has been said at
the end of the XII. Chapter of the Second Part) it can be thought the Greeks
adore the Sacrament. It is true, that all things which we therein observed, do
not well agree, as many say, with this act of Adoration, no more than the
reproach made by Arcudius (a Greek Latinised) against the Greeks; whereof we
made mention in the same place: when he says, That they give but little or no
honor unto the Sacrament. As for Cabasilas, Archbishop of Thessalonica, who
wrote in the XIV. Century, he says only, That believers, willing to show their
Devotion and their Faith, adore, bless, and celebrate as God, that is to say,
in the Act of communicating Jesus Christ; who is understood in his gifts.
Nevertheless, certain words of Gabriel Archbishop of Philadelphia, are cited;
who was a Prelate at Venice about 45 years ago, the which do formally lay down
the Adoration we treat of. But the Protestants answer thereunto, that besides
that, the Greeks do several things which (as has been showed) agree not with
this Adoration. There never has been in the Greek Church any Decree made for
the adoring of the Eucharist; neither does there appear any, in their public
Books of Religion. They say moreover, That there is no certainty that the words
cited under the name of Gabriel of Philadelphia, are his; because the Greek
has never been cited: And that if it were true that they had been spoke by
this Prelate, it were not to be thought strange, that a Greek, living amongst
the Latins, should be prevailed upon by the ordinary practice of those which
adore the Sacrament with the Worship of Latry; but that his example and
testimony conclude nothing touching the body of the Greek Church. In fine,
Anthony Cancus, a Patrician of Venice, Archbishop of Corfou, answering unto
Pope Gregory the XIII. which had commanded him particularly to inform him of
the differences betwixt the Greek and Latin Church, observes expressly in his
History of the Heresies of the Modern Greeks, the Manuscript whereof is to be
seen in the Kings Library, that there is no Christian Communion which renders
less reverence, less honor, nor less Worship unto the Sacrament of the
Eucharist, than the Greeks do. He also adds, that having taxed them with the
little respect they give unto the Sacrament, that they answered him, That there
was no command which required this Adoration. From whence he takes occasion to
compare them unto Oecolampadius; who plainly taught, that the Sacrament should
not be adored with the Worship of Latry: Let the Reader judge of this dispute;
for it is not my business to decide it.

Therefore from the consideration of the Greek Church, I pass unto that of
Ethiopia, or the Abyssins; in the which, according to the testimony of Francis
Alvarez a Priest of Portugal, and an Eyewitness, In his Voyage into Fthiopia,
cap. 11.
all the People as well Men as Women, go unto the Communion with their hands
lift up and open; and during the whole Office, and all the time of the
Communion, every one is standing; Damian a Goes, p. 507.
the which is confirmed by Zaga Zabo an Abyssin, who in the Explication of
their Faith, translated by Damian Goes, observes, that in saying their Mass,
they do not show the Sacrament of the Eucharist, as he saw that it was usually
practiced amongst the Latins. The which does show how little credit is to be
given unto a Liturgy of the Abyssins which is put into Latin, in the Library of
the Holy Fathers, without mentioning from whence it was taken, or who it is
that translated it; and in the which there is mention made both of the
Elevation and Adoration of the Sacrament; the which is directly contrary unto
the Deposition of these two infallible Witnesses; whose testimonies we just now
received; and the one of which, to wit, Alvarez, expressly observes, that the
Abyssins do not lift up the Sacrament in the Celebration of their Eucharist;
which is the cause, as the other says, that the Sacrament is not showed unto
the People, as it is amongst the Latins. And in the West it self, there has
always been People which have celebrated the Sacrament without adoring or
lifting it up, as we have showed at large in the first Part of this Historical
Treatise; because, before the Introduction of the Elevation, or Adoration of it
in the Latin Church, Berengarius, with his followers, were grown very eminent;
who were immediately followed by the Albigensis and Waldensis, which spread
themselves in France, Italy, England, in Bohemia and elsewhere; and all those
celebrated the Eucharist without lifting up or adoring the Sacrament; which
practice was followed by the Taborites of Bohemia, at the beginning of the XV.
Century, and the which is also practiced by Protestants, which are in very
great numbers in all parts of Europe.

In fine, to conclude this Chapter, and at the same time the whole History of
the Eucharist, I will here insert two passages of St. Austin, to the end the
Reader might judge of his Opinion touching the subject which we examine. In the
first, he puts the Sacrament in the same degree with the other Symbols, and
gives it only the respect which ought to be given unto Religious things, Lib.
3. de Trinit. c. 10.
To establish a Sign, (says he) one employs sometimes a thing that was
existent before upon Earth; as Jacob when he awaked after his Dream, made use
of the Stone which served him for a Pillow while he slept; sometimes the thing
one makes use of, is made on purpose for it, and should continue for some time
after; as the Brazen Serpent which Moses lifted up in the Wilderness, and as
our Characters and our Letters. But sometimes also it ought to cease to be,
after having served the use whereunto it was destinated; as the Bread which we
make on purpose to that end, and which is consumed in receiving of the
Sacrament. But because these things being done by Men, are known unto Men, they
may be honored or respected as Religious things, but to cause admiration as
miraculous things, it is what they cannot do. In the other of these two
passages, he speaks of Baptism, and of the Lords Supper, and without making any
difference betwixt the one and the other, as to the respect which we owe them:
He attributes unto them only a bare and common veneration; and also he will
have us give it unto them, not through any carnal servitude, but by a spiritual
liberty; that is to say, as he explains himself, not in venerating these
Sacraments for their own sake, nor in taking the Sign for the thing signified;
but in directing our Devotion unto the things whereunto they do relate. Him
(says he) that does Worship or Venerate a Sign, Lib. 3. de Doctr. Christian.
cap. 8. and 9.
without knowing what it signifies, he is made subject to the Law; but he that
celebrates a Sign which is useful, and Divinely instituted, in knowing what it
does signify, he does not venerate that which is visible and temporal: but all
his Devotion is lifted up unto him unto whom it ought to be referred. And I
affirm, that such a person is free and spiritual, even though he had lived
under the times of Bondage, wherein it was not yet convenient to explain the
Signs unto carnal Men, they being to be brought under by this yoke. The
Patriarchs and Prophets, and all those of the Ancient Israel which the Holy
Ghost made use of, were those spiritual Men, whereby we have received the aid
and comfort of the holy Scriptures. But since the Resurrection of our Savior
Jesus Christ, in these times wherein the Ensign of our liberty has manifestly
appeared, we are not so much as burdened with the troublesome observation of
Signs, whereof we have the knowledge already. Whereas the Ancients had such
great numbers, we have but very few, and these few it self, which our Savior
and the example of the Apostles left us, are very easily practiced, very easily
understood, and of a most pure observation; as the Sacrament of Baptism, and
the Celebration of the Body and Blood of our Savior. Every one that receives
them, knows them very well, and whereunto they have relation; and they be
venerated, not by any carnal Obedience, but by a spiritual Liberty. Besides, as
it is the Nature of a servile weakness to follow the literal sense, and to take
the Signs for the things signified. I suppose, that it is also the Nature of
Error and Extravagancy, to attribute unto Signs needless and frivolous
Explications.

God Almighty give us all Grace so well to distinguish Signs, from the things
which they represent, that we may never give unto those, that which we ought
only to render unto these; I mean, that Jesus Christ only may be the Object of
our Worship and Adoration; and his Sacraments, that of our Veneration and
Respect. So be it. Amen.

AN Alphabetical Table OF THE Chief MATTERS contained in this BOOK.
The Letters, A, B, C, mark the three Parts of the Work: A, The First Part: B,
The Second: C, The Third.
A.
ACcidents cannot subsist without their Subject. B. Chap. 5. page 254
Albigensis, their Doctrine, Manners, and Persecutions they suffered. B. chapter 18.
475 Albigensis made profession of the Belief of Berengarius immediately after
his death. Id. 474 Albigensis and Waldensis had one and the same Belief. Id.
475 There must be a distinction made betwixt the Adoration of Jesus Christ, and
the respect and veneration due unto his Sacrament. C. chapter 4. 562 Jesus Christ
distributing his Sacrament unto his Disciples, commanded them not to adore what
he gave them; neither did they adore it. Id. 563 St. Paul speaks nothing of
this Adoration in his censuring the Corinthians. Id. 564 St. Luke says nothing
of it in the Acts, where he makes mention of the Celebration of the Sacrament.
Id. Ibid. The first Decrees made touching the adoring the Sacrament, was in the
XIII. Century. Id. 576 The use of ringing a Bell for the same Subject,
instituted in the same Century. Id. ibid. Adoration of the Eucharist does not
agree with many things practiced by the ancient Church. Id. 571 To adore what
one sacrifices is an Impiety. Id. 583 To adore what one eats is absurd. Id.
ibid. The Sacrament miraculously adored by Beasts, was unknown unto the ancient
Church before Berengarius. A. Chapter 8. 80 The Adoration of the Eucharist
inconsistent with what the Ancients have said in their Disputes against the
Heathens. Id. 581 The Adoration of the Sacrament never retorted against
Christians by the Gentiles. Idem. 482 The Adoration of the Sacrament does not
appear in the Disputes of the Fathers against the ancient Heretics. Id. 584
Adoration of the Sacrament is not practiced by the Greeks nor Abyssins. Id.
ibid.
B.
BErtram did write by the Command of King Charles the Bald. B. chapter 13. 403
Bertram's Book falsely attributed unto Oecolampadius. Id. 406 Bertram's Book
unadvisedly attributed unto John Scot. Id. 403 Berengarius much esteemed for
his Sanctity. B. Chapter 17. 453 Berengarius calumniated. Id. 454 Berengarius his
Adversaries could not answer his Arguments. 457 Several disputed and argued for
Berengarius. Id. 456 Berengarius favorably heard by the Pope. Id. ibid. The
Doctrine of Berengarius spread throughout the whole Church. Id. 454 Berengarius
retracts for fear of death, but perseveres again. Id. 460 Epitaphs made by
Hildebert, Bishop of Mentz, and by Baldrick, Abbot of Bourgueil, and Bishop of
Doll, in praise of Berengarius. Id. 461
C.
WHence proceeded the Reports of unlawful Copulations, and those inhumane
Banquets wherewith the ancient Christians were scandalized. A. Chapter 2. 8 The
Celebration of the Sacrament altered by several Heretics, and rejected by
others. Id. p. 16. and Chapter 3. 24 Wherefore the Eucharist is called the Lord's
Supper. A. Chapter 5. 40 A general and particular Consideration of the place where
the Symbols were consecrated. Id. 42 The Eucharist celebrated but once a day in
each Church; which is also still observed amongst the Greeks, Muscovites, and
Abyssins. Id. 49 The matter of the Vessels employed in this Ceremony
considered. Id. 50 The Celebration, and generally, all the Divine Service was
said in a Language understood by the People. A. Chapter 6. 55 Consecration was made
by Prayers, Blessing, and giving of Thanks. A. Chapter 7. 65 The time and place of
Celebration, and of the Communion. A. Chapter 10. 110 The Communion was received
standing. Id. 116 The Greeks and Abyssins do communicate standing. Id. 118 The
Communion standing. Id. ibid. There have been always in the West that did and
do communicate so. Id. ibid. Certain Customs practiced in the ancient Church,
in the act of communicating. Id. ibid. The Communion under both kinds practiced
in all Christian Churches, and also in the Latin Church for above 1000 years.
A. Chapter 12. 131 The Introduction of the Communion with the steeped Eucharist.
Id. 135 The Communion under one Kind established at Constans, Anno 1415. and
confirmed at Trent, Anno 1562. Id. 143, 144 All Christians, except those of the
Roman Church, communicate under both Kinds. Idem. 146 The Remainders of the
Sacrament burnt in some Churches, and eaten by little Children in others. A.
Chapter 16. 170 Preparations requisite for him that celebrates. C. Chapter 1. 521 The
Original Use of the Sign of the Cross, and of Material Crosses in the Worship
of Religion. Id. 538 Preparations required of the Receiver in respect of God
and Jesus Christ. C. Chapter 2. 542 Auricular Confession before receiving the
Sacrament was not practiced for above eight hundred years. C. Chapter 3. 549
D.
WHat Doctrines should be retained in the Church. A. p. 1 Corruption of
Doctrine is commonly the Consequence of the Corruption of Manners. A. Chapter 2. 7
The Doctrine of the Council of Constantinople, in the Year 754. touching the
Sacrament. B. Chapter 12. 365 The Doctrine of the second Council of Nice, although
it censures the Expressions of that of Constantinople, yet it condemns not its
Doctrine. Id. 375
E.
BRead and Wine have ever been the Matter of the Eucharist. A. Chapter 1. p. 2
Wherefore Jesus Christ chose Bread and Wine, and wherein the Ancients placed
the resemblance they have unto his Body and Blood. Id. 3 The mixing of Water
with the Wine, and its mystical signification. Id. 4 Other mystical
Significations in the composition of the Bread. Id. 5 The Dispute touching
Levened or Unlevened Bread. A. Chapter 3. 28 Whence the Bread of the Eucharist
came, the Form of it, with the Changes which happened unto it, and at what
time. A. Chapter 4. 30, etc. Who they were that distributed the Sacrament, and what
they said. A. Chapter 11. 121, etc. Who they were that had Right to communicate,
and their Words. Id. 123 Women sometimes distributed the Sacrament in Italy and
France. Id. ibid. The Sacrament never celebrated without Communicants. Id. 126
The Eucharist received by the hand of the Communicants. A. Chapter 13. 150 This
Custom ever practiced in the West, Id. 154 Communicant permitted to carry the
Eucharist home, and along with them in Voyages. A. Chapter 14. 160 The Eucharist
sent unto the Absent, and the Sick; and by whom. A. Chapter 15. 164. Plasters made
of the Eucharist. A. Chapter 16. 169 The Eucharist interred with the Dead. Id.
ibid. The Wine of the Eucharist mingled with Ink. Id. 171, 172 The Greeks mix
it with warm Water at the Instant of Communicating. Id. 172 The Eucharist
called Bread and Wine by the Fathers in the act of Communicating. B. Chapter 2. 199
The Fathers affirm it is Bread and Wine, Bread which is broken, Corn, Wheat,
the Fruit of the Vine, etc. Bread and Wine wherewith our Bodies are nourished;
Bread, the matter whereof passes the same fate of our common Food; Bread which
is consumed in the Distribution of the Sacrament; things Inanimate. Idem. 200,
201, etc. They testify that the Bread and Wine lose not their substance by
Consecration. Id. 206 The Participation of the Eucharist breaks the Fast. Id.
210 The Eucharist is a Subject whereof one receives a little, a bit, a piece, a
morsel. Id. 211 The Eucharist is the Sacrament; the Sign, Figure, Type,
Antitype, Symbol, Image, the Similitude and Resemblance of the Body of Jesus
Christ, by opposition of the Truth absent. B. Chapter 3. 213 The Eucharist is not
barely the Sacrament, the Sign, etc. but a Sacrament in the lawful use of it,
accompanied with all the virtue and efficacy of this divine Body, and this
precious Blood. Id. 220 When the Fathers say it is Bread and Wine, they never
mince their words. Id. 221 When they say it is the Body and Blood of Jesus
Christ, they use several Modifications unto their Expressions. Id. 223
Alterations happened to the ancient Expressions, by whom, and how. B. Chapter 11.
361 When the use of Incense was introduced in the Celebration of the Eucharist.
C. Chapter 1. 523 The Proof and Trial the Communicant should make of himself before
Receiving, C. Chapter 3. 542 This Proof comprehends all the Dispositions of the
believing Soul in regard of the Sacrament. Id. ibid.
F.
HIm which makes a thing is before that which is made. B. Chapter 5. p. 250
Institution of the Feast of the Sacrament by Urban the Fourth, Anno 1264 C. Chapter
4. 579 This Feast, for the Novelty of it, was not received at first but by the
Church of Idem. 580 When the Feast of the Procession of the Eucharist was
instituted. Id. ibid. Several desired that this Feast might be abolished. Id.
582
G.
AT what time they began to keep the Sacrament for the Sick. A. Chapter 15. 165
William of Malmesbury is deceived in speaking of the Conversion of Berengarius.
B. Chapter 17. 460
H.
NO body can dwell in himself. B. Chapter 5. 262 History of the VII. Century. B.
Chapter 11. 361 The state of the VIII. Century. B. Chapter 12. 365 History of the IX.
Century. B. Chapter 13. 385 Continuation of the History of the IX. Century. B. Chapter
14. 425 The Dignities and Creation of Herribold Bishop of Auxerr. Id. ibid.
Continuation of the History of the IX. Century. B. Chapter 15. 430, etc. History of
the X. Century; which was an Age neither of Light nor Darkness, but made up of
both. B. Chapter 16. 439 History of the XI. Century. B. Chapter 17. 450 History of the
XII. and XIII. Centuries. B. Chapter 18. 465 History of the XIV. and XV. Centuries.
B. Chapter 19. 497
I.
WE should hold by what was done by Jesus Christ at first. A. Chapter 1. p. 1 The
Image and Figure cannot be the same thing whereof they are the Image and
Figure. B. Chapter 3. 218 Jesus Christ is absent from us as to his Humanity, and
present only by his Divinity. B. Chapter 4. 233 The Ancients have only acknowledged
two Comings of Jesus Christ. Id. 240 The spiritual Presence of Jesus Christ is
common with him and the Father. Id. ibid. Jesus Christ is present with the
believing Soul by the Intercourse of Devotion. Id. 241 Jesus Christ must be
sought in Heaven in Communicating. Id. 242 The Body of Jesus Christ, which was
made 1600 Years ago, cannot be made every day. B. Chapter 5. 251 In what sense the
Books of Charlemain condemn the term of Image in respect of the Sacrament. B.
Chapter 12. 380 John Scot wrote of the Sacrament by Command of Charles the Bald. B.
Chapter 13. 403 Adversaries of John Scot upon the Point of Predestination. Id. 415
John Scot never accused by his Adversaries to have erred upon the Point of the
Eucharist. Id. ibid. John Scot enrolled in the number of Saints after his
death. Id. 413 The Book composed by John Scot by Command of the Emperor Charles
the Bald, burnt at the Council of Verceil, 200 years after; viz. An. 1050. Id.
414
L.
A Body cannot be in several places at once; no, not the glorified Body of our
our Lord Jesus Christ. B. Chapter 5. p. 247 The glorified Body of Jesus Christ
cannot exist invisibly, and after the manner of a Spirit, in one place; nor by
consequence, in the Eucharist. Id. 248 The place which contains is greater
than what is contained. Id. 251 Two Bodies cannot be in one and the same place;
and there cannot be Penetration of Dimensions. Id. 261 Every part of a Body
should answer unto every part of the place. Id. ibid. A Body cannot be whole
and entire in one of its parts. Id. ibid. The Original of using Lamps and
Lights in the Celebration of the Eucharist. C. Chapter 1. 531
M.
THe Flesh of Jesus Christ is to be eaten spiritually and corporally. B. Chapter 4.
234 The Wicked do not eat the Body of Jesus Christ, but the Sacrament of it
only. Idem. 237 John Hus and Jerome of Prague put to death as Enemies of
Transubstantiation, although they ever believed it. B. Chapter 19. 508, etc. What a
Mystery does mean. B. Chapter 5. 259, etc.
N.
THe Nature of Bread remains after Consecration. B. Chapter 2. 206 Nicholas the
First keeps silent during the Disputes of the IX. Century. B. Chapter 15. 430 The
Silence of Nicholas the First no way favorable unto Paschas. Id. 431
O.
JOhn Damascen his particular Opinion of the Eucharist. B. Chapter 12. 365 Paschas
Radbert, a Friar of the Monastery of Corby, near Amiens, his Opinion. He was
after Abbot of the same Convent. B. Chapter 13. 385 Opinion of the Adversaries of
Paschas. Id. 393, etc. The Opinion of Paschas is that of Roman Catholics, and
the Opinion of his Adversaries that of Protestants, which are called
Calvinists. Id. 405 The Opinion of his Adversaries followed by the greatest Men
in the IX. Century. Idem. 430 The Silence of the Popes, Adrian the Second, and
Nicholas the First prejudicial to the Opinion of Paschas. B. Chapter 15. 431 The
Opinion of Paschas had no advantage over that of his Adversaries during the X.
Century. B. Chapter 16. 440 It began to be established in the XI. Century. B. Chapter
17. 451 Berengarius and his Followers Opposition, with his several
Condemnations, which hindered not but he persevered unto his death. Id. 455
Berengarius calls the Opinion contrary to his, the Folly of Paschas, of the
People, and of Lanfrank. Id. 454 Berengarius his Opinion condemned after his
death, by Urban the Second, in a Council held at Plaisance, Anno 1095. B. Chapter
18. 465 Those which held this Belief assembled themselves in the
Archbishopric of Treves, Anno 1106. Id. 466
P.
REflections of the holy Fathers upon the words of Institution of the
Eucharist. B. Chapter 1. 187 How they understood these words, This is my Body. Id.
188 No Body can participate of himself. B. Chapter 5. 262 How the Fathers
instructed their Catechumeny. B. Chapter 7. 283 (...) signifies not only to adore,
but venerate and respect: therefore it is to be explained according to the
nature of the Subject in hand. C. Chapter 4. 563, etc.
Q.
THe Question of Communicating under both Kinds discussed at large. A. Chapter 12.
141, etc. Who opposes not an Error, approves it. B. Chapter 15. 431 Whosoever
recovereth not a Man from Error, shows that he erreth himself. Id. ibid.
Whosoever defends not a Truth, suppresseth it. Id. ibid. The Question of the
Adoration of the Sacrament fully examined. C. Chapter 4. 563, etc.
R.
THe Christians reproached for sacrificing Bread to God. A. Chapter 3. 25
Christians reproached for serving Ceres and Bacchus. Id. ibid. Religious Women
called the Blood of Jesus Christ common Wine B. Chapter 6. 273 Remy of Auxerr, as
well as Damascen, believed the Union of the Bread unto the Divinity. B. Chapter 13.
391 Rupert de Duitz believed the Assumption of the Bread, and followed near
hand the Opinion of Damascen, and of Remy of Auxerr. B. Chapter 18. 468
S.
THe Sacraments are simple in the Act, and wonderful in effect. Preface. The
Sacrifice of Christians is a Sacrifice of Bread and Wine. A. Chapter 8. 82 The
reason why the Fathers gave the Eucharist the name of Sacrifice, but
improperly. Id. 83, etc. They confess unto the Pagans they have neither Altars
nor Sacrifices. Id. 94 They never oppose the Eucharist unto the Sacrifices of
the Law, but the Actions of Piety and Christian Religion, and the Sacrifice of
the Cross. Id. 96 The Elevation of the Sacrament to represent the Elevation of
Christ on the Cross, when begun to be practiced. A. Chapter 9. 101 The Elevation
converted into the Adoration of the Host, in the XIII Century. Idem. 105 There
has been always People in the West which have celebrated the Sacrament without
Elevation or Adoration. Id. 103 The breaking of the Bread of the Sacrament
always practiced in the Church, even amongst the Latins, until the XII.
Century. A. Chapter 9. 106 The Sacraments have no Miracles in them. B. Chapter 2. 212
It is unto the virtue and efficacy of the Sacrament that we must refer the
Communion which we have with Jesus Christ, and our Vinification. B. Chapter 3. 230
The Testimony of the Senses is infallible. B. Chapter 5. 257 The Use of Flowers
practiced by the Latins in honor to the Sacrament, unknown unto the primitive
Christians. C. Chapter 4. 573
T.
ALtar, or Eucharistical Table, one and the same thing in the Writings of the
ancient Fathers of the Church. A. Chapter 5. 44, 45. It was for a long time made of
Wood, in the same form of Tables to eat upon; and not in the form of an Altar.
Id. ibid. There was but one Table, or one Altar in a Church. Id. 47 The Greeks,
Muscovites, and Abyssins now retain the same Custom. Id. 50 What Fraud and
Deceit is. B. Chapter 5. 260 The Taborites of Bohemia, and their Belief. B. Chapter
19. 505 John Hus and Jerome of Prague ever held Transubstantiation. Id. 508
V.
THere can no Prescription be alleged against Truth. Preface. The Truth of God
must be followed, and not the Traditions of Men. A. Chapter 1. p. 1 A Body should
be visible and palbable. B. Chapter 5. 247 What may be seen and felt is a Body. Id.
264 Waldensis, their Doctrine, Manners, and the Persecutions used against them.
B. Chapter 18. 472, etc. Waldensis in Italy in the XIV. Century. B. Chapter 19. 502
Wickliff, his Doctrine and Followers, which were very numerous in England,
under the name of Lollards, in the XIV. Century. Id. 499 The Waldensis of
Provence and Piedmont. Id. 512 The Original of holy Vestments used in the
Celebration of the Eucharist. C. Chapter 1. 539
FINIS.

