THE RIGHT OF PRIMOGENITURE, In Succession to the Kingdoms of ENGLAND,
SCOTLAND, and IRELAND: AS DECLARED By the Statutes of 25 E. 3. Cap. 2. De
Proditionibus, King of ENGLAND, AND Of Kenneth the Third, and Malcolm
Mackenneth The Second, Kings of SCOTLAND.

AS LIKEWISE Of 10 H. 7. made by a Parliament of Ireland; With all Objections
answered, and clear Probation made, That to Compass or Imagine the Death,
Exile, or Disinheriting of the KING's Eldest Son, is High Treason.

To which is added, An Answer to all Objections against Declaring him a
Protestant Successor, with Reasons showing the Fatal Dangers of Neglecting the
same.

And when the Husbandmen saw the Son, they said amongst themselves, This is the
Heir, come let us kill him, and seize on his Inheritance,

Matthew. 21.38. London, Printed for the Author, 1681.

THE PREFACE.
Reader,
THE General Question now in Agitation amongst the People is, Who is next
Lawful Heir to the Crown? The Protestant says, The King's Eldest Son; The
Papist, a Collateral Heir; The free Statesman, None at all.

The Two incident Questions to the General and Principal, are not rightly
stated; for they are not as they ought to be made, Whether here is a Lawful
Marriage, or a Lawful Filiation: But whether there are Witnesses to prove the
Papal and Episcopal Ceremonies of a Marriage and a Filiation, which false state
the Case, and are nothing to the purpose. But we cannot come to the resolution,
either of the Principal or Incidents false or true, before the Discussion of
Two other Preparatory Questions.

(1.) By what Law Marriage, Filiation, and Succession ought to be judged Lawful
or Unlawful? (2.) By what Judge the same ought to be judged.
As to which I have already proved at large in the First Book, That the same
ought to be judged by no other Law than the Moral Law of God; And in the
Second, That the same ought to be judged by no other Judge, than the King and
Parliament. To avoid therefore vain Repetitions, I must desire to refer thee to
the First and Second Books for thy full Satisfaction; and in this Third, shall
only from the Two other Premises make this Conclusion, That the King's Eldest
Son is the next undoubted Lawful Heir, both by the Law of God, and of the Land;
wherein though I wave the false state of the Question* Whether Ceremony, or no
Ceremony? and only insist on the true, Whether Lawful, or Unlawful yet I desire
thou will accept these following Reasons for my Excuse.

(1.) In reference to the Parties contending. (2.) The Laws by which they are
to be judged. (3.) The Witnesses. (4.) The Court by which they are to be
judged.
As to the Parties contending: (1.) Because as to the Matter of Fact, Whether
Ceremony or no Ceremony? I am altogether a Stranger, and know nothing of it;
and if I did, yet all Council are Prohibited by the Law to speak to any Matter
of Fact. (2.) This hinders not any others from using what Probation they shall
please of Ceremonies; but all Advantages of the same are hereby to them saved
by Protestation. (3.) This seeks not to hinder any from using what Ceremonies
in their Marriages they please, which suit best with their Consciences and
Conveniences; only that which is here affirmed, is the Lawfulness and Validity
of the Marriages of such with whose Consciences or Conveniences such Ceremonies
suit not, if they are made without them. (4.) No Liberty of Conscience, no not
so much as of Opinion, is hereby precluded any man touching the Point in
Question, nor is he hindered from opposing any thing here delivered; but if he
differ, is invited to do it; so it be in Print with Name subscribed, whereby
the same Liberty may be given to Reply. (5.) Because I write to Protestants,
and only desire to give Satisfaction to Conscience concerning Lawful and
Unlawful before God, and not to Superstition concerning Ceremony and no
Ceremony before the Bishop. (6.) It were more for the Safety and Interest of
the Protestant Religion, that a Protestant Prince either waved his Legitimacy
by the Papal and Episcopal Ceremonies and Law, or were totally Illegitimated by
the same, as King Edward the Sixth and Queen Elizabeth were, and as they did
Claim his Legitimation and Title from the most Righteous, Sacred, and Immutable
Moral Law of God, and the Law of the Land; and not from Pontifical Laws. To
speak next in reference to the Laws by which Marriage and Filiation ought to be
judged, which are the Laws of God, and of the Land agreeing with the same. I
wave insisting on Ceremonies, (1.) Because those Laws Civil or Canon, of
Emperors, Popes, Bishops, Synods, or Councils of Trent, or other Councils which
Impose Ceremonies on Marriage, are neither the Laws of God, nor of the Land;
but Usurpations: as I have already proved at large, Lib. 1. p. 43. Et Lib. 1.
p. 31. Et Lib. 2. p. 182, 183. (2.) To set any value on the Ceremonies of those
Laws were to give the Supremacy of the King and Parliament, and the Laws
enacted by them concerning Marriage, Filiation, and Succession to Popes and
Bishops, and their Canons; and thereby to give them power to Depose Kings, and
give or sell the Successions of Kingdoms to whom they please. (3.) It is
clearly and unanswerably proved in the following Discourse, That the Marriage
now under consideration, was a Lawful, Holy, and Indissoluble Marriage by the
Moral Law of God, as declared both in Nature and Scripture.



To bring a Ceremonial Law therefore where the Moral is so clear, were to bring
a Candle to give light to the Sun. Then next as to the Laws of the Land, The
Marriage, Filiation, and Succession, are as clear by them as by the Law of God;
As (1.) by this present Statute, 2. E. 3. cap. 2. of Treasons, as is proved at
large, and all Objections answered in the following Discourse. (2.) By the Jus
Coronae, which is the Common Law of the Land, whereby the Law of Succession to
the Crown differs from that of Succession to Subjects, proved likewise as
before. (3.) By the Law of Necessity, which is not only the Law of this, but of
all Lands, and not only of Lands, but Seas: The time of this Marriage being
alleged to be in a time of War, when the Ceremonies of the Common Prayer Book
and it self were abolished and prohibited by the Predominant Power of the
Sword, and the place beyond Sea, and in Exile. (4.) By Presumptions, which as
to Marriage, Filiation, and Legitimation, are the Law of the Land,
Praesumptiones Juris and de Jure, for to speak truly, the same are impossible
to be proved by Witnesses, or any other way than by Presumption, as is employed
by the Common Rule, Filiatio non potest probari, and likewise more fully shown,
Lib. 1. p. 104, 105.


Now the Ground and usual Presumptions of Marriage and Legitimation by the Laws
of the Land, and of the very Canon and Civil Laws themselves, Are (1.) Fame and
Reputation of Marriage. (2.) Cohabitation. (3.) No lawful Impediment why the
Parties should not Marry. (4.) Chastity and Children. (5.) Length of time, and
no Judicial Questioning, and Sentence to the contrary while alive. (7.) Promise
of Marriage. (8.) Acknowledgment by the Father of the Children, either by word
or writing, or by giving them Aliment and Education, as Children.


As to the First, Fame and Reputation, which are Voces and opinio Vulgi, are an
usual Presumption of Marriage. As to the Second, The Cannon Law it self Jus
Pontificium praesumit ex diuturna Cohabitatione filium esse Legitimum, Craig.
Feud. 270. Cohabitation for any time is so high a Presumption of Marriage, as
it Legitimates the Son. And amongst the Old Romans, one of their chief ways of
Lawful Marriage, without Ceremony of Priest or Temple was Vsus, that is
Cohabitation and Conjugal Society for the space of a year, and this was reputed
so considerable a time, as it made a Marriage by Prescription. As to the Third,
which is where there is no Lawful Impediment, nor the Parties are prohibited by
the Law of God to Marry, this makes a presumption of Marriage; because it was
no Sin for them by the Law of God to Marry. As to the Fourth cause of
Presumption, which is Chastity and Children, where all the Circumstances concur
of Lawful Marriage as Cohabitation, no Lawful Impediment, Chastity of the Lady,
Children, and acknowledgment by the Father of the Children to be his; these are
not only the strongest presumptions which can be made of a Lawful Marriage; but
are of themselves, as is fully proved in the following Discourse without any
Ceremony, a Marriage Lawful, Holy, and Indissoluble. As to the Fifth cause of
presumption, which is no Judicial Questioning and Sentence against the Marriage
in the space of Thirty years, in which time all Witnesses may be Dead, and
Writings lost or burnt; the same is so high, as by the Laws of the Land, and of
all Nations no proof ought to be admitted to the contrary, nor no questioning
now to be permitted of the same; because it is beyond the time of Limitation of
Actions, and the peace and security of all Families and Kingdoms must be
destroyed, should Witnesses be required Thirty years after of all such
Marriages as have not been Judicially questioned and sentenced in all that
time. As to the Sixth cause of presumption, which is the Death of either Party
without being Judicially questioned or sentenced while alive; This by the Law
of God and of the Land, is so high a presumption for the Parents, and so
necessary justice for the Children, That no Probation ought to be admitted to
the contrary, nor ought or can the Legitimation of the Child be questioned
after the Death of either Parent; yea, though the Marriage of the Parents were
Unlawful, as if a man Marry his own Sister (which is a far more Unlawful
Marriage, than to Marry without a Papal or Episcopal Ceremony) and have Issue
by her, if she die before a Judicial hearing, and sentence passed against her;
her Children are Inheritable, and their Legitimation can never be questioned;
for she that is Deceased cannot be Summoned before any Humane Tribunal: And if
Sentence should be there passed against her, she is condemned without Hearing;
and therefore that the Children ought to be Legitimate and Inheritable, has
been resolved by the Parliament it self, as may appear Bro. Deraignement 5.
Bro. Bastardy 23.44. 24 H. 8. 39 E. 3.32. And it is for the same reason very
clear, That if Queen Katherine the Wife of H. 8. had died before Judicial
Sentence passed against her, the Legitimation of his Daughter by her, who was
afterward, Queen Mary could never have been questioned; and should the
Legitimation of the Royal Lines of England, Scotland, and Ireland, or any other
Kingdom in the World, be permitted to be questioned after the Death of one or
both of the Parents, It is impossible but all certainty and security of the
Successions to them must be utterly destroyed. As to the Seventh cause of
presumption, which is presumption of a Promise of Marriage, to show which, all
the forementioned circumstances concur, and though the Ecclesiastics of
Scotland keep the people under sufficient servility of their Ceremonies of
Marriage; yet even thereby the Laws of the Land does promise of Marriage
without any Proclamation of Banns or other Ceremony, both Endow the Mother, and
Legitimate the Children, as appears Craig. Feud. 269.270. As to the last Cause
of Presumption, which is Filiation, not only the Civil Law, but the Law of God
in the Scripture, Legitimates every Son, and makes him Heir to the Father who
begot him, either of a Primogenial or Filial Portion, except of Inheritance
entailed to a former Wife, as was that of Abraham to Sarah; and whether this
Probation of Filiation is made by the Son or Father, as in the Civil Law is
said, Filium alicujus se esse probans, videtur probare se esse Legitimum, Et
ib. ad Marg. de Adopt. who proves himself a Son to any, proves himself
Legitimate. And by the same Law, such as are proved Children are Legitimated,
though there were no Ceremonies of Marriage, Authen. Collation. 6. Novella 174.
Tit. 3. quibus modis Nature. cap. primo Siquis 3530. And the Scripture is
Positive in the point, Romans 8.17. If Children, then Heirs. Et Gal. 4.7. If a
Son, then an Heir. (5.) To return again to other Laws of the Land, besides
those of Presumptions. It is not necessary to prove a Lawful Marriage by
proving Ceremonies: But all Marriage is declared Lawful, whether with or
without Ceremonies by the Doctrine of the Church of England, and the Law of the
Land, which is not Prohibited by the Law of God; as appears by the 32 Art. of
the 39 Articles, Roger's Articles, p. 185. 187, 188. as shown more at large in
the Discourse following, and likewise in the Statute 32 H. 8. cap. 38. of
Precontracts, wherein there is this Clause, And that no Reservation or
Prohibition (God's Law except) shall Trouble or Impeach any Marriage without
the Levitical Degrees: Whereby it is clear, that this Marriage being without
the Levitical Degrees, and not Prohibited by the Law of God, ought not (by the
express words of the Act of Parliament) to be troubled or impeached by any
Humane Law whatsoever, Ecclesiastical or Temporal. Which said Act of
Parliament, except as to matter of Pre-contracts, stands unrepealed to this
Day, and of full force. And the Reasons of the said Act are expressed in the
Preamble of the same, to be because the Usurped Power of the Bishop of Rome,
has always entangled and troubled the mere Jurisdiction and Regal Power of
this Realm of England, and also unquieted much the Subjects of the same by his
Usurped Power in them; and by making that Unlawful, which by God's Word is
Lawful, both in Marriages and other things. (6.) They whom no Law of the Land
makes Illegitimate, are Legitimate by the Law of the Land; But no Law of the
Land either in England or Scotland, makes the Children either of Papist or
Protestant born of Marriages not prohibited by the Law of God Illegitimate.
Therefore all Children born of Marriages not prohibited by the Law of God, are
Legitimate by the Law of the Land; for though some Penal Laws have been by
Pontifical pretenses procured, which have presumed too far to prohibit contrary
to the Divine Ordinance, Marriages and Meats not prohibited by the Law of God;
yet none but the Pope and Council of Trent, who in their Luciferian Pride
pretend to power above God's Law, ever transgressed so far in these Kingdoms,
as by such penal Laws to null or make void such Marriages, or to Illegitimate
their Children, or though they imposed penalties on the Parents to impose any
on the Children; as may appear by the Statutes 3 Jac. 5. for England,
prohibiting Popish Recusants to Marry otherwise than by a Minister lawfully
authorized in some open Church or Chapel, according to the Orders of the
Church of England. And the Act Car. 1. Par. 2. Sess. 2. Act 8. fol. 88. for
Scotland, prohibiting any to Marry in another Kingdom, without the Banns first
proclaimed in Scotland. And that the Omission of Ceremonies contrary to a penal
Law, neither Nulls the Marriage, nor Illegitimates the Issue; Vid. proved
before, Lib. 1. p. 110, 111. (7.) Frustra probatur quod probatum non relevat.
It were time misspent to prove Ceremonies, which when they are proved, prove
nothing to the Matters in question, which are, a lawful Lady Companion, as
intended by this Statute, and an eldest Son by her of the Blood of King Charles
the Second, the rightful present Possessor of the Three Kingdoms, and of the
Blood; and of his two special Predecessors King Edward the Third of England,
and King Fergusius of Scotland; as to which Probation of the Ceremonies of a
Marriage, proves nothing of the Truth or Lawfulness of the Marriage; for many
Ladies have been Married with all the Ceremonies the Priest could lay on them;
yet have their Marriages been utterly unlawful, and prohibited by the Law of
God; nor do they prove the Truth or Lawfulness of the Lineal Blood, derived
from the Possessors, or Predecessors. As for Example, The Kings of Sparta were
to be of no other Blood but of the race of Hercules; these were Married with
all the Ceremonies accustomed in that Kingdom; yet did not those Ceremonies
preserve the Chastity of the Queen from being so over-familiar with Alcibiades,
her Husband's ungrateful Guest, and whom he had hospitably entertained, when
fled from his own Country of Athens; but he having got her with Child, boasted
when he was gone from thence, that he had left Heirs of his Blood to the
Kingdom of Lacedaemon. So Henry of Spain, Anno Dom. 1459. having Married his
Queen with all the Ceremonies accustomed in that Kingdom, but being unable
himself, persuaded her to be got with Child by Bertrand of Guttua; Joan thus
gotten, is proclaimed Heir, but refused by the people. Bertrand is made Earl of
Ledesma, and Duke of Alburquerk. Sp. Hist.

Canutus the Dane, Married here in England, Algine who was Barren; she to
oblige the love of her Husband, feigned her self with Child, and packt one that
was Suppositions on her Husband. King Canutus was very joyful of his supposed
Son, and called his Name Sweno, and after gave him the Kingdom of Norway.

Philip the Second of Spain, was Ceremoniously Married to Queen Mary; for whose
being with Child as was supposed, a Day of Public Thanksgiving was kept, and
the Bells rang with Joy through all England; but as is said, King Philip was
Jealous of the like Issue with Canutus; what had the proof of the Ceremonies of
Marriage been to the purpose to prove Adulterous Children to be of the race of
Hercules, or Henry; or such as had been Suppositions of the Danish or Spanish
Races. (8.) It were a Dishonor to the Holy Protestant Religion, and the
Professors thereof, to be able to Establish the Lawfulness and Validity of
their Marriages, on no more Sacred Principles than Ceremonies of so unclean an
Original, as Popes, Common Prostitutes, Magicians, Aruspices, Astrologers,
Southsayers, Priests of Priapus and Venus, Pagan Gods and Goddesses, and
Demons themselves, as is already proved, Lib. 1. p. 43, 44.51, 52. Then as to
Witnesses, It were an unnecessary Tempting of God to cast what is not the cause
of a single person, but of all the Protestants in the Three Kingdoms, on the
hazard of such Witnesses as the Probation of Ceremonies Thirty years since, and
in a Foreign Catholic Country will require; for it is certain, the Bishops and
Magistrates of that Country are Papists, and therefore no equal Witnesses may
be had thence, but such as may think it is Meritorious to overthrow the
Protestants right or wrong; and the same Danger is of Witnesses at home,
obnoxious to as great Temptations of Papists here, whose Religion is not to
keep Faith with Heretics, as they call Protestants; whereby they may as is
commonly practiced, be corrupted with Money; either in a counterfeit manner to
offer their Testimonies, and when they have Sworn to Recant and Reprobate
themselves, whereby the Truth shall be betrayed; or a greater Number of false
Witnesses be Suborned to Swear against the Truth, then may be got to Swear for
it, whereby the Truth shall be destroyed, or such Judges may be, as will hear
no Witnesses but such as are right for the turn, whereby the Truth will be
suppressed; of which Popish practices too much has appeared fresh before our
Eyes in the Examination of the late Horrid Plot. Therefore no Prudence to give
them opportunity to do the like, or worse, by joining Issue with them on the
Impertinent point of Ceremonies of Marriage, wherein only they are able to
corrupt Witnesses. But it is more secure to stand on the points of Substance of
Marriage according to the Law of God, which are these, viz. Cohabitation,
Conjugal Society, Chastity, Children, and acknowledgment of them by the Father
to be his, of which God's Providence has provided so many Witnesses as will be
in vain for them to Suborn or Corrupt false Witnesses to the contrary. Besides,
if Witnesses may be had yet alive after Thirty years time; yet they may Die or
be Poisoned, or otherwise made away when known, before they come to Hearing, or
so terrified that they will not dare to testify the Truth; why then shall all
be put in danger by Ceremony, when Substance, Places all in Security, and it
were an injust thing Three Kingdoms should be hazarded on the Lives of two or
three Witnesses. To speak at last in reference to the Judges and Court, by whom
this Marriage ought to be judged, which ought to be only by the King and
Parliament, both as to the Fact, and the Law; for as to both the same as
alleged being made beyond Sea in a Foreign Catholic Country, not under the
Jurisdiction of the King and Parliament, nor where his Writ runs: The
Archbishop of Canterbury cannot be sent unto to certify, because it was made
Beyond Sea, the Foreign Catholic Bishop cannot be sent unto to certify,
because he is out of the Jurisdiction. And besides, by Acts of Parliament all
Foreign Certificates, and all other Foreign Acts of Jurisdiction from the
Bishop of Rome, or any other Foreign Bishop ought not to be admitted here;
besides no Foreign Witness can either be Summoned to appear here, or to be
examined there. So as to the Fact of Ceremonies, were they never so many at the
Marriage, they are impossible to be brought to an equal Trial or Probation
here, and the Ceremony that 'twas in a Church consecrated by a Bishop; for as
Coke says, no House can be a Church, without such Consecration, which is
impossible to be Sworn by any Witness; For none but God can make place or time
Holy, and not a Bishop; there remains therefore nothing which ought or can, as
to the Fact of Marriage be proved here, but the Substance of Marriage, which is
Cohabitation, Conjugal Society, Chastity and Children, which are Notorious, and
need no Foreign Witnesses. Then as to to the Law of the Ceremonies, the
Protestant Ceremonies of Marriage are by the Law in a Catholic Country
Heresy, and forbidden. The Catholic Ceremonies are forbidden here. These
Ceremonies therefore in a Foreign Marriage, can neither be judged here by the
Law of the Catholic Country, because it concerns Inheritance which lies in
England; nor by the Law of England, because the Fact was done in a Foreign
County; it ought therefore only to be judged by the Moral Law of God which
judges according to Substance, and not Ceremonies, and is the Universal Law of
all Nations and Countries. (2.) It were impertinent to prove Ceremonies before
a Parliament, because the same being a Court of Equity, ought to judge
according to Trust and Intention of Marriage; though the Witness of Ceremonies
are Dead, and Writings lost or burnt, whereby any verbal Promise, or Ceremonial
form of Words cannot be proved. (3.) God forbid the Representative of the
People in Parliament, whom they have entrusted with all they have in Matters of
such infinite weight, should be so Ludicrous as to cast away the safety of the
King's Person, to Extinguish his Lineal Blood, to Destroy the Religion,
Liberty, Propriety, and Lives of all his Protestant Subjects in the Three
Kingdoms on such Toys, as that there are no Witnesses to be got to prove
Ceremonies of Verba de Praesenti, or, With my Body I thee worship, or to Swear
that the Ring was Gold and not Brass, or that it was put on the fourth Finger,
and not on the fifth; or not on the Tumb, but on the Finger. (4.) It is
impertinent to prove Ceremonies in a Court of Equity, especially in the Supreme
Court of Equity, which a Parliament is, who ought to judge Right, Secundum
aequum and Bonum, without any regard to Ceremonies, as to make Estates good
without Livery of Seisin, Attornment, Inrolement, Fine, Common Recovery, or the
like; so likewise ought they to judge without any regard of the Ceremonies and
Formalities of Pleadings, according to the Truth and Merits of the Cause; yea,
they ought not only to judge without; but contrary to all Ceremonies and
Formalities, if they find them Estopples to Truth, and Bars to Equity; yea,
contrary to the Law it self, if they find it Summum Jus. (5.) In this very
point of Legitimation, the High Court of Parliament ought to judge according to
Truth and Equity, though contrary to all Ecclesiastical Laws, and contrary to
all Episcopal Certificates; as appears by Coke expressly, Part 4. fol. 36. where
he says, The Parliament may Bastard a Child that is by Law Legitimate, viz.


Begotten by an Adulterer, the Husband being within the four Sees, as Rot.
Parl. 5. Et 6 E. 6. in the Marquess of Winchester's Case; and may Legitimate
one that is by Law Illegitimate, and born before Marriage. (that is, without
the Ceremonies of Marriage.) And this may be done Absolutely, or with
Exception; of which later way, take one Example for many. John of Gaunt Duke of
Lancaster, had by Katharine Swinford, who was not Married with the Ceremony of
a Priest and a Temple four Children, (Slandered in those Popish Times with the
Name of Illegitimate) viz. Henry, John, Thomas, and Joan; and because they were
Born at Beaufort in France, they were vulgarly called Henry de Beaufort, etc.
After at a Parliament holden 20 R. 2. The King by Act of Parliament in the form
of a Charter, does Legitimate these three Sons, and Joan the Daughter, with an
Exception, which is, Excepta dignitate Regali; which shows that the King and
Parliament may when they please Legitimate according to the Moral Law of God,
and not only without, but contrary to Ceremonies. And though they shall not,
yet is the Legitimation by the Law of God above that of all Humane Laws. And
though a Right thereby Dormit aliquando, yet Moritur nunquam, as appears in
Henry the Seventh, who long after derived his Title from John de Beaufort Duke
of Somerset, the second Son of John of Gaunt by Katharine Swinford, who was
only Married according to the Moral Law of God, and without the Ceremonies of a
Priest and a Temple, notwithstanding the Exception in the Act R. 2. (Excepta
dignitate Regali) for what that Act denied him, a later Act gave him, and
before he Married with the Lady Elizabeth, the Daughter of Edward the Fourth,
and Heir of the House of York, the Crown was by Act of Parliament intailed to
Henry the Seventh, and the Heirs of his Body, and indeed all Settlements of the
Crown, by Act of Parliament, both in the House of York and Lancaster are in
themselves Legitimations, without any naming the word where there has been any
Scruples concerning the same; and though there have been none, are the surest
and most undisputable Titles of Successors, and of the greatest Advantage to
the Possessors; which is visible in the Examples of the Kings of England and
Scotland, the greatest part of whom have made use of Acts of Parliament, though
their Titles have been unquestionable. Upon the whole, it seems not possible
for any Title of Succession to be more clear both in Divinity, Law, and Equity,
than the present, except by Act of Parliament, wherein the Person is
particularly named; which is only wanting to make known to others what the same
is already in it self: And to declare by a particular Act what is already
declared by this General Act of E. 3. And all other the General Laws of God and
the Land before mentioned.

WILL. LAWRENCE.

THE CONTENTS OF The Third BOOK.
CAP. I.
THe words of the Statute 25 E. 3. cap. 2. De Proditionibus, as in the Original
French. Page. 1. The Statute of Kenneth 3. and Malcolm Mackenneth 2. concerning
the Succession to the Crown of Scotland, as related by Buchanan. Page. 2.
Objections against these Statutes (made chiefly by Buchanan himself) and the
Policy of them in making the Crown Hereditary to the Eldest Son answered. ibid.
Objections against the being of the King's Eldest Son within the Statute of 25
E. 3. cap. 2. De Proditionibus. Page. 20. Obj. 1. That the Lady Mother was not
a Queen. ibid. Answ. 1. The Statute is false Translated by the Lawyers, and the
Scripture false Translated by the Bishops in the word Queen. ibid. Answ. 2.
Proved that the Lady Mother was Madam sa Compaign, according to the Moral Law
of God, which is all and more than is required to be proved by the Statute.
ibid.
Obj. 2. No Marriage according to the Mass Book in the time of E. 3. nor by the
Modern Common Prayer Book, or Book of Canons. Page. 23. Answ. 1. No Marriage by
any Book required by the Statute, but only a Lady Companion according to the
Moral Law of God. Page. 24. Answ. 2. Marriage by the Common Prayer Book, not
Necessary in a time of War, when both Books of Common Prayer and of Canons were
Prohibited and Abolished by the Power of the Sword. ibid. Answ. 3. The
Legitimation of Children by the Law of God and of the Land, ought not to be
questioned after the Death of either Parent, where not Judicially questioned
and sentenced in their lifetime, Vid. Praeface and. Page. 25. Answ. 4. Not
Necessary for a King who is Supreme Ordinary to Marry by the Common Prayer Book
or Book of Canons. Page. 26. Answ. 5. A King who is Supreme Ordinary may
dispense with his own Canons, and with any thing that is only Malum Prohibitum
in his own Marriage, but not with what is Malum in se, by the Moral Law of God.
Page. 28.
Obj. 3. The Lady Mother was not HIS Companion, which is the Article of
Propriety required by the Statute. Page. 32. Answ. She was HIS, and he had the
sole Propriety according to the Law of God and the Land. Page. 33.
Obj. 4. There was no Marriage according to the Law of God. Page. 34. Answ. 1.
Certain Preparatory Considerations are laid down (before the contrary is proved
to this Negative) By what Law and what Judges shall be judged what is the Law
of God, by which is after proved here was a Marriage according to the Law of
God. ib. Answ. 2. Of the damnable Effects have followed by the Popish
Prohibitions, and Nulling of all Marriage not made by a Priest in a Temple.
Page. 35. What is not Marriage by the Moral Law of God. Page. 39. What is not
Matrimony by the Moral Law of God. ibid.
Answ. 3. The Statute requires neither a King De Jure, nor a Lady Companion De
Jure, nor a Son De Jure, but only De Facto; yet are they all here, both De Jure
and De Facto, Page. 40. Dangerous to leave the Succession of a Kingdom on so
uncertain a word as Lawful; yet here both the King, the Lady Companion, and the
Son are all Lawful. ibid.
Answ. 4. A Lawful Successor may be of an unlawful. Marriage. Page. 41.
Obj. 5. The Lady Mother was not a Wife according to the Scripture. Page. 42.
Answ. 1. The Objection is false, and it is after proved she was a Wife
according to the Scripture. ibid. Answ. 2. The Statute requires no Wife
according to Scripture, but only a lawful Companion, yet was she both a Wife
and a lawful Wife according to Scripture; as will hereafter be proved. Page.
43. Answ. 3. The Bishops have falsely Translated the Scripture in all words
relating to Marriage. ibid. Of certain Differences between a Wife of the
Bishop's making: and a Wife of God's making. Page. 46.

Obj. 6. There is no Bishop's Certificate to testify the Marriage and
Filiation. Page. 48. Answ. The Statute requires no Certificate of either. ibid.
The Forms of Bishops Certificates. Page. 49. Their Original came from the
Priests of Priapus. Page. 50. Of the Damnable Mischiefs ensue from Trial of
Marriage and Filiation by Bishops Certificates. ibid. The Certificates of
Bishops inconsistent with the Right of Primogeniture. Page. 58. Of the General
Custom of Nations, of Successions to Kingdoms by Primogeniture, and of the
Mischiefs and Civil Wars commonly follow the disinheriting of the Eldest Son.
Page. 62. What is Marriage, and what Matrimony de Facto. Page. 66. What is
Marriage De Jure according to the Law of God, and of the Nations. Page. 67. Of
the three Lawful Marriages amongst the Romans. (1) Usu. (2) Confarreatione. (3)
Coemptione. Page. 68.
Of the three Lawful Marriages amongst the Hebrews, (1) Copulatione. (2)
Coemptione. (3) Instrumentis. ibid.
That Carnal knowledge, Chastity, and Childbirth between a Man and a Woman not
prohibited by the Moral Law to Marry makes a Marriage Lawful, Holy, and
Indissoluble without Banns, License, Priest, Temple or any other Ceremony
whatsoever. Page. 71. That the Marriage Coemptione, Confarreatione, or
Instrumentis, was not intended by Christ, but only the Marriage Copulatione.
Page. 86. An Epithalamium on the Marriage of Nature intended by Christ without
a Priest or Temple. Page. 88.

Obj. 7. The King's Eldest Son is not the Heir intended by the Statute. Page.
90. Answ. Proved he is the Heir both in the Letter and Intention of the
Statute. ibid. That to compass the Exile or Disinheriting of the King's Eldest
Son is High Treason. Page. 94.

Obj. 8. By the Custom of Nations, the Succession goes not to the Eldest Son,
born when the Father is only a Prince, but to a younger Son, born when he is a
King. ibid. Answ. This Statute was made to prevent incertainty of this and
other Customs, and prevent all Cavils and Contentions about Succession, by
ascertaining the same to the Eldest Son. Page. 95.
Obj. 9. The King's Eldest Son is not yet declared Prince of Wales, or of the
Scots. ibid. Answ. The Statute requires no such thing. Page. 97.
Obj. 10. Illegitimacy deprives of the benefit of the Statute. ibid. Answ. This
Statute declares every Eldest Son of a King Legitimate, and Heir to the Crown.
ibid. The Eldest Son of a King of Great Britain is Legitimate by his
Birthright, per Jus Coronae. ibid. Examples of the same Jus Coronae in other
Nations. Page. 100. Examples of the same Jus Coronae in the Eldest Sons and
Daughters of the Kings of England and Scotland, who have thereby succeeded as
Heirs to their Fathers Kingdoms on Marriages, according to the Moral Law of
God, without the Ceremonies of a Priest, or a Temple. Page. 102, 103. That it is
High Treason for any Subject to slander the King's Eldest Son with
Illegitimacy. Page. 111. A Comparison of the Popish slanders of Illegitimacy
against Queen Elizabeth, and the King's Eldest Son. Page. 112. A Comparison of
the Popish slanders of Illegitimacy against King Edward the Sixth, Queen
Elizabeth, the King's Eldest Son, and the Sons and Daughters of the whole
Protestant Clergy. Page. 114. Of the insolent absurdity of Popish Laws,
Disinheriting the Lawful Sons of Kings according to the Law of God, and
inheriting the Bastards of Popes by the Law of the Devil. Page. 118.


CAP. II.
WHether necessary in the present juncture of Affairs for the King and
Parliament to declare a Protestant Successor to the Three Kingdoms. Page. 121.
Objections against it Answered. Obj. 1. Declaring a Protestant Successor by the
King and Parliament, makes a Kingdom Elective and not Hereditary. ibid. Obj. 2.
Acts of Precedent Parliaments cannot bind Subsequent from repeal. Page. 122.
Obj. 3. Acts of Parliament cannot bind the Power of the Sword from cutting off
those Acts by Conquest. Page. 123. Obj. 4. Declaring a Successor by Act of
Parliament incites him to be disobedient and rebellious. ibid. Obj. 5. The
Ottoman Emperors never declare a Successor. Page. 124. Obj. 6. Queen Elizabeth
refused to Declare a Successor. Page. 127. Reasons for declaring a Protestant
Successor, by the King and Parliament, with the Great Dangers ensue the
neglect. Page. 132. 1. Danger to the Conscience of the Prince. ibid. 2. Danger
by the incertainty of the Laws of Succession of the Crown. Page. 133. 3. Danger
of the Arbitrary disposing of the Crown by Rome or Canterbury. Page. 134. 4.
Danger of the Predominancy of Papal and Episcopal Laws of Marriage, Filiation,
and Succession above the Moral Law of God, and the Laws of the Land. ibid. 5.
Danger to the King's Person, his Lineal Heirs and House. Page. 135. 6. Danger
of Lineal and Collateral Heirs to destroy one another. ibid. 7. Danger if the
King's Eldest Son should happen to die before his Father, leaving his Heir and
younger Children in Minority. ibid. 8. Danger of a Successor without Assent of
the People. Page. 137. 9. Danger of a Papist Successor. Page. 138. A Papist
Successor more dangerous to Papists themselves, than a Protestant Successor.
ibid. A Papist Successor or Male utterly Destructive to Protestants, and a
Female doubly Destructive. Page. 160.
10. Danger in regard of Foreign Princes. Page. 182. 11. Danger of exposing
Succession to Counterfeit Wills and Testaments. Page. 190. 12. Danger of
encouraging Usurpers. Page. 191. 13. Danger in doubtful Titles of Interregnums.
Page. 192. 14. Danger of Cantonizing the Kingdoms. ibid. 15. Danger of Exposing
the Succession of the Kingdoms to Sale. Page. 193. 16. Danger of Exposing the
Succession of the Kingdoms to Conquest. Page. 197.


LIB. III. CHAP. I.
The words of the Statute 25 E. 3. cap. 2. De Proditionibus, as in the Original
French.

AUxint pur ceo que diverse Opinions ont estre eins ceax heurs quel Case doit
estre dit Treason et en quel nemy; le Roy a le request des Seigniors et Commons
ad fait declarisment que ensuist; cestassavoire quant home fait compasser ou
imaginer la Mort nostre Seignior le Roy, Madame sa compaigne ou de lour fits
Eigne et Heir.

The words as Translated by Pulton and Coke into English.

WHereas diverse Opinions have been before this time in what case Treason shall
be said, and in what not; the King, at the request of the Lords and Commons,
has made a Declaration in the manner as hereafter follows; That is to say,
When a man does Compass or Imagine the Death of our Lord the King, of our Lady
his Queen, or of their Eldest Son and Heir.

The Statutes of Kenneth the Third, and Malcolm Mackenneth the Second, as
related by Buchanan, Lib. 6. Rer. Scot. p. 191, and 196.

Adjectae sunt and Aliae leges, ut quemadmodum Regi maximus natu filius in
regnum Succederit, ita filio ante Patrem defuncto nepos avo subrogaretur.

Englished.

There were other Laws also added, That as the Eldest Son of the King should
succeed to him in his Kingdom; So if such Son dyed before the Father, the
Nephew should succeed in his stead to his Grandfather.

Another Law of Scotland mentioned by Skene, Reg. Majest. Lib. 2. cap. 33. De
Nepote ex Primogenito filio.

Nepos ex filio Primogenito mortuo jure representationis succedit Avo suo, and
filium postnatum Avi id est Avunculum suum excludit.

Englished.

The Eldest Son being dead before the Father, the Nephew by the Eldest Son
shall in right of Representation Succeed to his Grandfather; and exclude any
Younger Son of his Grandfather, that is to say, his Uncle.

This Law of Scotland was taken out of Glanvil, Lib. 7. c. 3. which shows it is
the unquestionable Law of England, as well as of Scotland; and likewise out of
the Civil Law, L. 3. C. de suis and legit. Haered. l. Posthumorum. 13. H. de
Injust. Testamento, etc. 33. ex l. 1. 6. H. de Haered. Skene says further,
That of this Question between the Son of the Eldest Son, and the Uncle,
Franciscus Vinius Treats at large, Lib. 3. Decisionum Decis. 501. and he
allcadgeth, Alciat Cons. 101. and Bartol. in l. post fratres C. 1. de legit.
haered. Bald. Salyc. and Doctores in l. si viva Matter C. de Bon. Pater.

The Statute made 10 H. 7. in a Parliament of Ireland, called Poyning's Law:
The words of which are these,

It is Enacted, That all Statutes late made within the Realm of England,
concerning or belonging to the Common or Public Weal of the same, from
henceforth be deemed Good and Effectual in the Law, and ever that be accepted,
used and executed within this Land of Ireland, in all Points, and at all times
requisite according to the Tenor and Effect of the same.

Coke says, 4 Part 351. That Hill. 10. Jac. Regis, it was resolved by the Two
Chief Justices and Chief Baron, that this word (late) in the beginning of this
Act, had the sense of (before) so that this Act extended to Magna Charta, and
to all Acts of Parliament made in England before this Act of 10 H. 7. And by
the same Reason extends to the Statute of 25 E. 3. cap. 2. De Proditionibus, on
which this Discourse is founded; from whence will be after proved these
Conclusions.

Conclusion 1.

This being granted, That if the Eldest Son had happened to Die in the Life of
his Father, the Eldest Son of the Prince who died, should have Succeeded Jure
Representationis of his own Father, as Heir Lineal to his Grandfather, and
excluded the Grandfather's Younger Son, who is his Uncle, a fortiori, must it
be granted, that if both Grandfather and Father die, the Eldest Son who is the
Grandchild Surviving, he ought to exclude his Uncle; for he now comes in Jure
proprio which is a greater Right than Jure representationis; and if the less
Right exclude the Uncle, much more must the greater.

Conclusion 2.

When the Right of the Crown shall actual descend from the King in Possession,
on the Eldest Son in Possession, who is the next Lineal Heir of his Blood, then
is the Son Actually King both De Facto, and De Jure, as was his Father who died
in Possession of the Kingdoms. And therefore all the forementioned Acts of
Parliament, and Common Laws of England, Scotland, and Ireland, and the Imperial
Laws with them unanimously declare, It will be not only then High Treason to
Compass the Death, Exile or Disinheriting of the King's Eldest Son, but
whatsoever else is High Treason against a King, will be the same against him.

Objections chiefly by Buchanan against these Statutes, and the Policy of them,
making Kingdoms Hereditary to the Eldest Sons, Answered.
Who is best able to defend a Kingdom, should have it.
Object. 1. Salus Populi, is above all Statutes, and the Power of Kings and
Parliaments themselves, and above all Acts of Parliament: Statutes therefore
which Repeal the Ancient Fundamental Laws which were in Great Britain, of
Election by Parliament, and in Ireland by the Custom of Tanistry of Succession
of the Brother before the Son; such Statutes ought themselves to be repealed,
and not to repeal those which are better; and it being most necessary pro
salute Populi, that he who is best able to defend a Kingdom against Enemies
Foreign and Native, and has learnt the same by Age and Experience, should
succeed; which the Brother being more able and fit to do than the Son, ought,
according to those Ancient and Necessary Customs, to succeed before the Son;
which Custom as to Scotland is recited by Buchaman, Mos majorum qui e
propinquis Regum defunctorum non proximos sed, maxim idoneos, eligerent, modo
a Fergusio primo Scotorum Rege essent oriundi. The Custom of Scotland was, That
the Parliament chose out of the Kindred of the King deceased, not the next, but
the fittest, so as they were such as were descendents from Fergusius the first
King of the Scots; and on this Custom Kenneth the Third, who was the Brother
of King Duffus, was by Election of the Parliamem of Scotland preferred before
Milcolumbus the Son of Duffus, though a Youth of great hopes; which Kenneth
began his Reign Anno Dom. 970, and proved a most Valiant and Wife Prince, and
repelled a Mighty Invasion of the Danes, whom he overthrew in a Battle with a
great Slaughter of them: but the same Kenneth afterward inflamed with
Ambition, Covetousness, and Cruelty, secretly poisoned Milcolumbus the then
Prince of Scotland, being the said Son of his Brother Duffus deccased, and with
great dissimulation counterseiting even Tears and great Grief for him, Convened
a Parliament at Scone, whom partly by Terror, and partly by Deceit, he got to
Abrogate the Law of Succession of Brothers before Sons, which had made him
King, and been the Sanctuary of Public Safety, and Enacted a Law of
Succession for his own private and not the Public Interest, clean contrary,
viz. That the Kingdom should be from that time Hereditary in this manner; That
his own Eldest Son should be Prince of Scotland. That when any King dyed, his
Eldest Son should next succeed to the Crown; and if the Eldest dyed living his
Father, the Nephew should succeed instead of his Son who dyed: And other
Constitutions, as appears, Buchanan rer. Scotl. 190, 191. Who says further,
Kenneth making the Kingdom of Scotland Hereditary, tormented in Conscience.
Ita Rex per scelus posteris uti putabat regno stabilito, animum tamen suum
confirmare non pot uit, etc. The King (says he) having by so great a
Wickedness established his Kingdom, as he thought, to his Posterity, he could
not Establish his Mind; for although he courted all sorts of Men with the
highest show of Love and Courtesy, and so managed the Affairs of the Kingdom,
that there was nothing wanting which showed him not a good King; Yet his Mind
perpetually disquieted with the conscience of his wicked fact, suffered him not
to have any solid or sincere joy, but the thoughts of his foul Crime rushing
into his memory, vexed him by Day and by Night, most horrible Dreams disturbed
his rest; at length, whether truly (as some affirm) or whether his troubled
thoughts made him so fancy what oftentimes happens to Guilty persons, a voice
came from Heaven, by which he seemed in his sleep to be warned, Do thou
think the Murder of Milcolumbus, an Innocent Person, committed by thee most
wickedly in Secret, is hid from me? or that I will any longer suffer it to pass
without punishment? For already there are Plots laid by Treason, which thou
shall not escape, to take away thy Life; neither shall thou (as thou think)
leave thy Kingdom Stable or Secure, but full of Tumults and Tempests to thy
Posterity. With which fearful Dream the King being terrified, Early in the
Morning he flies to the Bishops and Monks, and declares to them the Confusion
of his Mind, and Anguish of his Conscience for his Crime; but they gave him no
true Remedy from the Doctrine of Christ (for they had already degenerated from
the Piety and Learning of the Ancient Professors); But advised those many
absurdities Long since invented by wicked Persons for their own gains, and
rashly believed of the Unlearned and Overcredulous, That he should enrich with
Gifts the Holy Places and Temples, and should visit the Sepulchers of the
Saints, kiss their Relics, redeem his Sins by Masses and Alms, and should
have a greater Honor and Reverence for the Monks and Priests, than he had
formerly used to have. Neither did he omit any of these Explations which he
believed would help him: But he was notwithstanding after by appointment of
Fenella, a Lady formerly Injured by him, and an Ambuscada of Horse laid for
him, taken and killed, as Buchanan, p. 192. after the death of Kenneth, and
this Intayl of the Crown to his Issue by the Murder of his Brother's Son. It
appears, Buchan. rer. Scotl. lib. 6. p. 192, 193. That Constantinus the Son of
Caten called Calvus, Constantine Calvus procures the Law of Kenneth to be
repealed.
began to dispute much against the Injustice of this Law, to which they were
circumvented by fear to assent; and thus he begins, Quid enim Stultius quam rem
unam omnium maximam a prudentium censura and Suffragiis ad Arbitrium fortunae
revocare, etc. What (says he) is more foolish than to take away a matter of
the greatest concern from the Votes of Wise Men in Parliament, and to cast it
on the Wheel of Fortune; and that these should bind themselves to be ruled by a
Child who has the chance to be born, and who is ruled by some petty Woman, and
drive away most Valiant Men from assistance in the Government? What if the
Children of Kings should have any infirmity of Body or Mind, whereby they are
utterly disabled to perform necessary Acts of Empire; what if Children should
have possessed the Kingdom in such time when we fought with the Romans,
Britons, Picts, English and Danes, not for the Kingdom, but for Life? or what
can be said more Mad, than what God threatens to the Contumacious, that
Children should reign over them, as the highest Calamity we should enact as a
Law, on our selves, and the greatest Threats of the Divine Prophets we should
either contemn or run headlong into it of our own accord. Neither is there any
truth in what the Flatterers of Kenneth boast, that by this means the
Govetousness and Slaughters of Kindred are avoided. Neither are the Treacheries
of Guardians less to be feared to the Children of Kings left in Minority, than
of their Kindred; wherefore now the Tyrant being fallen who Ravished our
Liberty, let us valiantly resume the same; and his Law Enacted by force, and
assented to by fear, (if it be a Law, and not rather a selling us for Slaves)
let us abrogate and repeal the same, and Restore again our Ancient Fundamental
Laws, (which brought forth this Kingdom of nothing, and from so small
beginnings not only advanced to such an height as is inferior to none of our
Neighbors; but when cast down, has again raised the same to its former
Strength; and let us embrace the present opportunity while it offers it self;
which if once Elapsed, we may in vain seek again. The People are by this
persuaded; and the Twelfth day after the Funeral of Kenneth, he is chosen King
Anno Domini, 994. And was after Slain in Battle in the Town of Vaumond in
Louthian in the Second Year of his Reign. And though Milcolumbus or Malcolm the
second Son of Kenneth the Third, who was so tormented in Conscience for
Poisoning the first Son of his Brother Duffus, to get an Act to Intayl the
Grown to his own Posterity, made no Conscience to kill Grinius, another Son of
the same Duffus, in Battle; Malcolm Son of Kenneth revives and confirms the Law
making the Kingdom hereditary.
and having by the Success gotten the Power of the Sword into his hand in the
Same manner as his Father Kenneth had by force Enacted, again by force
confirmed at the Same Scone, by Parliament, the Act of Intayl of the Crown to
the Issue of Kenneth, Buchanan, 196. Yet does Buchanan the same Historian, p.
200, and 201, censure this Act of changing the Ancient Law of Election by
Parliament of the Brother or any other person more fit than the Son, to be
Injust, Imprudent and Unfortunate.

Objections against the Reviver.
1. Injust, 1. Injustice.
Because, he says, Italex enervat vires consilij publici, sine quo nullus
Legitimus dominatus potest consistere. Such a Law enervates the Strength of
Parliaments, without which no Lawful Government can be; for all Government is
either by Conquest or Contract. As to Conquest, there is none demanded or
acknowledged on Such a Title. As to Contract, there can be none without a
Parliament, who are the Representative of the People to contract for them.

2. Imprudent, ^. Imprudence.
Because, Propinquorum in eos qui Regno potiuntur insidias, et Regnantium
adversus eos, quos et natura, et lex voluit ^^ique esse Charissimos suspitiones
nesarias, quas narrationis or do Exphrabit, tot priorum Seci^^orum clades cum
illis collatae calamitatibus quae Alexandri tertij interitum sunt consecutae,
Leves prae ijs and tolerabiles videri possunt. The Treacheries of Kindred
against those who enjoy the Kingdom, and the wicked Suspicions of those who
Reign against them, who by the Bonds of Nature and Law they ought to esteem
most dear (as this discourse in order shall declare); And the Slaughters of so
many former Ages compared with the Calamities which hereby followed the death
of Alexander the Third, were light and tolerable.

Note, Alexander the Third began his Reign Anno Domini 1649. he Married first
Margaret Daughter to Henry the Third King of England, by whom he had Alexander,
the Prince David, and Margaret who married Hangonamus, or, as some call him,
Ericus, Son to Magnus 4th King of Norway, who bare him a Daughter commonly
called the Maiden of Norway, The Maiden of Norway had United England and
Scotland, if she had lived.
Skene. And concerning this Lady of Norway, says Buchanan, Lib. 8. p. 241.
Edvardus Anglorum Rex gnarus suae sororis neptem Regis Norvegiae filiam unam,
Ex Alexandri posteris esse superstitem, Eandemque Regni Scotorum Legitimam
Heredem, Legatos ad eam deposcendam filio suo in Scotiam misit, etc. Edward the
First King of England knowing his Neice the Daughter of the King of Norway to
be the only Remaining Issue of Alexander the Third, and Lawful Heir to the
Crown of Scotland, he sent his Ambassadors into Scotland to ask her in
Marriage for his Son: They when they Argued much in the Public Gonvention of
the Public Benefit which would ensue such Marriage, they found the Minds of
the Scots not Dis-inclined from that affinity; for Edward was a man of great
Courage, and of great Power, and Ambition of greater. And the glory of his
Valor in the Holy War while his Father was alive, and in Subduing Wales after
his death, shone bright: Neither could they ever Remember the Scottish and
English name to have been nearer Conjoined, than under the Last Kings; Neither
could old Hostility be more Commodiously abolished, then if there were an Union
made of both Nations upon Honest and Equal Conditions. The Marriage was
therefore Readily Assented unto, and Conditions added by Mutual assent of both,
That the Scots should so long use their own Laws and Magistrates, till such
Children should be born of the same as were able to Reign: And if none should
happen to be procreated, or being born, should dye before their Lawful age;
Then the Kingdom of Scotland should go to the next of the Blood Royal. Things
being thus Agreed, Michael, or as others mention, Daevid Wemes, and Michael
Scot, two Knights of Fife, of great. Repute for their Prudence, with their
Country in those Times, were sent Ambassadors to Norway; but they, because
Margaret (for that was the Young Ladies Name) dyed before their Arrival,
returned home sad and nothing done; by whose immature death there arose such
Controversy as vehemently shook England, and almost destroyed the Name of the
Scots. For to go on with the History as he and other Writers Relate it, not
withstanding this new Act of Intayling the Crown, Ten Competitors arose to the
Crown of Scotland, notwithstanding the Act of Reviver making the same
hereditary.
there arose Ten Competitors for the Succession, Erick King of Norway; Florence
Earl of Holland; Robert Bruce Earl of Anandale; John de Baliol, Lord of
Galloway; John de Hastings Lord of Abergaveny; John Cumyn, Lord of Badenair;
Patrick de Dunbar, Earl of March; John de Vesey, Nicholas de Hues, William de
Ross, All or the most part of them alleging themselves descended from David
Earl of Huntingdon, Younger Brother to William King of Scots, and Great Uncle
to the late King Alexander.

But the Principal and most Potent Factions which contended, were that of
Balyol and Bruce, On which, says Sir Richard Baker, Hist. 96. broke out the
Mortal Dissension between the Two Nations, which consumed more Christian Blood,
and continued longer, And the Wars between the Factions of Baliol and Bruce.
then any Quarrel we read of ever did between any Two People in the World; for
he that began it could not end it, but it lasted almost Three Hundred Years,
and was never thoroughly abolished, till it pleased God to Unite the Discordant
Blood of the Three Kingdoms in King James; Which Discords had never happened
amongst these Ten Competitors, had not the Ancient Law of Electing by
Parliaments the fittest of the Blood Royal (whereby generally Brothers were
Elected before Sons) been abolished. A very Imprudent way therefore is it to
design for Public Peace, what Experience shows to have the greatest cause of
perpetual Wars for so long a time as 300 years together.

The like Civil Wars in England followed between York and Lancaster from
Generation to Generation, and this Statute of Treason prevented not the same.
The Civil Wars between York and Lancaster not prevented by the Statute making
the Eldest Son Heir.
Another Imprudence, Buchanan mentions, p. 201. Vt Reges videlicet constituamus
quibus alij Rectores praeficiendi, and in eorum potestatem universum tradamus
populum, qui ipsi sui potestatem non habent, and qui aegre Regibus usu rerum
peritis and prudentia praestantibus parent, poscimus ut qualibuscunque Regum
umbris pareant. That we should constitute Kings to govern, who must have others
set over them to govern themselves; and that we should deliver the whole People
into their Power who have not power over themselves; and that we should require
of such who will hardly obey the best Kings, and most Excellent in Experience
and Wisdom to obey any shadows of Kings shall be set over them.

Imprudence of attempts by such Acts to perpetuate a Name or Race.
Of a third Imprudence and Infortunateness incident in this to Princes
themselves, he says, Quod autem privatunt ex hac Lege petunt Reges Emolumentum
ut generis et nominis perpetuitatem inde sibi promittunt, id quam sit vanum et
fallax, etc. That the private profit which Kings seek out of this Law, being
the Perpetuity of their Race and Name, is very vain and deceitful, not only in
manifold ancient Examples, but Nature it self may teach them, if they will
consider with how many Laws and Rewards the Romans endeavored to perpetuate
the Famous Names of their Families, of whom there remains now not the least
sign in the whole World conquered by them. And deservedly, I think, this
happens to them who contend to give Eternity, which neither themselves have,
nor can have, to a thing in its nature so flying and frail, and every moment
obnoxious to all Casuality, as cannot be capable of Stability; And attempt the
same by such a way as is most contrary to their design: for what is less
faithful to Diuturnity then Tyranny? but to the same this new Law prepares the
way, and a Tyrant is the universal mark of the hate of Mankind, for whom it is
impossible to stand long; and when he falls, he draws the Ruin of his whole
Family with him. This Endeavor of Foolish Men, the Deity seems to me, many
times, to break with a Contemptuous stroke, and sometimes as a Competitor with
him in Power to expose it to public derision: And I know not whether there
can be any more fit or manifest Example of the Divine Pleasure than in him whom
we now mention: Malcolm the Author of the Law of Succession of Eldest Sons,
dyed without a Son.
For Milcolumbus who so much Labored to confirm by Parliament a Law Enacted by
his Father by force for the Succession of the Sons of Kings in their Fathers
room, left no Issue Male behind him. And as to his two Daughters, one of them
called Beatrice, he matched to a Nobleman called Crinus, a Thane of the
Western Isles, and a Chief of the other Thanes, whom that Age called an Athan.
The other called Doaca, he matched to the Thane of Angus, by whom was begot
Macbeth, of whom I shall speak further in his proper place, and indeed do we
not find in all Ages the greatest Races sooner destroyed than the meaner: And
if any have escaped the Tempest of Time, they have not been the Lofty Cedars,
but the humble shrubs. Where are now all the Races of Giants of the Old World?
Where are now the Races of the Egyptian Gods, who in the reputed forms of Men
reigned on the Earth? Where is the Race of Nimrod the Founder of the Assyrian?
Of Arbaces the Founder of the Median? Of Cyrus the Founder of the Persian
Empire? The Crown endures not to every Generation.
Is not the saying of Solomon true, Prove. 27.24. Riches are not for ever, and
does the Crown endure to every Generation?

(2.) This new Law of intayling to Sons, though it may preserve the Counterfeit
name, yet destroys the true Fame of the Father, which is called, Children of
the same Name, destroy the Name of the Father.
Isa. 56.5. a Name better then of Sons and Daughters. As there were so many
Pharaohs that the Chronologists are by the Ears and cannot agree which was the
Pharaoh when Abraham went into Egypt, which was the Pharaoh Entertained Joseph,
which was the Pharaoh commanded the Male Children to be destroyed; And which
was the Pharaoh was drowned in the Sea. The like of the Dariusses, and of the
Herod's, though they were but few, and many others.

Many other Names and Races whereby there can be no Encouragement of Fame to
Virtuous Actions for Public good; nor Discouragement to Vicious by Infamy,
who are causes of Public Evils: whereas on the contrary, as is well observed
by Sir Francis Bacon, Actions of the highest Fame, and of greatest Merit to the
Public, have been done by the unmarried and Childless Men; yea we find this
Vanity of Intayling the Father's Name so much slighted by the great Nestorian
Church in Persia, that if after Marriage a Male-Child were born, Father lost
his Name to his Son in Persia.
the Father lost his own Name, and was called by the Name of his Eldest Son;
as, if the Father's name was Moses, and the Son's name Joseph; the Father was
no more called Moses, but Aben-Joseph; that is, the Father of Joseph. Heylin,
660.

And we find though Darius destroyed Belshazzar the Son of the Conquering
Nebuchadnezzer, and Cassander the Children and Mother of the Great Alexander,
and Augustus destroyed Caesarian the Son of the Renowned Julius Caesar, whereby
the Race of every one of these Conquerours became Extinguished soon after their
death; yet we hear the Names of the Fathers resound to this Day more gloriously
from the single Trumpet of Fame, than they could have done from the weak Cries
of Infants in a Numerous Offspring, had they left a Posterity.

(3.) It is said against this Law of Intayling to Sons, That though the Royal
Lines are not always so suddenly Extinguished, as in the Last Examples; Yet
the Periods of them and their Heirs Male, and of Races and Kingdoms themselves
are fatal, and, as some Politicians observe, terminate most with about the Term
of about 500 Years many under; Imprudent to seek to perpetuate Races against
Nature, Fate and Providence, which are irresistible.
few above. So in the Ancient Kingdom of the Egyptians, there were above Twenty
Dynastyes, at the Period of every one of which, the Race of that King who began
to Rule the Dynastye, Either Expired, or was Extinguished or Destroyed; and it
is easy to see how many Races and Names of several Kings have in short time
worn out and been changed to new, both in England, Scotland, France, Spain,
etc. It is in vain therefore by human Laws to seek to resist the Decrees of
God, and perpetuate a Race which God has appointed to Determine, Seeing, as
Solomon says, Eccles. 9.11. The Race is not to the swift, nor the Battle to
the strong; neither yet Bread to the wise, nor yet Riches to men of
understanding, nor yet Favor to men of skill. And it is said, Dan. 4. The Most
High Rules in the Kingdom of men, and gives it to whomsoever he will. Better
therefore both to Princes and Subjects, is the Counsel of Christ, Matthew. 6.33.
Seek ye first the Kingdom of God and his Righteousness, and all these things
shall be added unto you. Dan. 7.27. Whose Kingdom is an Everlasting Kingdom.
And as is said, Psalm. 16.11. In his Presence is fullness of Joy, at his Right
Hand are Pleasures for evermore.

Answ. 1. As to the first Objection, That the Brother ought to be preferred
before the Son, and Liberty left, according to ancient Custom, to the
Parliament to Elect him, if he is Judged fittest for Succession; And that the
Brother is always most fit and more for the Safety of the Kingdom, he being
always of greater Age and Experience than the Son, who may chance to be a
Child, and more need Tutors and Governors himself, than to Govern others. As
to which part of the Reason of possibility of Minority in the Son, I answer,
First, That a Posse ad esse non valet Argumentum. And with all due Honor had
to the Age and Experience of others, the Eldest Son is here no Infant or Minor:
But has attained to a higher Maturity and Flower of Age and Strength, than
Alexander the Great, who began at Twenty to Conquer the World; and has shown
already the Highest Proof of Valor in War, and Affection to Religion and
Justice in Peace. Secondly, admit it should happen the Eldest Son to be an
Infant or Minor, as the intention of this Statute is it may; which make it,
notwithstanding his Infancy, Treason to Practice against him: And though an
Eldest Son should be left at the Death of any King an Infant or Minor; yet by
the Mercy of God, the Righteousness of the Title, and a standing Parliament
During the Minority, The Infant and Kingdoms are as Safe, as if he were of full
Age; And more. Safe than in the hand of a Collateral Heir of full Age, whose
Guardianship is most dangerous to a Lineal Heir.


Answ. 2. As to the Reason, That it is more for the Fame of Virtue for the
Father to have none of his name; Than to have his name Lost amongst a Multitude
of the same names derived from him to numerous Posterity; I shall answer in the
words of Buchanan, in another place on another dispute, p. 406. Quod si de
honor unus Et non de omnium salute hic esset disputatio, Ego quoque facile ac
Lubens ad eorum sententiam accederem; verum cum de eo Statuendum sit hodie quod
omnium privatorum vitam Et fortunam, quod totius Regni incolumitatem
complectitur; huic uni c^gitationi omnes Singulorum rations concedere oportet.

Answ. 3. As to that Reason of the Objection, That Periods of Royal Races and
Successions to Kingdoms are natural, in regard the subject matter is so frail
as not to be Capable of Perpetuity; and fatal, in regard God has appointed the
same by an Immutable Decree; and Providential, in regard it is often likewise
effected by a particular Providence: and seeing the Laws by which God Governs
the World, God governs the World by the Laws of Nature, Fate and Providence.
are the Law of Nature, the Law of Fate, and the Law of Providence, quae supra
nos nihil ad nos, they are irresistible, and all Human Laws to cause or avoid
their effects, are in vain. To which is answered and gladly acknowledged, That
God is pleased to Govern the World by all these Three Laws; First, the Law of
Nature, which is his Decree of Subordination of Causes. Secondly, the Law of
Fate, which is his Decree of Co-ordination of Causes to such Ends as to his
Wisdom seem best. These two are the Greatest, Imperial and Immutable Law of
the World; and against these it is not only folly and a Sin to make Common Laws
or Acts of Parliament, Not lawful to pray against the Law of Nature or Fate.
but even to pray.

Desine fata Deum flecti sperare precando. Hope not from Prayers thou
Thy Fate from God can bow.
Thirdly, The Law of Providence, which is the Regulation of Accidents which are
neither Decreed nor Immutable. And this is the Law Paternal, Prayers not only
Lawful but necessary in matters reserved to Providence.
by which he Governs all his Creatures sensible of Good and Evil. And as to
this Law of Providence, human Laws, Endeavors and Prayers are not only Lawful
in such as are Capable to Pray, but necessary to obtain the good, and to avert
the evil; and both these are acknowledged by the Heathen Poets themselves, Sed
satis est orasse Jovem qui donat et aufert,
Det vitam Det opes aequum mi animum ipse parabo.
Hor. lib. 1. ad Lollium Epist. Flectitur Iratus voce Rogante Deus.

Ovid.

But if we will take our Limitations of Prayer from Christians, they must have
always these two, That they must be Lawful; that is, not contrary to any
revealed Law or Will of God; and likewise be always with submission to his
Secret Will.

The Law Moral a Fourth Law by which God governs the World.
I Answer therefore, That though the Three Laws mentioned are great and
wonderful Wages by which God governs the World in general, and Successions to
Kingdoms in particular; yet they are not the only Laws by which he does it;
but there is a Fourth Law as great as any of the former, which is the Law
Moral; the obligation of which is Reward and Punishment, which not Improperly
may be called a Law Magistratical; for as God is the Supreme King and Father,
so is he likewise Supreme Magistrate of the World, and bears not the Sword in
vain. And this Law may only be Exercised, and the Obligations thereof laid on
the most Noble Subjects, who are so in Three respects: First, In regard of
their Knowledge, as the Law Moral can only be Exercised over the Subjects
Sensible and Intellectual; What Subjects liable to the Law Moral, and what not
and what liable to the Laws of Nature, Fate and Providence.
whereas the Laws of Fate and Nature may be Exercised both over these, and over
Subjects Ignorant, Insensible, Irrational, Foolish Madmen, and deprived of all
Intellect alike. Secondly, in regard of their ability, as the Law Moral can be
only Exercised on persons able to perform it; but the Laws of Nature, Fate and
Providence, over Babes new born, Blind, Deaf, Dumb, Maimed, and the Dead
themselves. Thirdly, in regard of Liberty, as the Law Moral can only be
Exercised over free Agents; but the Laws of Nature, Fate and Providence may be
Exercised over necessary Agents, forced Agents, Bondmen, Slaves, Captives,
Prisoners and persons in Chains and Fetters.

Though therefore all humane Actions are under one of these four Laws, and a
Man is a necessary Agent as to the Law of Nature, and a forced Agent to the Law
of Fate and Providence, and a free Agent as to the Moral Law; yet seeing he may
be in many things Ignorant when he is Ruled by Nature, when by Fate, when by
Providence, Not revealed to Man by which of these four Laws he does Act in any
particular Action.
and when by the Moral Law; and consequently it may be secret and not revealed
unto him when he is a necessary agent, when a forced agent, and when a free
agent; or in the more Common word, when his Will is free, and when Bond: In
this Ignorance therefore of all the other Three Secret Laws, he ought to act
according to the Moral Law which God has revealed and promulgated always, and
according to the other Three when God has in particular Acts of his own,
manifested his Will in them, as it is an Act of God, that an Eldest Son is born
who is an Infant or Minor; And a Brother born who is a Major, and this Act of
God is good and of great Mercy; but that on this Act of God Murder should be
Committed, or Civil Wars be unjustly Raised, is Evil, and an Act of Man, and
God is not the Author of this Sin: and though no humane Law could have caused
or prevented this of the Infancy of a Son, or Majority of a Brother; yet may
and ought human Laws prevent or punish the wicked acts of men which may ensue
thereon in attempts to Murder either; and seeing God by his Moral Law has
Commanded Powers to be a Terror to Evil Doers, it is their Duty therefore (And
if they neglect it, the bear the Sword in vain) to make Laws to prevent and
punish them, and not to leave Infants and Subjects Exposed in such a Wilderness
of Dangers as this is of Succession, because its possible Fate may destroy
them, notwithstanding the greatest human care; and Providence may, without any
such care taken at all, preserve them; Which Stoical and Epicuraean Follies of
fata regunt homines, fatis agimur, Cedite fatis, or Res humanas ordine nullo
fortuna regit, or vita regitur Fortuna non Sapientia, to Extend beyond their
Bounds prescribed by God, or to all humane Actions because ordained and
permitted in some, were like the Ridiculous Pagan Divinity derived from none
but such Authors, Not to sow, because Fate may destroy the Harvest with it; and
Providence may give an Harvest without it. Not to wear Arms in War, because
Fate may destroy with them, and Providence may preserve without them: Not to do
good Works, because if Predestined to be Damned, thou shall be Damned with
them; And if Predestined to be Saved, thou shall be saved without them. I
should not have thought this of Fate worth the objecting or answering, had I
not found the same Actually pressed in the most Excellent Historian and Statist
that ever writ in the Isle of Great Britain; for such was Buchanan, out of whom
I have recited it.

To the Objection of the Civil Wars between Baliol and Bruce, and York and
Lancaster, notwithstanding the Succession of the Crown ascertained to the Kings
Eldest Son.
Answ. 4. As to the Calamities of Civil Wars which followed between Baliol and
Bruce in Scotland, and the Houses of York and Lancaster in England,
notwithstanding the Laws in both Kingdoms making the Crown Hereditary to the
Eldest Son; And that such Laws did not prevent the same: I Answer, first, As
to Scotland, the effect of the Law of Primogeniture could not be expected,
where there was no Eldest Son surviving, nor on the Death of Margaret of Norway
so much as an Heir Lineal Male or Female left; but if there had been an Eldest
Son left, there is no appearance of any thing against it, but the Crown of
Scotland had never Returned to the Line of the Earl of Huntingdon, but remained
in the Line of King Alexander the Third, who was the last Possessor; which
would have prevented all those Ten Competitors to claym from Huntingdon, and
consequently the Wars between Baliol and Bruce. Then as to the Civil Wars in
England, if Richard the Second had left a Son, there appears no probability
that ever there had been a Civil War between York and Lancaster. Besides, if
when there is an Eldest Son left, as was by Edward the Fourth, and an younger
Son with him, and notwithstanding there followed a new Civil War between York
and Lancaster in the Persons of Richard the Third, and Henry the Seventh, first
though this Law of Primogeniture in Succession did not prevent it; And though
the Law make it High Treason to Compass the death of the Eldest Son, yet could
it not prevent the Murder of both the Sons. To which I answer, That it is not
to be Imputed as a fault to the Statute or Law, that some wicked persons dare
break it; but is notwithstanding of greater use as the Statutes which make it
High Treason to Counterfeit the Kings Seal, or to Clip Money, and Felony to Rob
on the Highway; Though many have notwithstanding Counterfeited the Seal, Clipped
Money, and Robbed on the Highway; yet are not these Statutes Useless, but a
great Security to the People: for though there are now a few, if there were no
such Statute at all, there would be multitudes of Malefactors.

Richard the Third designing to Murder his Brother's Sons, first slandered them
with Illegitimacy.
Besides, as to the Particular Instance of Edward the Fourth, it was his
Inadvertency, and indeed Imprudence to Commit the Guardianship of his Son in
Minority to his Brother, who thereupon forged Illegitimacy against them, and
Murdered them; And it was done for want of such a Law of Succession, as was
Enacted by Kenneth the Third, and Malcolme Mackenneth the Second in Scotland,
which according to Buchanan, lib. 6. p. 191. was, A Guardian by the Law of
Scotland to be Elected by Parliament during the Minority of the Prince.
Vt Rege Impubere Tutor qui pro Rege esset interea Eligeretur vir prudentia and
opibus insignis, qui ad quartodecimum usque Annum Regis nomine rem
administraret. Ad id aetatis ubi Rex pervenerit ipsi sibi curatores Eligere
posset. That the King being under the Age of Fourteen Years, Election should be
made of a Guardian of great Estate and Wisdom, who should be his Regent in the
mean while, and Administer his Affairs in the King's Name till he arrived at
the Age of Fourteen; and when he came to that Age, he himself might choose his
own Guardians: Which Election of a Guardian, must be intended to be by
Parliament; for it appears by the words, That the Infant or Minor King must
not, nor is able to choose himself, till he come to the Age of Fourteen. And it
is contrary to Reason, that any other should be his own Judge to choose
himself, to have to himself to his own use the Custody of the Person of the
King, Dangerous to Commit the Guardianship of a Minor prince to the next Major.
in whom all his Subjects have an Interest. And it would be very Dangerous to
the Infant, if he who is next Successor to the Crown, should get the Custody of
the Heir into his hands. There is no Third Power can be therefore above
Exception, who ought to choose the Guardian of an Infant King, but the
Parliament; And accordingly we find it to be the constant Practice of that
Kingdom, as appears, Buchanan, Lib. 19. p. 687. when it is said, Sed cum
homines usu rerum Edocti Perspicerint vix fieri posse ut in tanta fortunae
inconstantia non aliquando in pueros, aut alioqui Regno ineundo Impares
haeredes, jus summi Magistratus inciderit, etc. But when taught by Experience,
men saw that it could not be but in so great inconstancy of Fortune, but the
Right of the Supreme Magistracy might fall amongst Children or other Heirs
unfit to Govern a Kingdom, they Ordained, That in the mean time one should be
Elected Regent who Excelled the rest in Estate and Counsel; Guardians chosen by
Parliament, the only Security of Kings in Minority.
and our Ancestors following this way for the space of Six hundred Years, have
transmitted thereby the Kingdom safe to Posterity. So Robert Bruce, being dead,
Thomas Randolph Earl of Murray, and Donald Earl of Mar, Andrew Murray, John
Randolph, Robert Stuart succeeded singly, and sometimes more number are by
Parliament chosen into that place. So James II. being a child, Alexander
Leviston being of no Kin, nor of the chief Rank of Nobility, but only a Knight,
and of more repute for Prudence then Ancient Descent, was elected to be his
Guardian. Neither can there be alleged any want of persons of the Royal Stock
to have been the cause of such choice; for there was at that time John Kennedy
chief of his Family, and King James his Nephew by his Sister, there were his
Uncles James Kennedy Archbishop of St. Andrews, Primate of the whole Kingdom in
all kind of Virtue, and his Brother, born of the Kings Aunt, Douglass Earl of
Angus was not remote from the Kings Blood; Archibald Earl of Douglas, in Power
almost equal to the King, and superior to any of the rest; yet did none of
these complain of any Injustice in the Parliament for making another choice;
and not long after four Guardians were given to James III. not taken for the
Kindred, but chosen by Parliament. It was but of late that John Duke of Albin
was sent for by the Nobility out of France to moderate the Affairs of Scotland,
James I. being then a child, and was confirmed by a public Act of Parliament.
Neither was it done because he was next of Kin, for he had an Elder Brother
called Alexander. But James I. being absent, Robert his Uncle ruled the
Kingdom. And with what Right? Was he taken for nearness of Blood? No he was
chosen by the People. Nor so neither. How then was he created? When Robert III.
was so sick in body and mind, that he was not able to discharge his Office, he
made his Brother Robert his Viceroy, and commended his Children to him. So his
Brother starved to death David his Eldest Son, and sought how to destroy
likewise James his Younger, had he not escaped by slight. But he being now
placed in possession of his Tyranny, and his Brother dead with grief, without
Parliament or assent of the People he kept it, and by force left it to his Son
Mordach, etc. Buchanan proceeds, p. 688. Quid enim minus justum esse poterat
quam aetatem innoxiam atque infirmam ejus fidei committere, qui pupilli sibi
crediti mortem semper expectat and optat? What can be more injust, then to
commit the innocent and weak Age, to one who always hopes for, or wishes the
death of the Pupil entrusted in his hands. And after he says, Laodice the
Queen of the Cappadoceans is related to have killed every one of her children
as in order they arrived at fourteen years of age, to gain thereby a little
more time to reign. If a Mother will destroy her Children to get the use of a
little time, what shall we think, will their old Enemies dare, yea will they
not dare to do, inflamed with the Brands of Covetousness, to cruelty against a
Child hindering their hopes of a perpetual Kingdom? If this Example seems old
and obscure, or far-fetched, I will add more clear and nearer home: For who is
so ignorant of things so lately acted, as he knows not Galeacius Sfortia,
though at man's Estate, though married, and the Son in Law of a Potent King, to
be killed by Lodowick his Uncle? Or to whom are the Calamities unknown which
ensued that cruel Parricide, the most beautiful Region of Italy brought almost
to a Devastation, the Sfortian Family, The not abolishing Episcopal Laws which
pretend to Illegitimate whom they please, the sense of the Murder of Edward V.
and his Brother.
so fruitful of valiant men, destroyed; Barbarians let into the most pleasant
Country watered by Po. Against whose Rapine nothing was safe, against whose
Cruelty nothing was secure. Who has been born in the soil of Great Britain,
and has not heard of the cruel Murder by Richard III. King of England of the
Sons of his Brother Edward IV? A great cause of the murder likewise of these
Princes was, that Papal and Episcopal Laws were not abolished which pretend to
illegitimate whom they please.

Making a Kingdom hereditary to the eldest Son weakens not the Power of
Parliaments.
And (5.) as to the Reason against these Statutes (which makes the Crown
hereditary to the eldest Son) that the same enervate the strength of
Parliaments, and without a Contract made by every Prince with a Parliament, no
Government can be just, in regard if he receives not the Kingdom by Contract,
he assumes it by Conquest, which over a Free Nation is unjust. To which is
answered, First that these Acts of Parliament of England, and Scotland, which
entail the Crown to the Eldest Son, do no way weaken but confirm and establish
the Power of Parliaments and Exercise of the same for the Public safety. (1)
In regard the Entail being made to the Eldest Son by Act of Parliament, the
same declares, that what is given by Act of Parliament, may be taken by Act of
Parliament; and that every former Act inacted, may by a latter Act be repealed,
according to the known Rule, Vnumquodque dissolvitur eodem modo quo conflatum
est. Secondly according to the General Examples of Acts of Parliament, amongst
which nothing is more common than for later Acts to change the Entails of the
Crown made by former Acts. Thirdly, This Power of Parliaments is expressly
declared by Act of Parl. 13 El. 1. still in force, by which it is enacted that
to affirm that the Laws and Statutes do not bind the Right of the Crown, and
the Descent, Limitation, Inheritance, and Governance thereof, is High Treason.
Fourthly, All the Reason alleged of the Ancient Custom of New Election of the
Successor (on every Descent) is only lest the Eldest Son should happen to be an
Infant, or otherwise unfit for Government, that the Parliament might choose the
fittest, which here is satisfied in the Eldest Son, who is above all exception
known to be the fittest who can be chosen. Fifthly, though this reserve of
Power remain naturally in Parliaments to repeal and change former Acts
concerning Succession by new Acts when there is just and necessary cause, yet
it is necessary likewise there should be a praevious Act to mark out the Heir
in whose name the Parliament shall be called, to declare the Succession or
Guardianship if he happen to be an Infant. And what if after a King happens to
die there happen a Rebellion, or Invasion, which makes it impossible to
assemble a Parliament, will it not be a great safety to the People, that a
standing Act of Parliament has before hand appointed the Successor to take
care of the Kingdoms till he can call a Parliament to give their assistance
therein. There is nothing therefore can be justly excepted against these two
Acts of Parliament of England and Scotland for ascertaining by Law the Eldest
Son to be Heir to the Crown. The excellency of the two said Acts of Parliament
of England and Scotland, which ascertain the Succession of the Crown to the
Kings Eldest Son.
But it were a great unthankfulness to the Providence of God to undervalue such
Laws, whereby all Accidents are obviated, Questions and Doubts resolved, and
Objections answered by so few words as two Lines in each, and the Peace of
Succession preserved in Great Britain, for so many hundred years, which in
other Empires and Kingdoms cannot be effected without those horrid Murders of
Younger Brothers by Elder, or Elder Brothers by Younger; of lineal Heirs by
collateral, or collateral Heirs by lineal; of Sons by Fathers, or of Fathers by
Sons; (whereby Civil Wars, Devastations, and Ruins of Kingdoms have ensued:
and that the want of such Statutes, or the Breach of them have been causes of
these Evils, and Enjoyment of them has been the Cure, will, I hope, appear in
the Objections and Answers following.

Objections first against the not being of the Kings Eldest Son within these
Statutes, answered.
Obj. 1. That the Lady his Mother was not a Queen, therefore the Kings Eldest
Son is not within the Statute.

Statute false translated in the word Queen.
Answ. To this the answer is easy and clear, that the word Madame sa Compaigne
are falsely translated our Lady his Queen, and ought to have been translated our
Lady his Companion, which is proved by the Reasons following.

(1.) Because it is manifest sa Compaigne signifies not the word Queen in
specie, but any Lady Companion in general. (2.) Because it is manifest the
makers of this Act of Parliament intended not to restrain their several meaning
only to a Queen, for they knew Royne was French for Queen as well as Roy for
King: and if they had intended so, could have more certainly and easily said,
Compass le mort nostre Seignior le Roy and sa Royne, than Madame sa Compaigne.
(3.) Because at the time of making this Statute the famous Black Prince being
the Eldest Son to Edward III. was married to Joan Daughter to Edmund Earl of
Kent, and had Issue by her Richard of Bourdeaux after King of England, and none
doubts but it was the intention of the King Edward III. who passionately
affected his Grandchild Richard, that in case the Princes Wife should happen to
die in his life time, whereby she should not have been a Queen, but that
notwithstanding if the Black Prince had happened to have survived him, which he
did not, and been King, his Eldest Son Richard should have benefit, of this
Statute. (4.) It would have been made doubtful by the Bishops who usurped then
the Papal Supremacy over Princes, of giving or refusing to give them Coronation
when they pleased, whether the Kings Wife should be titled Queen, if the Bishop
refused her Coronation, Ralph of Canterbury refuses to Crown Adeliza Queen,
unless he should first discrown the King.
as Ralph Archbishop of Canterbury did to Adeliza the second Wife of H. I.
unless the Kings would suffer him to pull off the Crown first from the Kings
head, and new Crown him, in acknowledgment that the Supremacy of the Coronation
Office belonged to Ralph the Archbishop, Bak. Hist. 43. Touching which Office
of Coronation of Kings and Queens, that it belongs to Parliaments, and not to
Bishops; and that David himself was both crowned and anointed by his Parliament
and not by the Priest, is shown, lib. 2. cap. 1. p. 169, etc. (5.) The Law of
Saxons and Scots that no Wife of a King should be called Queen.
Because the Title of Queen was then under Envy, and doubtful whether not
against the ancient Law both of England and Scotland, the same not appearing to
have been repealed by any Act of Parliament, Bak. Hist. fol. 6. says a Law was
made by the West Saxons, that no Wife of a King should be called a Queen: and
fol. 8. that it was so rigorously observed that, when Ethelwolph had married
Judith the Beautiful, Daughter of the Emperor Charles the Bald; in honor of
whom, in his own Court he ever placed her in a Chair of State, with all other
Majestical Complements of a Queen, contrary to the Law of the West Saxons, made
to avoid the great Expense of Treasure incident to great Titles and Ceremonies,
and against other inconveniences, and so much displeased his Lords thereby,
that they were ready to have Deposed him, but were prevented by his death not
long after. Buchanan Rev. Scot. 407. takes notice of this Law, and says,
Saxones lege caverunt ne ulla deinceps Regis Vxor Regina vocaretur, aut in sede
honoris in publico Regi assideret. And 406. mentions the like Law in Scotland;
Quas Reginas alii suo quisque sermon nos Regum uxores appellamus, nec altioris
fastigii nomen ullum in iis agnoscimus; voluerunt enim opinor viri prudentes ut
illae quoties mentionem sui fieri audirent, ex adjuncto viri nomine se viris
obnoxias esse meminissent. (6.) The Statute by Compaigne intended Sociam
Thalami non Throni. And in the same sense is the word Companion used in
Scripture, Cant. 1.15. It is said, Behold thou art fair my Companion, thou art
fair. And Mal. 2.14. Yet is she thy Companion, and the Wife of thy Covenant. In
both which places the word Companion signifies the Companion of the Bed, and
not of the Throne Non been convenient nec in una sede morantur
Majest as and Amor --
Nulla fides regni sociis, omnisque potestas
Impatiens consortis erit.

Of the like false Translation of the Scriptures by the Bishops of the Hebrew
words Shegal and Gibhira, into the English word Queen.

Scripture false translated by Bishops in the word Queen.
Psalm. 45.9. Is thus falsely translated, Upon thy right hand did stand the Queen
in Gold of Ophir. Whereas the Hebrew is only Shegal, which signifies no more
than Conjux or Wife, from Shagal, Coivit, Concubuit, and is no more than a
Woman that has been lain with by her Husband. In like manner 1 King. 15, 13.
and 2 King. 10.13. are false translated Queen, the Hebrew word being Gibhira,
which signifies no more in French than Madame, as in the Statute; nor in Latin
than Hera or Domina; nor in English than Lady or Mistress. And the Ancient
Hebrews, and many other Nations did no more allow the Title of Queen, except to
a Queen Regnant, than as is already said did the Saxons or Scots; for Regina is
derived a Regendo, and is only proper to Gynarchies, and imports none but the
Supreme Governess of a Kingdom, by which Title Queen Elizabeth was called.
Neither had Saul or David any Queens, but only Wives, nor Solomon himself in
all his Royalty of his thousand Wives any Queen, for 700 are only called in
the Septuagint 1 King. 11.3. (...), which is no more than Feminae Principes in
Latin, and Chief Women in English. And the other 300 (which are falsely
translated Concubines, as I have elsewhere at large showed) are called (...),
which signify no more in Latin than Juvenculae, and in English than the
honest name of Young Women: Neither was he the Son of a Queen, for his Mother,
wheresoever she is named, is only called plain Bathsheba, as 1 King. 1.5. And
Bathsheba went in unto the King into the Chamber, and the King was very old.
And verse 28. Then King David answered and said, call me Bathsheba; and she
came into the Kings presence, and stood before the King. And 1 Chronicles. 3.5. And
these were born unto him in Jerusalem, Shimeah, and Shobah, and Nathan, and
Solomon, four of Bathsheba the Daughter of Ammiel. That the Bishops have
likewise falsely translated all in the Scripture relating to Marriage and
Filiation, is proved before at full Lib. 2. p. 142. usque ad p. 162. And in
other matters as is assirmed by that great Linguist Doctor Broughton, Old
Testament false translated by Bishops in 848. places. The Lady Mother of the
Kings Eldest Son was Madame sa Compaigne intended in this Statute.
they have false translated the Old Testament in no less then 848. places.

Now that this Lady-Mother was Madame sa Compaigne, which are both the words
and intention of the Statute, is so known as need not be proved by Witnesses.
For she had the honor to be Primus Amor, the first Lady Companion of the
Prince, the Rays of whose Favor cast upon her, made the Luster of those
Graces rarely conjoined in the same person, the more illustrious; for she was a
Virgin, and not praepossessed by another; She was a Protestant, and not a
Papist; She was a Native, and not a Strange Woman; She was a Subject, and not
Imperious. In her were conjoined Beauty with Chastity, Greatness with Humility,
Treasure with Frugality, Fidelity with Adversity. Though she did not reign with
him to be called Queen, she suffered with him, and was partaker of all his
troubles; no bloody Wars, no Seas, no Foreign Countries could fright her from
him. But as if the Soul of that sacred Queen Eleanor, the Companion of the
famous Edward I. in his Wars to the Holy Land, had transmigrated into her Body,
she led the Pilgrimage of her life with him whithersoever he traveled; and
though she had no Crown in her Life, she was faithful to Death and beyond
Death, left him such a pleadge of affection as is hoped by Gods mercy will
indear her memory to all Protestants in the three Kingdoms, which will evince
to all except the Malicious, That she was Madame sa Compaigne, the Lady his
Companion mentioned and intended in this Statute: which is sufficient, and as
much as is necessary to be proved.

Object. 2. That she was not married according to the Mass Book, Common Prayer,
Book of Canons, or Ordinance of Parliament, or by a Priest in a Temple;
therefore the Eldest Son is not within this Statute.

Marriage by the Common Prayer Book, not necessary within the Statute.
Answ. 1. There is neither the word Marriage, Mass Book, Common Prayer Book,
Book of Cannons, or Ordinance of Parilament, Priest or Temple named in the
Statute; therefore being not expressed, they are not to be intended in so wise
a Statute which minded substance and not Ceremonies, and Safety of the Royal
Blood and not Insecurity and Incertainty.

(2.) Admit the Statute had in express terms said our Lady his Companion
married by the Mass Book, which was the Book then in Fashion, at time of this
Statute, yet none will deny, but when by a succeeding Power this Mass Book was
abolished or changed, Marriage by the Common-Drayer-Book not necessary in time
of War.
as in the time of H. 5. the Service Book of Paul's was changed into the Service
Book of Salisbury, that none need to marry according to it. Then as to the
Common Prayer, and Book of Cannons at the time of the Princes taking his Lady
Companion, it is known that both Mass Book, Common Prayer Book, Book of
Cannons, and all were abolished by the then Power of the Sword, and it might
have been Death for a Prince to have married by a Book of Common Prayer, or in
Public. Is any Protestant then so imprudent as to expect in such a time and
place of War, and the Usurping Power provailing in their contrary Ordinances,
and threatening death and destruction to all who opposed them, that such who
were in those dangers, should publicly, and with Rites and Ceremonies, by a
Priest, Temple, and Altar, solemnize a Marriage? or can any be so senseless, as
when in the time of King John, Pope Innocent, Marriage by the Common Prayer
Book not necessary in time of Interdiction, Papal or Potentatical.
the French King, and English Bishops, conspired together and the Pope
Excommunicated and Interdicted the King and whole Kingdom of England for the
space of six Years, three Months, and fourteen Days before the Interdiction
could be bought off. Neither payment of vast sums of Money, and the laying down
his Crown, Scepter, Mantle, Sword, and Ring at the feet of Pandolfus the Popes
Legate, and making his Kingdom tributary to Rome, during all which time of
Interdiction there was no Church open for Marriages or Burials, but People were
buried like Dogs in Ditches; and where they married God knows. And in the
latter times of Potentates of Interdiction of the Common Prayer Book, and
Marriage by it, can any, I say, be so senseless as to censure in such a time
those who were excluded from all Mass-Books, Common Prayer Books, Priests and
Temples, if they make use of Gods Ordinance and not of the Priests, and married
without them.

(3.) There is another Circumstance in this Case, which makes it both Unlawful
and Impossible to question the Validity of this Marriage, because without
Mass Book or Common Prayer, or Ordinance of Parliament; for the Lady Mother,
The Mother being dead, the Legitimation of the Child not to be questioned.
who was the Royal first Companion, is now dead; And by Law of God and Man none
ought to be Censured without hearing, and answering for her self, which now is
impossible; for who knows, if Questioned while alive, What besides the
necessities of War, she could have alleged both as to the Fact and Law; what
Matrimonial Promises or Contracts Verbal or in Writing; what Matrimonial
Trusts, what Witness, what Evidence she could have produced: For which reason,
even by our own Laws, as appears 39 E. 3.32. If a man Marry his own Sister,
which is a very unlawful Incestuous Marriage, and contrary to the Law of God,
and has Issue by her, and she dies, if not Judicially Questioned and Sentenced
for it in her Lifetime; the Legitimation of her Issue shall not be questioned
after her death, because she was not Summoned to answer while alive. Of which,
see more before in the Preface. So Littleton himself, though he is much Devoted
to the Service of the Laws and Religion of his Holy Father the Pope concerning
Marriages, yet he confesses, Sect. 399.340. That if the Legitimation of a Child
is not questioned while alive, his Heir shall never be questioned after he is
Dead. And if a man Marry his Sister, and has Children by her, if one Parent
dye, though Incest, the Children are Legitimate, 39 E. 3.32. But in this Case
where there is no Incest, nor any other matter in the least, prohibited by the
Law of God, nor pretense or color of any but the omission of a Petty Ceremony
of a Common Prayer Book, a human Law, and that in a time of War too, when
abolished, to violate the Sanctuary of the Sepulcher and the Deceased, seems
not only Unchristian but Barbarous. How unlawful the Desertion of a Virgin is
while alive, has been already show, Lib. 1. p. 88. But far more unlawful is
the Desertions of her Children after her Death. And how Unlawful Divorce of her
is after Procreation of a Child, has been already shown, Lib. 1. p. 94. But
far more Unlawful is the Divorce of the Dead. Oh ye Romish Monsters, ye are
more Cruel than Death: for death it self Divorceth not quoad praeterita, Death
a Divorce, but no Dissolving of Marriage quoad praeterita.
but only quoad futura. Death it self Nulls not, but only Dissolves the
Marriage. No Dragon but that of the Seven Heads, has a Retrospect in repeal of
Laws. No Wolves but those in Sheeps-clothing with their howles disturb the
blessed Dead.

Act of Confirmation of Marriage to persons in Hostility, by Ordiance of
Parliament ought to have Confirmed Marriages of those who were not in Hostility.
(4.) By the Statute 12 Car. 2.33. It is Enacted, That all Marriages by pretense
or color of any Ordinance of Parliament since May, 1642. (which was during the
Times of the War and Usurpation) shall be adjudged of the same force and
effect, as if they had been solemnized according to the Rites and Ceremonies of
the Church of England, which is according to the Common Prayer Book. This ACT
therefore though it give and intend Right and Justice to those who had been in
Hostility, and does take away all Cavils and Scruples might after have arisen
concerning the Ordinance, Marriage and Legitimation and Succession of Children;
Yet did it not intend such as were Friends should be left in a worse condition
as to their Marriages and Children, than those to whom they had given the
benefit of this Act; or that there should only a Balm be provided for the
Wounds of one party, and those of the other, who were more necessitated to
receive them, be left bleeding without any: for the Royal Party could then
neither Marry by the Common Prayer-Books which the Sword had abolished, nor
according to the Ordinance of Parliament, not daring to approach their
Quarters, Act confirming Marriage according to Ordinance of Parliament, ought
to have Confirmed Marriage according to the Ordinance of God.
or to be publicly Banned at Church or Market-Cross; Especially Persons of
Eminency to Expose themselves to such a Snare as might entrap them, and
endanger their Lives. It was not therefore the Intention of the Protestants in
this Parliament, That this Act of Confirmation of Marriages should have been
partial, and only to Confirm one Party; but rather to have been as the Act of
Confirmation of Judicial Proceedings made in the same Year was general to all
Parties, and to have Confirmed all Marriages in general made since May, 1642.
not contrary to the Moral Law of God, to be of the same force and effect as if
they had been Solemnized according to the Rites and Ceremonies of the Church of
England, or the Common Prayer Book. It is an old Rule, that Favores sunt
ampliandi, Favors are to be enlarged, and not restrained; and it might be
happy for many Families who have Suffered for his Majesty in time of the Wars,
if such a general Act of Confirmation of Marriages then made, not contrary to
the Moral Law of God, were yet Enacted, and the Favor not Restrained only to
Marriages made by Ordinance of Parliament: For as to those many Papists who had
free Liberty to Live in the Parliament Quarters (when the Royal Party had not)
took advantage of, and first Married before Justices of Peace, and after by
their own Priests: It is not Equal therefore, that Protestants, that could not
have that Safety which Papists had, or if they could, thought it, perhaps,
against their Conscience to Marry according to the Forms prescribed by
Ordinance of Parliament, should be Excluded from all Favor or Excuse to the
Marriages of themselves, and Successions of their Children, which is by this
Act given to the Marriages and Children of these who were in Hostility, and of
Papists themselves.

There was likewise another ACT made 29 Car. 2. 1677, for the Naturalizing of
Children of his Majesty's English Subjects born in Foreign Countries during
the Late Troubles, which was to them a Just and Necessary Right, though it had
been so long delayed, and was a Restitutio Naturalium, and no less; yea rather
a more necessary Right, though it has been longer delayed, were an Act of
Legitimation of the Children of all Protestant Parents born between June 14.
1641. and March 24. 1660, who at the time of their begetting were not
prohibited by the Moral Law of God to Contract Marriage, would be Restitutio
Natalium; Restitutio Natalium as necessary to the Relief of the Children of
such as suffered for his Majesty in his Dominions, as Restitutio Naturalium to
such as were born beyond Sea.
And be a great Relief to the Children of such Parents as Suffered for his
Majesty in his Dominions, and are far more in number than such Children as
happened to be born beyond Sea; there having been so many whose Necessities
Disabled them to transport themselves from the Danger at home, yet could not
avoid it by staying here, but living in fear of the power of the Sword, Dared
neither to Marry by the Common Prayer Book, because prohibited; nor by the
Ordinances of Parliament, because by such Publication of themselves, they had
been Exposed to have been seized on by their Enemies. So it seems either such
Act of Legitimation, or the former Act of Confirmation of Marriages, will be
Just and Necessary for the Suffering-Party not yet Relieved.

(5.) If Bishops acknowledge in deed, what they allege in words, Not necessary
for a King to be Married by a Priest or Common Prayer Book.
Supremacy in Causes Ecclesiastical in the King, then must they acknowledge
Supremacy of Marriage to be in him, because they alledg Marriage to be a Cause
Ecclesiastical, and they themselves De facto Exercise the supremacy of
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction in it; and if they give him Supremacy of
Jurisdiction of Marriage in general, They much more give Supremacy of
Jurisdiction of his own Marriage in particular: for, majus continet minus, Et
cui licet quod majus est non aequum est quod minus non Licere. If therefore a
King of England has Supreme Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction of his own Marriage,
and neither Pope nor Bishop can null or invalidate any Marriage of the King, his
Predecessors, to Depose him from his Throne, nor any Marriage of his own to
Dis-inherit his Lineal Heir from the Succession and Jus Coronae in the King
relating to Marriage and Succession, as shall be after further shown, is
different from that of Subjects; and as is by the Bishops themselves affirmed
Canon 2. The same Supremacy belongs to the King, which belonged to the godly
Kings of the Jews, who could thereby marry themselves without Priest or Bishop.

The matter therefore must come to this Push, If the Bishop acknowledge the King
has Supreme Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction of his own Marriage, and no longer
under a Guardian of the Spiritualities, then must he acknowledge he may Exercise
the Acts of such Supremacy; for, frustra est illa potentia quae nunquam
reducitur in actum: And if he will acknowledge the King to be Supreme Ordinary,
as all the Common Law Books do; then must he acknowledge he may Exercise all
Acts of a Supreme Ordinary: But if he will not acknowledge him to have
Ecclesiastical Supremacy, and to be Supreme Ordinary, and to have the same
Supremacy the godly Kings of the Jews had of their own Marriages; Then must
the Bishop show a sign of his Mission from God to Exercise Supremacy, and to be
Supreme Ordinary over Marriages of Kings; which neither Pope nor Bishop nor
Priest ever could or can do.

Now all the height of Ecclesiastical Supremacy of Marriage whereof human Power
is Capable, A. King may dispense with Malum Probibitum in his own Marriage, but
not with Malum in S^.
is to Dispense with Malum Prohibitum, but not with Malum in se; Malum
Prohibitum, is that which is Prohibited only by some positive Law of Man; Malum
in se, is that which is Prohibited by the Moral Law of God: As Prohibitions of
Marriage without Banns, License, Ceremony, Common Prayer Book, Priest or
Temple, these make only Mala Prohibita, Because Prohibited only by the Positive
Laws of Men, and not by the Moral Law of God; and, Vnumquodque Dissolvitu^
eodem modo quo conflatum est; All Laws made of Marriage by men, may be again
dispensed, changed, repealed and abrogated by men who have the Supremacy of
Marriage. But Adultery, Fornication, Desertion of Virgins after Deslouring,
Divorce of a Wife without cause, Abdication of a Natural Child without Crime,
charging a Child on a wrong Father, charging adulterous or false Children on
the Husband of a Woman Married by a Priest in a Temple, etc. These are Mala in
se, Because prohibited by the Moral Law of God which is Eternal and Immutable,
and cannot therefore be dispensed with or confirmed; but all Laws, Customs,
Canons, and Acts of Parliament Dispencing or Confirming any of these, are void.
A King therefore who has Supremacy Ecclesiastical, may Dispense with all Mala
prohibita, if there were any in his own Marriage: He may Self-Marry himself, A
King being Supreme Ordinary, may Marry himself without Ceremonies, by the Law
of the Land.
as the Kings of Israel and Judah did, without a Priest, Banns, License, Book
of Cannons, Common Prayer Book, Temple, or any Ceremony; And being Supreme
Ordinary, as the Kings of Israel and Judah were, needs not the Bishops
Certificate, but may Certify his own Marriage according to the Moral Law of
God. And this is clear and unanswerable by any who does not deny the Supremacy
Ecclesiastical.

(6.) As Supremacy in the Person of the King inables him to Dispense with and
Confirm his own Marriage in manner before said; So, a fortiore, the Supremacy
of this Statute made by the Supreme Legislative Power both of the King and
Parliament united, can clear the Marriage therein intended from all the Mala
Prohibita laid on it; for no Mala Prohibita could be laid on it but by some
former Common Law, Custom, Canon, or Statute Law: But this Statute has
Supremacy of all those: for, Leges Posteriores, Priores contrarias abrogant;
Latter Laws abrogate all former which are contrary: So all contrary Laws which
were before of Marriage, Filiation, Heirship, Succession, and Certificates of
Bishops contrary to the intention of this Statute, for the Safety of the Lady
his Companion, and their Eldest Son and Heir, are by the same Intention
abolished.

(7.) As this Statute had Power to Enact what it Intended; So is it manifest,
This Statute intended not that Marrlage or Filiation should be tried by
Certificate of the Bishop.
that it never intended to restrain the Companion Royal to be one Married by
the Mass Book, or Book of Canons; or their Eldest Son and Heir to be only one
so made by the Certificate of a Bishop: for Edward the Third, who was the
Author of this Statute, was one of the most Wise Valiant Kings at that time in
the World; And his Predecessors had been fresh in Memory too much turmoyl'd
with the Bishop of Rome and their own Bishops; and John Stratford Archbishop
of Canterbury, sent himself, though in the Head of a Victorious Army in France,
an Insolent Letter, wherein he charged him with Violation of the Rights of the
Church and Magna Charta, and many other Matters, and threatened to Excommunicate
all his Officers. Too great Affronts for so Great a Prince not to become
sensible how dangerous It would be to suffer Bishops to have to do with the
Marriages, Filiations and Successions of Kings, and thereby to put power into
their hands, to Depose, and Dis-inherit his Successors when they pleased: and
William Whickham Bishop of Winchester, who was Confessor to his Queen Philippa,
and ingratiated himself by Alice Pierce the King's Concubine, An incredible Lie
by a Bishop concerning John of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster. Tinsell's Hist. 78.
for Money showed after how ready they should be to Act such Feats for Alice
Pierce against Sons of first Wives: for out of hatred to the Famous John of
Gaunt King Edward's Fourth Son, for no other cause, but because he was a great
Favourer of Wickliff's Doctrine, the Proto-Protestant of England, spread a
false fame on him, That the Queen Philippa, one of the most Virtuous Wives that
ever was, had confessed to him at her Death, That he was not the King's Son;
but that she, to please the King the more, who desired Sons above Daughters,
she being Delivered of a Daughter, caused her Daughter to be secretly conveyed
away; and this John, the Son of a Flemish Priest, to be brought and put to
Nurse instead of her, for the King's Son. A most Incredible Lie; but such a one
as shows what Certificates Kings Sons may happen to have from Bishops for being
Favorers of the Protestant Religion. It is not therefore to be imagined, that
it was intended by this Statute in those times, the Bishops and their
Mass-Books and Certificates should have any thing to do with the Lady Companion
of the King, or their Eldest Son. The King likewise then knew, that by the then
Laws of the Land, A King is Supreme Ordinary of his own Marriage.
he had in himself the Right of Ecclesiastical Supremacy, and that he was the
Supreme Ordinary of his own Marriage, and did never therefore intend to give
away his own Prerogative to Pope or Bishop, who, being Supreme Ordinary, could
Self-Marry himself, and without the Bishop Certify his own Marriage.

(8.) Books of Canons, Common Prayer-Books, Banns, Lycenses, Priests, Temples
and all other Ceremonies without which Marriage is forbidden, being only Mala
Prohibita; and the Scripture prohibits the Prohibitions themselves of these
Mala Prohibita to Marriage, and calls such Prohibitions, the Doctrine of
Devils; which is already proved, Lib. 1. p. 52.

What is Borum in se by the Law of God, cannot be made Malum in se by the. Law
of Man.
(9.) Marriage without the Common Prayer Book and Priest, being only Malum
Prohibitum by the Law of Man, and the same Marriage being Bonum in se by the
Moral Law of God; Malum Prohibitum by the Law of Man, cannot make that Malum in
se, which is Bonum in se by the Law of God. As it was Bonum in se for Daniel to
pray to God; though Darius, Dan. 6.7. by his Decree made it Malum Prohibitum to
pray within Thirty Days, except to the King, (or if he had said, Except by the
Book of Common Prayer, or Book of Canons, it had been all one) And under a
great Penalty of being cast into the Den of Lions; yet notwithstanding this had
not nor could make it Malum in se in Daniel to pray to God without the King,
Common Prayer Book, or Book of Canons, within the Thirty Days prohibited; much
Less had it been a Malum in se for Darius himself who had the Supremacy
notwithstanding this Ecclesiastical Law of his own whereby he Prohibited
prayer, or if he had prohibited Marriage to his Subjects, to have Prayed or
Married himself in the Manner himself, and not the Law of God, had Prohibited.

(10.) Priests use to Self-Sacrament themselves, though they have not
Supremacy, without any other Priest. What hinders therefore why they may not
Self-Marry themselves, A Priest may self marry himself.
seeing Popery it self could never pretend to Raise Marriage to a higher Pitch
then a Sacrament.

(11.) If Priests may Self-Marry themselves, there is no Reason why Laymen
should not be allowed the same Liberty of Conscience to Self-Marry themselves
without a Priest. A Layman may self-marry himself.


As a King who is Supreme Ordinary may Marry himself without Ceremonies, by the
Law of the Land: So the Subject may marry himself by the Law of God, which is
above the Law of the Land.
(12.) Qui potest majus, potest minus; And that Act which does perfect Marriage,
is greater than any Act which does only prepare or inchoat and leave it
imperfect. Now it is not denied by the Popish Casuists and Schoolmen, and the
Civilians and Canonists themselves, But carnal knowledge only perfects Marriage;
if therefore a Layman may self-Ly with his Woman, which perfects Marriage
without a Common Prayer Book, or Book of Canons, after the Priest has first
had her before him by his Bell, Book, and Candle, why may not the poor Layman
save all his Money and Self Ring the Bell, Self take the Book, Self light
the Candle, or Torch, Self contract himself, per verba de praesenti; And then
Self lie with a Woman; or do it first, without acting all this impertinent
Pageantry and Running Round about Church, unless they would bring in again the
old Pagan way for the Priest likewise to Do the Act of Perfection of Marriage,
The Kings of Israel and Judab, The Ottoman Emperors and Subjects Self-Marry
themselves without a Priest.
as the Indian Priests, and too many of the Popish Priests do Ly with the Woman
first, before the Husband.

(13.) It is very well known, that the Ottoman Emperors and Subjects of their
Mighty Dominions, self-Marry themselves, according to the Moral Law of God,
without Priest, Temple, Bell, Book, or Candle; yet to the shame of such as call
themselves by the name of Christians, may it be said, Their Marriages are more
Chaste, their Filiation and Successions more Certain, and no such Adulteries,
Fornications, Stews, Brothel-houses, and Poxes and Plagues, and other
Mischiefs thereby, as those who use all these, and all the Luxuriancy of Papal
and Episcopal Ceremonies besides in their Marriages. And of the Mischiefs came
to Solomon the Magnificent, by being seduced by Roxalana, to break the Custom
of Emperors to Selfmarry themselves, to Marry her by a Priest, appears at
large, Lib. 2. p. 245. etc.

Not HIS Companion.
Object. 3. The Third Objection is, That though the Lady Mother was a Companion
to the King, Yet she was not HIS Companion, which is the Article of Propriety
required by the Statute.

Answ. To which is Answered, That if she had been the Wife of another man, or
any other had had a Lawful Propriety in her, it is not denied but the Objection
might have been material; but here was the most Lawful way of Election of a
Companion, and acquiring Propriety in her, not only according to Gods
Ordinance, but the Laws of all Nations, (except the Papal and Episcopal) and
not Impertinently, as expressed by the Poet, Elige de vacuis quam non sibi
vindicat alter;
Si nescis Dominum res habet ista suum.
Take her that is free; if it thou know not,
Think she some unknown Master then has got.
Here was Possessio vacua, Virgo intacta, neither Party Prohibited by any Law
of God to take or yield Possession, or acquire Propriety one in another. All
Lawyers which write de modis acquirendi Dominij in a Wife and Children, though
they lay it as a Fundamental, That Contract, Sponsions, Promises, yea, Buying
and Selling it self only create an obligation, but Transfer no Propriety
without Tradition of Possession; according to the Old Verses, Rem Domino vel
non Domino vendente duobus,
In jute est potior, traditione prior.
And though acquisition of the possession of Women and Children by Tradition or
Seizure, or other ways, without carnal knowledge and Generation, does only
acquire the Propriety of them as of Slaves or Servants, but not as of Wives or
Children; yet they assirm, and the whole Scripture assirms with them, that
carnal knowledge between persons not prohibited by the Law of God, is an
acquisition of Propriety in the Woman, and generation an acquisition of
Propriety in children. And that all Ceremonies of acquiring Propriety in Wives,
without carnal knowledge; and all Adoptions for acquiring Propriety in
children, without genoration of them, are Fictions and Fopperies. The Scripture
therefore calls every woman Lawfully laien with by a Man his Wife; and every
Son he begets, his Son, which gives a Propriety; of all which Texts of
Scripture I shall speak more largely in answer to the next Objection.

Not Married according to the Law of God.
Object. 4. That she was not Married according to the Law of God.

Answ. (1) Before the contrary is proved to this Negative, and the Truth shown
unanswerably that she was married according to the Law of God; It will be
necessary to prove by what Law, the Law of God concerning marriage ought not
and ought to be Judged, whether it be the Law of God or no.

Secondly, By what Judge, Marriage ought not and ought to be Judged to be not
according, or according to the Law of God.

As to the Law by which it ought not, it is clearly and fully already proved;
therefore to avoid repetition, I refer the Reader to the former Books,
Chapters, Pages here following quoted viz. That it ought not to be Judged.

1. By the Law of Moses and Customs of the Jews, of which, Vid. Lib. 1. p. 2.
2. By the Laws and Customs of the Heathen Nations. Vide. Lib. 1. p. 10. 3. By
the Laws Civil, Canon or Feudal. Vid. Lib. 1. p. 21. 4. By the Laws of Mahomet,
Vid. Lib. 1. p. 26. 5. By Ecclesiastical Laws, Vid. Lib. 1. p. 31. 6. By such
Laws of England Scotland or Ireland, as are Relics of Popery or contrary to
the Laws of God, Vid. Lib. 1. p. 64. usque ad p. 125. 7. By Ceremonial Laws,
Vid. Lib. 1. p. 127.
Of the Absurd and Ridiculous Ceremonies on which Priests would have Marriage,
Filiation, Aliment and Succession to depend, Vid. Lib. 1. p. 127.

Of the Original of Compulsion to the Ceremonies of a Priest and Temple in
Marriage, which came from the Priests of Priapus and Venus, Pagan Gods and
Goddesses, Magicians, Aruspices, Astrologers, Demons, with the Strumpets
Theodora, Marozia and others, and Popes and Bishops their Chaplains, Vid. Lib.
1. p. 43.45.52.83. of Theodora and Morozia more, p. 79.

Of the sinal causes of Compulsion to the said Ceremony of a Priest and a
Temple, viz. the Insatiable Lust, Covetousness and Ambition of Priests, Vid.
Lib. 1. p. 53.

Of the most Dismal Effects and Mischiefs ensuing Compulsion of the Ceremony of
a Priest and Temple in Marriage, Vid. Lib. 2. p. 192. usque ad 250. et ultra.

Of certain other Mischiefs not before Recited.

Of the damnable Effects ensuing Prohibitions to Marry, and nulling Marriage
except by a Priest in a Temple, contrary to the Moral Law of God.
Other mischiefs not before recited, of Compulsion of the Ceremony of a Priest
and Temple in Marriage, and the false naming that Marriage which is no
Marriage; and false nameing that no Marriage, which is a Marriage; whereby they
call Good Evil; and Evil Good; Light, Darkness; and Darkness Light; so that the
whole Mystery of the Romish Antichrist depends on the Compulsion of this
Ceremony to Marry, Bury and Pray by a Priest in a Temple.

The wicked Causes of Prohibiting the Clergy to Marry by this Ceremony of a
Priest and Temple, and compelling the Laity.
(1) Without this Ceremony they could not prohibit marriage to their Clergy,
which Militia Togata of theirs to keep unmarried, is one of the Arcana Imperij
Papalis, and was first Decreed by Pope Nicholas the First. The sinal causes
were,

1. That the Priests might have no Dependence or be under command of the
Lay-Lords, by reason of their Wives and Families; for whom, if they kept them,
they would be necessitated to provide Lay-Maintenance, the Spiritual being too
short Commons for so many. 2. That what Wives and Children the Priests had,
they might sit by other men's Fires, and be maintained at other men's Tables, and
succeed to other men's Inheritances. 3. That the Priests might be the Richer and
Abler to pay the more Tributes and Taxes to the Pope. 4. That they might be
provoked to Lie with the more Laymens Wives, and thereby fish out all the
Secrets of their Husbands for Intelligence to Lay their own Plots, and discover
those against them in Auricular Confession. 5. That they might not be put to
the usual Cost of Intelligence, which is commonly very Dear, but might by this
way be had for nothing, and probably with Rewards to such Gallants. 6. That
between the Woman and the Priest, they might Rob the Layman of his Goods, and
share it between them. 7. That when the Layman was come to die, the Woman, to
whom her Living man was more pleasant than her Dying, might persuade him to
make the Priest Overseer of his Goods, and of the Children he had got for him;
And to give Land to Pious (that is to say) Pontifical Uses. 8. That the Laymen
might not Lie with the Priests Wives, and return to them the Talio, to which
end they made themselves Judges of the Causes of Divorce; And made strict
Canons Prohibiting the Lay Divorce a Vinculo, for Adult'ry, and that they
should give Surety and Bond, though Divorced a Mensa and Thoro, while either
was Living, never to Marry again; but the Priests might turn off their
Courtesans, if they suspected a Layman had been with them, when they pleased.
So the Priest who was the Malefactor and Adulterer with the Lay-man's Wife,
was Judge in his own Case of the Layman's cause of Divorce, and would not allow
it if he were within the four Seas; but none but himself was Judge of the cause
of his Courtesans Divorce, which he may do Arbitrarily, and only for change at
his pleasure. But this Prohibition of Marriage to the Clergy, nor the mischiefs
thereof could not have been without Compulsion to the Ceremony of a Priest and
a Temple in Marriage; nor could the Canon of Trent have found any other
Ceremony by the omission of which to have made all other Marriages null and
void, because no other Ceremony is in the Power of the Priest to compel men to,
or can be Testified by him against those who omit it; nor can any other
Ceremony be raised to so Luciferian an height, as to make a Ceremonial Law of
Pope or Bishop, to overthrow a Marriage by the Moral Law of God. But if any
Priest should take a Woman, and intend to make a Courtesan of her, yet get her
with Child, And Liberty of Conscience were given to such as Marry, to use such
Ceremony or not use it, then would this intended Courtesan deceive the Priest
in his filthy bargain, to have her only as a Courtesan, and follow him as a
Wife, according to the Moral Law of God, with her Children, and so spoil his
Trade of Confessing other men's Wives in secret; and if he kept not at home only
with her, perhaps penance him as bad as he penanceth others. For no other
Ceremony, designation or mark of difference could have been put between a Woman
got with Child by a Priest, and his Wife, but the omission of this Ceremony,
which every Priest would omit of purpose to free himself from her and her
Children when he pleased, though not the Laymen (the more beast he.)

(2) Without this Ceremony of a Priest and a Temple, they could not pretend to
make Marriage a Sacrament; nor could the Pope pretend the Supreme Jurisdiction
of Marriage, whereby he presumes to Depose Kings, and Dispose of the
Succession of Kingdoms.

(3) Without Compulsion to the Ceremony of a Priest or a Temple in Marriage,
the Bishop could make no Certificate against any Marriage, according to the
Moral Law of God, to be no Marriage.

(4) The Theodora's could not put in Adulterous Heirs into their Husband's
Inheritance at their pleasure, while they are within the four Seas, if their
Husbands had Liberty of Conscience allowed to marry according to the Moral Law
of God, without the Ceremony of a Priest and Temple.

(5) There could be no Transubstantiation of two Persons into one Person,
whereby all those mischiefs ensue, mentioned Lib. 1. p. 66. without the
Ceremony of a Priest in a Temple.

Of the Law, by which the Law of God of Marriage, Filiation, Aliment and
Succession ought to be judged.

Marriage ought to be judged by no Law except the Moral Law of God, and the
Moral Law by no Law but it self.
As to the true Law and Ordinance of Marriage, by which alone the same ought to
be judged, It is likewise already clearly and fully proved to be the Moral Law
of God; and therefore to avoid Repetition, I refer the Reader, if he please, to
Lib. 1. c. 8. p. 130. and for the Tables of the Moral Law, Vid. Ib. p. 131.

Of the Tables wherein the Moral Law of Marriage, Filiation, Aliment and
Succession is written, and the Witnesses and Judge thereof Commissioned by God
and not by Man, Vid. ib. 31, 32.

Of the Judges by which Marriage, Filiation, Aliment and Succession ought not,
and ought to be Judged.

Marriage, Filiation and Succession, ought to be judged by no Judges except the
Parents or the King and Parliament.
Having found the Law by which only we ought to Judge the Law of God of Marriage
to be the Moral Law of God, we ought next to consider by what Judge it ought
not, and ought to be Judged by the same Moral Law. There have been mentioned
before, Lib. 2. c. 1. p. 137. Five Competitor Judges of Marriage, Filiation,
Aliment and Succession.

(1) The Bishop. (2) The Magistrate. (3) The Soldier. (4) The Parents. (5) The
King and Parliament.
(1) And it has been showed, That the Bishop ought not to be Judge; with the
several Exceptions against the Abuses of Judges in their forms of Procedure,
both Ecclesiastical and Temporal; of which, vid. Lib. 2. cap. 1.

(2) That the Magistrate ought not to be Judge of Marriage, Filiation, Aliment
and Succession, vid. Lib. 2. cap. 2.

(3) That the Soldier ought not to be Judge of Marriage, Filiation, Aliment and
Succession, vid. Lib. 2. cap. 3.

(4) That the Parents ought to be Judge in Reference to their private
Patrimonies, vid. Lib. 2. cap. 4.

(5) That the King and Parliament ought to be Judge in reference to Public
Offices, and the Succession of the Crown, vid. Lib. 2. c. 5.

What is not Marriage by the Moral Law of God.

That neither Intent, Consent, Sponsion per verba de praesenti; nor such
Sponsion by a Priest in a Temple without Carnal knowledge, are Marriage, but
Mock Marriage, Vid. Lib. 1. p. 83, 84, 85, 86, 87.

What is not Matrimony by the Law of God.

The Civilians, Canonists, Common-Lawyers, Divines, Schoolmen and Casuists, are
as much out in the word Matrimony, as they are in the word Marriage. And all
the Kennels follow with full Cries the first who but opened his mouth, without
the least search further; and as they have thereby falsely made a Contract to
Marry, to be the very Act of Marriage; So have they falsely made the Contract
of Matrimony to be the very Act of Matrimony. And this Error they fell not into
by Ignorance, but Fraud. And the Popish Priests first took the President from
the Pagan. For without false naming what is not Marriage, to be Marriage; and
what is Marriage, Why Priests false named Marriage Matrimony.
not to be Marriage; and what is not Matrimony, to be Matrimony; and what is
Matrimony, not to be Matrimony; they could not have called Evil, Good; and
Good, Evil; neither could they have perverted the Moral Law and Text of
Scripture, to reward Adult'ry and Fornication under the false Name of Marriage
and Matrimony; and punish Marriage and Matrimony, under the false Name of
Adultery and Fornication, to their great Gains.

Matrimony, therefore, every one knows is derived from Matre, a Mother;
Matrimony none without a Child.
and without a Mother there can be no Matrimony: A Contract to make a Woman a
Mother, is so far from the Act of Performance which is Matrimony, that it seems
a Presumptuous and void Contract, because impossible to be performed by the
Contractor; for though he may Contract to bye with a Woman, which is Marriage,
and it may be in his Power to perform it, yet it is not in his Power to make
her a Mother; for the conception and birth of a Child is a Miracle which none
but God can do: and of this the Scripture is full, Birth of a Child the Act of
God, and not of Man.
Psa. 127.3. Children are an Heritage of the Lord, and the fruit of the womb is
his reward. Psa. 139.14. I am fearfully and wonderfully made, which is the same
with Miraculously made; and ver. 15. My substance was not hid from thee when I
was made in secret: and ver. 16. Thine eyes did see my Substance; yet being
unperfect and in thy book, all my members were written. And when all this is
done, he says further, Psa. 22.9. Thou art he that took me out of the womb.
And we find Jacob was of the same mind; for when Rachel, Genesis 30.1. said unto
Jacob, Give me Children, or else I die, ver. 2. Jacob's anger was kindled
against Rachel, and he said, Am I in God's stead, who has withheld from thee
the fruit of the womb? whereby there was something else necessary to Rachel's
Matrimony, than a fruitless Marriage; and that Jacob though he Contracted to
marry Rachel, Contracted not to make her a Mother. And till she conceived a
Child, there was a Marriage, but no Matrimony.

The Objection was, She was not Married according to the Law of God, therefore
the Eldest Son is not within the Statutes.

Statute requires neither a King de Jure, nor a Lady Companion de Jure, but
only de Facto.
Ans. (2) It were enough still to deny the Sequel, (1) Because the Letter of
the Statute requires not a Lady Married or lawfully Married, or Married
according to the Law of God; but only a Lady Companion. (2) Because it requires
not a King De Jure, as appears, Coke 3 part fol. 7. nor a Lady Companion De
Jure, nor a Son De Jure; But only a King De Facto, and a Lady Companion De
Facto, and a Son De Facto.
For though the Statute neither doubted King Edward to be a King De Jure, or,
in English a Lawful King, as well as De Facto; nor his Lady Philippa, being one
of the most virtuous Ladies in the world, to be his Lawful Lady Companion; yet
should the Statute have said, To compass the Death of our Lawful Sovereign Lord
the King, or of the Lady his Lawful Companion; it would have left Succession
more doubtful than before. For there never was a Law of the Land, The word
Lawful Uncertain and Litigious.
or Law of God, or Contract so clear, but Lawyers Ecclesiastical or Common for
Money have raised Questions and Doubts in, where the word Lawful, or any word
aequipollent or to that Effect is expressed: For first, when the word is not
expressed, there can no Law be Implied or Intended to Judge Lawfulness by, but
the Moral Law of God. But when it is expressed, as in the words, Lawful
Marriage, or, Lawfully begotten, they will expound them by Laws Papal and
Episcopal, which are not the Laws of the Land; and by Laws making Mala
prohibita, and not Mala in se, which are not the Laws of God; whereas, where it
is not expressed, it can only be Expounded by the Moral Law of God, which is
above all Humane Laws and Statutes. Secondly, A Lawful Successor may be of an
unlawful Marriage.
Because an Act of Parliament may make the Issue of a Marriage, though unlawful
and contrary to the Law of God, Heir to a Kingdom; As the Marriage of David to
Vriah's Wife, accomplished by Adultery with her, and the Murder of her Husband,
yet was Solomon Lawfully made Heir to succeed David. So Edward the Sixth
succeeded to Henry 8th, yet was his Mother Married while Anne of Cleve, his
former Wife, was alive. And that the unlawful Marriages of Parents ought not
Illegitimate, or be an Impediment to the Succession of Children, is fully
already proved, Lib. 1. p. 80. And to the same end the present Statute Enacts
no more in general for the safety of the eldest Sons of all Kings, than the
Famous Queen Elizabeth, 13 Eliz. 1. does for her own Heirs in particular; by
which Statute it is Enacted to be High Treason, To affirm that any ought to be
Heir and Successor to the Queen, The Crown entailed to the Natural and not
Lawful Issue of the Body of Queen Elizabeth.
except the same be the natural Issue of Her Body. So the old Lesson of the
Lawyers of the words, Lawfully begotten, is left out; yet no question that
Pious Queen intended more Lawful Heirs, than they with their Indentures, and
the Priests with their Banns or Benedictions used to make. (4) Because though
Successions to private Patrimonies may be held in suspense by Disputes of
lawful and unlawful, yet ought not Successions to Kingdoms so to be, which many
times not only the least Delay, but even the neglect of clearing all Doubts,
and declaring the Successor beforehand, destroys or involves in most bloody
Civil Wars to be after destroyed. (5) Because as is before touched concerning
the word Queen, no Penal Statute ought or can be Extended by Equity, nor any
thing be made within an Act of Treason, but what is within the Letter of the
same. But such Marriages or other Matters which are by any other Statute made
High Treason, ought to be Expounded to be within that Statute within the Letter
of which is so named or made; And not within the Intention of this Statute
wherein it is not so made. As by the said 13 Eliz. 1. It is made High Treason
to affirm, That the Laws and Statutes do not bind the Succession of the Crown,
that is Treason within the 13 Eliz. 1. But not within the 25 E. 3. for all
which Reasons though as it is at first said, It were sufficient to deny the
Sequel and say no more, yet that Malice it self may not have any pretense to
Cavil, I hope by God's assistance, Briefly, Clearly, and Unanswerably, when the
next Objection is answered, to prove she was both De Facto and De Jure, Married
according to the Law of God.

No Wife, no uxor.
Obj. 5. The fifth Objection is, That the Lady Mother was no Wife according to
the Law of God in Scripture.

The Reasons of this Objection are, (1) Because the Scripture calls a Woman
taken without Ceremonies, only a Concubine, or half-Wife. (2) Because, No
Concubine or half-Wife, or uxor in Scripture.
The word Uxor, signifies only a Woman made a Wife by the Ceremony of Unction
of the Husbands Door-Posts, or some other Ceremony.


Ans. 1. Though it were sufficient to show that there is no such word as Wife,
Concubine or half-wife in the Statute; and what is not in the Letter of a Penal
Law, cannot be supplied in the Intention, nor extended by Equity; and though it
were sufficient to deny the Sequel, yet to display the more the falsity of the
Allegations, I shall show there are no such words in Scripture as alleged.
For the Scripture is falsely Translated by the Bishops, and there is no such
word as Concubine different in Signification from a Wife in the whole Originals
of the Old Testament or New. Neither is there any middle word between a Wife
and a Whore; Neither is there any half-Wife, between a whole one, or None at
all; Neither is there any indifferent Wife, between a Lawful or Unlawful,
though there may be between a good and a bad. Lastly, Neither is there any such
Wife which can be Translated into the Latin word Vxor, so called quasi Vnctor,
from the Pagan Ceremony of Unction of her Husbands Door Posts; or so called
from any Episcopal Ceremony of a Priest and Temple.

Scripture falsely Translated by Bishops in the word Concubine.
The word of the Hebrew Text which they have falsely Translated Concubine, is
Pilegesh; which is derived from Palag Divisit, and Isha Foemina, and signifies
no more than a Divided several, or in plainer English, Another Woman or Wife
added to one or more, which the Husband had before.

The Greek word in the Septuagint which they have Translated Concubine, is
(...), which has a very innocent Signification, and signifies no more than
Juvencula, a young Woman, or a young Wife, 1 Chro. 1.32. Keturah, is by the
Septuagint rendered (...), which they have Translated Abraham's Concubine; for
which Reflection on Kiturah, they have no pretense or color; for Abraham
Married her not till Sarah was dead; the Marriage of Keturah therefore being
Lawful and unblameable, she ought to have been Translated Abraham's young Wife,
and not have been touched with the ignominious and fictitious Name of Concubine.
So ought they to have Translated the Levites Woman, Judges 19.1. Wife, and not
Concubine, or half-Wife; for ver. 3. they have Translated the Levite himself by
the name of her Husband, and not her half-Husband; and ver. 9. They have
Translated the Damsels Father to be his Father-in-Law, and not his half
Father-in-Law. And by the same Reason they ought to have Translated her to be
his Wife, and not what they would have to be, but his half-Wife; and ver. 2.
They have Translated her to play the Whore, and and not half the Whore; and to
run away, No half-Wife in Scripture.
and not half run away; and though there was in Scripture Pilegesh foemina, or
Vxor Divisa by a new Marriage; yet there never was any Vxor dimidiata or
half-wife we hear of therein; until this Levite, cap. 19.29. took a Knife and
cut his whole Wife into Twelve pieces, and by all probability into two halves
first, to make her run away from him after she was dead, further than ever she
did while alive.

(2.) There Is no middle word between a Wife, and Whore; for if a Woman is taken
for life, she is a Wife; if only pro hac vice; or for a lesser Term than life,
she is a Whore; and there is no middle Station for the limits of a Wife between
the first time of Marriage, and the end of Life.

(3.) It being shown before, that Pilegesh signifies only another Woman or Wife
taken after the first, which they have false Translated Concubine; if therefore
a second Woman or Wife is no Concubine, a fortiore the first can be none; and
therefore Keturah is false Translated Concubine, who was a third Wife; yet
durst not the Pope and Bishops themselves Translate Sarah, who was Abraham's
first Woman, Concubine, though she was according to Moses Law Incestuous, being
Abraham's Sister by the Father, (which Keturah was not) and though it be said,
Deuteronomy. 27.22. Cursed be he that lies with his Sister the daughter of his
Father; because if they had false Translated the first Woman Concubine, so
gross a Repugnancy would have been laughed at, and there would have been no
foundation whereon to have forged their word Concubine, or Designation or mark,
to difference it from such words as they must of force translate Wife.

(4.) There Is no indifferent Wife between a Lawful and unlawful; for though a
Lawful Wife is called a Wife, yet is not therefore an unlawful Wife called a
Concubine, either in Scripture or our own Laws, as appears 1 Jac. cap. 11. The
title of which Act is, That it shall be Felony to Marry a second Husband or
Wife, the former being Living; which Act calls this highest sort of unlawful
Wife, a Wife, though she be a Whore, and an Adulteress; and as there is no such
word as Concubine in Scripture, so there is no such word in the Law of the Land.
The Objection therefore is a Chimaera of a word and thing not truly in Rerum
natura, much less in Scripture, but false Coined and false Translated.

(5.) There Is no word in the Scripture which can be Translated as the Papal
Translation is into the Latin word Vxor, so called quasi Vctor from the Pagan
Ceremony of Unction of the Husbands Door-Post; The Scripture Wife false
Translated into the Latin word uxor.
nor can the same be Translated from the Papal Latin word Vxor, by the
Bishops, into the English word Wife; nor any Woman be so called from Episcopal
Ceremonies of a Priest in a Temple. It is to be here noted, That this Ceremony
of Unction of the Door-Posts which was to be with Wolfs grease, and the
Ceremonies of untying the Woman's Girdle, and of stoutly eating and drinking by
the Man, which the Priest persuaded the People to be so necessary to Marriage,
and to the naming the Parties Man and Wife, (as the Bishops do now, the Priest
and Temple and other Ceremonies) That they worshipped four Goddesses or
Daemonesses of purpose to praeside and give their Benediction to these
Ceremonies; and no doubt they got Fees or Offerings for them all. The Goddesses
names were Vnxia, Cinxia, Victua and Potua, as says Arnobius, Contra Gent.
Lib. 3. O l Egregia Numinum and singularis Interpretatio potestatum, nisi
posts virorum adipali unguine oblinerentur a Sponsis, nisi Virginalia vincula
jam ferventes Dissolverent atque imminentes Mariti, nisi potarent and manderent
homines, Dij nomina non haberent. Oh excellent and singular interpretation of
the Gods and Powers above, unless the Door-Posts of the Men were well greased
by the Woman; unless the hot and eager Husband tore off Mrs. Brides girdle; and
eat and drank lustily, the Gods would have no Names, nor could the Wife get the
name of a Wife. These are the Ceremonies of Rome Pagan, without which the Woman
could not be called Vxor a Wife, and the same is done for no other end than
filthy Lucre. Yet whom God has joined by his immutable Moral Law with a
Husband, and has given them Children, who are the Gift of God, and they have
been both all their days like John and Elizabeth, Luke 1.6. walking in all the
Commandments and Ordinances of the Lord blameless, without the Episcopal
Ordinances and Ceremonies of a Priest in a Temple, this Wife of God's making
shall by him be called (though he false Translate Scripture for it) Concubine
and Whore. And a Whore and Adulteress of the Bishops making, shall be called a
Wife of God's making; of which Episcopal Abuses to get Money, I shall only cite
one Practique in Scotland, and after some others in England, Craig. Feudorum
Fo. 230. says, Memini Robertum Magistrum de Semphil, Patrem Roberti nunc
Principem illius familiae, cum ex concubinatu Joannae Hamiltoniae hunc ipsum
filium suscepisset, and ei impense faveret, in Articulo Mortis cu sibi
decedendum videret, ad Aedem sacram se in Lectica deferri curaret, ibique
nuptiis solemniter peractis cum domum rediisset Octavo post die fatis
concessisse. Ex quo subsequente Matrimonio licet in Lecto agritudinis in quo
Decessit solemniter peracto, filius antea susceptus non minus in Haereditate
successit quam si ex legitimo Matrimonio natus fuisset. I remember, that Robert
the Master of Semphil, Father of Robert, now chief of that Family, when he had
begotten him by his Concubine Madam Joane Hamilton, and entirely loved him, He
being at point of Death, when he saw himself past hopes, caused himself to be
carried to the Holy Church in a Litter, and there the Ceremonies of Marriage
being solemnly performed; when he was brought back again to his House, he died
eight days after; from which subsequent Marriage although in the bed of
Sickness wherein he deceased, the Son begot before did as Lawfully succeed to
the Inheritance, as if he had been begot in Lawful Matrimony. And why should
not the Lady have been called Wife, but Concubine, and the Son have succeeded
without so barbarous a Ceremony, as hurrying a Dying Man to a Priest and a
Temple, when he was gasping for another world, to get a Wife in this; an Act
more proper to hasten his Death and Burial, than Marriage, and to have been
abhorred by all Dutiful Children, had they not been compelled by the Tyranny of
such Popish Ecclesiastical Laws, as to the Dishonor of the two so Renowned
Protestant Kingdoms in Great Britain are Tolerated to prey worse than Death on
them and their Posterity.

But of the false Translations of Scripture by Bishops, in all other words
related to Marriage, see more at large, Lib. 2. cap. 1. 142 ad 162.

Of certain differences between a Wife of the Bishop's making, and Wife of
God's making; which make the first neither within the Law of God, nor the
Statute.
There Is no Protestant Nation in Christendom wherein the Jurisdiction usurped
by Bishops, is so high and Extravagant in making other Men's Wives and Children
for them, as in England.

(1.) The first difference between a Wife of the Bishop's making, and of God's
making, is, The former lets herself to Hire to him who will give most Jointure,
Dower or Thirds for her; but the latter does neither buy nor sell her Husband,
but he keeps his own, and she hers, both Money, Goods, and Lands. Concerning
mercenary Marriages, Vid. Lib. 1. cap. 6.113. Vsque ad 118.

(2.) A Wife of the Bishops making, has Power to Steal and Esloigne all her
Husband's Substance, and to put it into the hands of his Enemies for her own
use; and he can have no account against her, because, as is already shown, Lib.
1. p. 70. The Bishop by his Sacrament of Marriage has Transubstantiated two
persons into one person: but the Wife of Gods making is under account; and
nothing keeps a Steward Faithful, but Account.

(3.) The Wife of the Bishops making, has Power given her by the Benediction
of a Priest in a Temple, if she is not able her self, to hire unknown persons
with her Husbands Goods to Rob, Beat and Disseise her Husband, and Esloigne his
Goods, and no remedy against her: But a Wife of Gods making, though she has
Gods Benediction, which is above the Priests, has no such power, but there is
remedy against her.

(4.) The Wife of the Bishops making, has Power to lay all her secret and
unknown debts, true and feigned, by her Confederates, and as many as she will,
on her husband, and to undo him, and no remedy against her.

(5.) The Wife of the Bishops making, has Power by the Benediction of a Priest
in a Temple, to commit as many Trespasses either with Tongue or hand, truly or
by Confederacy with accomplices as often as she pleases, making her husband pay
Damages till undone, and he has no remedy.

(6.) A Wife of the Bishops making, has full Power, by virtue of the said
Benediction, to hire Adulterers with her Husbands Goods and Money to get
Children to succeed to them, and he has no remedy.

Adulteresses protected, and the Son of an Adulterer made Heir before the
Lawful Child of the Husband by Episcopal Certificat.
(7.) A Wife of the Bishops making, if she has a Daughter by her Husband, and
Elope and run away from him with another man, and has Issue by her New
Companion the Adulterer: her Eldest Son, this Son of the Adulterer, shall be
Heir to the Husbands Inheritance, though he were the greatest Peer in the Land:
Yea, though he had an Elder Daughter before of his own begetting by her; As
appears 7 H. 4. fo. 9. Where the Case was, That Julian took to Husband John de
C. in the County of York, and was Married at Fleetsham, and the said John had
Issue by her W: After the said Julian Eloped and went into the County of N.
and, it being not Felony in those days, took to Husband W. B. and he had Issue
by her W. her Eldest Son, who after sued to be Heir to John; and the true Heir
of John objected against him the Elopement of his Mother ^^dian, and his being
begotten by the Adulterer, and not by John.

On which Justice Rikhill gives Judgment, That if John were within the Four
Seas at the time of the begetting of W. then W. was the Son and right Heir-Male
of John.

The Calf his whose Cow is Bull'd by another Bull.
And of this he gives a good Lusty Reason. For, says he, who that Bulleth my
Cow, the Calf is mine. And my Lord Coke, Com. 244, does on the Margin refer to
this Authority of Justice Rikhill, and agrees with him as right as a Gun; and
adds over, That no Proof ought to be admitted to the contrary; and therein I
think none will Envy Justice Rikhill or my Lord Coke, (who I think were within
the Four Seas, and never out) to enjoy the Liberty of Conscience in disposing
their own Goods how they please. But there appears no Reason why they should
deny the same Liberty of Conscience to all the rest of their fellow Subjects
who live within the same Four Seas, to dispose of their own Goods as they think
Just; neither ought they by so unequal a Sentence to have given away the
Successions of True and Lawful Heirs, without allowing them hearing or
witnesses, to those who are false and adulterous. And therefore from such Wives
of the Bishops making, Injust for a Prince, much more for a Judge or Bishop to
force an Heir on another.
and such Judges of Marriage, Filiation and Succession, of the same making,
Libera nos Domine. Iniquum est aliquem haeredem invito a Principe dari. Craig.
Fe^d. 267. much more must it be for a Judge or Bishop.

Object. 6. There is no Bishops Certificate of the Marriage and Filiation.

The Form of the Bishops Certificate of Marriage.

Cok. Lib. Intra. fo. 181. In Dower on a Nunquam fuit in legitimo Matrimonio
copulata pleaded; A Writ is sent to the Bishop to Certify, who returns this
Certificate, Et praedictus Episcopus per literas suas Patentes and Clausas etc.
And the foresaid Bishop by his Letters Patents and Close has Certified to the
Justices here, That by virtue of the foresaid Writ to him directed, Convocating
before him such of right as are to be Convocated, has diligently Enquired and
Certified the truth of the matter, That in the Chapel of B. in the County of
G. in the Diocese of L. the Sixth day of Aug. An. 1606. Matrimony true, pure
and lawful per verba de praesenti, according to the Form and Rites of the Book
of Common Prayer of the Church of England, between the said A. B. and C. B. was
solemnized by one Mr. A. U. Clork, in the prosence of J.J. W.B. W. W. R.M.
Witnesses in this part by the said Bishop examined and sworn, and of other
Witnesses then present, the said A. B. and C. D. his Wife being of Lawful Age,
and of all other Matrimonial Contracts free, clear and clean, as the Witnesses
so sworn and examined believe.

The Form of the Bishops Certificate of Bastardy, Rast. Lib. Intra. 105. b.

On a Plea of Bastardy pleaded, and a Writ to the Bishop to Certify, he makes
a Return, Venerabilibus viris Justiciarijs in Brevi Regio praesentibus annex.
specific. permissione Divina C. Episcopus etc. Certificamus quod diligentem and
solertem fieri fecimus Inquisitionem de materijs in Brevi praedict' Content',
per quam invenimus per Legitimas in hac part probationes and alia in hac part
Canonice requisit', quod infra nominat' N.H. de T. A. H. de P. J. H. de P. and
P. H. de P. Bastardi sunt and quilibet little Bastardus est, prout praedict' R.
B. in Brevi praedict' nominat' placitando allegavit, and non Legitime prout
praedict' N. A. J. and E. placitando allegarunt, and hoc idem nobis satis
constat.

We Certify, That we have made diligent and cunning Inquisition of the Matters
contained in the Writ, by which we find by Lawful Proofs and other things
Canonically in this behalf required, that the within named N. H. of T. A. H. of
P: J.H. of P. and E. H. of P. are Bastards, and every of them is a Bastard, as
the said R. H. in his Writ aforesaid named in Pleading has alleged, and not
Legitimate as the said N. A. J. and E. have in Pleading alleged; and this
appears clear enough to us.

Having shown the Form of these Certificates what they are, I now answer to the
Objection:

(1.) That the Letter of the Statute not mentioning either Marriage,
Legitimation, Bishop or Certificate, there needs no Proof or use of these at
all; but it is sufficient to prove a Lady Companion De Facto, and an Eldest Son
de Facto, as mentioned in the Statute. (2.) Admit there was a Marriage or
Legitimation to be proved, the Statute does not limit to any special manner of
Probation, but leaves liberty to make Probation qu cunque modo, as in all other
Matters. (3.) A Penal Statute cannot be extended by Equity to make Treason
against an Heir so made only by Certificate of the Bishop, feeing the Letter of
the Statute makes not any such Treason; and it would be of very dangerous
Consequence, to make any Intentional or Express Statute to give Power to any
Bishop or Archbishop to declare Kings or their Successors by Certificates
under pain of Treason: for then is the old Papal Power, and greater than the
Papal, put into their hands of making and deposing them at their pleasure,
either under Pain of Excommunication or Treason; and the power of Declaring or
laying the Penalty of Treason in the Bishop, would be greater than it was of
Excommunication in the Pope. (4.) It is manifest, that the Wise and Renowned
King Edward the Third, the Author of this Statute (as has been already shown)
never intended they should have thereby any such Power or Pretense; which
though sufficient to answer the Objection, I shall give some further Touch of
the Mischiefs that ensue by them to the People, as well as to Princes.
Of the Mischiefs that ensue of Bishops Certificates of Marriage and Filiation,
which Certify other kinds of Heirs than the Heir intended by this Statute.

The Original of Certificates of Marriage came not from Christ, but from the
Priests of Priapus, and the Devil.
(1.) The Original of Bishops Certificates of Marriage and Filiation, came not
from Christ or his Apostles; for we neither find, that he or they ever
Contracted or Married any Man and Woman, nor gave Certificate of Marriage or
Filiation themselves, nor Precept to their Successors to do the same.

(2.) The only Original of them which can be found, came from the Priests of
Priapus, who forbid all Marriages, except by the Ceremonies of a Priest in a
Temple; of which kind of unclean Priests, I shall only here repeat a short Note
before mentioned, from Cornelius Agrippa de Van. Scient. p. 738. in these
words, Sordidissimus Priapus pro Deo habitus hunc coluerunt primi illi
Religionum artifices Chaldaei, Aegyptii, Assyrii, Babylonii, Arabes, Scythae,
Aethiopes, ac perinde tota Africa, Asia and Europa; nec fas erat ullum
Sacerdotem fiori qui Priapi sacris non crat initiatus. Hic est ille Belphegor,
Idolum omnium antiquissimum, quod est Chamos dictum, a Chamo filio Noe. The
filthy Priapus was reputed a God, him worshipped the first Founders of
supersti^ous Religions, The Chaldaeans, Egyptians, Assyrians, Babylonians,
Arabians, Scythians, Ethyopians, and almost all Africa, Asia and Europe:
neither was it lawful for any to be made a Priest, unless he was first
Initiated in the Sacred Rites of Priapus. This is Belphegor, of all other the
most ancient Idol, which is likewise called Chamos, from Cham the Son of Noah.

That these Priests of Priapus, who is the same with Baal-Peor and Milcom, had
their Doctrine of compelling Women and Men to be Married by Priests with
Ceremonies, from the Devil, appears by what use they put it to, Numb. 25.1. And
the People began to commit whoredom with the daughters of Moab, and they called
the People to the sacrifice of their Gods, and the People did eat, and bowed
down to their Gods, and Israel joined himself to Baal Peor. And in the
Scripture, Idolatry is commonly called going a whoring after Idols, because the
Priests made the Men and Women the baits to entice one another, under pretense
of Religion, to their Conventions in the Idol Temple, where the Priest was the
Pander-General, and took the fees of all to his great Gain.

The Original of Certificates of Filiation came from the Priests of Priapus.
2. The Original of Certificates by the Bishop or High Priests, of Filiation,
began likewise from the Incertainty Children were cast into by these
Promiscuous copulations at their Temples or Groves, or other Public
Conventions by the Pander Priest; who that he might not lose his fees kept a
Register or Toll-Book, where these who coupled for that time had their names
entered to have paid them their fee. And when the Child got there, was grown to
discretion to enquire who was his Father, his Mother, who had played the Whore
with so many Strangers at the several Sacrifices, could not tell, unless she
sent to the Priest who kept the Priapeian Sacrifice at that time which suited
nearest her Child's Age, to send a Certificate of the name of the Person or
Persons were then entered together with her name in his Toll-Book. Which way of
Certificate of Filiation by the Pagan Priest, The Certificate of the Priest of
Priapus better than that of the Bishop.
was far more Rational than the Certificate thereof by the Bishop: For first,
the Child never sent for a Certificate to the Pagan Priest, but when he did not
know his Father. Secondly, The Pagan Priest entered in his Register every time
the Woman copulated with a Man; for which he had a new Fee. But the Bishop will
undertake that if it be but once set down in his Register, That such a Man and
Woman came to his Temple, though they never came near one another afterward, or
the next day deserted one another, or the Woman being beforehand with Child by
an Adulterer, was the next day after she had been thus with the Man at the
Temple delivered of such an Adulterous Child, or begot with Child, or was
Delivered of Twenty Children successively by twenty Adulterers for twenty years
after; yet the Bishop will make a ridiculous, beastly and wicked Certificate.
And Littleton and Coke, bear him out in it, That in all these cases the Man who
went Twenty years since with this Woman to his Temple, if he were within the
Four Sees at the time of the begetting of these Adulterous Children by the
Adulterers; yet he the Man within the Four Sees begot them, and Probatio non
admittitur in contrarium. Oh! Excellent Law, and excellent Divinity. The
Certificates of the Priests of Priapus are very bad, but these Episcopal
Certificates are ten times worse. But I must, for brevity, refer the Reader to
what has been said before, Lib. 1, p. 72, 73. The original of these
Certificates of Filiation by Priests for other causes, were likewise either
Cheats of the Priests, or came from the Actual Response of the Devil: So the
Priests would anciently attribute the begetting of any Child whose Father was
unknown, if he proved an Hero, The Priest fathered Men on the Gods.
or had any other Excellence, especially if Rich, and gave him Money, to some
of the Gods; as Romulus and Remus were fathered on Mars; Plato on Apollo; and
Vulcan they made himself a God, because (...) without a Father. But the
greatest number of them they laid at Jupiter's Door, who no question had a
great charge upon his hands, and sometimes when the Mother was unknown, they
Mother'd him on some Goddess or other, as Achilles on Thetis; Aeneas on Venus;
Oedipus not knowing his Father whom he had slain, nor Mother, wnom he had
Married, had a Response from the Oracle, or Certificate from the Priest of
Apollo, which acquainted him with the same. And Alexander, ambitious to have a
greater Father than Philip, sent to the Oracle of Jupiter Ammon, and for a
great Sum of Gold had either a Response from the Devil, or a cheating
Certificate from the Priest, That he was the Son of Jupiter. But we never hear
amongst the Pagans themselves, of any Son who was so wise to know his own
Father, or was not ashamed of him who went for a Certificate to the Priest or
the Devil.

(3.) The final Causes why they so eagerly desire the Jurisdiction of Marriage
and Filiation by this Power of making Certificates, are their Covetousness and
Ambition, vid. at Large, Lib. 1. p. 53. ad 57. Popery ruined if Episcopal
Jurisdiction of Marriage were taken away.
And that the Pope were ruined if Episcopal Jurisdiction of Marriage and
Filiation, and their Certificates should be taken away, Lib. 2. p. 184. It may
be said therefore to Bishops Certificates, as to the ends they designed them,
according to the saying of Christ, Mat. 6.24. Ye cannot serve God and Mammon.

Certificates of Bishops condemn Infants without hearing. Condemn Children for
the Sin of the Parents.
(4.) The Persons they make Certificates against being Infants, and not able to
answer for themselves in Suits in the Episcopal Courts, are Condemned without
Hearing.

(5.) Infants are Condemned by such Certificates, contrary to the Law of God,
for the Sins of their Parents.

6. Certificates Judge of Filiation, which is acknowledged by the Bishops
themselves impossible to be proved according to the old known Rule, Filiatio
non potest probari. A Certificate Episcopal is therefore a Sentence without
Probation, which is not only in the highest nature injust, but void and
ridiculous. Of this,. Vid. plus. Lib. 1. p. 104, 105.

Certificate an Usurpation of Jurisdiction of Lay-fee and Free-holds.
(7.) The Certificate indirectly passes judgment on Temporal Inheritance and
Lay-fee, which is a mere Romish Usurpation assumed by the Bishops, which
Bracton fo. 420. will not allow the Pope himself to have; for he says on a
Certificate of Bastardy, Cum Index Ecclesiasticus inquisitionem fecerit, non
erit ab eo appellandum, etc. and his Reason he gives, Quia sic potest causam in
insinitum protrahere, de Judice in Judicem usque ad Papam, and sic potest Papa
de Laico feodo indirecte cognoscere. If therefore for the Pope to Sentence, or
Certificate Bastardy, is indirectly to give Judgment of Lay-fee, is not such
Certificate of a Bishop in Great Britain as indirect a passing of Judgment on
Lay-fee, as is that of the Bishop of Rome. And do not Lay-fees lie thereby as
much under the Arbitrary disposing of the one, as ever they did of the other?
Both Pope and Bishop must claim this Power of Certificate by Conquest, or
Contract; if by Conquest, it is probable they must put it to another Trial
before any Romish Conquest will be granted; if by Contract, let them show ever
any Act of Parliament made for the same, by assent of the House of Commons. And
if it were possible to show any such, yet all Acts confirming Magna Charta, and
likewise the Petition of Right, repeal it. For Liberty and Propriety cannot
consist with the Certificates of Bishops.

Marriage and Filiation not to be submitted to any Judges or Arbitrators,
except the Parties themselves, or God.
(8.) Certificates of Marriage and Filiation, usurp the Power of Judgment of
such Matters as cannot be submitted (though the Parties assented) to any
Arbitrators or Judges, but God himself, or the Parties. And this is very
Judiciously delivered by West. Symbol. Tit. Compromise and Arbitrament, fo.
165.6. That no causes Matrimonial are arbitrable, lest men should separate
those whom God has joined together. If this is true, (as none but stupidity it
self can be but sensible, that the Laws of God cannot be submitted to the
Arbitrament of Men) what then becomes of all Episcopal Certificates of Marriage
and Filiation, unless they intend to fight against God himself?

Bishop who certifies, ignorant both of Fact and Law.
(9.) The Judge who makes the Certificate is totally Ignorant both of the Fact
and Law: which see already proved, Lib. 2. p. 180.

Herodotus tells of a Place in Lybia, where the Children of Women who were
common, drew Lots before a Public Assembly (but whether the Assembly were
Ecclesiastical, it does not appear) of such whom their Mothers nominated; and
whom the Lot fell on, what wise Children were these? They knew them to be their
own Fathers as infallibly, no question, as if they had tried by the Witchcraft
of a Seive and a pair of Shears, and equally with a Bishop's Certificate; only
on the first they paid no Fees: The blind Goddess being always found so just,
she will take none.

(10.) The Case is false ^^ated, as the state of the Question which is made,
is, Whether A fuit Legitimo Matrimonio copulata, when the intent is by the
Bishops Certificate to Null the Marriage; whereas this Question, as to Nulling
the Marriage, is impertinent; for every Prohibited Marriage is not Null or
Nullable, but may be notwithstanding it is Prohibitum be Indissolubile.

(11.) It Is stated Illegitimum Matrimonium in General, Illegitimum Prohibitum,
and illegitimum in se.
and does not say whether Illegitimum Prohibitum, or Illagitimum in se; each of
which will fall under clean different Considerations one from another. And that
to teach, that any Illegitimum Prohibitum in Marriage is unlawful, which is not
Illegitimum in se, is the Doctrine of Devils, as is already proved, Lib. 1. p.
52.

The state of the Question ought to be, whether Son or no Son, which is Matter
of Fact; and not whether Legitimate or not Legitimate, which is Matter in Law.
(12.) The true state as to Filiation, being to be the question, Whether Son or
no Son, it is false stated, and false named, Whether Bastard, or whether
Legitimate or not Legitimate, where it has been proved at large, Lib. 1.79.
That there is no such word or thing as Legitimate or Illegitimate amongst the
ancient Lawyers, or in Rerum natura, till Popery. And Lib. 2. p. 146. and 156.
That there was no such word or thing as Bastard in the whole Scripture, or
amongst the ancient Lawyers or Divines, until the Popes and Bishops falsely
Translated the Scriptures. As to the word Mamzer, which signifies no more than
Alienigena and Nothus, which signifies no more than Fictus, into the
forementioned Scurrilous word of their own unclean Invention.

Certificate of the Bishop, Nonsense. Certificate of the Bishop Nulls all
Marriage Prohibited contrary to the Law of England and Scotland.
(13.) Their Certificate as to Marriage Per verba de Praesenti, is Nonsense;
which see already proved, Lib. 1. p. 84.

14. The Certificate distinguishes not between Marriage Prohibited, and Null;
but Nulls every Marriage Prohibited, and barbarously Illegitimates every Child
born of the same, which is already proved, Lib. 1. p. 110. to be contrary to
the Law of God, and the Law of England, and may likewise appear to be contrary
to the Law of Scotland, by an Act of Parliament there made, Sess. 2. Par. 2.
Car. 1. Act. 22. against Clandestine Marriage; which Act Prohibits and
punishes those who are Married without Banns, or by Josuits or Popish Priests,
and lays Fines or every Nobleman, so offending, of Five Thousand Pounds; and
on every Gentleman or Burgess, of one Thousand Marks; but neither English nor
Scotch make such Prohibited Marriages void, nor Nulls them, nor Illegitimates
their Children; neither can any Humane Law Null that Marriage which the Moral
Law of God makes valid; nor separate those whom the same Law Prohibits not to
Marry (though the Law of Man does) when God has joined them by Procreation and
Birth of a Child.

Propriety in Parents and Children destroyed by Bishops Certificates.
(15.) The Episcopal Certificate destroys all Propriety the Father has in his
Children, and the Children have in their Father; For by the Law of God and
Nature, there is no way of acquiring Propriety in Children but by begetting of
them. This is Plain in the Scripture in all the Genealogies there mentioned.
And in the Fact of Adultery of David with Vriah's Wife, where the Child who was
begotten in Adultery, is plainly made by the Scripture the Child of David;
though the Now Episcopal Certificate would make it the Child of Vriah.

And worthily may such be said to be ignorant of all Laws of acquiring
Propriety in Children, who pretend because the Propriety of another man's Lambs
and Kids may by Contract of his own Wife be made his, therefore the Propriety
of another man's Children may likewise by her Contract be made his; and because
Quicquid plantatur, seritur, vel inaedificatur, omne solo cedit. And Judge
Rikhill, as beforementioned, will not only have the like accession of another
man's Bull to his Cow to make the Calf to be his; but likewise to be his Cow,
and himself to be not only the Owner, but the Father of such Calf. The
Ignorance of all Law in Certificates therefore blindly subverts the Fundamental
of all Acquisition of Propriety by the Father in begetting. No wonder if they
destroy the Propriety of the Children in the Father, though begotten by him,
and make them Nullius filii: and again forces a Child on him who is not the
Father, to be his Heir whether he will or no, and robs him of his Inheritance,
Neque enim aequum non consentienti haeredem alium dare. Craig. 267.

Certificates of Bishops deprive Infants of Aliment, and destroy them.
(16.) The Certificate of the Bishop exposes Infants to be destroyed, and
deprives them of all Aliment from the Father, who begot them. For by making the
Father who begot them, to have no Propriety in them, nor they in him, and the
Children to be Nullius filii, all Obligation is taken off from the Father; and
he is made worse than an Infidel not to provide for his own Children, either by
Aliment while alive, or Succession after his death.

The true Children are disinherited by the Adulterous on Certificates.
(17.) The Certificate starves and disinherits the true Children, and Aliments
and Inherits the false. For shame take away such wickedness amongst Christians,
which is not to be found among Infidels.

This has already been shown to be the wicked Practice of Episcopal and Common
Lawyers Pa^o^nized by Judge Rikhil, Littleton and Coke, contrary to the Law of
God, where the Husband is within the Four Seas at the time of begetting the
Child, and gives power to disinherit the right, and intrude Adulterous Heirs
not only into private Families, but Kingdoms. Of which take a strange attempt
emboldened on this absurd Popish Principle, That adulterous Children born
within Matrimony, are inheritable to the Husband of the Adulteress, and not to
the Adulterer, Anno 1459. Henry of Spain being himself unable for generation,
persuaded his Queen to be got with Child by Bertrand of Guttua; Joane thus
gotten is Proclaimed Heir, and Bertrand is made Earl of Ledesma, and Duke of
Albuquerk: Hist. Hisp.

The People force him to reject his supposed Daughter, and to declare his
Brother Alphonsus; and he refusing, they Depose him, and Crown Alphonsus. Hist.
Hisp.

Henry overcomes: Queen Joane has two Children more by another Minion;
Alphonsus dies; Isabel the King's Sister refuses the Kingdom; she is declared
Heir, and Marries Ferdinand of Aragon. Hist. Hisp.

Anno 1474. Diverse join for Joane with Alf. of Portugal, who meant to Marry
her; But Anno 1480. she enters into a Monastery, and Alf. of Portugal. Here
Joane was born within Matrimony, and the Certificate of the Bishop, and the
Doctrine of Judge Rikhil, if it had been sent for, would have made Joane Heir;
but the very light of Nature taught the People, though in a Country blinded
with Popish Superstition, that she was not the true Heir by the Law of God, but
by Fiction; therefore they would not bear it.

Bishops Certificates make adulterous Children honorable, and true Children,
base.
(18.) The Certificate slanders and dishonours the true, and makes honorable
the false and Adulterous Children, as appears in the beforementioned form of
Certificate of Bastardy, That the under-named N. H. of T. A. H. of P. J. H. of
P. and E. H. of P. are Bastards, and every of them a Bastard: He makes Bastards
by Bundles, it is as easy to him as cracking of Nuts; and though 1 Cor. 6.10.
after other bad Company mentioned, it is said, No Revilers shall inherit the
Kingdom of God, yet the mouth of this Certificate is full of Revilings, and
devours no less than four Innocents at once, who against others might have had
their Actions of Slander; but against a pretended Jure Divino of an Episcopen
Slander, there is no Remedy to be had.

Certificates destroy Truth, and found on Fictions and Lies.
(19.) The Certificates undermine the Pillar of Truth, and lays the Foundation
of Marriage and Filiation on Fictions and Lies; As that Sponsa before a Priest
in a Temple is Vxor; That Verba De Praesenti, are Facta de praeterito and
futuro; That Prohibited Marriages are Null and void; That feigned and void
Marriages are by License and Dispensation true and valid; That Intention is
Contract; Contract is Tradition; Obligation is Propriety; and Promise is Gift.

Si donare vocas, promittere, nec dare, Cai,
Vincam te donis, muneribusque m^is. Mart.
That a Child is not Sib, or Kin, or of Consanguinity, or the Child of the
Father who begot, or the Mother who bare him or they of him; of which see more,
Lib. 2. p. 154, 155. That Children begot by Adulterers, were begot by the
Husband within the four Seas. That two Persons are Transubstantiated into one
Person by the words of Priests pronouncing them Man and Wife, L. 1. p. 66. with
many other, which I forbear here to repeat. All which are mere Fictions and
Falsities, and to be Abhorred, to be Tolerated to support Ceremonial
Mock-Marriage against the true Marriage according to the Moral Law of God.

Bishops Certificates inconsistent with the right of Primogeniture.
(20.) The Certificate disinherits Primogeniture in Succession to Kingdoms,
contrary to this Statute, and contrary to the Law of God and Nature.

Patritius Lib. 9. De Regn. T. 22. says, Jus naturae exigit and Gentium
Consuetudo confirmat, ut Maximus natu Ex filiis Mortuo Regi succedat. And
Tiraquel in Praefat. de Jure Primog. with this agrees the Rule that Deus facit
Haeredes. And no other sign can be in the Law of Nature interpreted to come
from God, but Primogeniture of a Son: with which likewise agrees the Scripture,
Deuteronomy. 21.15. If a man have two women (for that is the Original, and it is falsely
Translated, Si fuerit alicui duae Vxores) one beloved, and another hated, and
they have born him Children both the beloved and the hated; And if the first
born Son be hers that is hated, Then it shall be when he shall make his Sons to
inherit that which he has, That he may not make the Son of the beloved First
born before the Son of the hated, which is indeed the First born: But he shall
acknowledge the Son of the hated for the First born, by giving him a double
Portion of all that he has; for he is the beginning of his Strength, the Right
of the First born is his. The other Text of Scripture is, Jehosophat gave the
Kingdom to his eldest Son, and Gifts to his younger.
2 Chro. c. 21.1. Now Jehosophat slept with his Fathers, and was buried with
his Fathers in the City of David, and Jehoram reigned in his stead. And he had
Brethren the Sons of Jehosophat, Azariah, and Jehiel, and Zechariah, and
Azariah, and Michael, and Sephatiah; all these were the Sons of Jehosophat King
of Israel, and their Father gave them great Gifts of Silver and of Gold, and of
precious things, with fenced Cities in Judah: But the Kingdom he gave to
Jehoram, because he was his First born. Now when Jehoram was risen up to the
Kingdom of his Father, he strengthened himself, and slew all his Brethren with
the Sword, and diverse also of the Princes of Israel; And 2 King. 8.18. And he
walked in the ways of the Kings of Israel, as did the House of Ahab; for the
Daughter of Ahab was his Wife, and he did evil in the sight of the Lord.

Which Texts, the one for Primogeniture in private Families, the other for the
same in Successions to Kingdoms, make such Right appear very strong in both;
and these Observations tending to the same, may be taken from them.

(1.) That though the Eldest Son be the Son of a second Woman Married after the
first; yet if the Son of the second be the Son First born before the Son of the
first, he shall be preferred in the Succession.

(2.) Though the second Woman is an unlawful Woman: for here are the highest
Circumstances which can make a Woman unlawful; for the first Woman is still
alive, and has born the Husband Children as well as the second. For the words
of the Text are, They have born him Children, both the beloved, and the hated:
Yea, it may often fall out, That the Children of the first Woman may be first
born, and elder than the Children of the second Woman; yet if the first and the
Lawful man has an eldest Daughter, and the second and unlawful Woman has an
eldest Son; The Son of the second unlawful and hated Woman shall succeed before
the Daughter of the first Lawful and beloved Woman, a Fortiore, shall the
eldest Son, if born of the first Woman succeed.

Primogeniture to be in Marriage, though without Ceremonies.
(3.) Though there is no Ceremonial, but only the Moral Marriage, yet shall the
eldest Son of the Moral Marriage inherit: For it is not mentioned, nor is it
that the Woman who brought forth the First born should be first carried before
a Priest in a Temple, before the Woman who had a younger Son; for that would be
repugnant to the Law of Succession by Primogeniture, and impossible to consist
with it; and the Israelites never used any such Ceremony or other: But used the
first Solemnity of Marriage when they used any, except Sub Dio, where they
might see the Heavens in Memory of the Promise made to Abraham, Genesis 15.5. That
his Seed should be in Number as the Stars.

(4.) It Is to be observed, That not an eldest Son by Fiction of an Husband who
was within the Four Seas, but the truly first begotten Son shall succeed: for
the words are (he may not make the Son of the beloved first born, but the Son
of the hated, which is indeed the first born) so not the eldest Son by Fiction,
but the eldest Son indeed is here only both expressed and intended.

(5.) That the Right of Primogeniture extends not only to Aliment, for that all
Children, elder and younger, Sons and Daughters, have an equal right to. But
the right of Primogeniture extends in private Families amongst the Israelites
to a double Portion, and in Succession to Kingdoms to the whole: For the words
in Deuteronomy. are (A double Portion of all that he has) and the words of Chro. are
(The Kingdom he gave to Jehoram, because he was his first born.)

(6.) That the reason why a greater Portion is given to the eldest of what is
Superalimentary, than to the younger Children, is, That he is the Chief
strength of the Family to defend the Father when Aged, and the Children when
left in Minority, and the Inheritance it self, when Invaded by Pretenders. The
words therefore are (for he is the beginning of his strength, the Right of the
first born is his.)

(7.) That the Bishop ought not be witness of the Filiation or Primogeniture of
the Son. Feminine Popes if any, and not Male, ought to make Certificates of
Primogeniture.
But the Matter being in the Israelites Country, the same ought to be
testified by two or three witnesses, as Deuteronomy. 19.15. and more modestly by
Faeminine witnesses, than Per Papas mares; as likewise appears by the Example,
Genesis 38.27. And it came to pass in the time of her Travail, that behold Twins
were in her womb. And it came to pass when she Travailed, that the one put out
his hand, and the Midwife took and bound upon his hand a Skarlet Thread,
saying, This came out first; and it came to pass as he drew back his hand; that
behold his Brother came out, and she said, How have thou broken forth? This
breach be upon thee; therefore his name was called Pharez. And afterward came
out his Brother that had the Skarlet Thread upon his hand, and his name was
called Zarah.

(8.) That the Bishop ought not to be Judge of the Filiation or Primogeniture,
but the Father himself; for the words are (He shall acknowledge the Son of the
hated for the first born) which is the Natural Father shall acknowledge or
Cognosce him to be his first born.

(9.) That in Countries under Arbitrary Power, and the Regal Power not limited
by Laws, both the Royal Issue and Nobles lie commonly under great Danger of
being cut off by new Successors, unless they are of the true Religion, and fear
God.

(10.) That such Successors are often set on to great Cruelties by Idolatrous
Wives, as appears in this Example of Jehoram, who, as is mentioned in the Text,
slew all his Brethren with the Sword, and diverse also of the Princes of Israel:
And he walked in the way of the Kings of Israel as did the house of Ahab: for
the Daughter of Ahab was his Wife, and he did evil in the Sight of God.

(11.) That in such Countries where Religion and Laws bear not sway, the more
Rich and Potent the younger Sons of Princes are made, the more danger they
incur of losing all. (1) Because the Treasury of the Crown is thereby Exhausted
and Impoverished; as here Jehosophat gave his younger Sons great gifts of
Silver and Gold, and of Precious things. The great value of which after his
Death did but accelerate the Resumption of them by him who succeeded in his
Throne, and showed the Truth of what is said by Solomon, Eccles. 5.18. There is
a sore evil which I have seen under the Sun, namely Riches kept for the owners
thereof to their hurt. (2) Because great Military Power is commonly joined with
Treasure as here appears, Excess of Treasure and fenced Cities left to younger
Sons of Princes, commonly destroys them.
Together with the same he gave them fenced Cities; both which many times make
the Supreme fearful of such Power, not only too great to be subject, but
greater than his own; whereas if they had been left what was Moderate below
Envy and above Contempt (as the younger Sons of the China Emperors are, and
thereby enjoy more secure and happy fates than the Sons of the Grand Seignior,
Persian, Negus and Mogul ever attain) they might probably have lived, and
though their Brother Jehoram was wicked, never had his hands embrued in their
Blood.


Of the General Custom of Nations of Succession to Kingdoms by Primogeniture,
and of the Mischief and Civil Wars which have followed by Disinheriting the
eldest Son.

Having shown the Right of Primogeniture in Successions to Kingdoms from the
Law of Nature and Scripture, the same likewise appears to be generally the
Custom of all Nations, That the same Custom was amongst the Egyptians as we
has the Israelites, is inferred by Lyra from Exodus 12.29. And it came to pass
that at Midnight the Lord smote all the first born of the Land of Egypt, from
the first born of Pharaoh that sat on his Throne unto the first born of the
Captive that was in the Dungeon. And that the same Custom continued in the
times of the Ptolomies appears Justin 16. So was it amongst the Trojans, and
Hus succeeded to Troyas, as Dares to Phrygius in Lib. De Excid. Tro. The same
Custom of Succession to Kingdoms by Primogeniture was amongst the Persians,
Syrians, Macedonians, Parthians, Cretans, Rhodians, Albans, Romans, Sicilians,
Goths, Franks, Tartars, Turks, English, Scots, Hungarians, Spaniards, and
French; and the mischiefs that have insued by disinheriting of Primogeniture,
either wholly, or by Division of Succession into several Kingdoms have been
Infinite.

Amongst the Persians, Cyrus the younger Brother by the assistance of Parisatis
the Queen Mother, contending for Succession against Artaxerxes the eldest,
raised such Wars and drew in such Foreign Forces of Greeks as the same ceased
not till himself was slain by the Army of Artaxerxes.

The Civil Wars between Hircamus the eldest, and Aristobulus, the younger Son
could not be ceased till Pompey by the Roman Power restored the Kingdom to
Hircanus the eldest.

Disinheriting the eldest Son causes Patricides, Matricides, and Fratricides.
How many Patricides, or Matricides or Fratricides this has caused appears, as
to the first two by the Examples of Alphonsus the Tenth King of Castile, of
Gabriel the younger Son of the Marquess of Salusse, who by assistance of his
Mother, cast his elder Brother into Prison, pretending he was out of his Wits,
who breaking out of Prison, recovered his Principality, and having chased out
his Brother, Coupt up his Mother in the same Prison wherein she had before
Coupt him.

The like appears in several Persians, Turks and Africans. And for Fratricides
which it causes, Bodin Lib. 6. cap. 5.735, 736. says, Foolishly therefore do
those Parents, who overcomed with the flattery of their younger Sons, and
disinheriting the elder of their Kingdom, have incensed their Children most
cruelly to Murder one another so, as did the Father of Atreus and Thyestes, who
willing to prefer the younger before the elder, as more sit to manage Affairs
of State, so silled and foiled his House with many Tragedies.

And not to seek farther from home, we have seen all this Realm on sire with
Civil Wars; for that Lewis the Devout, at the entreaty of his second Wife, had
preferred Charles the Bald before Lothayr his elder Brother: wherefore Pope
Pius the Second did wisely in Rejecting the Request of Charles the 7th, the
French King desirous to have preferred Charles his younger Son before Lewis the
Eleventh his elder Brother; howbeit that the King had Reason so to do,
considering that Lewis had without any just occasion twice taken Arms against
him, so to have taken from him the Crown, and to have taken the Scepter out of
his hand.

And as Bodin says of France, he need not look far from home; so may we say of
England, we need not look far from home, for the said Events of disinheriting
Primogeniture. For what caused all those cruel Wars between the House of York
and Lancaster from Generation to Generation, whereby the English lost both all
their Conquests and Hereditary Possessions in France, and so many Princes of
the Blood, and Nobles and Commons were slain, but that the Line of a younger
Brother contended to be preferred before the Line of an elder? And have not as
bad Effects happened when the Successions of Kingdoms have been joined or
divided to more Sons or Heirs than one? Division of Kingdoms or part of them or
of the Treasure from the eldest to younger Sons, destructive to Kingdoms.


The Father of Jugurtha made him and his two Brothers Associates, but he killed
his two Brothers, and took all himself.

Constantine divided the Empire to his three Sons, they destroyed each other,
till one had all. James King of Aragon appointed Peter his eldest Son to be
King of Aragon, and James his younger Son to be King of Majorca; yet afterward
the elder Brother took the younger Prisoner, and in Prison starved him. So it
befell also the Children of Botislaus the Second King of Polonia, who having
divided the Kingdom unto his four Sons, and having left nothing unto his fifth,
kindled such a fire of Sedition as could not be after quenched without much
Blood of his Subjects. So William the Conqueror left the Duchy of Normandy to
Robert his eldest, and England to William Rufus, and his youngest Son Henry a
Pension. Robert after the Death of Rufus raising a War to recover his Right of
Primogeniture in England from his younger Brother, lost the Battle, was taken
Prisoner by Henry, and deprived of his Sight, cast into Prison and there died
miserably. It had been safe therefore for the Preservation of his House and
Kingdom, to have left the Dominions entirely to the eldest, and to have left
not one only, but both his younger Sons Pensions. A multitude of other Examples
there are of the ill success where Primogeniture is deprived not only of the
whole, but of any considerable-part or member of the Inheritance either in Land
or Treasure; which appears in the forementioned example of the Treasure, and
fenced Cities given to the younger Sons of Jehosophat, therefore destroyed by
the eldest, Primogeniture not to have the same Prerogative in Private Families
as in Kingdoms.
2 Chro. 21.2, 3, 4. Which is to be intended only of Succession to Kingdoms.
And as to private Families, both Equity and Policy is clean contrary, and that
there ought not to be left above a Scripture double Portion to the eldest,
where there are more than one; which is agreeable with the Examples of most
Nations.

Certificates introduce foreign Laws, and destroy the Laws of the Land.
(21.) The Certificate Introduces foreign Laws, and destroys Magna Charta, and
the Petition of Right.

The Foreign Laws it introduces on the Subjects as to Marriage, Filiation, and
Succession, and Religion, and Liberty, and Propriety all thereon depending,
have been already mentioned, are the Imperial, and French, and of the Council
of Trent. That by the Ceremony of a Priest in a Temple, the Adulterous Children
of the Wife shall disinherit the Natural Children of the Husband. The Trent
Law, That all Marriages without that Ceremony shall be Null and void, and the
Children Illegitimate. The French Foppery, That Natural Children shall not be
Natural Children, Excommunication, Penance, Absolution, Commutation-Money,
twice punishing for one Offense, and many other Popish foreign Laws; all which
destroy Magna Charta, and the Petition of Right, and are inconsistent with the
Protestant Religion, Liberty and Propriety.

Praemunire incurred by Certificates.
(22.) That the Certificate Episcopal Introducing such foreign Laws incurr a
Praemunire is proved before in the Case of Cardinal Woolsey. Lib. 1. cap. 5.37,
38.

High Treason incurred by Certificates.
(23.) The Certificate if it imposes those Foreign Imperial, Papal, French or
Trent Laws of Marriage or Filiation on the Succession of the Crown, or Certify
the King's eldest Son not to be Heir contrary to this Statute of 25 E. 3.
incurrs the Penalty of High Treason.

Certificates not to be traversed or diputed, nor under Appeal.
(24.) The Certificate though utterly false and unjust, is neither Traversable
nor admits Probation to the Contrary, nor is under Appeal either of Fact or
Law, nor is he bound to give any Reason of it; But, Sie volo sic Jubeo, stat
pro Ratione voluntas, Of which see more at large, Lib. 2. p. 175, 176, 177,
178, 179.

(25.) The Certificate causes all the mischiefs, which are before proved to be
caused by Compulsion to Marry by the Ceremony of a Priest in a Temple, Lib. 2.
cap. 1. p. 192. Vsque ad 253.

As to the Objections therefore, (1) That the Lady Mother was not Married. (2)
That she was not a Wife according to the Law of God.


Though as before it had been sufficient for me to deny the Sequel, That
because the Lady Mother was not a Queen, was not Married by the Common
Prayer Book; was not Married or a Wife according to the Law of God, therefore
the eldest Son is not within the Statute, in regard, as before's shown, no
Question can arise on the Statute whether the King or the Lady his Companion,
or the Marriage were Lawful, seeing as before's shown, the Statute intends and
makes it sufficient to be De facto: And it is so dangerous to leave Successions
to Kingdoms to Disputes of the Sword whether Lawful or Unlawful: And sufficient
is already said to answer all Objections relating to the Lady Mother: yet Ex
abundanti Cautela, against all shadow as well as substance of Objections, I
shall likewise show, That she was not only De Facto, but De Jure Married, and a
Wife according to the Law of God.

But preparatory to the same, I shall first show:

What is Marriage and Matrimony De Facto according to the Law of God.

First therefore as to the Etymology of the word Marriage, the same is derived
a Marito and Maritus a Mari, in English a Male, and signifies no more than the
Natural Conjunction of the Male with the Female, whether the same be Lawful or
Unlawful in the Act of Generation. The Effect of the same according to the
words of Christ, is Mat. 19.5. They twain shall be one flesh. And that is
effected in Unlawful as well as a Lawful Marriage, as says Paul, 1 Cor. 6.16.
Know ye not that he which is joined with an Harlot is one Body? for two (says
he) shall be one flesh. And Lipsius Antiq. Lection. Lib. 2. c. 9. to the same
effect says, Nubendi verbum Antiquum Antiquitus inter ea fuit, quae custos
ille hortorum libentius quam Virgins Vestae usurparent. Inde ^esto Nupta verba
obscaena and Petronio Nuptias facere (...). And though some make the Derivation
of the word Nubo more modest, and to be from Nubes a cloud, because the Brides
face was clouded or shadowed with an yellow Veil or Attire: yet this Ceremony
of clouding or veiling, and all other Ceremonies of Marriage were so
appopriated by use to the Priests and Temples of the Garden God, That not only
the word Nubere, but all other words signifying a Public Ceremonial Marriage
by a Priest in a Temple, were esteemed Obscene.

Of this see more Albericus Gentilis, De Nuptiis Lib. 2. c. 3. and Fermandius
de Cordova in Didascalia Multiplici, c. 39. and Tertullianum ad Vxorem, Lib. 1.
c 5. and Adversus Hermogenem c. 1. And so does M. Seldom De Jure Not. and Gent.
Lib. 5. c. 4. p. 573. observe that amongst the Latins Nubere and Nuptiae,
though sometimes used for the Ceremony of Marriage; yet it is Originally used
for Carnal Knowledge it self, as in Plautus.

Meretrix. Laena.

M. At satius fuerat viro dare Nuptum potius. L. Etiam Haec quidem Ecastor
quotidie viro nubit, nupsitque hodie; Nubet mox noctu, Nunquam ego hanc viduam
cubere scivi; Nam si haec non nubit lugubri mihi fame familia perit.

M. Better her you did marry. L. Marry true,
She did, and Day and Night does marry new;
For if she married not, my Family
With cruel hunger must soon starve and die.
This is unlawful Marriage, and too many of such Marriages there are.

Matrimony as is already before shown, cannot be without a Mother, and a Mother
cannot be without a Child; Matrimony therefore de Facto is Marriage whether
lawful or unlawful consummate by the Birth of a Child.

What is Marriage and Matrimony De Jure, according to the Law of God.

Having shown what is not and what is Marriage and Matrimony De Facto, I shall
next that is Marriage and Matrimony De Jure, according to the Law of God; that
is to say, according to the Moral Law of God. For Marriages fatal, such of
which the Poet speaks Fiunt Connubia fato, are not the intended subject here.
But as a farther Preparatory, before I come to prove this Thesis, I must
likewise lay down as Fundamentals to proceed on; The Laws of Nations, Gentiles
and Jews, and the Laws of God; as declared in the Scriptures of the Old
Testament and the New.

Of three kinds of Marriages amongst the Romans, and three kinds amongst the
Hebrews.

That Marriage by Carnal knowledge between Persons not Prohibited, is Lawful
without Ceremonies, not only by the Law of God, but by the Laws of all Nations,
except such as have fallen under the slavery of Popes and Bishops; and
particularly by the Roman Law, as appears by Godwyn's Antiquities, Lib. 2. cap.
20. p: 69. Who says amongst the Romans Marriage was made, and a Woman became a
Man's Lawful Wife three manner of ways, 1. Vsu. 2. Confarriatione. 3.
Coemptione.
The first, by Use or Customary Copulation for the time of one year. The
second, by Confarriation or eating a piece of Barley Cake between them before a
Pontiff or chief Bishop. The third, by buying one another with a piece of
Money. The two later are Fictions of Marriage and Fopperies: But as to the
first, which is a true and Lawful Marriage, if between Persons not Prohibited,
it was held by the Roman Lawyers, if a Woman lived with a Man at Bed and Board
the space of a year, she being not absent from him three Nights in the year;
this was so strong a Marriage that Propriety was got in such a Woman by
Prescription; if one year were a Prescription without a Priest or Temple, and
without Confarriation or Emption, much more must many years, yea the whole
life, a Woman till she died. The Law of the Hebrews was stronger, for with the
Romans there needed many Copulations, but amongst the Hebrews only one was a
perfect Marriage; as appears by Maimonides, who says, The Hebrews had likewise
three ways of Marriage, or making a Woman their Lawful Wife, No Priest
necessary in any kind of Ebrew Marriage.
Coemptione, Instrumentis, Copulatione, 1. Buying with a piece of Money. 2.
Drawing and signing Marriage Writings between them. 3. Copulation.
Either of which singly, and without any Ceremony was esteemed amongst them
between persons not Prohibited, a Lawful and valid Marriage. And Seldom De jure
Not. and Gent. Lib. 5. c. 4. p. 572. Translates out of the same Maimonides,
That Ante Legem Datam (Mosaicam) si foeminae in publico occurrisset vir, and
tam haec quam ille in Matrimonium consensisset, eam is Domum deducebat, and
remotis Arbitris cum ea concumbebat, atque ita ei siebat ea Vxor, seu foemina
ejus siebat. Before the Law given (says he) to Moses, if a Man had met a Woman
in Public, and both he and she agreed to Marry, he lead her to his House, and
when no witnesses saw them he lay with her in private, and so she was thereby
made his Wife, or which is the same, his Woman. And that this amongst the
Ebrews was a Lawful Marriage without any witnesses or Ceremony as well after as
before, the Law of Moses appears by the Scripture it self, and the very Books
of Moses: Of which take the Texts in order as follows:

Genesis c. 2.18. And the Lord God said, It is not good that the man should be
alone, I will make him an Help meet for him.

Genesis 1.27. So God created man in his own Image, in the Image of God created he
him, Male and Female created he them. And God blessed them, and said unto them,
Be fruitful, and multiply and replenish the Earth.

Genesis 2.24. A man shall leave his Father and Mother, and cleave unto his
Female, and they two shall be one flesh.

Genesis 4.1. And Adam knew Eve his Female, and she Conceived and bare Cain, and
said, I have gotten a man from the Lord.

Genesis cap. 5.1. This is the Book of the Generations of Adam. In the day that
God created man, In the likeness of God created he him. Male and Female created
he them and blessed them, and called their name Adam in the day that they were
created. And Adam lived an hundred and thirty years, and begat a Son in his own
likeness after his name, and called his name Seth.

Genesis c. 6.1. And it came to pass when men began to multiply on the face of the
Earth, and Daughters were born unto them, That the sons of God saw the
daughters of men, That they were fair, and they took them females of all which
they chose. And Verse. 4. There were Giants in the Earth in those days, and also
after that when the sons of God came in unto the daughters of men and they bare
Children unto them, the same became mighty men which were of old, men of
Renown; Of this Vid. Lib. 2.150.

Genesis 16.3. And Sarai Abrams Wife took Hagar her maid the Egyptian, after Abram
had dwelt Ten years in the Land of Canaan and gave her to her Husband Abram to
be his Wife, and he went in unto Hagar, and she Conceived. And Verse. 15. And
Hagar bare Abram a Son, and Abram called his Son's name which Hagar bare him,
Ismael,

Genesis 38.8. Go in to thy Brother's Wife, and Marry her.

Exodus 21.3. If he were married, his Wife must go out with him.

Numb. 12.1. Because of the Ethiopian woman he had Married.

1 Chronicles. 2.21. And afterward Hezron went in to the daughter of Machir the
Father of Gilead, whom he married when he was Threescore years old, and she
bare him Shegub.

Isa. 62.5. For as a young man marries a Virgin; so shall thy children marry
thee.

Genesis 20.3. As Translated in Latin by Mr. Seldom de Jur. Not. and Gent. p. 573.
God came to Abimilech in a dream by night, and said unto him, Behold thou shall
die because of the female whom thou have taken, for her male has lain with her.

Ex. 22.16. If a man entice a maid that is not betrothed, and lie with her, he
shall surely endow her to be his Wife, if her Father utterly refuse to give her
to him, he shall pay money, according to the Dowry of Virgins.

Deuteronomy. 22.28. If a man find a Damsel that is a Virgin which is not betrothed,
and lay hold on her and lie with her, and they be found; Then the man that lay
with her shall give unto thee Damsels Father fifty shekels of Silver, and she
shall be his Wife because he has humbled her; he may not put her away all his
days.

Deuteronomy. 21.13. Concerning the Marriage of a Captive Woman taken in Wars, it is
said, Thou shall go in unto her and be her Husband, and she shall be thy Wife.

Mat. 19.3. The Pharisees also came unto him tempting him, and saying unto him,
Is it lawful for a man to put away his Wife for every cause? And he answered
and said unto them, Have ye not read that he which made them at the beginning,
made them Male and Female; and said, For this cause shall a man leave Father
and Mother, and shall cleave to his Female, and they twain shall be one flesh.
Wherefore they are no more twain but one flesh. What therefore God has joined
together, let no man put asunder. They say unto him, Why did Moses then command
to give a Writing of Divorcement, and put her away? He says to them, Moses
because of the hardness of your hearts suffered you to put away your Wives; but
from the beginning it was not so.

Deuteronomy. 24.4. Her former Husband which sent her away, may not take her again to
be his Wife after she is defiled.

1 Cor. 7.28. If thou marry thou have not sinned, and if a Virgin marry, she
has not sinned.

1 Timothy c. 4.1. Now the Spirit speaks expressly, That in the later times some
shall depart from the Faith, Giving heed to seducing spirits and Doctrines of
Devils speaking lies in Hypocrisy, having their Consciences seared with an hot
Iron, forbidding to marry, and commanding to abstain from meats.

Mat. 19.9. According to the Original Greek is, Whosoever shall put away his
Woman, except it be for carnal Uncleanness, and shall marry another, commits
Adultery.

1 Cor. c. 7.2. To avoid Fornication, Let every man have his own woman, and
every woman have her own man: Let the man render unto the woman Due
Benevolence, and likewise the woman to the man. The woman has not Power over
her omn Body but the man, and likewise also the man has not Power of his own
Body but the woman. And Verse. 9. It is better to marry than to burn.

1 Timothy 2.15. She shall be saved in Childbearing, if she continues in Faith,
and Charity, and Holiness with Sobriety.

1 Timothy 5.14. I will therefore, That the younger woman marry, bear Children.

On these Foundations therefore premised, Of Acts of Parliaments, Laws of
Nations, and above all, the Moral Law of God in Scriptures and in Nature, if
the Lady Companion in this Statute as is said, Cant. 8.9. Be a wall, we will
build upon her a Palace of Silver, and Prove,

That Carnal knowledge between persons not Prohibited by the Moral Law and
Chastity and Childbirth of the Woman without Contract, Banns, License,
Witnesses, Priests, Temples, or any other Ceremony is a Marriage and Matrimony
De Facto and De Jure Lawful, Holy and Indissoluble, according to the Law of God.

First, therefore granting there can be no Marriage or Matrimony De Jure, where
there is none De Facto (for a Modus Entis cannot be without an Ens, an Accessory
without a Principal, nor an Accident without a Substance) It is proved on what
has already been shown, That here is a Marriage and a Matrimony De Facto by
the Birth of a Child. Secondly, That such Marriage and Matrimony between
Persons not prohibited by the Moral Law are Lawful, I prove,
(1) The Lawfulness of such Marriage and Matrimony in Respect no Prohibition by
the Law of God of the same though without Ceremony.

(1.) Because all Marriage and Matrimony is Lawful, which is not Prohibited by
the Moral Law of God; but these are not Prohibited by the Moral Law of God,
Therefore they are Lawful. Prohibition of Marriage without Ceremony not
Prohibited by the Law of God, is the Doctrine of Devils.
The Major is proved 1 Timothy 4.1. Because all Humane Laws forbidding Marriages
or Meats which are not forbidden by the Moral Law of God, are declared to come
from the Devil, and to be the Doctrine of Devils.

And accordingly all Papal and Episcopal Laws, all Ecclesiastical Canon and
Civil Laws, all Decrees of Councils of Trent, or any other Councils or Synods
forbidding to Marry in any Circumstance or Ceremony not forbidden by the Law of
God, came from the Devil, and are the Doctrine of Devils; which see proved,
Lib. 1. p. 52. And that the final cause of such Prohibitions of Marriage
without Pontifical Ceremonies, The final Cause of such Prohibitions, is only
filthy Lucre of the Priests.
are only accumulation of Fees, and Ambition of Pontiffs and Bishops, Vid. Lib.
1. p. 55, 56, 57.

(2.) All Marriage and Matrimony is Lawful which is not a Sin or a
Transgression; but such Marriage and Matrimony which are not Prohibited by the
Law of God are no Sin or Transgression; Therefore they are Lawful. The Minor is
proved 1 John 3.4. Sin is the Transgression of the Law. And Romans 4.15. Where no
Law, no Transgression.
Where no Law is, there is no Transgression.

(3.) What is declared no Sin by Scripture is lawful; but Marriage between
persons not Prohibited, is declared no Sin by Scripture, therefore Lawful. The
Minor is proved 1 Cor. 7.28. If thou marry, thou have not sinned; and if a
Virgin marry, she has not sinned.

(4.) What is commanded by Scripture is Lawful, and not Prohibited; But
Marriage and Matrimony is commanded by Scripture to young Women, therefore
Lawful. The Minor is proved, 1 Timothy 5.14. I will therefore the young women
marry, bear Children.

(5.) What is in Scripture commanded and blessed (between persons not
Prohibited) is Lawful and not Prohibited: But Marriage and Matrimony by Carnal
knowledge and multiplying Mankind is commanded and blessed in Scripture;
Therefore Lawful. The Minor is proved, Genesis 1.27. Male and Female ^reated he
them. And God blessed them and said unto them, Increase and Multiply and
replenish the earth.

(6.) What is rewarded in Scripture in Persons not Prohi^ited is Lawful and not
Prohibited; but Marriage and Matrimony between Persons not Prohibited is
rewarded; Therefore ^awful. The Minor is proved, 1 Timothy 2.15. She shall be
saved in Childbearing; if she continue in Faith, and Charity, and Holiness with
Sobriety.

The Lawfulness of Marriage which is not Prohibited by the Law of God is
acknowledged by the Church of England; Which I prove thus:

All Marriage acknowledged Lawful by the 39 Articles, is acknowledged Lawful by
the Church of England; but the present Marriage (whether there are any
Witnesses alive or no to prove it Ceremonial) is acknowledged Lawful by the 39
Articles; Therefore the present Marriage is acknowledged Lawful by the Church
of England.

The Minor is proved thus,

All Marriage not Prohibited by the Law of God, is acknowledged lawful by the
39 Articles: But the present Marriage is not Prohibited by the Law of God:
Therefore the present Marriage is acknowledged Lawful by the 39 Articles.

Though it is no ways necessary amongst so many clear and unanswerable Precepts
and Examples of Scripture it self as are here cited establishing the Lawfulness
of the present Marriage, to add the Humane Authority of the Church of England,
or any other National Church, yet in regard the Bishops in their Practice and
Certificates deny that Doctrine of the Lawfulness of Marriage, which they
themselves acknowledge and pretend to establish in their own Book of Articles:
To confute therefore those Certificates of theirs out of their own mouths, I
have here inserted their own 32d Article, without which they are not able to
secure the Lawfulness of their own Marriages, and Legitimation of their own
Children against Papists, Ossens, Gnostics, Nicholaitans, Hermogenians, and
other Heretics, but only on this Principle, That all Marriages not Prohibited
by the Law of God are Lawful; as appears by the Article it self, made Anno Dom.
1562. in the Fourth year of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, Roger's Articles, p.
185, 187, 188. where is mentioned,

(1.) That Bishops, Priests, and Deacons are not Prohibited by God's Law to
Marry, therefore it is Lawful for them to Marry. (2.) That it is Lawful for
them and all other Christian men to marry at their own discretion, as they
shall judge the same to serve best to Godliness.
Whence will likewise follow, That the Doctrine of the Church of England, and
the Ceremonies of the Church of England, are two distinct things, and to use
the words of the Article, As every Christian may Marry or not Marry according
to his Discretion, where not Prohibited by the Law of God; so he may Marry with
or without Ceremonies where not Prohibited by the same Law of God: As Adam
might have eaten of all the Fruits in Eden, with Ceremony or without Ceremony,
according to his Discretion where not Prohibited by the Law of God. And I think
no man will question this 32d Article not to be according to the Doctrine of
the Church of England. And the same Article touching Marriage, is known to be
the Doctrine of the Helvetian, Bohemian, Saxon, Suevian, and all the Reformed
Churches. If therefore the Tree is Holy, the Fruit is Holy; if the Marriage is
Lawful, the Son is Lawful. I have therefore proved him Lawful by Three
unanswerable Laws. (1) The Act of Parliament of Treasons. (2) The Law of the
Church of England. (3) The eternal and immutable Law of God in the Scriptures.


(2.) The Lawfulness of such Marriage and Matrimony without Ceremony, appears
in Respect of no Command of any Ceremony by the Law of God.

(1.) There Is no Commandment of any Ceremony in Marriage in the whole
Scriptures, either Old Testament or New, of Moses or Christ, of Prophets or
Apostles: but the same (as has been already shown) have been invented by
Priests of Priapus, Venus, Juno, Diana, Popes and Bishops either for Lust,
Covetousness or Ambition.

No Sin where no breach of a Commandment of God.
(2.) The Scripture makes nothing unlawful, nor Sin, but what is a breach of the
Commandment of God, where there is no Commandment therefore of God of joining
Ceremony with Marriage or Matrimony, Marriage and Matrimony between Persons not
Prohibited is lawful without them. This is proved Luke 18.18. And a certain
Ruler asked him, saying, Good Master, What shall I do to inherit eternal life?
The answer is verse. 20. Thou know the Commandments. And Romans 7.8. Sin taking
occasion by the Commandment wrought in me all manner of Concupiscence, for
without the Law Sin was dead. By which appears that where there is no
Commandment, there is no occasion for a Nitimur in Vetitum to kindle
Concupiscence to Sin, nor much less can there be Sin it self: For where there is
no Prohibition nor Command, there is no Law, and where no Law (as is already
said) there is no Transgression.

Salvation by no Legislator, Judge, or Law, but of God.
(3.) The Scripture teaches, That men can be saved by no Law but the Law of
God, nor by any Legislator or Judge but God; which is proved Jam. 4.12. There Is
one Lawgiver who is able to save and to destroy, who art thou that judge thy
Brother? And verse. 11. He that speaks evil of his Brother, and judges his
Brother, speaks evil of the Law and judges the Law, but if thou judge the
Law, thou art not a Doer of the Law, but a Judge. And Isa. 33.22. The Lord is
our Judge, the Lord is our Lawgiver. If therefore the Law of God is the only
Law by which Men and Women are saved in Marriage, Matrimony and Childbearing,
as well as all other Acts of Humane life; and God is the only Legislator and
Judge of them; then ought their Lawfulness without Ceremony to be judged only
according to the Law of God, and where there is no Law of God Prohibiting
Marriage without Ceremony, nor Commanding it with Ceremony, the Law of God
declares it Lawful without Ceremony; because nothing can be Lawful or Unlawful
but in reference to the Commandments and Laws of God.

Ceremonies rejected by the Scripture.
(4.) The Scripture rejects all Ceremonies done without Commandment from God,
Isa. 1.12. When ye come to appear before me who has required this at your
hands to tread my Courts; Bring no more vain Oblations, Incense is an
abomination unto me, etc.

Ceremonies false Translated Ordinances.
(5.) The Scripture teaches all Rites and Ceremonies to have been only
Temporary till a Time of Reformation, and to be abolished by Christ, as Heb.
9.1. The first Covenant had Ceremonies. For the Original word (...), ought to
be Translated Rites or Ceremonies, and not Ordinances or Laws, as the Latin
Translation is, and appears to be intended and is so Expounded by the Text it
self, Verse. 2, 3, 4. which names a Tabernacle, Candlestick, Table and
Shewbread, Veil, Golden Censer, and Ark overlaid with Gold. And v. 9. Gifts
and Sacrifices which could not make him that did the service perfect as
pertaining to Conscience. And verse. 10. Meats and Drinks, and diverse washings
and carnal Ceremonies imposed on them until the time of Reformation. All which
are an Enumeration of what we call in English and should have been Translated,
Ceremonies, and not Ordinances or Laws. As likewise Colo. 2.14. ought to have
been Translated, Blotting out the handwriting of Ceremonies that was against,
and which was contrary to us: And took it out of the way, nailing it to his
Cross. And ought not to have been Translated Ordinances or Laws. Mission to
teach, is no Mission to make Ordinances.
For the Original words used in this Text, are (...). The word Dogma is a
Derivative from (...), which signifies to Teach: which word Teach gives not
Authority to be a Legislator, or to Command or give Ordinances or Laws; as Ex.
24.12. And the Lord said unto Moses, Come up to me into the Mount, and be
there, and I will give thee Tables of Stone, and a Law and Commandments which I
have written that thou may teach them. Here Moses has no Authority to be a
Legislator, nor to make a Law, or Commandments, or Ordinances, but only to
teach those made by God. In like manner, Mat. 28.19. Christ says to his
Disciples, Go therefore and teach all Nations. And verse. 20. Teaching them to
observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you. So neither does here the
Authority of teaching make the Disciples either Legislators or Judges, nor give
them Power to give Laws, Ordinances or Commandments to the Nations; but only to
teach them the Commandments which Christ gave to the Teachers themselves.

If therefore the Original word Doceo gives no pretense to Translate what
signifies only Teaching to be making Ordinances, much less does the Derivative
word Dogma, which according to Isidore, Derivatur a Putando (i. e.) hoc puto
esse verum, hoc puto esse bonum, is derived from thinking, that is to say, I
think this to be true, I think this to be good. And is the Thought or Opinion
of Doctors on a Law or Ordinance, much less pretense, I say, does such
Derivative give to call Thoughts and Opinions the Laws and Ordinances
themselves: These Thoughts and Opinions then ought not to have been Translated
Ordinances but Ceremonies, because Ceremonies have only Thoughts and Opinions
of men, and no Law of God for them. And so does the Text expound it self, that
it intends not Ordinances but Ceremonies, as ver. 20. Wherefore if ye be dead
with Christ from the Rudiments of the world, why as though living in the world
are ye subjects to Ceremonies (Touch not, taste not, handle not, which all are
to perish with the using) after the Commandments and Doctrines of Men? which
things have in deed a show of Wisdom in Will Worship.

So the Pope is but a Thinker of all his Ceremonies of Marriage. And all his
Ceremonies of that and the rest are but Thinkings (as the Bell tinketh,
Ceremonies are Will Worship, and abolished by Christ.
so the Fool thinks) and has taken so many first and second Thoughts on the
tinking of this Silver Bell of his Profit, that he knows that if once the Truth
of the Doctrine should be spread and believed, That Christ has abolished all
Ceremonies, The Commandments of God of Marriage cannot be limited by or to the
Ceremonies of men, because Marriage where commanded by God is not a thing
indifferent.
it would ruin him and all other Popes who are Masters of them.

(6.) It being made the Express Command and Ordinance of God, Be fruitful and
multiply and replenish the Earth. And 1 Timothy 5.14. That the younger women marry
and bear Children; if the adding, or diminishing, or limiting of this Law or
Commandment of God by prescribing to them Papal or Episcopal Ceremonies should
make them unlawful; then first would it be in the power of Popes and Bishops to
make God's Commands things indifferent, which they might change or null, or
they might set all Carnal Copulation and Childbirth to Sale, by imposing such
Ceremonies as none shall be able to pass without first giving notice to the
Priest, and paying him what Fees he pleases, of which see more, Lib. 2. p. 96,
97. Secondly, this prescribing or Compulsion to Ceremonies in Marriage
punishes Lawfuld Childbirth in Mothers, and causes infinite Murders of
Children, which Vid. proved at large, Lib. 2. p. 234. to 240. and amount in
effect to the wicked Law of Pharaoh, which was so far from obliging the
Conscience, that Moses his Parents are commended for not obeying the same, as
appears Heb. 11.23. where it is said, By faith Moses when he was born was hid
three months of his Parents, because they saw he was a proper Child, and they
not afraid of the Kings Commandment. Therefore Marriage is Lawful without them.
Compulsion to Ceremonies makes the Law of God of Marriage of no effect.
Thirdly, This Prescribing or Compulsion of Ceremonies by men on Marriage and
Matrimony commanded by the Moral Law of God, destroys and makes the same of no
Effect, as appears Mark 7.13. For there the word (...) which is Translated
Tradition; (making the Word of God of no effect by your Traditions) ought to
have been Translated, Ceremonies false Translated Traditions
making the Word of God of no effect by your Ceremony. For the word Dosis
single, signifies a Giving, Delivery or Tradition, and Paradosis a Praeter or
Contradiction to the Law of God, as (...) is Contra Legem, and (...) is Contra
Naturam. Imposing or Compulsion of Ceremonies of Marriage on the Conscience,
being a thing Praeter et Contra Legem Dei. And that the word Paradosis is
intended here to be Ceremony, appears by the Text it self, verse. 8. Laying
aside the Commandments of God, ye hold the Ceremonies of men, as the Baptism of
pots and cups; and ver. 4. as before mentioned of Brazen vessels and Tables,
all which no man doubts to be Ceremonies of Men, and not Laws of God; which
though used to an Intention of Religion or Justice, yet cannot make that
Religious or Just which is not so by the Law of God: The Compulsion therefore
to the Ceremonies making the Law of God of Marriage to be of no effect;
Marriage must be Lawful without them. Fourthly, Compulsion to Ceremonies
destroys Marriage, Religion, Justice, Truth, Equity, Natural Affection.
Compulsion or Prohibition of Ceremonies in Religion, Justice, Marriage, and
Matrimony, destroys the worship in Spirit and truth of God, and Truth, Nature,
and Equity toward men; therefore Religion, Justice, Marriage, and Matrimony
are all Lawful without Ceremonies. As to Ceremonies of Worship by a Priest in a
Temple, See Lib. 2. p. 210, 211. As to Truth destroyed by them, See Lib. 2. p.
186. to 189. and p. 288. to 305. As to Nature destroyed, See Lib. 1.73. to 83.
and Lib. 2. p. 154, 155, 156. As to Equity destroyed, Prohibition of Ceremonies
not Prohibited by God does the same.
See Lib. 2. p. 312. to 329. And hence is to be further noted, That seeing the
Law of God does neither command any Ceremonies of Marriage, nor Prohibit all:
No Marriage ought to be Judged unlawful which does omit such Ceremonies not
Commanded, or does use such Ceremonies as are not Prohibited; but every person
ought to be left to his own Liberty of Conscience to omit such Ceremonies not
Commanded, or to use such as are not Prohibited, as suits most with his
Conscience and Convenience; the state whereof is best known to every man's self.

Concerning the Liberty of which private manner of Marriage without Ceremonies
or Witnesses; See Lib. 1.101. to 109. And concerning Ceremonies and
Circumstances, and the Difference between them see more, Lib. 2. p. 189. to 192.

Ceremonies answer not the Ends of Marriage.
7. Ceremonies answer not the Lawful and Necessary ends for which God instituted
Marriage by Carnal knowledge between Persons not Prohibited, Therefore Marriage
by Carnal knowledge is lawful without them: As the Ends for which God
instituted Marriage by Carnal knowledge was, (1) Genesis c. 2.18. It is not good
for man to be alone, I will make him a help meet for him. (2) Genesis cap. 1.27.
Be fruitful and multiply and replenish the earth. (3) 1 Cor. c. 7.2. To avoid
Fornication, Let every man have his own woman, and every woman her own man:
What do Ceremonies (were the whole heap of them used through the whole world)
Coacervated on two Persons signify to produce any of these Effects?

(3.) The Lawfulness of such Marriage by Carnal knowledge without Ceremony
appears by Express Command of Scripture.

Carnal Knowledge without Ceremony commanded to be acknowledge Marriage by
express Scripture.
Where the Man is commanded by the Scripture to acknowledge for his Wife,
whatsoever Woman not Prohibited he Lies with, though without Ceremony, it is
Lawful for such Woman to be his Wife, and the Marriage is Lawful without
Ceremony; But the Man is commanded by Scripture to acknowledge for his Wife
whatsoever Woman not Prohibited he lies with, though without Ceremonies; as Ex.
22.16. It is said, If a man entice a maid which is not betrothed and lie with
her, he shall surely endow her to be his wife: If her Father utterly refuse to
give her to him, he shall pay money, according to the Dowry of Virgins. And
Deuteronomy. 22.28. It is said, If a man find a Damsel that is a Virgin which is not
betrothed, and lay hold on her, and lie with her, and they be found; Then the
man that lay with her shall give unto the Damsels Father fifty Shekels of
Silver, and she shall be his wife, because he has humbled her; he may not put
her away all his days. The same Law was at Athens, only instead of the Fifty
Shekels, the Man was to pay the Virgins Father a Thousand Drachms, and Marry
her besides. Here are Lawful Marriages on the Virgins part yet no Ceremony. And
as for any Traditions or late Customs or Constitutions of Rabbi's contrary to
these express Laws of Moses and Scripture they are not to be valued. Such
Command of God not a thing indifferent to be added to or diminished from, by
any Laws of Men.
The express Command being Deuteronomy. 12.32. What thing soever I command you,
observe to do it, Thou shall not add thereto nor Diminish from it. And as is
said, Jer. 10.3. The Customs of the People are vain. And the observing the
Commandments of Men against the Law of God, being condemned by Christ, Mark
7.9. Ye reject the Commandments of God that ye may keep your own Traditions.

4. The Lawfulness of such Marriage by Carnal Knowledge between Persons not
Prohibited without any Ceremony is acknowledged by Episcopal Translations
themselves of Scriptures.

Carnal Knowledge without Ceremony between Persons not Prohibited, acknowledged
Marriage by Episcopal Translation of it so in the whole Scripture.
As Genesis 38.8. It is said, Go in to thy Brother's wife and Marry her: Where the
Hebrew word Bo signifies Ingredere ad; Go to bed to thy Brother's Wife; and 25
Deuteronomy. 5. The word is Jabo and Jabbein, derived from the same Root, signifies
Lie with her; which they have Translated Marry her. And Exodus 21.3. If he were
Married his Wife must go out with him: Where the Hebrew word Bagnal signifies
one who lay with the Woman, and by a Metaphor Possessor, or Dominus Mulieris,
which can be no other way but by lying with her. And this they have Translated,
Married. Again, Isa. 62.5. It is said, As a young man marries a Virgin: there
is the word Bagnal, which signifies to Lie with a Woman, which they Translate
Marries. And Deuteronomy. 21.13. It is said, Thou shall go in unto her and be her
Husband, and she shall be thy Wife. In which there is both Bo and Bagnal in the
signification before mentioned, which they have Translated, Go in unto her and
be her Husband. And many other places in the Scripture they have Translated
Lying with a woman though without Ceremony for Marriage; which they would have
thought lawful: unless therefore Episcopal Translators will acknowledge that
they have falsely Translated all the said places of Scripture, They cannot but
likewise acknowledge, The first Carnal knowledge of a Woman not Prohibited, is
Lawful Marriage of her.
That the first Lying with a Woman not Prohibited by the Law of God, though
without Ceremony, is Lawful Marriage according to the Law of God, and their own
Translation.

(5.) The Lawfulness of such Marriage by Carnal knowledge without Ceremony
between Persons not Prohibited, appears by Diverse other Examples of Scripture.

Genesis 20.3. As it is Translated by Mr. Seldom De Jur. Not. and Gent. p. 573.
But God came to Abimelech in a dream by Night, and said unto him, Behold thou
shall die for the woman which thou have taken: for her man has lain with her.
And he accordingly expounds the same according to the Talmud Gloss: Non
scriptum est, Nam uxor viri seu viri alterius foemina, sed verba illa, Ecce
morieris, pronunciantur eo quod Maritus concubucrit cum ea, and non Ratione
Sponsaliorum aut Deductionis in Thalmum. It is not written, For she is a man's
Wife, or she is the Woman of another man; but those words, Behold thou shall
die, are therefore pronounced because that her Man had lain with her, and not
by reason of any Contract or Espousal or Ceremonial Conthalamation. Whence it
is manifest, that contrary to the Papal and Episcopal Law by the Law of God and
the Scripture, Concubitus non Consensus facit Matrimonium, Carnal knowledge and
not Contract, between Persons not Prohibited, make lawful Marriage, for Ratio
Legis est Anima Legis. The reason given why she was another man's Wife, is
because he had lain with her: of which may be seen more at large, Lib. 1. p.
83. to 87. And though as to the Practique, Seldom in the same place makes a
Distinction between the manner of the Marriage of the Hebrews before Moses his
Law and After, and p. 574. uses these words, Ebraeis autem ipsis Ex jure suo
sario and civili Consensus solus citra omnem Controversiam sufficiebat. That
after the Law of Moses given amongst the Hebrews, without dispute their Law
both Sacred and Civil was; That only Consent without Carnal knowledge was a
sufficient Marriage; which is very strange should be affirmed by a Man so
Learned. For though no man doubts their Civil Laws and Customs called
Coemptions and Covenants in Writing, Marriages, according to the vulgar
Language; yet were they but Contracts and no Marriage; neither does or can Mr.
Seldom, or any other, instance one Sacred Law they had to do this, or to make
buying and selling, or Covenants in writing Marriage, without Carnal knowledge.
If he intends by Sacred, either the Law of God, or the Law of Moses, No Law of
God or of Moses, for any Jewish Ceremonies in their Marriages.
or the Law of Scripture: What do the Customs therefore of People, or of
Rabbis, or of a Sanedrim signify any more than the Canons of Popes against
any of these? It being so fully already proved, Lib. 1. p. 2. c. 1. That
Marriage, Filiation, Aliment and Succession, ought not to be judged by the very
Laws of Moses himself, or the Customs of the Jews; but only by the Moral Law of
God.

Exodus 21.7. It is said, If a man sell his daughter to be a maid servant, ver.
8. If she pleases not her Master who has betrothed her to himself: then shall
he let her be redeemed to sell her unto a strange Nation, he shall have no
power seeing he has dealt deceitfully with her. Ver. 10. If he take him
another wife, her food, her raiment, and her Duty of Marriage shall he not
diminish. On which Scripture may be observed; (1) Here is one buys a Maid of
her Father with intention to lie with her. (2) She is very poor, and worse than
a beggar; for she is a slave bought with his Money: whereas if she were a
Beggar and free, she could set what price she pleased on Sale of her Liberty,
and dispose it to what use she pleased. (3) Coemption or Buying was amongst the
Jews a betrothing or espousing; especially if besides the price to the Father
they gave the Woman a piece of Money likewise, though but a farthing; yea,
though nothing was given the Woman her self; but only the Price of Money, or
any thing else valuable was given to the Father. This was a sufficient
betrothing and Espousal, as appears by the words of David, 2 Samuel 3.14. And
David sent messengers unto Ishbosheth Readiness Son, saying, Deliver me my wife
Michol, which I espoused to me for an hundred foreskins of the Philistines. (4)
That amongst the Jews no Maid who was Poor and bought and taken by King or
Subject to be lain with, Amongst the Jews Carnal knowledge of a Maid that was
poor, by King or Subject, was lawful Marriage, without Espousal, Contract, or
other Ceremony.
needed to be Espoused with any Ceremony or Marriage-Covenants, or to have any
Dower or Jointure settled upon her; but he who bought or took her might lawfully
by the Jewish Law and Custom lie with her, without any of these; and the same
was lawful Marriage. (5) That this Buyer having lain with her, desires for
change to turn her off, and the same is called dealing Treacherously with her;
which shows she is a lawful Wife without any Ceremony. (6) It is said, If he
takes him another wife; her food, her raiment, and her Duty of Marriage shall
he not diminish. By which appears, That this poor Maid and Slave, whom he,
whether King or Subject has once lain with, is his true and lawful Wife
without any Ceremony. For the Buyer or Taker cannot be said to take another
Wife, unless the first was his Wife before; neither can he be said to owe a
Marriage-Duty to any Woman, unless who was lawfully Married, and who was his
lawful Wife, and so she is clearly without any Ceremony. For neither amongst
the Romans, Jews, and Turks, or any other Nations (not under Popes or Bishops
are Ceremonies and Solemnities used in the Marriages of Slaves, but only of
Free-women; nor can there be Covenants of Marriage, Dowers or Jointures given
to Women who are Slaves, (where the Law of Slavery is not abolished, as it is
amongst the greatest part of Christians) because a Woman who is a Slave is
neither capable of the Right of Propriety or Action against her Husband, being
her Lord and Master who bought her; yet is she capable to be his true and
lawful Wife, and of the Right of Food, Raiment and Duty of Marriage from him.


Genesis 16.3. It is said, And Sarai Abrams wife took Hagar her maid the Egyptian
after Abram had dwelt ten years in the Land of Canaan, and gave her to her
Husband Abram to be his Wife. And he went in unto Hagar, and she conceived. And
Ver. 15. Hagar bare Abram a Son, and Abram called his Sons name Ismael which
Hagar bare him. On which Text may likewise be observed,

(1.) That Hagar was Abram's Slave or Bondwoman.

(2.) That he got a Son by her without any Ceremonies and without
Marriage-Covenants, Dower, or Jointure. For Cap. 21.14. He casts her out, and
his Son with no more than a Wallet of Bread and a Bottle of Water on her
shoulder, to wander in the wilderness of Bersheba.

(3.) That notwithstanding here was no Ceremony; yea, though there was what was
worse, this Course Complement of Abram's casting her out of Doors; yet by his
Lying with her and getting her with Child, the Scripture calls her his Wife;
and many other places of Scripture there are, where the only Lying with a
Virgin or Woman not Prohibited, whether bond or free, lawfully entitles her to
be his Wife, and the same without any Ceremony is a lawful Marriage.

(6.) The Holiness of such Marriage by Carnal knowledge without Ceremonies
appears after.

What kind of Ceremonies Profane Marriage.
Ceremonies Profane Marriage: (1.) By the unnecessary Publication of what ought
to be kept secret; As by Diogenes Lying with a Woman in the Marketplace, or
the Jews lying with a Woman before two Witnesses. (2.) By using such Ceremonies
as produce wantonness, as Lascivious Songs, Promiscuous Dancings, Excessive
vanity of Apparel, public Exposal of the Bride to view Bridals, and many
others. (3.) By using such Ceremonies as are Ridiculous; of which there is
before mention, Lib. 1. p. 4. and 127. (4.) By using such Ceremonies as are
Idolatrous as Consecrations of Brides at Altars or Idols. (5.) By using
unnecessary Ceremonies derived from the Priests of Priapus and Venus, and other
Pagan Priests, and offensive to tender Consciences. (6.) By Compulsion of
Ceremonies in Marriage on Tender Consciences not commanded by the Law of God.
For though as is said, Compulsion of Ceremonies on Tender Consciences, Profane
Marriage.
Romans 14.14. Nothing is unclean of it self, yet as it follows in the same
Verse, To him that esteems any thing to be unclean, to him it is unclean, and
God's Ordinance of Marriage thereby Profaned; which is of it self and without
them most Holy.


(7.) Of Chastity making Marriage Holy and Indissoluble.

When God has joined a Man a Woman, and they are made one Flesh, there needs
no other Portion or Dowry to make the Marriage but Chastity:

Dos est magna Parentum
Virtus, and metuens alterius viri
Certo foedere Castitas.
Compulsion of Ceremonies destroy Chastity.
But the corrupt Popish Practique of Ceremonies in Marriage, has destroyed the
Honor and Use of so great and rare a Virtue, and a Messalina if she is led to
a Priest and Temple, shall be a holy Wife and a Lucretia, if she leads not the
same Dance shall be a Profane one, or none at all. But what this unclean
Doctrine of such Doctors is, matters not: By the Scripture Chastity of the
Woman and the Bed undefiled makes Marriage Holy and Honorable, Heb. 13.4. and
Inchastity dissolves and makes it shameful, Levit. 20.10. Pro. 5.9. and 6.33.
Mat. 19.9. And not the Ceremony of Priests or Temples; as to which Heavenly
virtue we need cite no more excellent Example than the Lady her self, before
objected against by those who never imitated her in the same; against whose
Chastity Fame it self dared not Lie.

Of the Indissolubleness of such Marriage without Ceremony Consummated by
Carnal knowledge and Procreation of a Child.

It is not denied but that by the corrupt Practice of the Jews, Greeks, Romans,
and other Nations, Men Divorced Women, and Women who were free and not slaves
Divorced Men arbitrarily at their pleasure, not only after Carnal knowledge,
but after Childbirth, and many Children had; without cause or crime. But this
is expressly forbidden by Christ, Mat. 19.6. They two are no more twain but one
flesh, What therefore God has joined together, let no man put asunder.

That the Marriage intended by Christ to be Lawful and Indissoluble, was only
simple carnal knowledge without Ceremony between a man and a woman not
Prohibited to marry by the Law of God.

(1.) Because at the time and place when and where Christ taught this Doctrine
of the Lawfulness and Indissolubleness of Marriage in answer to the question
concerning Divorce by the Pharisees to tempt him, Mat. 19.3. There was no other
kind of Marriage then known amongst the Jews but these three: (1) Copulatione.
(2) Coemptione. (3) Instrumentis.
Nor amongst the Romans who ruled the Land, but these three: (1) Vsu. (2)
Coemptione. (3) Confarriatione.
Now it is manifest Christ intended not Coemptione, Instrumentis, or
Confarriatione; all which kinds are already before explained what they are. For
first he intended only that kind of Marriage which makes one flesh, as he
expressly declares, Verse. 4, 5, and 6. which is only Carnal knowledge.
Therefore he intended not Coemption or Marriage Writings, or the Ceremony of
Confarriation by eating a Barley Cake before a Priest in a Temple; for none of
these make the Man and Woman one flesh. Secondly, Christ expressly declares
Verse. 4. and 8. That he intends such a kind of Marriage as was from the
beginning, that is, from the time of the Creation of Male and Female. Now it is
clear that there was no kind of Marriage from the beginning but simple Carnal
knowledge without Ceremony, and secret without Witness, except God only; and no
such thing as Coemption or buying or selling Women for Money, without writing,
or buying or selling them for Joyntures or Thirds by Indentures or Instruments
written, nor buying or selling them for Fees by the Priest for his
Confarriations and other ridiculous Ceremonies. Thirdly, Christ whipped all
Buyers and Sellers out of the Temple, and intended they should not buy or sell
there; much less did he intend they should buy or sell there God's holy
Ordinance of Marriage. Fourthly, Christ abolished all Ceremonies, and taught
the Worship of God ought to be in Spirit. And Fifthly, Christ never Instituted
any Marriage by a Priest, nor did he or his Apostles ever Marry a Man and a
Woman: he intended not therefore such kind of Marriage, which neither God
instituted nor of which he from God gave either Precept or Example. Sixthly,
Christ only intended such Marriages, whereof according to God's Ordinance, the
Poor might take equal benefit with the Rich: For he says, to the Poor the
Gospel is preached, but the Poor can take no benefit of Coemptions or buying of
Women for Money, or for Jointures or Thirds, nor are able to give Fees to
Lawyers for Indentures, or to Priests for Ceremonies, or to buy Licenses or
Gold Rings, or to pay so much as for Banns or Proclamations; Christ therefore
never intended they should be Prohibited all Marriage, except it were
Coemptione, Instrumentis, or Confarriatione; he gave them therefore that
Marriage which was Copulatione; otherwise they could have the benefit of no
Marriage at all. Seventhly, It Is manifest that Christ makes the Marriage
Copulatione to be the Ordinance of God which was from the beginning; for which
a man should leave father and Mother, and should cleave to his Wife, and this
was the Law of Moses, and the Law of the Romans, and Christ does establish and
confirm it by forbidding any Divorce except for Fornication, which in the Woman
is Polyandry, and according to the Maxim of Nature, Vnumquodque dissolvitur
eodem modo quo Conflatum est. As Carnal knowledge by a Woman with her Husband
shall make Marriage; so Carnal knowledge with another Man, does unmake and
dissolve the Marriage. If therefore Marriage by Carnal knowledge only is,
according to the Doctrine of Christ, a joining together by God and
indissoluble, a Fortiore, Procreation of a Child between them, is a joining
together by God, and Indissoluble by Man, and even it is by the Light of Nature
acknowledged, That Procreation of Children is a greater obligation than
Copulation not fruitful.

Nascitur ad fructum Mulier, prolemque futuram.

Claud. in Eutrop. -- Tormentum ingens Nubentibus haeret,
Quod nequeant parere and partu retinere Maritos.
Juv. Sat. 2. Faemina cum senuit, retinet Connubia partu,
Vxorisque Decus, Matris Reverentia pensat.
Nos Lucina fugit, nec pignor^ nitimur ull^.
Claud. in Eutrop. An Epithalamium on the Marriage of Nature intended by
Christ, without a Priest or Temple.
BRazen was Venus when in Pride
To Temples thronged she led a Bride,
Who with a blush
Like Rosy bush
First with one man in Woods did hide.
There free from fascinating charms,
And Hungry Wolves more cruel harms,
The Lamb did play,
And never stray
From fold of her own Shepherds arms.
Fair Chastity in Angels shape,
The Nymphs there taught how to escape
With pretty smiles,
And witty wiles
From every wanton Satyr's rape.
The Turtle there in secret sat
As sick of Love, as was her Mate,
And still did moan
To him alone;
Nor from him fled until her Fate.
The lesser Birds did sit and sing
How these in prime the Queen and King
Had been of May
So sweet and Gay
When it approached to the Spring.
There in the Royal Oak of Jove
Princes did wed and Live and Love;
And of Renown
Without a Crown
They Kingdoms had from God above.
Fast by in Cottages of Reed
The Subjects lay who were agreed.
Their Love did bless
With Happiness;
Oh happy thrice they and their seed.
No Mother there more fierce and wild
Then Tiger killed her new born Child:
Nor from it fly
For Parish cry
The Father did or was exiled,
The weeping Babe not babbling Fame
Dared illegitimate their Name,
Or Punishment
On Innocent
To lay of Parents guilt or shame.
Thus had the lovely Pairs at first,
Had not the State of Man been cursed
In Eden's Bowers
New dressed with Flowers,
Their own Fruit unforbidden nursed.
Thus he did Marriage make divine,
Who Water turned into Wine,
And Heaven to fill,
Where is no ill
With little Children did design.
Till what was right was feigned amiss,
Unless the Priest had the Tenth kiss,
And fees beside
To bless the Bride,
Then lost they Innocence and bliss.
Obj. 7. The eldest Son not Heir intended by the Statute.

Eldest Son not Heir.
Answ. 1. This Objection is in its own Nature repugnant to it self, That the
eldest Son and Heir in the Letter of the Statute, is not the Heir in the
Intention.

(2.) It Is Protestatio contraria facto, and not only to the Fact of another, but
to the Parties own-Fact; who Objects for the Popish Party who deny him to be
Heir in their words, affirm him to be Heir by their Deeds and wicked Plots to
kill him as Heir, that they may seize on his Inheritance, as is already shown,
Matthew. 21.38. They said amongst themselves, This is the Heir, come let us seize
on his Inheritance.

A multitude of kinds of Heirs.
(3.) The word Heir is the Genus, and eldest Son is the Difference. So the Heir
intended by this Statute is not only described, but perfectly defined and
differenced from all other Species of Heirs; As there is Haeres Sanguinis, and
Haeres Haereditatis, there is Haeres factus, and Haeres Natus, Haeres de facto,
and Haeres de Jure, Haeres verus, and Haeres fictitius, Haeres Astrarius, and
Haeres Apparens. There is farther, the Heir by the Civil Law, who succeeds in
Vniversum Jus Antecessoris, immovable and moveable Possessions, and
Obligations; There is the Hier by the Law of Scotland, and Customs in the
North, who succeeds to Lands, Heirlooms, and Heretable Bonds; but not to other
Movables. There is the Heir by Custom, and the Heir by Law. There is Haeres ex
provisione Legis, and Haeres ex provisione hominis. There is the Heir by
Contract inter viros, and Heir Testamentary and Heir Dative. There is Haeres
Viventis, and Haeres Defuncti. There is the Heir in Gavelkind, and Heir in
Burgh English. There is the Heir by the Ecclesiastical Law, and Heir by the
Common Law, and Heir by the Statute Law. There is the true Heir, and Heir by
the Certificate of the Bishop. There is the Heir per Jus Coronae, and the Heir
by the Law for Subjects. There is the Heir by the Ceremonial Laws of Men, and
the Heir by the Moral Law of God: There is the Heir of the Husband, and the
Heir of the Wife; Heir of the first, and Heir of the second Marriage, and so
many other Kinds there are of Heirs here not named; as the old Rhyme, though
made on another Subject, may be true enough applied to this:

Of Heirs there are as many Kinds,
As Mariners have found out Winds.
And should all these Kinds of Heirs, the greatest part of whom were before
this Statute, left unlimitted as to Supreme Successions, either at once or
Successively in the Three Kingdoms, bring their pretensions of Right to Trial
by Battles, though Papists would Rejoice in such perpetual Tempests as they
themselves had raised to Rent the British Oak in pieces, yet no Protestant
there would be who would not acknowledge it a great Providence of God, and
Piety and Prudence in this Statute, which to prevent the Causes of so many
Intestine Discords, has restrained the manifold kinds of Heirs, to whom there
can be but one at a time in the Three Kindoms who is the King's eldest Son, and
Heir of his Blood.

Eldest Son the only Heir intended.
(4.) It Is manifest this Statute intended no kind of Heir but the eldest Son and
Heir; First, Because the Natural affection of the Father directs his intention
irresistably to his eldest Son. Secondly, Because his Wisdom and
Self-Preservation leads to the eldest Son, who, as is before shown, is above
all other Children the chiefest Defense of the Father. Thirdly, Because the
Black Prince, who was intended to have the benefit of this Statute, was the
eldest Son and Heir of Edward the Third, the maker of this Statute.

Haeres Sanguinis, and non Haereditatis intended.
(5.) It Is manifest this Statute intended Haeres Sanguinis, and not Haeres
haereditatis; Heir of Blood, and not Heir of Goods; and Haeres viventis, and
not Haeres Defun^ti; Except before he is Born, and not after. And though
John-an-Oaks, who has been so long the Parret of Littleton and Coke's Law,
will stomach it very much to be taught a new Lesson; yet under his favor, his
Tutors in these matters of Marriage, Filiation, and Succession, were very much
Mistaken or Partial in this as other Matters, and many of them in the two
former Books have been already shown. And I shall, as to the two particulars
here mentioned, further show, first therefore, That Haeres Sanguinis, is
intended in this Statute, and not Hares Haereditatis.

(1.) Because Haeres Sanguinis, is Haeres designans; and Haeres Haereditatis,
Haeres designatus, to be known by the other.

(2.) Because the words of the Statute are, our Lord the King, the Lady his
Companion, or their Eldest Son and Heir: Now the Heir of the Inheritance of a
Kingdom cannot be intended, Because he derives his Title to the same only from
the King, and not from the Lady Companion, unless a Queen Regnant; therefore he
cannot be the Heir of both of them, as he is Haeres Hereditatis; but as he is
Haeres Sanguinis, he is Heir of the Blood of both of them, which is the only
Heir, intended by this Statute. Secondly, seeing the Heir of Blood, is in the
Express words of the Statute: And no words at all of the Heir of the
Inheritance, therefore the Heir of Inheritance ought not to be put in the
intention, otherwise than as Haeres designatus, marked to be known, by the
first knowing who is Haeres Sanguinis, because then a Penal Statute would be
extended by Equity.

And as to the other Particular, It is manifest, That Haeres viventis is
intended in this Statute, and not Haeres defuncti, except before he is born,
and not after. First, because the eldest Son who is Haeres Sanguinis, most
times happens to be born in the lifetime of his Father, and not to be a
Rosthume, and, ad ea quae frequentius accidunt Jura adaptantur. Therefore
Posthumes, which do rarely happen to be eldest Sons, shall not be only intended
to be within the Statute, and the eldest Son on whom the Royal Blood descended
en ventre sa mere; And he was Heir to the same before he was born, be therefore
excluded, because he is Haeres viventis to the same after he is born, and his
Father died not before his Birth. Secondly, The words of the Statute, Restrain
not the Heir to be, Haeres defuncti; before he is born, or after he is born;
therefore to restrain by the intention of either, is to extend a Penal Statute
by Equity; which ought not to be done. Thirdly, my Lord Coke himself, 3 part,
fol. 9. in his Exposition on this Statute, says, That Heir, is here taken for
Heir apparent, for he cannot be Heir in the life of the Father. Haeres viventis
intended Haeres Sanguinis and not Haeres Haereditatis.
It is a clear mistake; for first, an Heir apparent can only be of the King,
but the Statute makes him Heir both to King and Lady, and the catch which they
have got of Haeres non est viventis, was never intended to be any other than
Haeres Haereditatis, which kind of Heir is before unanswerably Proved not to be
intended within this Statute. And if it had, the Statute had served to little
purpose to ascertain the Heir of the Crown, so many sorts of Laws and Customs
pretending to be the Rule of Judgment of Haeres Haereditatis: but the eldest
Son, who is Haeres Sanguinis, as is already shown, can be but one in the Three
Kingdoms; and that the King's eldest Son, who is Haeres Sanguinis, the Chief
Heir of his Blood, by the Law of Nature, and not him who is made Haeres
Haereditatis by Papal and Episcopal Laws. When Theseus had occasioned the Death
of his Virtuous, Valiant and eldest Son Hippolitus, by the false Calumnies of
Phaedra his Stepmother, he cries out,

O nimium Potens,
Quanto Parents Sanguinis vinclo tenes,
Natura! quam te colimus inviti quoque!
Occidere volui noxium, amissum fleo.
Seneca in Hippol. I cannot, oh too potent Nature shun
The Bonds of blood 'twixt Father and a Son:
His blood, his blood, I in my anger shed,
For whom I now shed Tears when he is dead.
And did not David fall into a greater Passion of Love for Absolon, though the
most Unnatural, Ungrateful, and Traitorous Son that ever was. 2 Samuel 18.32. And
the King said unto Cushi, Is the young man Absolon safe? and Cushi answered,
The enemies of my Lord the King, and all that Rise against thee to do the hurt,
be as that young man is; And the King was much moved, and went up to the
Chamber over the Gate and wept; and as he wept, thus he said, Oh my Son
Absolon, would God I had died for thee, oh Absolon, my Son, my Son. But what
would David have done if Absolon had been a Loyal and Obedient Son. Oh! where
he now only wished he had died once, he would then have cried out and wished he
had died twice for him.

(7.) All Heirs are either Lineal or Collateral, unless therefore one of these
Kinds are intended, the Statute can intend none at all; Collateral Heirs of the
Crown not within this Statute.
now that Collateral Heirs are not intended, is expressly delivered by Coke, 3
Part. fol. 9. where he says, if the Heir apparent to the Crown be a Collateral
Heir apparent, he is not within this Statute as he says, Roger Mortimer Earl
of March, was Anno Dom. 1487. (11. R.) Proclaimed Heir apparent Anno 39. H. 6.
Richard Duke of York was likewise Proclaimed Heir apparent, so was John de la
Poole, Earl of Lincoln, by R. 3. and Henry Marquess of Exceter by King Henry
the Eight, but none of these or of the like are within this Statute, if only
Lineal Heirs are within the Statute, there can be none but the eldest Son can
be Heir intended, the eldest being expressly named Heir, and none besides named
at all.

That to compass the Exile or Disinheriting of the King's eldest Son, is High
Treason.

To Exile or Disinherit the King's eldest Son, High Treason.
First, Because the Exiling or Disinheriting the King's eldest Son indangers the
King himself. Secondly, Because to compass the Exile, compasses the Death of
the eldest Son; by depriving him of the King's Protection, and exposing him to
Poison or Assassination of his Enemies, and to compass to Disinherit him, is a
manifest design to destroy him, without which his Inheritance cannot be taken
from him; as Matthew. 21.38. They said amongst themselves, this is the Heir, come
let us kill him, and let us seize on his inheritance, And they caught him, and
cast him out of the Vinyard, and slew him.

The Son of a King, born after he is King, is to be preferred in Succession
before the Son of a King born, while he is Prince.

And of this there are many Examples, as Henry the First, being the youngest
Son of William the Conqueror, Born when a Prince, and born when a King.
standing in Competition for the Crown of England against Robert Duke of
Normandy, his elder Brother, made this one of his Objections, That Robert was
born when his Father was but a Duke, but Henry was born when his Father was a
King; and therefore obtained the Kingdom against Robert his eldest Brother. And
it is recited by Grot. de Jur. Bell. and Pac. p. 171. That the like passed in
Persia, between Cyrus and Arsica; in Judea, between Antipater the Son of Herod
the Great, and his Brother; in Hungary, when Geissa obtained the Kingdom; in
Germany, between Otto the First, and Henry, though not without Arms; and
likewise the same Question was between Xerxes, and his Brother Atabarzanes, and
between Artaxerxes Mnemon, and Cyrus, the Sons of Darius, and Parisatis
Artaxerxes being the elder, but born during the Private fortune of Darius, and
the like happened between Bajazet, and Zemez, contending for the Turkish
Empire, and many others.

Answ. These were put to the Trial of Battle, and for the greatest part the
eldest Son had the Success; but if it had been otherwise, the Event of War is
no Rule of Justice; and if it had been without War, yet where there is a
standing Act of Parliament Judicandum est Legibus non Examplis. And this Act of
Parliament was made to prevent the present, and all other. Accidents which
might happen to disturb the Peace of Succession of the Kingdom, and raise Civil
Wars, which it could not do without all other Sons and Heirs to the eldest Son,
and there being no other Son mentioned in the Letter of the Statute but the
eldest, and not a word of Distinction whether born before or after the Father's
obtaining the Kingdom; Vbi lex non distinguit ibi nec nos distinguere debemus;
for then the same mischiefs would ensue beforementioned of extending a Statute
of Treason by Equity, which leaves Treason arbitrary to every Judge who will
assume to declare it beyond the Letter, and to insert as many kinds of Sons and
Heirs as he pleased, which would make the Law, and all the Care and Wisdom of
it in ascertaining the Son Heir to be of no Effect, and leave the Kingdom in a
dangerous Condition, that every Prince Married in his Father's lifetime, and
having then some Children, and after his Father's Death others, might occasion
a Civil War, who should succeed to the Crown when he died.

The next Objection, That the King's eldest Son is not yet Declared Prince of
Wales, or Prince of the Scots.

The Original of this Title used to be given to the eldest Sons of the Kings of
England, was from Henry the Third, who gave his eldest Son Edward (who was
afterward King Edward the First) on his Marriage to Elianor the Daughter of
Spain, amongst other Principalities in France, England, and Ireland, likewise
that of Wales, Hinc natum ut deinceps unusquisque Rex qui secutus est filium
majorem natu principem Walliae facere consuevit. And in continuance of this
Custom, Anno 1610. Prince Henry the eldest Son of King James, was solemnly
created Prince of Wales by his Father. As to the Title designing the Prince of
Scotland to be next Successor, or Heir apparent, it seems to have been by their
Investiture of Cumberland, for says Buchanan Rer. Scot. lib. 6. p. 175. That
Constantine the Third in the Tenth year of his Reign Milcolumbo proximo Regis
filio Cumbriam donavit, qui honos velut Augurium and Argumentum erat eum
proxime regnaturum, Ac deinceps in proximis aliquot Regibus id fuisse
observaturum manifesta adversus veterem Comitiorum rationem fraud, quae omnem
Liberorum susfragiorum vim prope tollerit, non minus quam Coss^a Caesaribus
Designatio. Constantine the Third in the Tenth year of his Reign gave
Cumberland to Malcoli^, the Son of the last King, which Honor was as it were
the Inauguration or Sign of him who was next to succeed in the Kingdom, and was
after observed by some of the next Kings to that end, to take away by Fraud the
free Election by Parliament, no less than did the Designations of the Consuls
by the Caesar's; and after p. 189. he sath, That Kenneth the Third, being King
by Election of the People to make the Kingdom Hereditary to his own Son
Malcolm, finding it an Impediment in his way, that his Brother Duffus his Son
Malcolm Cumbriae tum praefectus erat, quam Regionem Scoti beneficio Regum
Anglorum it a tenebant, ut Cumbriae Praefectura velut omen Regni esset, atque
ita jam per aliquot aetates observatum erat, was then Governor of Cumberland,
which Region the Scots held by Gift from the Kings of England, to that intent
that the Presidentship of Cumberland should be for a Sign who should be next
Successor to the Kingdom, and so for diverse Ages the same has accordingly been
observed, he to inherit his own, Poisoned his Brother's Son, and p. 190. he
says, Milcolumbus regis filius in natura adhuc, ad rerum administrationem
aetate and Cumbriae praefectus et princeps Scotorum est Declaratus, quod nomen
perinde est Scotis atque apud Gallos Delfinus, apud priores Romanorum
Imperatores Caesar apud posterio res Rex Romanorum, quibus omnibus Successor
superiori Magistratui dari intelligitur. Malcolm the King's Son in an unripe
Age for Public Affairs, is declared President of Cumberland, and Prince of the
Scots, which Name is with the Scots Equipollent to the Daulphin amongst the
French, to Caesar amongst the Ancient Romans, and amongst the Modern to the
King of the Romans; by all which Titles, the Successor to the Superior
Magistracy is understood, but notwithstanding for the most part this has been
the Custom, yet it has been likewise often omitted, and Admit it had not, yet
there being no Law requiring it, there is no pretense that such Omissions makes
any incapacity in the Heir to succeed at Common Law, or to be within this
Statute for the Statute making no Distinction between the King's eldest Son
when made Prince of Wales, and when not, Vbi Lex non distinguit ibi nec nos
distinguere Debemus. Besides the Kingdoms being now United, a Title common to
both were more convenient than several Titles. The Roman Title Princeps
Juventutis, extended to the whole Empire.

The Objection of Illegitimation answered.

I think the Objector has now spit his Venom, Of Illegitimation.
but let him take heed it does not Poison himself; for first I answer it is
already proved, That the Marriage of the Lady-Mother, was Lawful, Holy, and
Indissolvable, according to both Precepts, and Example of Scripture; and that
no Humane Power can Prohibit such Marriages which the Law of God has not
Prohibited, Marriage a thing not indifferent, not to be limited by the Laws of
Men.
and that Marriage is not a thing indifferent, but necessary, and Commanded by
God; and therefore what are made Actus Legitimi by God, non recipient modum aut
Conditionem from Men, nor ought the Holy Ordinance of God be compelled to be
profaned by Papal Ceremonies, and dare any then Illegitimate that Law of God
by a Law Papal, or an Act of Parliament by a Law Episcopal, and vend such an
Act as will hereafter be shown to make it High Treason for any Subject to
affirm the King's eldest Son Illegitimate; but before I proceed to that, I
shall first prove the following Thesis.

The eldest Son of a King of Great Britain Legitimate by his Birthright.
That not only by this Statute, but by the Law of God, the Law of Nations, and
the Jus Coronae of Great Britain, Primogeniture in Succession has been
preferred, and such Issue adjudged Legitimate, Though procreated of unlawful
Marriages and Persons Prohibited to Marry, but was never questioned by any Law
(except that of Popes and Bishops) in the Issue of Persons not Prohibited by
the Law of God to Marry.

Concerning Legitimation by the Law of God and Nature, there is more than
enough already spoken, Lib. 1. p. 79. to 83. and several other places already
mentioned, concerning the Laws, declared in Scriptures this Right of
Primogeniture and Legitimation was always observed amongst the Kings of Israel
and Judah, Primogeniture succeeded amongst the Patriarchs, though no Marriage
by a Priest in a Temple.
even in their most unlawful Marriages, and without Ceremonies, with strange
Women of foreign Nations, though expressly Prohibited to them by the Law of
Moses, as appears by Maimonides, Godwyn's Jew. Antiq. Seldom, and others, but
as to the same to be as brief as possible, I shall only insist on one Example,
though not a Prince yet a Patriarch amongst them. It is said, Genesis 29.16. Laban
had two Daughters, the name of the Elder was Leah, and the name of the younger
was Rachel, Leah was tender-eyed, but Rachel was beautiful and well favored.
And Jacob loved Rachel and said, I will serve thee-seven years for Rachel thy
younger daughter. And Laban said, It is better that I give her unto thee, then
that I should give her to another man, abide with me. And Jacob served seven
years for Rachel, and they seemed unto him but a few days; for the Love he had
unto her. And Jacob said unto Laban, Give me my Wife, for my days are
fulfilled, that I may Go in unto her. And Laban gathered together all the men
of the place, and made a feast, and it came to pass in the evening, that he
took Leah his daughter, and brought her in unto him, and he went in unto her.
Et Verse. 25. And it came to pass in the Morning, behold it was Leah. And he
said to Laban, What is this thou have done unto me? Did not I serve with thee
for Rachel? wherefore then have thou beguiled me? Et Ver. 32. And Leah
conceived and bare a Son, and she called his name Reuben. Genesis 49.3. Jacob
says, Reuben thou art my first born, my might, and the beginning of my
strength, the excellency of Dignity, and the excellency of Power.

From whence may be observed, That if it were possible for any Objections to be
of weight against the Right of Primogeniture and Legitimation in any, it might
have been made against this of Reuben. For,

First, Here is no Intent nor Consent, no Contract, no Espousal of Marriage by
Jacob with Leah.

(2.) There is no Banns, no Leadings to Church, no Ceremony, no Joining by the
Priest, no Benediction by him of Jacob and Leah.

(3.) What is worse than the want of all these;

Here is (1) a mere Cheat, a Woman that is hated in the dark clapped into the
Bridegroom's Bed, instead of her that is beloved. (2) Here is the true Bride
Robbed of her seven years expected Enjoyment, by a false. (3) Here is the
Marriage-Covenant most perfidiously broken. (4) The Labourer is defrauded of
his hire for seven years Labor. (5) Here is Adultery and Incest committed by
the eldest Sister, with the contracted Husband of the younger Sister. (6) The
elder Sister her self knows, and is accessory to all these Crimes; yet has the
Impudence to Rest all Night, Acting them in a stolen Bed, and to outface them
in the Light of the Rising Sun; for behold in the Morning it was Leah,
notwithstanding all which Reuben is not punished for the Crimes of Leah, nor
does he lose thereby the Right of his Primogeniture; but Jacob declares him as
aforesaid, Genesis 49.3. Reuben thou art my first born, my might, and the
beginning of my strength, the excellency of Dignity, and the excellency of
Power.
And though he likewise express for the great Crime of Reuben himself, the
forfeiture of his Birthright, and that excellency which thereby belonged unto
him, and says, Verse. 4. Thou shall not excel, because thou wentest up to thy
Father's Bed, then defiled'st thou it: And the same is likewise declared, 1 Chronicles. cap. 5.1. Now the sons of Reuben, the firstborn of Israel, (for he was
the firstborn;) But forasmuch as he defiled his fathers bed, his Birthright
was given unto the sons of Joseph, the son of Israel: Yet does this prove the
stronger, that notwithstanding the unlawful Marriage and Crimes of Leah, his
Mother, the Birthright belonged unto him, till he forfeited the Privilege of
it, by so great a Crime, as he himself Committed, Legitimation impossible to be
forfeited, or to be taken from the Child, or the Incidents to the same.
and notwithstanding he forfeited the Privilege of his Birthright; yet he
forfeited not his Legitimation, but inherited an equal filial Portion with his
younger Brethren, for Legitimation is impossible to be forfeited, taken away,
or destroyed; unless it were possible to make the Son begot of such a Father,
not to have been begotten by him; for if he was begot by him, Filiation
includes Legitimation and Aliment sufficient if the Child want it, and the
Father has it in Possession, and Succession ought to be given him, though as
to the Superalimentary Quantity of his Goods, the Father has Liberty to
dispose them or alienate them from Legitimate and Illegitimate alike; how he
pleases for Filiation and Legitimation, The Power of Alienation by the Father
of the Goods, neither Legitimates or Illegitimates the Child.
are Jure naturae, and Jura Sanguinis, and Jura naturae sunt immutabilia, and
Jura Sanguinis nullo Jure Civili divini possunt; Upon the whole, I conclude,
that were there no other Example but this, it utterly overthrows all manner of
Objections whatsoever can be invented against the Right of Primogeniture, and
makes ridiculous all Popish Fictions of Illegitimation. The Marriages of the
Kings of Judah and Israel, and all the Ebrews might be Copulatione without
Ceremony, Godw. Antiq. and Seldom.

As to the Laws of the other Nations, besides the Hebrews, first to touch on
the Greeks; Jus Coronae of Greece, as to Legitimation.
Eustatheus on Homer concerning Teucer, who was a Natural Son, affirms, That
whosoever is born of a Prince is lawfully Born, and so Teucer was held in as
great Esteem as any other, and enjoyed his Inheritance; for as Servius says in
Greece, Consuetudinis Regiae fuit ut Legitimam Vxorem non habentes, aliquam
licet Captivam tamen pro Legitima haberent, ut Liberi Ex ipsanati succederent.
The Common Law of Greece was, That if a King had not a Lawful Wife, any Woman
he had, a Captive Slave should be accounted Lawful, and his Children by her
should be his Successors. So this was the Jus Coronae of Greece, though it was
otherwise as to Succession, amongst the Subjects Children; for they had only a
Filial Portion of a Thousand Drachmae, which they called (...), but not
Illegitimated, or left without Portion.

Amongst the Roman Emperors, there was no such thing ever heard of as
Illegitimation of the Emperors Children, Jus Coronae of Great Britain as to
Succession, differs from the Law of Succession as to Subjects.
till the Papal and Episcopal Laws overtopt the Imperial, nor any such thing
ever heard of, except falsely Translated amongst the Kings of Israel or Judah,
or in the whole Scripture, nor in the Ottoman Empire, nor in any Nation, except
where Popes and Bishops have set their foot, and as to the Jus Coronae of Great
Britain, as it is well known the same is necessarily in many things as to
Succession different from the Common Law of Succession to the Subject; So it is
as well known, that neither the Romish nor British Bishops have dared (though
they have Usurped on the Subjects) to invade the Legitimation of the Crown in
Great Britain, and if they have as in the famous Prince Edward the Sixth and
Queen Elizabeth, it has been fruitless. First, Constantine the Great was the
Natural Son of Constantius Sorus, by Helena a British Lady, who is called his
Concubine, and whom (after the Birth of his eldest Son, the said Constantine)
he repudiated, and after Married Theodora, the Daughter-in-Law of Maximinianus
the Emperor; yet Constantius Clorus dying here in Britain, his eldest Son
Constantine the Great, without Scruple made by any, succeeded his Father in the
Government of Britain, and all other Western Provinces belonging to his
Father's share of Empire in Scotland, Gillus Nothus.
Gillus Nothus succeeded to his Father Evenus, notwithstanding that false name
of Nothus cast on him by the Romish Episcopal Laws, contrary to the Law of God,
which Evenus was a Wife and a good Prince; yet he never contracted the Mother
of his eldest Son Gillus by the Ceremonies of a Priest or Temple; yet was this
in a time of Christianity, and not of Paganism, for Donald was the first
Christian King of Scotland, Anno Domini 199. which was long before Gillus,
Buch. Rer. Scot. 103. Et Skene in his Table of Kings. Robert the Second of
Scotland, Robert the Second of Scotland, Elizabeth More, and Eufemia.
a good and peaceable Prince (for those Atticbules does Skene in his Table of
Kings give him) took to him according to the words of this Statute to be the
Lady his Companion, Elizabeth More the Beautiful Daughter of Sir Adam More his
Subject, without any Ceremonies of Priest or Temple, and had Issue by her John,
Robert, and Alexander; after he deserts Elizabeth, and Marries her to Giffard a
Nobleman of Louthean: And by the Ceremonies of a Priest and a Temple, Marries
Euphemia, the Daughter of Hugh Earl of Ross, and had Issue by her Walter after
Earl of Jearne, David after Earl of Athol, and Euphemia after Married to James
Douglas, after Euphemia the Queen dies, and much about the same time Gyford
dies, King Robert resumes Elizabeth, and Marries her by the Ceremonies of a
Priest and Temple; as appears by Buch. Rer. Scot. p. 107. where he says, that
after the Death of Euphemia, Robertus non tam impatientia Coelibatus quam Amore
filiorum ex Elizabetha Mora prius Genitorum ipsam Vxorem duxit, hanc enim
eliganti forma Adami Mori illustris Equitis filiam adhuc adolescen^ vehementer
amarat; Ex eaque tres filios and duas filias susceperat, eamque Gifardo viro
nobili in Lothiana curaverat collocandam; verum sub idem fere tempus Eufemia
Regina and Gifardo Elizabethae Marito Defunctis, Rex seen vetere consuetudine
Morae inductus, sive (quod a multis traditur) ut filios quos ex ea genuerat
Legitimos faceret, matrem eorum sibi Matrimonio junxit, filios statim divitiis
and honoribus auxit, Johannes natu Maximus Carictae Robertus Tinchi^ Alexander
Buchaniae Comites sunt facti, adjecta etiam Badenach, nec munificatione
Contentus Comitiis ad Sconam indictis obtinuit, ut praeteritis Eufemiae Liberis
in Rege creando gradus aetatis observaretur. Whence may be observed,

(1.) That the Sons of a Lady born before any Marriage of her with the
Ceremonies of a Priest or Temple succeeded to the Crown of Scotland. (2.) That
she was a Lady not Prohibited by the Law of God for the King to Marry. (3.)
That she was the Daughter of a Subject. (4.) That the Subsequent Marriage by
the Papal Law signified nothing, for no stress is laid on it but the
Confirmation and Declaration of the Successors sought from the Parliament. (5.)
Though there were other Sons born of Euphemia the Queen, who was Ceremoniously
Married by a Priest in a Temple; yet the Parliament thought just to pass by her
Sons, and to settle the Succession on the Sons of Elizabeth.
Athelstanus Nothus -- Legitimate per Jus Coronae.
Athelstan was the eldest Son of King Edward the Elder before the Conquest, by
a Lady his Companion, to whom he was never Contracted by the Ceremonies of a
Priest in a Temple (but a Lady not Prohibited by the Law of God) to have
Married; King Edward had after him five younger Sons by two Wives, whom he had
Ceremoniously Married by a Priest in a Temple and died; after his Death,
notwithstanding the fourth Son of King Edward by one of his Episcopal Wives,
was left alive; and notwithstanding the Priests and others both in England and
Scotland, sought to dishonor him with the Name of Nothus; for by that name
Buchanun Rerum. Scot. 175. Styles him and says, Praerat omnibus Anglorum copiis
Athelstanus Edwardi Nothus, And in the same manner, other Writers; yet was
neither the name nor the thing any bar of his Succession to the Kingdom; but he
was thereto preferred before his younger Brother Edmund, whom Papal Laws made
Legitimate; and accordingly he was Crowned by Athelmus Archbishop of
Canterbury, at Kingston upon Thames: And proved after the most Heroic
Victorious Prince that the English ever had before the Conquest; for he
conquered both the Danes and Scots confederated against him, and Subdued the
whole Island.

Edward the Son of Edgar, Legitimate per Jus Coronae.
Ethestede, for her excellent Beauty surnamed the White, was a Virgin and not
Prohibited by Law of God for King Edgar to Marry; but he neglected or despised
Pontifical Ceremonies, and begot on her, without them, his eldest Son Edward;
for which Dunstan Archbishop of Canterbury enjoined him seven years Penance;
which he underwent for the Fact.

After Edgar Married Elfrida, the only Daughter and Heiress of Ordganus, Duke
of Devonshire, with the Ceremonies of the Church, and made her his Queen; and
likewise Contracted with her, That her Children should be Heirs to the Crown,
and had Issue by her two Sons, Edmund, who died young; and Ethelred, who
survived him. Edgar dies, Note, here are all the Objections made against the
succeeding to the Crown by Edward, which are now made, and more; for here is an
Heir by Marriage-Covenant opposed against the Natural Heir.
Queen Elfrid excepted against the Succession of Edward the eldest Son, That
his Mother was no Queen, nor Wife Married according to the Ceremonies of the
Church, and that he was therefore Illegitimate; That she her self was King
Edgar's Queen and Wife, whom he Married Solemnly according to the Rites and
Ceremonies of the Church; and that by his Marriage-Covenants he bound himself,
That her Children by him should be Successors to the Kingdom; That therefore
her Son was both the Legitimate Heir, and Heir by Covenant; and thereupon drew
diverse Lords to be of her Party; and the two Sons are both produced before the
Council assembled to demand their Rights: But while the Council sat to Debate
the same, Dunstan Archbishop of Canterbury came in with his Banner and Cross,
and not staying for dispute of the Title, presented Prince Edward the eldest
Son as next right Heir to the Crown, and their lawful King; and the Assembly
consisting most of Clergymen, drew the Approbation of the Rest; whereupon
Prince Edward was Admitted and Crowned King, being but Twelve years old, by
Archbishop Dunstan at Kingston upon Thames, Anno Dom. 975. and so continued,
till about Three years and Six Months after, King Edward Hunting in the Isle of
Purbeck, not far from Corf Castle, where his Mother-in-Law Queen Elfrid, with
his Brother Ethelred were then Residing, he out of his Love to both, would
needs go to visit them; where the cruel Stepmother out of Ambition to make her
own Son King, caused one to Stab him in the Back with a Knife as he was
Drinking a cup of Wine on Horseback, at his departing; who feeling himself
hurt, set Spurs to his Horse, thinking thereby to get to his Company; but the
wound being Mortal, and he fainting through loss of so much Blood, fell from
his Horse, and one foot being entangled in his Stirrup, he was thereby ruefully
dragged up and down; and lastly, left Dead at Corf Gate; in Commiseration of
which untimely Death, he was ever afterward called Edward the Martyr. On which
may be noted,

(1.) That notwithstanding the Mother of Edward was no Queen; Notwithstanding
she was never Contracted nor Married by the Rites and Ceremonies of the then
Church; Notwithstanding Elfrid was a Queen, and solemnly Married by all those
Rites and Ceremonies; notwithstanding the Kingdom was by Marriage-Covenant
settled on her Issue by King Edgar; Notwithstanding Ethelred appeared with a
Company of Lords Competitors; Notwithstanding the accompanying of Edgar with
Elfred, was through Romish Superstition, thought so unlawful as not to be
Expiated under seven years Penance; Yet the same Archbishop Dunstan, who
imposed the same on the Father, laid none on the Son, but he and the Clergy
declared him the Right and Lawful Heir; by which they did implicitly confess
and acknowledge, That the Moral Law of God of Marriage, and not any Ceremonial
Law of Man, is the immutable Law which ought to Govern the Succession of the
Crown.

(2.) The opinion of the Possession of the Crown to purge all Treason from him
who commits it, has been a great encouragement to the committing of the same.

(3.) That Princes disinheriting the Children of the first Wives, and entailing
their Kingdoms to the Children of the Second, destroying thereby their own
Houses.

(4.) That none are more Cruel to the Children of the first Mothers, than
Step-mothers; which it seems makes all Poets so out of Charity with them, that
they never mention them without some odious Epithet of Injustae, mala, dirae,
ferae, terribiles Novercae, and defame them with Stabbing, Poisoning, and
Witchcraft.

Pocula si quando Saevae infecere Novercae,
Miscueruntque herbas and non innoxia verba.
Virg. Georg. 2. When Cruel Step-mothers Poys'ning the Cup,
Add Herbs and Spells for Right Heirs to drink up.
I find but one kind of Stepmother excepted by Horace, as not apt to be Guilty
of these Practices, which is she that neither brings Portion, nor expects
Jointure, particularly of the Getick Women; of whose Chastity and good Nature
he thus writes:

Illic matre carentibus
Privignis mulier temperat innocens,
Nec dotata regit virum
Conjux, nec infido fidit adultero:
Dos est magna parentium
Virtus and metuens alterius viri
Certo foedere castitas,
Et peccare nefas aut pretium mori.
The innocent and kind Step-mothers there,
The Orphans Motherless to hurt forbear,
And not with Portions over their Husbands rant,
Helped by the Gay adulterous Gallant.
Virtue is Portion great, and Chastity
Strange man to touch, more fearing than to Die.
(5.) That where Marriage by the Ceremonial Laws of Men is preferred before a
Marriage by the Moral Law of God, this makes way for all Murders by
Step-mothers of the Children of first Mothers; of which see likewise the
Example of Roxalana, before related at large, Lib. 2. cap. 1. p. 245.

William the Conqueror succeeded to his Natural Fathers Dukedom, his Mother
never Married by a Priest in a Temple.
William the Conqueror was the Son of Rollo Duke of Normandy, by Arlotte a mean
Woman, whom he made Sa Compaigne, or Sociam Thalami, without any Ceremonies of
a Priest or Temple; she was a Person how mean soever, yet not Prohibited by the
Law of God for him to Marry, and though some slander her in hatred to her Son,
as if by some Lightness of hers all such as were of that Trade were since
called Harlots, from her name Arlotte; yet we find no proof of any Inchastity
in her, only she could Dance Ala mede de France, and if they can prove she was
Guilty of any worse, and were an Harlot, it only makes the President the
stronger, that the Law and Custom at that time and Country was, that the
Duke's eldest Son, though by a Woman taken without any Ceremony of a Priest or
Temple, ought after the Death of the Duke succeed to the Dukedom, neither was
this way any other Law or Custom than what is already shown to have been
amongst the Princes of the Hebrews, Greeks, Romans, and all other Nations not
inslaved by Superstition to receive the Forms of Marriage, and acknowledge the
Supreme Jurisdiction of them to be in the Bishop of Rome, or their own Prelates
or Pontiffs; by which Examples it appears, That by the British, Scottish, and
Norman Laws, the eldest Sons of Kings by Women not Prohibited to be Married by
the Law of God, though not Joined by a Priest in a Temple, or any other
Episcopal Ceremony; yet by Right of Primogeniture, they succeeded in the
Governments of their Fathers Dominions. It will be asked how then came the
ancient Law of God and the Land to be changed concerning these matters of
Marriage, Filiation, and Succession, and the Jurisdiction to be got or
pretended to be in Episcopal hands to Judge and Dispose of Marriage, Filiation,
and Successions both to the Crown, and Lay-Inheritances, according to Canonical
Laws, and not the Laws of God nor the Land? To which is answered, Hugh Capet an
Usurper of the French Crown, to curry favor with the Pope, first disinherited
natural Children.
That as to Normandy, and other the English Dominions after acquired in France,
as Bodin says, fol. 741. Hugh Capet was the first that made a Law in France,
That natural Sons, that is to say, such whose Parents were not Married by the
Popish Ceremonies of a Priest in a Temple, should not be Heirs, nor succeed to
the Kingdom. And at last strained his Law to that Degree of unnatural Cruelty
and Folly; that it was Enacted, That natural Children should not be accounted
natural Children, which Nonsense in that time of Popery, was not only followed
by the French, but imitated to get Money by the English and Scottish
Ecclesiastical and Common Lawyers; who, as has been already shown would not
admit natural Children to be Sib Kin of Consanguinity, nor Children to the
Father who begot, or the Mother who bare them; as if it had been in the Power
of Hugh Capet and them to overthrow or change the Laws of God and Nature.
Prohibition of Marriage, Sans Ceremony, a French Toy to disinherit all
Protestant Children.
So likewise by a French Decree, as says Everard, p. 24. All Children born in
Marriages, not Blessed by a Romish Priest, are made incapable to succeed to the
goods of Father or Mother: the Law of Capet was plotted by the French Bishops,
to get themselves Supremacy of disposing the French Crown, which foundation of
Power they commonly got from Usurpers to the intent that by their
Ecclesiastical pretense of Authority, they might protect a false Title, and
disinherit the true Heirs of the Blood. Heylin in his Geography, p. 186. says,
That Popes strengthen themselves by unlawful Marriages of Princes, and not by
lawful; and p. 101. Popes strengthen themselves by unlawful Marriages and
Successions of Princes, and not by lawful.
That Hugh Capet being a Prince of a strange Blood, was hoys^d up by the People
to the Prejudice of Charles of Lorrain, the true Heir of France, as Brother to
Lotherius, and Uncle to Lodovicus the last King of the Line of Pepin. And p.
129. he says, The occasion why Capet was chosen, and Charles of Lorain refused
was this, Charles Son to Lewis the Fourth King of France, being left to the
courtesy of his Brother, and by him not regarded, was by Otho the Emperor
invested in the Duchy of Lorain, Anno 984. which contains one Marquisate,
five Earldoms, and diverse Baronies. The eldest Son likewise of Lorain, is
entitled Prince of Barry; for which cause that he received Lorain from the
Emperor; Charles showed himself so alienated from the French, and wedded to the
Germans, that the French after the Death of his Cousin Lewis the First,
rejected him, and chose Hugh Capet for their King. This Charles had one Son
named Otho, and one Daughter called Hermingrade; from her descended Isabel Wife
to Phillip the Second, uniting the Bloods of Pepin and Capet, to the great
content of her Grandchild St. Lewis, who being a Man of a very tender
Conscience, is said never to have Joyed in the Crown of France, till it was
proved that by the Mothers side he was the right Heir of Charles of Lorain,
whom Hugh Capet had so unjustly dispossessed.

French and Popish Laws of Marriage, seek to destroy all English Heirs, and the
Protestant Religion.
So it appears, this French Law against Natural Sons was made to disinherit the
true Heirs of the Royal Blood of France, and to inherit the Certificate Heirs
of the French Bishops; and the other French Law mentioned against all
Succession of the Children whose Parents at their Marriage received not the
Benediction of a Romish Priest was made on Design to disinherit all Protestant
Children. The Law of Theodora against Natural Heirs, was to Disinherit the
true, and Inherit adulterous Heirs. The Law of Trent nulling all Marriages
without a Priest, and Witnesses, was to set to Sale Community of Women, to
raise Rents out of Stews, to lay a Tribute on Marriage, and inslave the
Successions of Kingdoms and private Patrimonies, to the will of Popes and
Bishops. Are there any Degenerous English so much Frenchified, as will impose
French Laws of Succession on the English Crown? Capet's Law not to be compared
with the Law of Edw. the 3d.
Shall Hugh Capet's Laws dare to contend with this Law of Edward the Third, who
beat and Conquered the greatest Navies and Armies of France; and in trial by
Battle at Cressey, proved his Right better to the Title of King of France, than
the Heir of Capet his; and had the same Heir of Capet taken Prisoner in Battle
by the Black Prince, the Heir of this Statute? Are there any so false
Protestants as to introduce such Popish Laws as disinherit all Protestant
Children? Are there any so profane Christians as will prefer the Ceremonial
Laws of Men above the Moral Laws of God? It has been shown thus far by the
Examples of so many Kings of this Island of Great Britain, that their
Legitimation and Succession thereby to the Crown, were by the Moral Law of God,
and not by the Ceremonial Laws of Romish or British Bishops; and none dared in
Great Britain, though they did in France, assume the Supremacy of
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction above the Royal and Parliamentary in Declaring the
Successors of the Crown; or if they did, they were overthrown in like manner,
may it be said of all the Kings and Queens which succeeded, concerning whom any
Question of Legitimation was raised; as for Example, John of Gaunt, the fourth
Son of Edward the Third, because he was a great favourer of the Wicklenites,
who were in those days most Zealous Protestants, was so hated by the Bishops to
whom the Doctrine of Wickliff was then terrible, that the then Bishop of
Winchester, John of Gaunt, for favoring Protestants, falsely slandred by the
Bishop of Winchester to be Illegitimate.
Confessor to his Mother Queen Phillippa, falsely slandered him to make him
Illegitimate; That he was the Son of a Flemming, and not of King Edward, though
his Mother Queen Phillippa was the most virtuous Wife of a King that was then
in the World, and to Illegitimate his Posterity by the Lady Katherine Swinford,
who was a virtuous Lady, and not Prohibited by the Law of God to be Married;
But yet never was Married to him by the Ceremony of a Priest or Temple, and by
whom he had Issue John Duke of Somerset, Thomas Duke of Exceter, Henry Bishop
of Winchester and Cardinal, and Joan a Daughter; which Daughter and all her
Brethren, were surnamed Beaufort from Beaufort a Castle which he had in France,
where they were all Born, and in regard thereof bare the Portcullis of a Castle
for the Cognizance of the Family; and these four Children, though they were
Legitimated by Act of Parliament in the Twentieth year of King Richard the
Second, and made capable of all Dignities; yet by Episcopal Power there was
inserted (Excepta dignitate Regali) which did as much as lay in an Exception so
much Illegitimate them to the Crown, that Coke says, Part 4. fol. 37. Henry the
7th, d^riveth ^imsel^ from Katherine Swinford, (...) Ma^d by a Priest in a
Temple.
The best Title of Henry the Seventh (who derived himself from John de Beaufort
Duke of Somerset, Son of John of Gaunt by the Lady Katherine Swinford) was by
Elizabeth his Wife eldest Daughter of Edward the Fourth; which Episcopal
Opinion of his would not have been taken for Law, if he had lived in the time
of H. 7. himself who notwithstanding this Episcopal Illegitimation, assumed the
Title of the House of Lanc^ster, as Legitimate by the Law of God, Both York and
Lancaster derive the Lines from Persons slandered to be Illegitimate by Laws of
Men, but made Legitimate by the Law of God.
and descending from a Lady not Prohibited to have been Married to John of
Gaunt, by the Law of God.

In like manner the Lady Elizabeth, eldest Daughter to King Edward the Fourth
by the Lady Elizabeth Gray, from the House of York claims was declared
Illegitimate by Richard the Third; because as was all^adged, E. 4. was
praecontracted to the Lady Lucy, which Lady Elizabeth was her self likewise
first promised in Marriage to the Daulphin of France, before she was Married to
H. 7. yet was she Legitimate, and her Issue Legitimate by the Law of God, and
succeeded United to the House of Lancaster to the Kingdom, according to the
same Law.

The same has been before mentioned of the Lady Elizabeth More, her Children
by Robert the Second King of Scotland were Born before any Ceremonial Marriage
of a Priest in a Temple; yet were they all Legitimate by the Moral Law of God,
Edward the Sixth Illigitimated by Papal Laws, but Legitimated by the Law of God.
the eldest succeeded to the Crown. In like manner King Edward the Sixth was
declared Illegitimate by the Pope, and the pretended Ecclesiastical Laws; but
he was Legitimate by the Moral Law of God, and succeeded to the Crown
accordingly.

Lastly, Queen Elizabeth was not only declared Illegitimate, by the Pope, but
by the Acts of Parliament of her own Father H. 8. which is above any
Declaration or Proclamation of a Privy Council; Queen Elizabeth Illegitimated
by Papal Laws and Act of Parliament, but Legitimated by the Law of God.
yet no true Protestant doubts but she was Legitimate by Moral Law of God,
which is above all Laws, and happily succeeded to the Crown, according to the
Law of God, to the Comfort of all Protestants.

From which Examples and Reasons appears the truth of the Thesis before laid
down.

(1.) That the Legitimation and Succession of Kings eldest Sons born of Women
not Prohibited by the Moral Law of God, was never questioned by any Laws,
except that of Popes and Bishops. (2.) That Legitimate and lawful Heirs may be
Born of unlawful Marriages. (3.) That the Moral Law of God has always been,
and still is the greatest Security of Legitimation and Succession to the Crown
of Great Britain, and ought to be preferred above all Ceremonial Laws of Men.
(4.) Next to the Moral Law of God, the greatest Humane Security of Legitimation
and Succession to the Crown, is either a general Act of Parliament, as this is
constituting and ascertaining the Heir by a General or Special Distinction or
Description, or when any doubt or danger arises by Act of Parliament
Declaratory of the Particular Successor or Name.
That it is High Treason by this Statute for any Subject to slander the King's
eldest Son with Illegitimacy.

Though Papal and Episcopal Canons have made their ordinary work to
Illegitimate the most Sacred Persons of Protestant Princes, who disdain to buy
their Mercenary Dispensations, Faculties, Licenses, and Pardons of Popes, or
Bishops, and particularly the most Pious King Edward the Sixth, and Queen
Elizabeth. And as is said, Jude 8. Defile the flesh, despise Dominions, speak
evil of Dignities; yet let them know, there is this Statute above all their
Canons and Synods, will punish their wickedness if they presume to Illegitimate
any King of England, or his eldest Son, it seems on these Reasons:

(1.) Because this compasses the Death of the King himself, his Father, for
who destroys the Kings Armies or Fleets which should defend him, compasses his
Death; but Non legiones non classes aeque firma imperii Munimenta ac numeros
Liberorum. Not Legions nor Fleets equally defend a Kingdom as Children; And
above all Children, the eldest Son. All which is more authentically expressed
by a great King and Soldier, Psa. 127.3. Lo Children are an heritage of the
Lord, and the fruit of the womb is his reward, as arrows are in the hand of a
mighty man, so are the Children of the youth, happy is the man who has his
quiver full of them, they shall not be ashamed; but they shall speak with the
Enemies in the Gate. And likewise as to the eldest Son, the Scripture it self
magnifies him as an high defense to the Father, as Jacob expresses of his,
Genesis 49.3. My firstborn, my might, and the beginning of my strength, the
excellency of Dignity, and the excellency of Power. And who has Vindicated His
Majesty's Honor and Safety in Wars abroad, and against Popish Plots,
Assassinations, Pistols, Poniards, and Poisons at home with such Fidelity,
Affection, Zeal, Constancy, Vigillancy, and Valor as his eldest Son? And does
he not then who compasses his Death, compass the Death of the King himself?
And does not he who slanders him to be Illegitimate, compass his Death?

(2.) Because this exposes Majesty, and the eldest Son likewise to contempt,
by depriving both of the hopes of a Lincal Successor. And this is complained of
by no less a Prince than Alexander the Great, who charge his Army, as related
in Curtius, p. 6. Orbitas mea quod sine Liberis sum spernitur; my being
childless causes your contempt of me; which want of Children inheritable, put
him in the same condition of being despised, as was he who said, Isa. 56.3. I
am a dry Tree: And the want of a Son capable to succeed him was the Ruin of so
great a Monarch, his Mother, House and Empire, his Enemies Poisoning him in the
flower of his Age securely, as knowing he could leave no Son of himself to
revenge his Death.

(3.) Because who affirms the eldest Son Illegitimate, does it to the intention
to seize on his Inheritance, and who intend to seize on his Inheritance will
compass his Death, as Matthew. 21.38. They said amongst themselves, This is the
heir, come, let us kill him, and let us seize on his Inheritance. And they
caught him, and cast him out of the vineyard, and slew him.

A Comparison of the Popish Slanders of Illegitimation against Queen Elizabeth,
and the King's eldest Son.

Queen Elizabeth was not only declared and proclaimed Illegitimate by the
Pope's Divinity, but the Popish Party so far misinformed her own Father H. 8.
in Matters of Law, and over-wrought on the King as they compelled him by
weariness to rest on Implicit Faith in them, and to declare his own Daughter
Illegitimate; an Error which not only he, but many other Princes have been the
more easily drawn into, in regard by the Subtlety of Ecclesiastical and
Temporal Lawyers, the Laws of Marriage, Filiation, Aliment, and Succession; and
the Comments on them have been increased to so huge heaps, and confused
Volumes, and so many Writers of contrary Religions and contrary Jurisdictions,
have had their Power and Profit concerned in them, as is impossible for Princes
(who have so many Affairs of State to look after besides) to Read them over as
long as they live, and such faithful Protestant Subjects as have endeavored
humbly to represent the truth, as to the Law of God, and of the Land, have been
by the same Popish Party not only intercepted, and Prohibited to Write or
Publish any thing against, but so much as to dispute the Romish as well as
Turkish Alcoran of their Laws. One great Example of which appears in these two
great Descendents of the Blood Royal, the Famous and Pious Queen Elizabeth, and
the Valiant and Virtuous eldest Son of the King: To go on therefore in their
Comparison of Suffering wrongfully.

(1.) It may be observed, that Queen Elizabeth was a Protestant; and so is the
Kings eldest Son a Protestant. (2.) Her Prosecutors were Papists, so are the
Prosecutors of the King's eldest Son Papists. (3.) Papists laid Plots to
Assassinate and Poison Queen Elizabeth; so have Papists laid Plots to
Assassinate and Poison the King's eldest Son. (4.) The final Cause why Papists
would have destroyed Queen Elizabeth, was to seize on her Inheritance; so the
final Cause why Papists would destroy the King's eldest Son, is to seize on his
Inheritance. (5.) Queen Elizabeth was Innocent; so is the King's eldest Son
Innocent. (6.) Queen Elizabeth was deprived of the help of a Mother by her
Death; so is the King's eldest Son deprived of the help of a Mother by her
Death. (7.) Queen Elizabeth was deprived of the help of a Father by the unjust
Prosecution of Papists; as appears 28 H. 8. cap. 7. by which Act she is
declared Illegitimate to all intents and purposes, and utterly foreclosed,
excluded, and barred to Claim, Challenge or Demand any Inheritance, as lawful
Heir to the King her Father: And it is further Enacted, That it shall be High
Treason so much as to call the said Lady Elizabeth Legitimate; yea, the Act of
Parliament is so furious against the poor Innocent Lady, as if they desired to
Destroy and Damn the Conscience of all good Protestants at once, with hers and
her; They Enact further, That it shall be High Treason to believe (Oh
miserable! Thought it self is made High Treason) the Marriage of the Lady Ann
with the King her Father, to be good, lawful, or not void. Let it be left to
Supreme Authority to consider how far the Papists have endeavored to proceed
in the same Nature against the King's eldest Son. (8.) Queen Elizabeth might
say as David says, Psalm. 27.10. When my Father and my Mother forsake me, then
the Lord will take me up; So may the King's eldest Son say the same. (9.) Queen
Elizabeth notwithstanding all this was Legitimate and lawful Heir of Blood by
the Moral Law of God, and the Protestant Religion; and so is Recognized and
acknowledged by Parliament, 1 Eliz. cap. 3. and accordingly God gave her the
happy Succession to the Kingdom; So the King's eldest Son by the Moral Law of
God and the Protestant Religion, is Legitimate, and the next Lineal and Lawful
Here Is Sanguinis, Heir of Blood; for Jus Sanguinis is the Law of God and Nature;
and Jura Sanguinis (as has already been said) Nullo Jure Civili divini
possunt. (10.) It was the Interest of Queen Elizabeth when she obtained the
Lawful Power to Maintain and Defend the Moral Law of God, and the Protestant
Religion; So will it be the Interest of the King's eldest Son to use what
lawful Power God gives him to Maintain and Defend the Moral Law of God and the
Protestant Religion against Popish Ceremonial Laws, and Superstitious
Religions.
A Comparison of the Popish Slanders of Illegitimation against King Edward the
Sixth, Queen Elizabeth, and the King's eldest Son. And the Sons and Daughters
of the whole Protestant Clergy.

This Slander against the Sons and Daughters of the Clergy could not have been
raised without another Slander first raised against the Marriages of the
Mothers -- Both which are taken notice of by the Statute 5. and 6. E. 6. cap.
12. which Statute making first a recital of the Stat. 2. and 3. E. 6.21. of
Repeal of all Laws of Man against the Marriage of the Clergy, proceeds in these
words, viz. Yet since the making of the said Act diverse evil-disposed Persons
taking occasion of certain words and Sentences in the said Act comprised, have
and do untruly and very Slanderously report of Priests Matrimony, saying, That
the same Statute is but a Permission of Priests Matrimony, as Usury and other
unlawful things be now permitted for the eschewing of greater inconvenience and
Evils; so that thereby the lawful Matrimony of Priests in the opinion of many,
and the Children Procreate and Born in such lawful Matrimony, rather be of the
greater number of the King's Subjects accounted as Bastards than Lawfully Born,
to the great Slander, Peril, and Disherison of such Children, which untrue
slanderous report of Holy Matrimony does not only redound to the high dishonor
of Almighty God; but also to the King's Majesty's dishonor, and the High Court
of Parliament, and the Learned Clergy of this Realm; who have determined the
same to be most lawful by the Law of God in their Convocation, as well by the
Common consent as by the Subscription of their Hands; and that most of all is
to be lamented through such uncomely Railings of Matrimony, and slanderous
Reproaches of the Clergy, the Word of God is not heard with Reverence, followed
with Diligence, the Godly proceeding of the King's Majesty not received with
due Obedience, etc.

Banns required to the Marriage of the Clergy.
Provided always, That this Act, nor any thing therein contained, shall extend
to give Liberty to any Person to Marry without Asking in the Church, or without
Ceremonies, according to the Book of Common Prayer and Administration of the
Sacraments, nor shall make any such Matrimony already made, or hereafter to be
made good, which are Prohibited by the Law of God for any other cause. The
Protestant Clergy by these Acts thought themselves as secure as they do now.
But Queen Mary immediately on King Edward's Death repealed this Law, and made
all the Married Clergy, their Wives, and Children, Rogues, Whores, and Bastards.

From whence may be observed, (1.) That a Marriage and Legitimation, which is
lawful by the Law of God, may be wickedly Slandered by Papists, and by Papal
and Episcopal Laws to be unlawful.

(2.) It has been already shown, that the Marriages of the Lady Mothers of
King Edward the Sixth, and of Queen Elizabeth, and of the King's eldest Son,
and the Legitimation of Children, were and are lawful by the Moral Law of God;
but the same have been Slandered, and still are, by the virulent Tongues of
Papists.

(3.) That these wicked Slanders of the Legitimation of the King's eldest Son,
do produce not only the same evil Effects which the Statute declares to ensue
from the Slander of the Legitimation of the Sons of the Clergy; but greater and
more dangerous.

(4.) That the final Cause why the Papists and their Laws Slander the
Legitimation of the King's eldest Son, and of all the Sons of the Protestant
Clergy, is the same; which is because they would seize on their Inheritance or
Estate, and divide the Spoil amongst the Papists.

(5.) It is well known that the Inheritances and Estates of the Descendents of
the Protestant Spirituallity and Clergy (in which Body are included all
Spiritual Persons, Doctors of the Civil Law, exercising Spiritual Jurisdiction,
Churchmen, Ministers, all persons within Orders) are great and numerous
through the Three Kingdoms, who will all Suffer, if a relapse to Popery.

(6.) That their Wives and their Descendents which have Married, have been
obnoxious ever since the Time of Reformation; the first to Consiscation of
their Dowers, Jointures, and Thirds; The other to Illegitimation, and thereon
Confiscation of their Inheritances, Lands and Goods. The Law which forbid the
Clergy to Marry, was made by Pope Nicholas the First, to wicked intents, which
have been before already shown; the Clergy, and their Wives and Children, are
likewise left obnoxious to the same by the Proviso mentioned, which requires
Banns to make lawful the Marriage of the Clergy; but they usually have none,
but are Married by Licenses, which makes them likewise obnoxious to the very
Letter of the Act; which if there should happen a Papist Successor, he may take
advantage thereof without a Repeal, or Repeal the Act, and so take advantage
either way, which he will. Let not the Protestant Clergy therefore, nor the
Bishops be deceived, or vainly flatter themselves that they can compound or lay
the Obligation of an Oath, or an Act of Parliament on a Papist Successor if any
happen to be; nor think he will lose so infinite heaps of Treasures, as this
point of the Marriage of the Clergy, and the Illegitimation of their
Descendents, will by Confiscations of all the Jointures, Dowers, Thirds of all
the Archbishops, Bishops, and inferior Clergies Wives, and of the Successions
of their Posterities in the Three Kingdoms, will bring into his Treasury;
Therefore certainly if a Papist Successor happen, there will be no living for a
Married Clergyman in England, it will be Heresy sufficient to Burn him if he
is Married, and a cause sufficient will be his Estate; and for Provision, his
Wife must expect none; unless like the Indian Wife, she Burn with him, in hope
to find it in another World. Queen Mary Illegitimated and Destroyed all the
Wives and Children of the Protestant Clergy, notwithstanding they were
Legitimated by Act of Parliament.
They need look no further for an Example than of Queen Mary; who was a Papist
Successor to the Protestant Act of King Edward her Brother; who though he
confirmed the Marriages of the Clergy, and the Legitimation of their Children
by two Acts of Parliament, left in their highest Vigor and Power, and though
she had solemnly promised the Protestants, without whose help, she had not
probably come to the Throne, that they should enjoy Liberty of Conscience; yet
as soon as ever she obtained the Kingdom, she repealed her Brothers two Acts,
and made Whores of the Wives, and Bastards of the Children of all the
Protestant Clergy Married, Burnt them, and Confiscated their Estates. And that
Pious Martyr Archbishop Cranmer, who was Married, was Cruelly Burnt amongst the
rest.

(7.) There is no way to preserve the Marriages and Legitimations of the
Protestant Clergy, and their Wives and Children, from the destruction of a
Papist Successor; but to have Protection from a Protestant Successor of the
Crown, and to cast off this Papal Doctrine of Ceremonial Marriage, and to teach
the truth of Marriage according to the Moral Law of God, which is the true Jus
Coronae, as has been already shown, and makes the eldest Son of a Protestant
King, and himself a Protestant to be of the same Interest with the Sons of a
Protestant Clergy, and to engage him by God's help to be his Instrument to
defend them and the Protestant Religion, Liberty and Propriety to the Glory of
God, and Comfort of the People: Can therefore any of the Protestant Clergy be
so imprudent as in their Doctrine to destroy the Holy, Just, True, Ancient,
Eternal, and Immutable Moral Law of God of Marriage and Legitimation, to bring
in the Unclean, Adulterous, Spurious, Illegitimate, Injust, Lying, Upstart,
newfangled, Ceremonial Laws of Priapusses and Popes; and not understand they
thereby Slander their own Mothers and Wives to be Whores, their Daughters to be
Bastards, themselves and all their Sons, to be Sons of Whores and Bastards.

Can they be so inconsiderate, as to imagine that any Slander they shall raise
against the Marriages of the Lady Mothers, of Queen Elizabeth, King Edward or
the King's eldest Son, or the Legitimations of Queen Elizabeth her self, King
Edward, or the King's eldest Son, or against the Jus Coronae, and this Act of
Parliament of 25 E. 3. Cap. 2. De Productionibus, as not to understand the same
Slanders Militate against the Marriages and Legitimations of themselves, their
own Mothers, Wives, and Children; or not to know what pretense or Power they
put into the hands of Popes and Bishops, to disinherit and dispose of the
Successors and Succession of the Crown, they give them a greater Power to
disinherit and dispose at will of their own Inheritances, Wives, and Children,
and by forsaking the Moral Law of God, of Marriages and Legitimations, and
Idozing the Ceremonial Laws, Papal or Episcopal, drive themselves into this
inevitable Dilemma, either to fall into the hands of a Papist Successor, who
will assuredly destroy all Married Priests and Ecclesiastics, their Wives, and
Children, and Successors, and make a prey of all they have, or to fall into
hands of Justice, as the fruits of Folly and Treason, in slandering the right
of a Protestant Successor.

Of the Insolent Absurdity of Popish Laws, disinheriting the Lawful Sons of
Kings by the Law of God, and Inheriting the Bastards of Popes by the Law of the
Devil.

The Scripture says, Galat. 4.7. If a Son, then an Heir; that is to say, to
the Father who begot him, and not to a Fictitious Father. But the Popish Law,
or what is above it the Practique, says, Let none be an Heir of a Marriage not
Contracted by a Priest in a Temple, except a Bastard of a Pope; in which the
Law of New Rome follows that of old Pagan Rome; which prohibited some kind of
Women to the Subjects; but gave Authority to Caesar to lie with what Women he
would. And the like to the Romish false Prophet, is imitated by the false
Prophet Mahomet, who in his Alchoran prohibited diverse Women to the people but
counterfeits God, speaking to himself and saying, But as for thee, O Prophet,
thou may Lie with what Women thou will. But in this the Pope goes beyond
Mahomet; for the one Illegitimates no Children, nor disinherits them; but the
other all of Women not Churched, except his own. So Pope Paul the Fifth is
related to have gotten out of his Leaden Bulls in a small time Twenty hundred
Thousand Scutes of Gold, with all which he bought Lands for his Bastards, and
Pope Sextus the Fifth, being himself the Son of a Swineheard created his
Bastard a Cardinal, and gave him Ten Thousand Crowns per Annum Revenue, and
besides Left at his Death Ten Millions of Treasure. Another Pope gave his
Bastard the Kingdom of Sicily, and diverse Principalities of Italy, and a vast
heap of Treasure. Pope Alexander the Sixth intended likewise to have given his
Bastard Son Caesar Borgia, a Kingdom (whom though the veriest Villain in the
World) Matchiavel in his Treatise De Principe, proposes as the only Example
for Kings to imitate. And by Probability a Kingdom he had obtained, had he not
and his Father by the just Judgment of God, been Poisoned by the same invenomed
Wine at a Banquet; which they had prepared for others. All Italy is already
over-stocked, and the Principallities thereof, and of other Catholic
Countries, in time likely to be the Inheritances of none but of the Bastards of
Popes, and their Descendents Male or Female, under the Name of Nephews, and
Neices, and by the Matches of Papal Descendents into Protestant Dominions, the
like Evil may be justly feared, if not prevented; and what is worse, a
perpetuating thereby of their Superstition from Generation to Generation.

The Scripture likewise says, Heb. 13.4. Marriage is honorable in all, and
the bed undefiled; but Whoremongers and Adulterers God shall Judge: But the
Popish Law says, no Marriages are Honorable made by the Law of God, unless
made by the Papal Laws, nor the Children; nor Chastity, nor the Bed undefiled,
nor the Sons though of Kings, descending from the same, according to the
Foundation of all Honor, the Immaculate Law of God. But the Bastards of Popes,
such is the Impudence of the Whore of Babylon, to Prohibit Honor to all except
her self and her Brats. And as to these, Pope Eugenius the Second Usurped the
Authority when he pleased to create them Kings, Dukes, Earls, and Knights, and
has plagued and encumbered the World with fictitious Titles of Honor; but he
vouchsafes the lawful Sons of Kings no better Title than Base Sons, except they
receive from him the mark of the Beast. This is not strange that Swineheard
Popes and their Trulls, should not only not disinherit nor degrade their own
Blood, but extol the same above the Imperial: But it is strange that any
Christian Emperors and Princes should have ever been so Pope or Priest-Ridden,
or so far have suffered them to have set their foot on their Necks, as to Kick
from their Heads the Crowns and Honors of them and their Sons, for the
Bastards of Popes to inherit and to disinherit their own, for which not only
his Holiness himself derides them, but they become a Derision to Jews, Turks,
and all the World besides, none of them being so foolish to admit the Doctrine
of Devils, of Prohibiting Marriages not Prohibited by God amongst them, or
Illegitimating the Children of such Marriages.

Lastly, It is already proved, That Carnal Knowledge, Chastity, and Childbirth
makes a Marriage, Lawful, Holy, and Indissoluble by the Law of God between all
persons not prohibited. And it is notorious, That Popes have kept openly their
Whores and their Bastards, and Rule what they call their Holy Church by them.
So did Theodora the Impudent Concubine of the Duke of Tuscany rule all Rome,
and gave her Daughter Marozia, as wicked a Queen as her Mother to be Concubine
to Pope Sergius the Third, of whom he begot him who was afterward his Bastard
Pope John the Twelfth, the Mother Marozia poisoned Pope Leo 6. and Pope Stephen
7. And got her Bastard Boy to be Pope John the Twelfth. Pope John the
Thirteenth was deposed in Council, Anno 961; for abusing his Father's
Concubines, for Gelding some Men, and putting out the Eyes of others, for
Drinking a health to the Devil, etc. Pope Clement the Fifth was a Common
Fornicator; and it is Notorious, That all Popes are Panders-General of all the
Stews and Houses of Fornication in Rome, and fill their Treasuries with the
hires of Whores. And are these fit Fellows to make Marriages Holy, or to make
Laws to overthrow God's Holy Ordinance, and dispose thereby of the Succession
of Protestant Kingdoms?

LIB. III. CHAP. II.
Whether Necessary in the present Juncture of Affairs, for the King and
Parliament to declare a Protestant Successor to the Three Kingdoms of England,
Scotland and Ireland?
TO prepare which Question for the Consideration of Supreme Authority, it will
be necessary first to recite the Objections which are made for the Negative;
And then the Reasons which are brought for the Affirmative.

Object. 1. Declaring a Successor by the King and Parliament, makes the Kingdom
Elective, and not Hereditary.

Answ. It Is acknowledged, if the Declaration were to be by the Parliament Sole
without the King, it might possible make a Kingdom Elective; but where by Law
the King has a Negative, and the Declaration is not made without his Consent,
it is otherwise; for it is sufficient to make a Kingdom Hereditary, if the Law
make it descendible to the King's Heirs, in Case it be not otherwise by the
King himself and Parliament actually disposed of, which is seldom done, and in
Cases of Necessity. But yet are they not disabled of the Power to do it when
they think necessary, as a private Inheritance does not therefore cease to be
Hereditary, because the Owner has Power to Give, Sell, Alien, or otherwise
dispose of it; it is sufficient if by Law it descend to his own Heirs, unless he
Actually happen according to Law to dispose of it from them.

Obj. 2. Declarations by Act of Parliament are in vain, Because Acts of
Precedent Parliaments cannot bind the Power of a subsequent Parliament, which
is shown by diverse Examples. Cok. 4 Part. fol. 42. And Grotius speaks to the
same intent, That Kings Predecessors cannot bind Kings Successors. Est autem
causa Successionis non subjecta Regi nunc regnanti, quod inde apparet quod Rex
nunc regnans nulla lege obligare potest Successorem: Successio enim Imperii non
est de Jure Imperii, ac proinde mansit in statn naturali quo nulla erat
Jurisdictio, Grot. de Jure Bell. and Pacis lib. 2. cap. 7. p. 171. That a cause
of Succession is not subject to the King now Reigning, appears from this, that
a King now Reigning can by no Law bind his Successor; for the Succession to
Empire is not of the Right of Empire. But the same remains in the state of
Nature, wherein there was no Jurisdiction.

Answ. Though a King and Parliament present, by declaring a Successor, cannot
bind a Parliament future, but they may again Repeal or Abrogate such present
Act of Declaration; yet does it not follow that the present Act of Declaration
is vain, and of no use.

For first, Then by the same Reason, it might be said that Magna Charta, and
the Petition of Right, And all the Acts of Parliament we have are vain and of
no use, because future Parliaments have Power to repeal them; notwithstanding
which it is manifest such an Act of Declaration would be of great Use and
Benefit.

Secondly, An Act though repealable, is not vain, because such an Act cannot
pass without the Major number of Votes, which will be an Encouragement to the
major number to continue their endeavor to preserve; And a Discouragement to
the minor part in another Parliament to attempt to repeal.

Thirdly, Because succeeding Parliaments have a Reverence to preceding, and
though they have Power to repeal, yet do they not use to repeal to the utmost
of their Power, nor can a former Act be repealed but by another Parliament;
which if a Protestant Successor is Declared, must be called by him, and he has
then a sufficient Legal Power to Exclude so far Papists from Elections of
Members of Parliament, as probably they will have no Power to repeal former
Protestant Acts.

Fourthly, Subsequent Parliaments cannot repeal the Act of a Precedent quoad
praeterita; for which reason the whole People will act with far greater Courage
both in Peace and War, in Execution of whatsoever they have a standing Act of
Parliament to protect them, than where there is none.

Fifthly, Such an Act does leave the Successor and his Parliament in a Posture
and Possession of Arms Lawfully to defend his own Right and the Protestant
Religion, both against Secret Massacres, and Open Rebellions and Invasions by
Papists.

Object. 3. Acts of Parliament cannot bind the Power of the Sword, or Armies in
the Field.

Answ. Though they cannot bind such as are Actually Convented without raising
other Armies against them; Prevents, though it binds not the Power of the Sword.
yet they may take ways both to prevent their Convention, and to raise other
Armies against them, if Convenient, and the Success must be left to God.

Object. 4. That a Successor Declared, Declaring incites not a Lineal, but a
Collateral Heir to Rebel: and, not an eldest Son, but a younger wrongfully
present before him.
may prove Rebellious or Disobedient.

Answ. This Objection is made, 28 H. 8. cap. 7. But it makes no Danger of it,
except only in Case it should happen to be of a Collateral Heir, when the King
should have no Lineal Heir of his Body. Concerning which Collateral Heir only,
and not his Lineal, These are the words of the Statute by way of Petition from
the Parliament to the King; And if your Grace before it may be certainly known
whether ye shall have Heirs or no, should suddenly name or declare any Person
or Persons to succeed after your Decease, and for lack of Heirs of your Body
lawfully begotten into the Royal Estate of the Imperial Crown of this Realm,
then it is to be doubted that such Persons that should be named might happen to
take great heart and Courage, and by Presumption fall into inobedience and
Rebellion; by Occasion of which Premises, great Divisions and Dissentions may
be, and is very likely to Arise and Spring in this Realm, to the great Peril
and Destruction of us Your Majesty's most humble and obedient Subjects, and of
all our Posterities. Whereby it appears, This Statute is only afraid of
Declaring Collateral Heirs, If there should be no Lineal Heir of the Body, or
they should fail. In like manner Queen Elizabeth having no Lineal Heir of her
Body, was afraid to declare the Collateral. But she declared the Natural Heirs
of her Body should Succeed, as appears, 13 Eliz. 1. which are the next Lineal,
and not Collateral Heirs. And the Example of Christian Princes in like manner
has been never to Scruple the Natural affection of their own Natural eldest
Sons, to declare them Successor after their Death; for that gives them no
Greater present Power than they had before. The Heir, as is said, Gal. 4.1.
Differs nothing from a Servant. So Edward the Third, did not doubt to Declare
his Eldest Son, the Famous Black Prince, his Successor, by the General name of
his Eldest Son in this Statute, nor likewise by making him Prince of Wales, to
declare him by name his Heir Apparent and Successor; nor did he ever the less
Trust him with the Command of great Armies in France, with whom he was
Victorious; yet did the Son so declared never presume to any higher Title than
Prince of Wales; nor Motto, than Ich Dien, I serve, as if he studied how to
testify his Obedience to God and his Father, and to show that the Heir
differs nothing from a Servant. In like manner did the Old Roman Emperors
declare their Eldest Sons Caesar's, and Principes Juventis. The Modern Emperors
theirs Kings of the Romans. The Kings of England theirs Princes of Wales. The
Kings of Scotland theirs Princes of the Scots. The French Kings theirs
Dauphins; with so little doubt of Danger thereby, that they rather look on the
same as the greatest Security of themselves, their Families and Kingdoms, to
have their Eldest Sons declared Successors in their Lifetime: but always as is
said, this is true, only where the Eldest Sons are declared, and not where
contrary to the order of Nature Younger Sons or Collateral Heirs are preferred
before them, or to disherit them.

Object. 5. The Ottoman Emperors never declare a Successor.

Answ. They are ill Presidents to be followed; for the not declaring of a
Successor, causes all those Bloody Butcheries of Fathers of their own Sons;
And Brothers one of another, and gives the Janissaries Power to sell the Empire
to that Son or Brother who will give most Money for the same: which the
Emperors would gladly reform if they were able, and declare their Successors as
other Princes do, were they not overpowered by their own Slaves, as appears,
Turk. Hist. 479. Selymus, The Ottoman Emperors why they declared no Successors.
a Younger Son of Bajazet the Second, was made by his Father Governor of the
Kingdom of Trapezond, and Married without his Fathers liking the Daughter of
Mahometes a mighty King of the Tartars, called Precopenses. Selymus, by the
assistance of his Father-in-Law, provided a great Fleet and Army Pretending but
not Intending War on Hungary: Bajazet receiving Advertisement of Selymus his
Army, and that he had left Trapezond, and was come over into Europe; suspecting
his Design, notwithstanding his Pretenses to be against himself; yet not
seeming to take notice thereof, sends Ambassadors to dissuade him from the
Hungarian War, and to persuade him to return peaceably to his former
Government; but without effect; for he continues his March onwards toward his
Father. In the mean time, Bajazet moved the rather with the fear of Selymus,
resolved on that which he had long time in his Mind deeply Considered, in
regard he was aged and sickly, to resign the Empire to Achomates his eldest
Son, and proposes the same to the Soldiers; but they being Corrupted before
with Money by Selymus, Cunningly seeming to commend Achomates; yet would
neither yield that Bajazet should resign or nominate him for his Successor: And
the chief Reasons they alleged were, That the same was neither according to
the Custom of the Ottoman Kings, nor for the behoof of the Men of War, who
should thereby be defrauded of the Rewards usually granted unto them during the
time of vacancy of the Empire arising from the Spoil; taking of them who are of
Religions different from the Turks; for it is a Custom, that immediately on the
Death of the Turkish Emperors, all the Jews and Christians which dwell at
Constantinople, Pera, Hadrianople, Thessalonica and Prusa; especially Merchants
Exposed unto the Injuries of the Turks, are by the Janissaries, and other
Soldiers of the Court, spoiled of all their Wares and Goods, and became unto
them a Prey: neither will they give their Oath of Allegiance unto the new
Emperor, until he grant them their Prey, and Swear by his Head to Pardon all
their Outrages before Committed. When Bajazet saw his Men of War generally to
oppose themselves against the Nomination of his Successor, he tried what Money
would do with them; and promise them Five hundred Thousand Ducats, if they
would stand favorable to Achomates, and accept him for their Sovereign, but he
could not move them, for they assured themselves of greater Rewards in Pay and
Plunder from Selymus. So with Grief and Patience he put up the Matter; hoping
for a fitter Opportunity to effect what he desired. Selymus in the mean time
under diverse pretenses marches on toward his Father; and Corrupted the
greatest part of his Council with Money and great Promises to betray him, and
advance Selymus to the Empire, only Cherseogleson and old faithful Bassa,
advises Bajazet to Chastise the Rebellion of his unnatural younger Son, and to
give him Battle; wherein Selymus was overthrown, and the greatest part of his
Army Slain. Achomates hearing of all the trouble had happened between his
Father and Brother, Selymus writes to him, desiring him to dispatch his long
Determined and Promised Resignation of the Empire. Bajazet of himself still
continued desirous of the Translating the Empire to Achomates, and making no
great Secret of it, Commanded Galleys to be provided to Transport Achomates for
that end from Scutari, where he then was, to Constantinople, but the Bassa's
and Soldiers Corrupted by Selymus's Money, would not suffer him; whereupon he
writes to Achomates how the matter stood, and that he should therefore return
from Scutari to his old Charge of Amasia, until he might with bounty win the
Minds of the Soldiers and great Men, to effect his advancement with less
Danger. Achomates thus deceived of his hopes, Complained of his Father how he
had deceived him, and made him a Byword and Laughing Stock to the World, and
meditating either Revenge or Defense against his Brother, raises an Army, and
on Contumacy when Commanded to Disband, is by the Incitation of Selymus with
his Party proclaimed Traitor by his Father, and Bajazet is so over-persuaded by
the Conspirators, That he sends home for his younger traitorous Son Selymus,
Pardons him and makes him General of his Armies, against Achomates the elder
Son. Selymus having received the Army, they Corrupted by him, Proclaim him
Emperor. Selymus thereupon Poisons his Aged Father Bajazet, being almost
Fourscore years of Age, and Murders his Brothers and Five of his eldest
Brother's Sons. From whence may be observed.

(1.) The Great Error of Bajazet, who gave his younger Son Selymus a Kingdom,
and so great Power with it, that he was able to be a Competitor against his
eldest Son, and to raise a Rebellion against himself; which is Inconsistent
with the Right of Primogeniture, and Divides the Empire into many Empires. (2.)
That Excessive Treasure given to a younger Brother, gives him Power to Corrupt
both the Council and Army of his Father, who gave it him. (3.) Bajazet by
setting the younger Son in Contention with he eldest, he lost the Fidelity of
both, and was destroyed between them. (4.) He did very imprudently to promise
his eldest Son the Resignation of the Empire, and ought only to have declared
him Successor after his Death; 1 Bajazet by preferring his younger Son before
his eldest, exposed him to be Murdered unless he took Arms in defense of his
Life.
but more Imprudently to break his Promise to him, and thereby to Expose him a
Public Laughing Stock to the World, and a certain mark to be Murdered by his
Brother Selymus, unless he took Arms in his own Defense to prevent it. (5.)
That by probabillity, if he could have effected the Declaring of his eldest Son
Successor, and given only Moderate Portions to his younger Sons, as the Chynoys
and Aethiopians Emperors gives theirs, such miserable Murders might not have
fallen on himself, his Sons and Nephews. The like Destruction is before
observed to have fallen on the younger Sons of Jehosaphat, by his leaving them
overmuch Treasures and fenced Cities, to the Diminution and Power of the eldest
Son Jehoram, 2 Chronicles. 21.1, 2, 3, 4.
Object. 6. Queen Elizabeth Refused to Declare a Successor.

Osburne says, Q. Eliz. why she refused to declare a Suocessor.
The proposing any thing of Declaring a Successor was so ungrateful to Queen
Elizabeth, that the moving of the same cost Pigot and Wentmorth their Liberty,
though they proposed it in Parliament, and others Dearer: what were her Reasons
against it, may be partly drawn from Buchanan, Lib. 17. p. 603. who says, on
an Embassy sent from Scotland to her, to desire she would Declare Mary Queen of
Scots Successor to the Kingdom of England; to which he says, Queen Elizabeth,
p. 606. answered to this Effect:

There are many Reasons, says she, draw me away from this Transaction.

Primum quod non ignorem quam sit periculosum hanc movere camarimam ac jure
mihi semper abstinuisse videor ne jus Regni in disceptationem vocarem: Toties
enim jam Sermonibus multorum Jactata est Controversia de Matrimonio justo deque
nothis and Legitimis Liberis, dum pro ingenio quisque aut huic aut illi parti
studet, ut and ego ipsa hactenus ob has Disputationes ad nubendum suerim
Cunctatior, etc.

First, I am not Ignorant how dangerous it is to move this Contention, and I
seem to my self most Justly to abstain from Calling a Kingdom in Possession
into Dispute concerning the Right; for it is so often already Controverted what
is Lawful Matrimony, who are Legitimate, and who are Illegitimate Children,
according to every man's Opinion, and as he favors this or that Party, That I
my self by Reason of these Disputes, have been hitherto more slow to Marry;
once when I Publicly received the Crown, I was Married to my Kingdom, and as a
pledge of which I always wear this Ring: And howsoever these Affairs stand, I
will as long as I live be Queen of England; when I am dead, let who has the
best Right be my Successor. If your Queen is she, I will no way be against her;
if another has Right, I will not do him wrong: If there is a Law against your
Queen, it is unknown to me; for I do not make willingly any curious Inquisition
after this matter: But if there is any such Law, I took an Oath when I took the
Kingdom, that I will not Change my Subjects Laws without their assent. But as
to what you have alleged in the second place, That this Declaring a Successor
will contract a straighter Friendship between us, I rather fear it will sow
hatred; for do you think that I shall take any Delight to have my Funeral
prepared always set before me? It is a Peculiar of Kings, that they have no
friendly mind to Children, who by Birthright claim to be their Successors when
they are dead. Of what mind was Charles the Seventh the French King, against
Lewis the Eleventh, and he against Charles the Eighth, or Francis lately
against Henry? Of what mind therefore is it likely I shall be against my
Neighbor, when once Declared my Successor? To this may be added what I think
of very great weight, I know the Peoples inconstancy; I know how full they are
of the present state of things; I know what prying eyes they have into the next
Successor; The Dangerous Rising Sun is only a younger Brother, or a Collateral
Heir.
I know it is natural for more to adore the Rising than the Setting Sun; And,
to omit other Examples, I have seen enough in my own Time, when my Sister Mary
held the Kingdom, what Prayers and they make to see me set in her Throne? With
what eagerness were my Concerns carried on; neither am Ignorant to undergo what
dangers they would have hazarded, if I would have joined with them according to
their desire: But now perhaps the same Men have not the same Mind toward me,
Like Children who in sleep rejoice for Apples off'red them in a Dream, and
presently awaked in the Morning, when deceived in their hopes, Change their Joy
into Weeping. So they who with great Good will applied to me while I was called
Elizabeth; and if I beheld any with a more smiling Countenance, they forthwith
thought with themselves, that as soon as I obtained the Kingdom, they should be
rewarded rather according to the measure of their Desires, than of the good
they had done me; but now when the Event answers not their Expectation, many of
them would be ready to Change to any state of things, so they might but gain a
better fortune: For no Riches of any Prince though never so great, are
sufficient to satisfy the insatiable desires of Men. Now if the affections of
our People will Languish, either for Moderate gifts, or any other Light cause,
what will such Malevalents do, if they have a certain Successor, to whom to
carry their grievances, or go themselves, when they are angry? In what Danger
do you think I shall be near so Potent a Prince my Successor, to whom how much
strength I add, so much I take from my own Security. This Danger by no Cautions
or Bonds of Laws can be averted, neither will Princes who fail of their hopes
of a Kingdom, easily contain themselves within the Bounds of Right and Equity.
And for my own Part, if the world were certain of my Successor, I shall never
think my Affairs in Safety.

We see here the very Considerations we are now on, of Declaring a Successor,
is in Debate by Ambassador between these two great Queens, Elizabeth of
England, and Mary of Scotland. One the Head of the Protestants; the other of
the Papists in their two Kingdoms. Queen Elizabeth was the Lineal Heir to the
Kingdom of England to the last Possessor; Queen Mary derived her self to be the
Collateral. Queen Elizabeth, as it is before mentioned, had been Declared
Illegitimate by the Pope and Popish Laws and Canons, and by her own Father; And
a Popish Act of Parliament she was not only Declared Illegitimate, but the
Marriage of the Lady Ann her Mother to her Father, to be void; with the Penalty
of High Treason, added on any who should affirm Contrary to the first, or
believe Contrary to the latter.

(1.) Therefore it is to be observed, That Queen Elizabeth being a Protestant,
thought it not wise or safe to Declare a Papist for her Successor; yet she
after Declared King James her Son, who was a Protestant, her Successor; and it
pleased God to make him an Happy Instrument to Unite both Kingdoms in the
Protestant Religion.

(2.) That she being the Lineal Heir, thought it not wise or safe to Declare a
Collateral Heir her Successor in her own Lifetime. Therefore thought she had a
great Affection to make King James, who was her Godson, her Successor; yet she
forbear to Declare him so, till on her Deathbed she perceived her self past
all hopes of having Lineal Heirs of her own Body; but while there was a
possibility, she might, she Declared by 13 Eliz. 1. They should be her
Successor, and Enacts a Penalty of High Treason against those who should affirm
the contrary.

(3.) That Queen Elizabeth does not think it fit that her Legitimation should
be Judged by Popish Laws, as she could expect no other would endeavor to be
done, if she permitted a Contest between her and a Papist. What? Shall a Virgin
Queen be Judged by Laws, which, as is already shown, came from the Priests of
Priapus and Venus? Shall a Protestant Queen be Judged and Shot to Death by the
Cannons and Constitutions of the Strumpets Theodora Marozia, and the Whore of
Babylon? No, she was Judged Legitimate by the Holy Moral Law of God, and the
Protestant Religion, to be Successor to her Natural Father; and though he
forsook her, God took her up, and by his assistance the Gates of Hell were not
able to prevail against the truth of the same: And let any Papist now, if he
can, show any Reason or Scripture, why he should with foul mouth asperse the
Legitimation of King Edward the Sixth, or Queen Elizabeth, or the Kings Eldest
Son; or why the latter ought not to be Successor as well as was the former; and
Print the same with his Name subscribed: And no question there are Protestants
enough will answer him. Yea, The Interest of a Prince Legitimate by the Moral
Law of God and the Protestant Religion, to maintain both against Popish
Ceremony and Superstition.
let him prove, if he can, That it is not only the Greatest Honor to a
Protestant Prince himself, but a great Mercy and Providence of God to a
Protestant People, to offer them such a Prince whom he has made Legitimate by
his own Holy Law and the Protestant Religion, and permitted him to be Declared
Illegitimate by the Papist unholy Law and Superstition, and thereby laid on him
the highest Obligation of his own Interest to maintain the Holy Moral Law of
God and Protestant Religion, against the Popish Ceremonial Laws and
Superstition; and far worse it had been for the Protestants, if Queen Elizabeth
had not been made Illegitimate by the Papists, then that she was.

To Conclude, a full answer has been therefore already given the Objection,
That Queen Elizabeth never refused to Declare a Protestant and Lieal Successor,
but only such as were either Papist or Collateral.

Obj. 7. A Protestant Successor will not be equal to Papists, who are not only
a Considerable, but a great and potent Party of the People of the Three
Kingdoms.

Answ. This is fully answered already before, Lib. 2. p. 401, 402, 403, etc.
where it is shown to be the Interest of the Protestant Religion to abolish all
Laws of Recusancy equally which are Penal to the Consciences either of
Protestants or Papists, except as to Mass, Idols, and Popish Priests. This is
likewise answered in the following Reasons, wherein it is shown, That not only
Protestants, but Papists themselves (except Popish Priests) may hope for
greater Security and Happiness from a Protestant Successor, than they ever had
or it is possible for them to have from Papist Predecessors or Successors; to
which I therefore desire to refer.

Reasons for Declaring a Protestant Successor, by the King and Parliament.
HAving answered all Objections against Declaring of a Protestant Successor, I
shall now only add some few Reasons for the same, arising from the Great and
manifold Dangers caused by the Neglect.

1. Danger to the Conscience of a Prince.
(1.) The first Danger is to the Conscience of a Prince, when he shall give
Account to God of the Neglect of so great a Duty to him, and so great a Trust
reposed in him by the People; as to which, There is none doubts but every
private Father is by his Duty to God bound, while it shall please God to lend
him Life and Health, and before Death with a sudden Arrest hurry him hence, to
give an account of his Stewardship, to make Provision according to his Power
for the leaving his Family in Peace after his Decease; much more it is the Duty
of all Princes who ought to be the Public Father of their Countries, who have
so great Account to Give; not only for their own Families, but for Nations and
Kingdoms, and all the Wars, Murders, Massacres and Devastations which by their
default shall happen after their Death. To provide, while God gives them Life
and Health, for prevention of such Calamities amongst their People, and for the
Peace of Succession in the Government over them. And in the Statute of 35 H. 8.
cap. 1. This great Trust Reposed in the King by the People, is expressed a Chief
Consideration of Declaring a Successor; and settling the Succession of the Crown
by King and Parliament, in these words in the Preamble of the Act, viz.

Forasmuch as our most Dread Sovereign Lord the King, upon good and just
Grounds and Causes, Intends by God's Grace to make a Voyage Royal in his most
Royal Person into the Realm of France against his ancient Enemy the French
King, his Highness most Prudently and Wisely Considering and Calling to his
Remembrance how this Realm stands at this present time in the Case of
Succession, and poising and weighing further in himself the great Trust and
Confidence that his Loving Subjects have had, and have in him, etc. And to the
Intent his Majesty's Disposition and Mind therein should be openly Declared
and manifestly known and Notified, as well to the Lords Spiritual and Temporal,
as to all other his Loving and Obedient Subjects of this Realm, to the Intent
of their Assent and Consent, might appear to Concur with thus far as follows,
of his Majesty's Declaration in the behalf, and thereupon makes Provision for
the Succession of the Crown in the same Act.

In like manner it is provided by the Law of Persia, as says Herod. Lib. 7.
That whenever the King goes to War abroad, he ought first to Declare his
Successor, that he may leave Peace at home.

2. Danger by the incertainty of the Laws of Succession of the Crown.
(2.) The Danger caused by Incertainty of the Laws of Succession of the Crown,
(and that this is a Great Danger, and necessary to be Remedied by a Declaration
by King and Parliament) appears likewise by the Preamble of the Statute of 25
H. 8. cap. 22. in these words, viz.

Wherefore we your said most humble and Obedient Subjects in this present
Parliament Assembled, calling to our Remembrance the great Divisions which in
time passed have been in this Realm, by reason of several Titles pretended to
the Imperial Crown of the same, which sometime and for the most part insued, by
Reason of Ambiguity and Doubts, then not so perfectly Declared, but that men
might upon froward intents, expound them to every man's sinister Appetite and
Affection after their Sons, Contrary to the Right Legalty of the Succession and
Posterity of the Lawful Kings and Emperors of this Realm, whereby has insued
great Effusion and Destruction of man's Blood, as well of a great number of the
Nobles, as of other Subjects, and especially Inheritors in the same, and the
greatest occasion thereof, has been because no perfect and substantial
Provision in Law has been made within this Realm of it self, when Doubts and
Questions have been moved and proponed of the Certainty and Legalty of the
Succession and Posterity of the Crown.

By which Statute appears the Judgment of the King and Parliament to be, That
the great incertainty of the Law in points of Succession of the Crown, was one
great Cause of the great Mischiefs of effusion of Blood both of Nobles and
Commons which insued thereby, and the fittest Remedy to be the Declaration of
the Successor uncertain by the King and Parliament; which is accordingly
therefore done in the same Statute. And it likewise appears that the same Doubt
in Law was raised then as to Succession, which is now, Whether the King's
Marriage and Issue by the Mother of Queen Elizabeth was Lawful and Legitimate,
which is Declared by this Act of Parliament that it was. And H. there is first
intendency there to Declared a Legitimation of the same Marriage with Queen
Ann, the said Mother of Queen Elizabeth: And that all the Issue had and
procreate, or to be had procreate (without saying Lawfully) between the King
and Queen Ann, shall be his Lawful Children, and be Inheritable to the Crown;
Then is the Crown Declared to be to the King for Life, and the Remainder to be
to the first Son of his Highness of his said Lawful Wife Queen Ann begotten,
and to the Heirs of the Body of the said first Son Lawfully begotten; and for
default of such Issue, with diverse Remainders over, and make it High Treason to
slander the King's Marriage in prejudice of the Heirs of the same.

3. Danger of Arbitrary disposing the Crown by Rome or Canterbury.
(3.) The other great Danger from the incertainty of the Laws of Succession,
besides effusion of Blood, which is the Arbitrary disposing by Episcopal Sees
whether of Rome or Canterbury, though only Rome named, unless a Successor is
Declared by the King and Parliament, is likewise mentioned in the said Statute,
25 H. 8. cap. 22. in these words, viz. By Reason whereof the Bishop of Rome,
and See Apostolic, Contrary to the great and inviolable Grants of
Jurisdictions by God, immediately to Emperors, Kings and Princes in Succession
to their Heirs, has Presumed in time past to invest who should please them to
Inherit in other men's Kingdoms and Dominions; which thing we your most humble
Subjects both Spiritual and Temporal, do most Abhor and Detest.

4. Danger of Predominancy of Papal and Episcopal Laws of Marrlage, above the
Moral Law of God.
(4.) One great Cause of the incertainty of the Laws of Succession of the Crown,
is, That Papal and Episcopal Ceremonial Laws of Marriage, Filiation and
Succession, are tolerated in the Three Kingdoms, to Usurp a Predomination, not
only over the Law of the Land, but the Moral Law of God: It is therefore
necessary to avoid the Danger mentioned, to proceed from the incertainty caused
by Papal and Episcopal Laws, That a Declaration by King and Parliament be, Who
shall be Successor in Particular and by Name, which clears all Doubts, and is
the highest Security under God, on which any Crown, or Succession to it, can
depend.

5. Danger to the King's Person, Line, and House.
(5.) The not Declaring a Successor, is Dangerous to the Person of the King and
his House; of which we need not look on any other Example than Alexander the
Great, of whom Justin, Lib. 15. relates, That he being desired to Declare a
Successor, though he had a Son called Hercules, and though his Wife Roxana were
Great with Child, yet would he Declare neither; but Willed, That he who was
most worthy, should Succeed; which was the same in effect, as if he had Willed
they should after his Death destroy one another with Civil Wars, and his own
House amongst them; for so they did: And Cassander, one of his mean and not
Chief Officers destroyed his Mother Olympias, and all his Kindred: Such was the
Fate of so great a Monarch, who while alive thought the World too little; yet
was he himself Poisoned, and when Dead, nor he, nor his Mother, nor his
Children, nor any of his Kindred retained any Spot, but their Graves being all
destroyed with him; of which there appears no second Cause, but his Neglect to
Declare his Son Hercules his Successor, who might have been a Preservative to
him, according to Tacitus, Pravas aliorum spes cohiberi si Successor non in
incerto. The wicked hopes of Plots against the Possessor are Checked if the
Successor is not uncertain.

6. Danger of Lineal and Collateral Heirs to destroy one another.
(6.) The Danger of the Lineal and Collateral Heirs destroying one another, does
cause all those Murders, Poisoning, Strangling, Burning out the Eyes, or
perpetual Imprisonments of the Blood Royal of the Turkish, Persian, Ethiopian,
and other Eastern Kings and Emperors, but that they have no Parliaments Elected
by the people to Declare their Successor, and to Protect the Liberty,
Propriety, and Lives of their younger Children by standing Laws; but on the
Death of the old Emperor, the Election, or rather Sale of the Empire to the
New, is left to the Lawless will of the Priest or Soldier.

for the Crown between Nephews and Uncles: This Danger is not so great in
Scotland, as in England; for there, as has been already said, as Buchanan
mentions, their Ancient Act of Parliament Enacts, Vt quemadmodum Regi maximus
Natu filius in Regnum Succederet, ita filio ante Patrem Defuncto Nepos avo
subrogaretur: That as the Eldest Son of the King should Succeed to him in the
Kingdom; so the Son being Dead before his Father, the Nephew should Succeed in
his stead to his Grandfather. It has been already before shown, how dangerous
Guardians Uncles are to Nephews in Minority; and if in Majority, all Histories
witness under how great incertainty the Law is in most Nations to determine the
Question, (which ought to be preferred, the Uncle or Nephew in Succession to a
Kingdom; that is to say, in such Kingdoms who have no Parliaments Elected by
the People to establish the manner of Succession) And how great Wars and
Devastations have been made between Nephews and Uncles on the incertainty of
the Law of the Country in that point. And though in Succession to Common
Inheritances in England, the Nephew is by Custom preferred Jure
Representationis to the Uncle, and though my Lord Coke likewise in his
Exposition on the said Statute of 25. E 3. cap. 2. Coke 3. Part. fol. 8. says
to be the Fitz-Eigne, the Eldest Son of the King within that Statute, it is not
always necessary he should be his first begotten Son: for the Second after the
Death of the first begotten without Issue is Fitz-Eigne, with the Statute Et
sic de caeteris, which does implicitly seem to affirm, That till the Issue of
the Eldest Son fails, the second Son shall not Succeed by this Statute, which
implicitly prefers the Nephews in Successions before the Uncle, but he showing
no Authority therein, but his own, and that only implicit and not Express; and
the Common Law and Customs of the Crown being very uncertain, obscure, and as
often broken as kept, when not Confirmed by Act of Parliament; And King Edward
himself the Wife Author of this Act (when the Black Prince Died and left his
Eldest Son Richard of Bindeax, who was after R. 2.) Doubting of the certainty
of the Law, in the Point did, as the wisest way, procure Richard to be Declared
Successor by Act of Parliament in his Lifetime, to secure him against his
Uncles.

T^^ ^aw of E^ not clear in point of Succession of the Crown between Nephew and
Uncle, where the Father dies before the Grandfather.
The certainty of the Law of England therefore may be not without Cause doubted
in this Point of Succession between Nephew and Uncle, and Danger there may be,
lest the incertainty of the same, give the same Pretenses to create Civil Wars
here, as it does in other Countries, unless prevented by an Act of Parliament,
as in Scotland, Vt filio ante patrem Defuncto Nepos Avo Subrogaretur.

8. Danger without Assent of the People.
Danger if the Successor assume the Crown without the Assent of the People by
their Representative in Parliament, the Right of a Successor is not here
Disputed, nor the Law whether he is King before Coronation, or not until
Contract with his Parliament, and Coronation received from them. Highest a
Successor can say, is only as Paul says, 1 Cor. 10.23. All things are lawful
for me, but all things are not expedient: All things are lawful for me, but all
things edify not. Though the manner whereby a Successor ascends the Throne may
be lawful, yet may it not be Expedient; neither may it Edify the Throne. H. 8.
was a King of great Courage and Wisdom, and doubted not the Right of him and
his Posterity to the Crown; Yea, though he had more than any other King, Power
granted him by Act of Parliament, himself to Declare his own Successor, either
by his Letters Patents or last Will; yet he showed therein his great Wisdom and
Moderation, and would not do it without Assent of his Subjects; as appears in
the already mentioned Statute 35 H. 8. cap. 1. in these words, viz.

And albeit that the King's most Excellent Majesty, for default of such Heirs
as are Inheritable by the said Act, might by the Authority of the said Act give
and dispose the said Imperial Crown, and other the Premises by his Letters
Patents under his Great Seal, or by his Last Will in Writing, Signed with his
most gracious Hand, to any Person or Persons of such Estate therein as should
please his Highness to Limit and Appoint. Yet to the Intent that his Majesty's
Disposition and Mind therein should be openly Declared, and Manifestly known
and notified, as well to the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, as to all other his
Loving and Obedient Subjects of this his Realm, to the intent that their ASSENT
and CONSENT might appear to Concur with thus far as follows of his Majesty's
Declaration in this behalf.

For so Wise a King well know, that let the Right of a Successor be what it
will, yet if he lose the Love of his People, which cannot be obtained without
their Assent and Consent, he loses the Chief Defense under God, of that, and
all other Right he has; if therefore a Successor is Declared by Act of
Parliament, so great a Danger is avoided of not having the Assent and Consent
of his Subjects; seeing such an Act of Parliament cannot be without the Assent
and Consent of the major part of the People included in the plurality of Votes
of their Representative.

9. Danger of assuming the Crown by a Papist.
The next great Danger is, The assuming of the Crown by Force by a Papist
Successor; if not prevented by a Declaration of a Protestant Successor, by the
King and Parliament.

That a Papist Successor is most Dangerous to all Lay-Papists themselves, and
that they may Live far more Happy under a Protestant, than one of their own
Religion.

A Distinction ought to be made between Lay-Papists and Papist Priests.
Both Religion, Justice, and Mercy, engage all those who are affected with the
least of any of them, to put a great difference betwixt the Deceived, and
Deceivers; and betwixt the Blind, and those who mislead them to fall into the
Ditch. A Distinction is therefore necessary to be made by all Protestants
between the Lay Papist, and the Papist Priest; Mercy is to be shown the one,
and Justice the other: And if this just Course had been used from the Beginning
of the Reformation, that no Penal Statute had been made against the
Lay-Papists, but only against the Papist Priests; The Protestant cannot be
secure, unless the Lay Papist be likewise secure from Penal Laws against
Conscience.
No Bishop Bencroft under pretense of maintaining the Dominicans against the
Jesuits, and Regulars against Seculars, had been able to maintain Legions of
both in Secret to Destroy the Protestants in their own Land, nor under the
blind name of Recusants, to turn the edge of all the Penal Laws pretending to
be made against Papists, to cut off the Protestants. And the Sacrament of the
Paschal Lamb to be a Destruction to the Israelites, and a Passover to the
Egyptians; those Penal Laws being pursued with the highest Rigor against the
Protestants, but came not near the Papists Dwellings; or if they did, they took
more easy Pardons from the Exchequer, than from the Pope. So if the late Act
concerning Oaths and Sacraments, had been Restrained only to Papists;
Protestants had not suffered in so high a Degree as now they do. But I pass
from what is past, to what is future, to show what Mischiefs the Papists
themselves are to expect from a Papist Successor, and what benefit from a
Protestant.

(1.) The first Mischiefs they will meet with in a Papist Successor, is a most
miserable one; take what Covenant, what Vow, what Promise, what Oath they can
from him, yea, an Hundred Oaths, his Conscience cannot be bound with any of
them: and the Catholics themselves shall take as little hold of his Catholic
Faith, as the most of those whom they think or call Heretics.

As for Example: William the Conqueror was a Papist, and is mentioned Dan.
Hist. 36. to get Assistance of the King of France (who was then young) in his
Design for England, William the Conqueror a Papist King, forswore himself to
Papist Subjects.
promised if he obtained the Kingdom, to hold it of him as he did his Duchy of
Normandy, and do him Homage for it, which would add a great Honor to that
Crown. Then was he be-before-hand with Pope Alexander, to make Religion give
Reputation to his Pretended Right, he promised likewise to hold it of the
Apostolic See, if he prevailed in his Enterprise, whereupon the Pope sent him
a Banner of the Church, with an Agnus of Gold, and one of the hairs of Saint
Peter: And he likewise by great Promises got his own Brother Odo Bishop of
Baieux, to furnish him with Forty Ships for his Expedition. After William had
with great difficulty got the Battle at Hastings, wherein King Herold happened
to be killed with an Arrow in his Eye, some of his Nobility with all their
Power strove to establish Edgar Atheling the next of the Royal Issue in his
Right to the Crown; but the false Bishops rather bent to let in a Foreign
Enemy, being fooled by him with fair Promises, than to assist the Native
Prince; and by their Example drew in the Nobility to trust to his Personal Oath
made at his Coronation, before the Altar of St. Peter to defend the Holy
Church; that was the Papist Church and the Rectors, and to Govern the Universal
People according to the Laws; but this Oath and his Promises, were as weak to
bind him, as the single hair of St. Peter he had got from the Pope; for as soon
as he had Established himself, he was not such a Fool to do Homage for England
to the French King, nor to hold the same of the Apostolic See, nor to defend
the Bishops and Abbots in their fat Bishoprics and Abbeys; but as Cambden
says, He made such clear work with them, that he did not leave one English
Ecclesiastic whom he thrust not out of his place, and filled their Rooms with
Erench Sr. John's.

And for the English Nobility, he drove some to fly to Scotland, some to
Norway, some to Hungary, and any other Places where they could be received,
till in the end he had totally destroyed them, and filled their Places with
French Contes; and to show himself no partial Dealer with those who would trust
his word, he spared not his own Brother Odo, the Bishop of Baieux; but
notwithstanding the Forty Ships with which he had Supplied him, on promise of
better dealing, he seized and Confiscated all his Treasure which he had, which
was very great, and hoarded up with an Intention to have bought the Papacy. And
it is no wonder if mali Corvi malum ovum. And he practiced the same deceit
against themselves and their false Religion had taught him toward others; for
let a Papist Prince swear never so many Oaths to Papists of his own Religion,
and break them all, the same Religion fits him with Popes enough at his Elbow
to Confess and Absolve him instantly, or if he doubts his Trencher-Popes cannot
do it, he can have for Money his Unholiness himself to Absolve him from any
Oath, Covenant, or League with any other Papist Prince, whether of Peace or
War; and how many Examples are there of the same? And more easily can he do it
with his own Subjects; as Dan. Hist. fol. 143.

King John a Papist King, forswore himself to Papist Subjects; being Absolved
from his Oath by the Pope.
King John for the Glory of God, and Emendation of the Kingdom in Parliament,
makes Articles of Agreement between him and the Barons; wherein are Confirmed
all the Laws and Liberties of the Kingdom, and Mutual Oaths taken on both sides
by the King and Barons, in Solemn manner for the Observation of the same
Articles. The King likewise sends his Letters Patents to all Sheriffs of the
Kingdom to cause all Men of what degree soever within their several Shires to
Swear to observe the Laws and Liberties thus granted by his Charter. There we
see a Papist King agrees with Papist Subjects on Oath in the highest manner,
and both the King and Barons, and the whole Body of the People of what degree
soever, are solemnly Sworn before God. And the Laws and Liberties are likewise
Confirmed by Act of Parliament.

But the next News in the History we hear of is, He has some Papist evil
Counselors, who tell him he was now a King without a Kingdom, a Lord without a
Dominion, and a Subject to his Subjects; whereon this Papist King sends to the
Pope, and by Bribery he Absolves the King from his Oath, Nullifies the Act of
Parliament, and Excommunicates the Lords. Now therefore let it be shown how
these Papist Lords, being laid in the Pickle of Excommunication, and not having
Personam standi in Judicio, could have done to have bound the Conscience of
their Papist King, to have performed to them his Contract, Covenant, League,
and Oath, or let it be no wonder if Protestants are very fearful to have a
Successor of such a Religion; or if they think that these Lords had not been
more happy if they had had a Protestant King, or of any Religion which would
have bound his Conscience to have kept his Word, and much more his Oath to his
Subjects.

The Papist Lords grown Desperate of Right from their English Papist King, run
into the other Extreme, and will Trust themselves to the Oath of a Foreign
Papist King, seeing their own would not keep his, they send therefore over-Sea,
and go in great haft to Louys the French Kings Son, to Solicit him to take
upon him the Crown of England, who is their tres humble Serviteur, and as ready
to Swear to them, as they to him, A French Oath pretended surer than an English.
and to make wise to them, that a French Oath was surer than an English; over
therefore he comes to England in Person, with as great a Fleet and Army as the
Power of France could make on so likely hopes of a Conquest, encouraged by so
great a Power of the English Barons, who called them in, and joined with them,
and being Landed in Kent, in May, the Lords bring him to London, where he takes
his Solemn Oath to Restore their Laws and Liberties, and recover their right
for them. King John, who had first forsworn himself, was notwithstanding in the
Field with another Army against King Louys, but fell into a Fever and Died, or
as some say, was poisoned; On his Death many of the English Lords hoping to
find more Truth in the Son than in the Father, returned from Louys to their
Native King, and suddenly Crowned Henry the Third, the eldest Son of King John,
being then but Nine years old, in a great Parliament Assembled at Gloucester,
28 October. by which Parliament his Tutelage by Reason of his Minority, was
Committed to the Great Marshal William Earl of Pembrook, a Man Eminent both in
Courage and Council.

And it is likewise to be noted, That this Henry was begotten by King John of
Isabel, the Daughter and Heir of Aymer Earl of Angloulesm, who was before the
Marriage pre-contracted to Hugh le Brun Earl of March. The Mother of Henry the
3d. pre-contracted when King John Married her.
So if the World had been so much given to slander the Legitimation of the
King's Eldest Son, as it is now, here had been a greater Exception against the
Succession of the Crown to him than can be now in the least shadow pretended;
for Isabel being pre-contracted to a former Man, was a Woman Prohibited by the
Law of God to be Contracted or Married by another Man. Yet did neither this,
nor his Minority, nor the amazing Danger of a Foreign Enemy Landed, assisted by
the Native Nobles possessed of the Royal City, and entered into the Bowels of
the Kingdom, Deter this Wise and Noble Parliament for making use of the
Coronation of the King's Eldest Son, Coronation of the King's eldest Son, the
best remedy against the Barons calling in the French.
as the best Remedy against it, and to Commit his Guardianship to a Person of
Courage and Council; they Succeeded accordingly, for Louys was beaten in a
Battle at Lincoln by the Protector; and sending back for Recruits into France,
which were with great Expedition there provided, and sent with a Mighty Fleet,
which Fleet was likewise met and beaten by the English Fleet at Sea, and the
Army therein Vanquished by God's great Providence; which News coming to the
Ears of Lovys, made him hopeless of any longer Subsistence here with Safety,
and thereupon makes a Composition for his passage home, abjures his Claim to
the Kingdom, and returns to France; But if Louys had prevailed here, wi^^
Security had the English Nobles had in his French Oath, for within a little
while after he had taken it, he made spoil and plunder of all he could lay
hands on, Louys a Papist King, breaks his French Oath to the Papist Subjects of
England.
Friend or Foe; which made many of the English, he breaking his Oath to them,
to think themselves disobliged thereby from the Oath they had given him, and to
forsake his Party, and more would have forsaken him had it not been for shame
of Inconstancy, and that he had their Hostages in France, whom he would have on
their Revolt Destroyed. And to show his Intention of perfecting his Perjury to
the height if he could have got Power, there was a constant Report and
generally divulged concerning the Confession of the Viscount Melun, a
Frenchman, who lying at the point of Death, touched with Compunction, is said
to reveal the Intention and Vow of Louys; which was not only to Destroy the
English Nobility, but if he could the whole Nation. Dan. Hist. 148. The like
Example is of the French Catholic, more properly Papist Faith to the Nobility
and People of Scotland, Buchan. Rer. Scot. Lib. 17. p. 156. where appears, The
French Papists were called into Scotland by the Scotch Papists, to assist them
against the Protestants there, on Mutual Agreement on Oaths between the Papist
of both Nations; but when the French. Army came they spoiled alike both Papist
and Protestant. And the French Garrison at Leith destroy all with Fire and Sword
as far as they could reach. A French Papist King forsworn to the Papist
Nobility of Scotland.
Clades autem Ex vastatione Agrorum non minus ad Papanos sine discrimine
Scotorum Nobilitatem Extinguendam esse, in little autem praediis mill
Catraphractos Equites Gallos collocari posse, reliquam Multitudinem Servorum
Loco habendam; id Consilium literis ejus ad Gallum interceptis divulgatum,
mirum quantum Gallorum odium Jam aliis de Causis natum auxit. Ambianus autem
Episcopus non modo Roman Cause minus aequos sed etiam Gallorum partibus minus
quam ipse Censebat aequum addictos in dicta causa agere rapere truci dare
jubebat.

The Devastation of the Country about Leith by the French, fell no less on the
Papist than Protestant. Labross advised that the whole Scottish Nobility was
without any Difference made to be destroyed, and a Thousand French Barbed Horse
to be planted on their Estates, and the rest of the Multitude to be kept for
Slaves; which Council (his Letters being intercepted wherein he had sent the
same to the French King) after it was divulged, it is wonderful how it increased
the hatred against the French, which for other Causes was already sufficiently
begun. The Bishop of Amiens likewise, without over hearing the Cause, Commanded
not only those who favored not the Romish Religion, but the French Cause, as
much as he would have them to be pursued, taken by Force, and Killed.

Henry the 3d. a Papist King, forsworn to Papist Subjects.
To return again to England, we left where King John having broken his Oath to
the Nobility and Parliament being dead, the same Oath of preserving the Laws
and Liberties was again obtained of his Son Henry the Third; who in the Barons
Wars wanting Money, a Tenth is granted him by the Clergy, and a Scutage by the
Layity of Three Marks of every Knights Fee; yet with this Agreement, That the
often Confirmed Charter of Magna Charta, and Charta Forestae should be again
Rectified, Confirmed and Sworn to; and that in the most Solemn and Ceremonial
manner, as Religion or State could ever devise to do.

The Solemn manner of giving his Oath by Henry the Third, to confirm his
Subjects Liberties.
The King therefore with all the great Nobility of England, all the Bishops and
Chief Prelates in their Pontificalibus, with burning Candles in their hands,
assemble to hear and pronounce the Terrible Sentence of by-Excommunication
against the Infringers of the Charters, and at the lighting of one of those
Candles, the King having received one in his hand, gives it to a Prelate, who
stood by saying, It becomes not me who am no Priest to hold this Candle, my
heart shall be a greater Testimony; and withal laid his hand spread on his
Breast the whole time the Sentence was Read, which was thus pronounced,
Authoritate Dei Omnipotentis, etc. which done, he caused the Charter of King
John his Father, granted by his free Consent to be likewise openly Read; in the
end, having thrown away their Candles (which lay smoking on the ground) they
cried out, So let them who incur this Sentence be extinct and stink in Hell.
And the King with a loud voice said, As God me help, I will as I am a Man, a
Christian, a Knight, a King Crowned and Anointed inviolably observe all these
things; And therewithal the Bells rung out, and all the people shouted for Joy,
Dan. Hist. 169. but his Oath came to nothing, Henry the 3d. secretly Absolved
from his Oath to his Subjects by the Pope.
for he secretly sent to the Pope for his Absolution from them, and the Pope
for Money by his Apostolic Sentence Absolves the King from his Oath to his
Subjects, whence insued great Wars and Miseries in the Land, Bac. Hist. 86. and
though Magna Charta was in his time granted; yet he never kept it, but his
whole Reign after, the same was a perpetual Contention by him to raise his
Prerogative to an Arbitrary Power, Destructive to all Liberty and Propriety of
his Subjects, which he had Confirmed to them by Oath, Charter, and Act of
Parliament; and instead of asking a Dispensation of the Pope to Levy Taxes on
the Subjects without their Consent in Parliament, he took the easier way, and
dispensed with the Pope to Levy on them what he would, and give him a share. So
the poor Subjects paid double, whereas if they had paid only to the Pope, or
only to the King, they had only born a single burden; but now they Complained
as the History mentions, Shepherd and Woolf confederated to share the Sheep.
That the Shepherd and the Woolf Confederated both to destroy the Sheep, and
the Pope continually levied so many insupportable Taxes on them to maintain his
Wars against the Emperor, that both Clergy and Layety addressed their heavy
Complaints of him to the King himself; but the King was so far from relieving
them, that he offered the Pope's Legate to deliver up to him the Chief Opposers,
who now by the King's Animation grew more insolent to oppress them than before.
Henry the 3d. being dead, his Son Edward the First Succeeded him; a King
Renowned for his Valor and Wisdom against his Enemies, yet Dissentions with
his Subjects hindered that Valor, and from extending themselves to that degree
of Glory they might have otherwise arrived; neither is it only Valor and
Wisdom, unless Justice is likewise joined, can make a People happy in their
Prince, or himself happy in them. Edward the First, a Papist King forswore
himself to his Papist Subjects.
He likewise took the same Oath for preservation of Laws and Liberties, as his
Father and Grandfather had done; but whether seduced by their Example, or their
Evil Counselors, as he had imitated them in the taking; so likewise did he in
the Violation of his Oath; for as his Father had done before him,
notwithstanding his Oath and Complaints by his Subjects, of the Pope's
oppressions, he and the Pope as his Father had done, like the Shepherd and the
Woolf, agreed to divide the spoil of the Flock between them; the Pope therefore
granted the King the Tenth of all the Churches of England, and the King grants
the Pope to have the first fruits of those Churches, Dan. Hist. 202.

This Edward likewise, after many Contests wanting Money in the 25th year of
his Reign, called a Parliament, wherein with much ado he granted the
Confirmation of the two Charters of Magna Charta, and Charta Forrestae, and
that with the omission of the Clause of Salvo Jure Coronae Nostrae, such
another Clause as is Aut per Legem terrae; which the King labored much to have
inserted; but the People would by no means agree; he therefore Confirmed them
absolutely, and Enacts further, That All Archbishops and Bishops shall
Pronounce the Sentence of Excommunication against all those that by Word, Deed,
or Counsel do contrary to the aforesaid Charters, or that in any Point break or
undo the same; and that the said Curses be twice a year Denounced and Published
by the Prelates aforesaid. And if the said Prelates, or any of them be Remiss
in Denunciation of the said Sentences, the Archbishop of Canterbury and York
for the time being, shall Compel and Distrain them to the Execution of their
Duties in form aforesaid; as appears in the Statute 25 E. 1. cap. 4. And all
this he confirms by Solemn Oath: What greater Security can be Invented? here is
an Act of Parliament, Oath, Excommunication, Curses, Edward the First, for a
furnish of Gold, absolved by the Pope from his Oath.
Archbishops, Bishops, Prelates, all engaged to see it performed; but to what
purpose? King Edward sends a Furnish of Gold to the Pope for his Chamber, and
he sends him back an Absolution from his Oath and Covenant with his Subjects,
concerning the Charter of their Liberties, whereby they are all again broken by
the King, and lost to the Subjects, Bak. Hist. 99.

Edward the Second, a papist King forswore himself to papist Subjects.
Edward the First being dead, (for the Pope's Absolution from his Oath could
not keep him alive) Edward the Second Succeeds him, who not only took his
Coronation Oath, and kept it not; but likewise before his Coronation, in Regard
the Lords threatened they would hinder it, unless according to his Father's
Will, who had Commanded him to Banish Pierce Gaveston, he would do the same; he
Solemnly swore, That if they would not Dispute his Coronation, but rest quiet
till the next Parliament, he would Banish him as they desired. And likewise
after, in the Third year of his Reign, being further pressed and importuned,
consented at last that the Parliament should draw Articles of Agreement between
him and the People, of whatsoever was necessary for the good of the Kingdom,
and he would Ratisie the same upon Oath; who thereupon Elected diverse Choice
Men, both of the Clergy, Nobility, and Commons, to Compose those Articles;
which done, the Archbishop of Canterbury, with the rest of his Suffragans,
solemnly pronounce the Sentence of Excommunication against all such who should
Contradict those Articles which are there Publicly read, before the Barons and
Commons of the Realm, in the Presence of the King, amongst which, the
Observation and Execution of Magna Charta is required, with all other
Ordinances, necessary for the Church and Kingdom: And that as the late King had
done, all Strangers should be Banished the Court and Kingdom, and all Evil
Counfellors removed. That the Business of the State should be treated of by the
Counsel of the Clergy, and the Nobles. That the King should not begin any War,
or go any way out of the Kingdom without the consent of the Common Council of
the same, Dan. Hist. 205. which Articles and others, though they seemed harsh
to the King; yet to avoid further Trouble, he yielded to them, and Ratified
them on Oath; but especially to the Banishment of his Minion Pierce Gaveston,
who being a Gascoigne was a Stranger, intended by the Articles to be Banished,
Strangers, some to be Banished from Court.
though not under the same Suspicion as other French, their Contrymen, who
have generally when entertained in Court by the English Kings, been Evil
Counselors to them, to Imitate the French Arbitrary Power and Persidiousness
over their Subjects, and to breed Division between the King and People, to
prepare the Kingdom to be a Prey to their own French Masters, Stranger at Court
Spies.
whose Leidger Spies and Intelligencers they hear, have usually been
entertained at the Cost of the English Kings against themselves; none can
therefore doubt but King Edward the First, the Father of this King Edward the
Second, did Nobly and Wisely in Banishing all Strangers from his Court, and
left the same Command on his Son. And more particularly concerning this
Gaveston, though he not only broke in this the Command of his dead Father; but
his Oath to his Loving Subjects, which was his Ruin; for his entertainment of
French Councels endammaged his English Subjects, and his nearest French
Relation Isabel his own Queen Persidiously by the help of her Brother the
French King, raised a Rebellion here of his own Subjects against him, which
caused him to be Deposed from his Kingdom, and shortly after to be Murdered in
an hideous manner in Barckly Castle.

So here are four Kings, Great Grandfathor, Grandfather, Father and Son all
Papists; all Confirming and Breaking Magna Charta, and their Oaths, and their
Subjects to whom they have broken them have been all Papists, Magna Charta no
less than Thirty times Sworn or confirmed, and forsworn or broken by Papist
Kings to Papist Subjects.
and the same Papist Religion gives no Mutual obligation of an Oath, though to
Men of the same Religion; Yea, this Magna Charta of Liberties has been Thirty
times Confirmed by King and Parliament, while the Papist Religion lasted; which
shows the Oath has been more than Thirty times broken, by some or other of
their Papist Princes; for otherwise it would not need so many new Confirmations
and Oaths. In the Protestant Religion it is held, That once forsworn,
ever-forlorn; In the Papist it appears, he is not so thought, though Thirty
times forsworn; but he may still swear and forswear, and begin again anew, as
many times as he will; were it not therefore more secure for the Papist himself
to Covenant with a Protestant Successor, who dares not break his Oath, lying
under so great a Penalty of Conscience than with a Papist, who makes Perjury
not to be Penal, and whose Religion it self teaches the wicked Doctrine of
Lysander, that Children ought to be deceived with Promises, and Men with Oaths?
for what Commerce or Humane Society can there be had with those who will keep
neither? whether they be Kings or Subjects, or of what Degree or Religion
soever they be?

(2.) Seeing a Papist Successor can be obliged by no Contract or Oath, Only two
ways of Succession, Contract or Conquest.
therefore he cannot Succeed by Contract. And if he Succeed not by Contract,
then he will Succeed by Conquest; for there are but two ways of Succession,
either by Contract, or by Conquest. And if he Succeed therefore by Conquest,
such Power he will say it is Diis aequa Potestas, Deus est Imperator in Coelis,
and Imperator est Deus in Terris Jure Divino, is above all Humane Laws; he will
therefore be Lawless, and no Law shall be but his Will. But a Protestant
Successor claims only to the Rule, according to Laws agreed and assented to by
the Subjects themselves, by their Representative in Parliament. Can any Sober
Papist deny it is not better to have his equal Laws, than as a Slave to be
destroyed at Pleasure, by a cruel, unjust, and lawless Will, as they are
generally by their Princes in all Catholic Countries?

Further Examples of the Perfidiousness of Papist Princes to Papist Subjects.
Henry the Fourth, a Papist King, forswore himself to papist Subjects.
HEnry the Fourth was a Papist, and a Violent Enemy against the Wicklenite
Protestants, yet perfidious to his own Papists too; as appears Truss. Hist. fo.
73. there are Articles made against him, and the first of them is, That when he
returned from his Exilement, he made Faith only to Challenge and Recover his
Inheritance and his Wives; and not to intermeddle with the King, nor with his
Crown: by reason of which Oath, diverse Loyal and good Subjects to King Richard
resorted unto him, not having any Treasonable intent; but after when he saw his
Powers so much increased that he might do what he pleased, he wickedly brake
his Oath, and without any Right, or color like Right, procured himself to be
made and Crowned King.

Another Article was, That no Justice could be expected from his hand; because
that contrary to the Oath he had taken when he was Crowned he had by Letters
sent into sundry Shires, thereby procured certain Burgesses of the Parliament,
and Knights of the Shire to be Chosen, whom he knew would not fail to serve his
turn, as occasion should be offered. Here we see is a Papist King, and Papist
Subjects, and he takes an Oath to them concerning the greatest Liberty the
Subjects can enjoy; which is, the free Election of their Representative in
Parliament; yet this Papist King breaks this very. Oath, not only to his Papist
Subjects, but to that very party who were of his own party, and Crowned him.

Richard Duke of York, a papist Subject, forswore himself to Henry the Sixth, a
papist King.
Henry the Sixth, and Richard Duke of York, were both Papists, and the Duke of
York took his Oath of Allegiance to King Henry. After taking King Henry
Prisoner, He Calls a Parliament in the King's Name; by which Parliament
terrified by the Duke's Sword, it was agreed and Enacted, That Henry during his
Life should retain the Name and Honor of a King, and that the Duke of York
should be proclaimed Heir Apparent to the Crown, and Protector to the King's
Person, his Land, Dominions, and Country. And that if at any time King Henry's
Friends, Allies, Favorites in his behalf, should attempt the Disanulling this
Act, that then the Duke should have present possession of the Crown. No sooner
was the Parliament Dissolved, but the Duke by virtue of his Protectorship,
esteeming himself a King in Office and Power, though not in Name, dispatcheth
Letters to the Queen, the Duke of Somerset, Exceter, and other Nobility, who
were then in Scotland, with all speed to repair to his presence at London; they
knowing their own Security, lay only in keeping out of his Power, marched
toward him, but Guarded with an Army of Eighteen thousand Men, and met him at
Wakefield, who had there but a small Army of Five thousand to oppose them, on
whose Valor notwithstanding the Duke relying, and though advised by his
Council to forbear Fight till his Son the Earl of March could bring up his
Forces to join with him; yet the Pride of his former Victori^s make him deaf to
good Advice; and therefore rashly joined (...), whereby he hastened his own
Destiny, and was Slain on the place, with Three thousand of his Men; after
which Overthrow of the Father, his Son the Earl of March and his Confederates
having overthrown the Queens Army at the Battle of Mortimor's Cross, and fought
the Battle of St. Albans, and the Earl of Warwick's Forces joined with him, is
proclaimed King; but before he could be Crowned he was forced to Fight again
with another Army, which King Henry had raised in the North; which Battle
continued doubtful with eager Resolution on both Sides the space of Ten hours,
whereby there were above Six and thirty thousand Men Slain, Bak. Hist. 203. But
in the end, the Day fell to Edward, and the King flying to Barwick, and her Son
to France, Edward is Crowned King; but after Disobliging the Earl of Warwick,
he leaves Edward, and endeavors to restore again the Title of Henry the Sixth,
and removes him out of the Tower, where he had been a Prisoner almost Nine
years, and Restores him his Crown, and all Imperial Ornaments and Officers, and
King Edward is proclaimed an Usurper, and all his partakers Traitors, which
forced King Edward to fly to the Duke of Burgoign his Brother-in-Law, who had
Married his Sister; but Warwick sending Forces over to Callice, to Infest the
Dominions of Burgoign for Entertainment of Edward; Burgoign being sensible of
the storm likely to fall on him, wisely so wrought, that he made a Truce with
King Henry, The Duke of Burgoign a Papist Ally, forswore himself to Henry the
Sixth, a Papist King.
and Ratisied it by Oath, that he would give no Aid to his Brother-in-Law
Edward against him. Yet this Oath he immediately broke, and underhand
furnished him with Eighteen tall Ships, Two thousand Dutchmen, and Fifteen
thousand Florens of Gold. Here may be seen what little Trust can be had by an
English Papist Prince to the Oath of a Foreign Papist Prince, though he pretend
the common Obligation of the same Religion. See here the next Example, how
little a Papist King can trust the Oath of a Papist Subject, or a Papist
Subject him. After the Second Battle at St. Albans between the Queen and the
Forces of Edward Earl of Marsh, the Nobles who in outward show before seemed
for the King, withdrew themselves from Attending his Person, and the Lord
Bonvile coming in a Complemental manner to the King, saying, It grieved him to
leave his Majesty; Henry the Sixth a Papist King, broke his Promise to two
Papist Subjects, to the loss of their lives.
but Necessity for the Safeguard of his Life enforced it: But at length he was
importuned, and Sir Thomas Kyviel likewise by the King to stay, he passing his
Royal Word that their stay should not endanger their Bodies; upon which promise
they stayed, but to their cost, for such was the implacable Fury of the Queen,
that hearing Baron Thorp was by the Commons Beheaded at Highgate, she the day
after the Battle being Ash Wednesday, caused both their Heads to be struck off
at St. Albans. Truss. Hist. 172.

If so Saint-like a Papist King, or his Queen for him, broke his word to those
of his own Religion, what is to be expected from them who openly appear in the
shape of the Father of Lies, and care not for Transforming so much as in show
to Saint or Angel.

As the Duke of Burgoign had contrary to his Oath aided Edward with a Fleet,
Men, and Money against Henry the Sixth; so he himself coming over, and Landing
at Ravenspur in Yorkshire, finding but cold Entertainment, and having marched
to York, and finding as little Expression of Welcome, he fell on the old Popish
shift of swearing and forswearing. Edward the Fourth, a Papist King forswore
himself, though he took the Sacrament on it to Papist Subjects.


He therefore swore deeply, and took the Sacrament upon it that he came not to
disturb King Henry, but only to recover his own Inheritance, and for the more
show thereof, he wore an Estritch Feather, Prince Edward's Livery; which
Proposition seemed so reasonable, that many who resisted him before, were as
ready to assist him now, both Sides seeking to make London their Friend; to
which end, the Earl of Warwick sends to his Brother the Archbishop of York to
Labor in it with the City, to continue their Fidelity to Henry their King;
which he did accordingly, but could not get above Seven or Eight thousand Men,
a small proportion to withstand King Edward. Comines and Bodin make the Reason
why the Citizens were rather inclinable to bring Edward to be, because he owed
the City great Debts; and if he should miss, they should lose their Debts.
Others add another Reason to be, Because Edward had been kind to many of the
Citizens Wives, who importuned their Husbands to receive him; but whatever were
the cause the Archbishop of York, so much doubted of the effect of their being
Faithful, that he sent secretly to Edward, to desire him to receive King Henry
into his Grace, which on promise of being Faithful thereafcer, he obtained; and
thereupon the Archbishop delivered King Henry into King Edward's hands.

Edward the Fourth contrary to his Promise, suffers Henry the Sixth to be
Murdered.
So here Edward a Papist King, promises Henry a Papist King, on the greatest
Consideration one King can give to another, the Delivery of his Person into his
Competitors hands, that he will not hurt him in his Custody; yet after he
Commands or Suffers him to be Murdered in the Tower by his Brother the Duke of
Gloucester, where he was Imprisoned.

A Papist Successor will give no Liberty of Conscience to Papist Subjects.
(3.) A Papist Successor will not give Papists themselves Liberty of Conscience,
insomuch as a Thought. But will force the Conscience, either by Imprisonment,
Inquisitions, Racks, or Tortures falsely to accuse it self, or by Compulsion to
Oaths or External Forms and Ceremonies of Worship to betray it self to the
Injust punishment of Penal Laws and Statutes. He will exercise the Cruelty of
the Inquisition on Papists themselves.
How little the Papist Inquisition spare their own Papists, though they have
not the least exception against them for their Religion, may in part appear by
the following Story.

Father Ephraim a Friar Capuchin, was Born at Anxerre in France, and was
Brother of Monsieur Chateaude Boys, Councellor of the Parliament of Paris;
Father Ephraim was Learned in the Languages, and of as great Diligence,
Learning, Eloquence and blind Zeal in Preaching up the Papist Religion as the
best of them. And to spread the same, he Traveled to the Indies, and was there
entertained at Bagnabar by the Chek, who had Married the eldest of the
Princesses of Golconda, and he Promised to build him an House, and a Church,
gave him an Ox, and two Men to carry him to Maslipatan, where he stayed to
Imbark for Pegu, according to the order of his Superiors; but finding no
Vessel ready to set Sail, the English drew him to Madrespatan, where they have
a Fort called St. George, and a General Factory for every thing that Concerns
the Countries of Golconda, Pegu, and Bengala; they over-perswaded him that he
might reap a fairer Harvest in this place, than in any other part of the
Indies; to which end they built him a very neat House and a Church. Madrespatan
is but half a League from St. Thomas, a Sea-Town on the Coast of Cormandel,
where was a very great Trade, especially for Calecots, and a very great Number
of Merchants and Workmen lived there, the greatest part whereof desired to
Inhabit at Madrespatan with the English; but that there was no Place for them
to Exercise their Religion. But when the English had Built a Church, and
persuaded Father Ephraim to stay, many of the Portugueses quitted St. Thomas,
by reason of the frequent Preaching of Father Ephraim, and his great Care as
well of the Natives, as of the Portugals, and in regard he spoke both the
English and Portuguese Languages perfectly well, which caused so great Envy in
the Clergy of St. Thomas Church, that they resolved to ruin him, and laid their
Plot thus. The English and Portugueses being so near Neighbors, could not
choose but have several Quarrels one with another; and still Father Ephraim who
was in great Reputation with both, was applied to for Composing their
Differences.

Now one day, the Portugueses quarrelled on purpose with some English Mariners
that were in St. Thomas Road, and the English came by the worst: The English
President resolving to have Satisfaction for the Injury, a War brake out
between the two Nations, which had Ruined all the Trade of that Country, had
not the Merchants on both side been very diligent to bring things to an
Accommodation, not knowing any thing of the wicked contrivance of particular
persons against Father Ephraim. All the Interposition of Merchants availed
nothing, the Friar must be concerned in the Affair, he must be the Mediator to
Act between Party and Party, which he readily accepted.

But he was no sooner entered into St. Thomas, but he was seized by Ten or
Twelve Officers of the Inquisition, who shipped him away in a Frigate that was
bound at the same time for Goa. They fettered and manacled him, and kept him
Two and twenty Days at Sea, before they would once let him put his foot on
shore, though the best part of the Mariners, lay ashore every Night: When they
came to Goa, they stayed till Night before they would Land Father Ephraim, to
carry him to the Inquisition-House; for they were afraid if they should Land
him in the Day, the People should know of it and Rise in Rescue of a Person who
was in Veneration over all India.

The News was presently spread abroad in all Parts, that Father Ephraim was in
the Inquisition, which very much amazed all the Frenchmen; but he who was most
surprised and troubled at it was Friar Zenon the Capuchin, who had been
formerly Father Ephraim's Companion; who after he had consulted his Friends,
resolved to go to Goa, though he were put into the Inquisition himself; for
when a Man is once shut up there, if any one have the boldness to speak to the
Inquisitor, or to any of his Counsel in his behalf, he is presently put into
the Inquisition also, and accounted a greater Offender than the other; neither
the Archbishop nor Viceroy themselves dare Interpose, though they are the only
two Persons over whom the Inquisition has no Power; for if they do any thing
to offend them, they presently write to the Inquisitor General and his Counsel
in Portugal, and as the King and the Inquisitor General Commands, they either
proceed against, or send these two great Persons into Portugal.

Yet Father Ephraim Reports, These high and proud Inquisitors and their Counsel
are very Ignorant Fellows, which he found when they put him to Question, and so
says he did not believe that any of them had ever read the Scripture; but the
more fit they are to be the Butchers in these Bloody and Inhumane Cruelties
they Practice. Monsieur de Chateau Des Boys, Father Ephraim's Brother
complained to the Portugal Ambassador, who presently wrote to the King his
Master to send a Positive Command by his first Ship thither, that Father
Ephraim should be Discharged; The Pope himself also wrote, The Inquisition
regards neither Pope nor King.
Declaring that he would Excommunicate all the Clergy of Goa, if they did not
Set him at Liberty: But all this signified nothing, for still they kept Father
Ephraim in such Duress in a blinded Dungeon, with a Window Barred with Iron but
half a foot square, that he lost thereby the Sight of one of his Eyes. And if
an Indian King had not relieved him more than the Pope or King of Portugal were
able to do, he had been there Destroyed; for the King of Colconda, who was at
Wars with the Raga of Carnatica, and his Army lay round about St. Thomas, on
Complaint to him of the Injustice by the Inquisition to Father Ephraim, sent
order to his General Mirgimola to lay Siege to the Town, and put all to Fire
and Sword unless the Governor would make him a firm Promise that Father Ephraim
should be set at Liberty within two Months; which so alarmed the Governor and
Town, that they suddenly got him to be set at Liberty at Goa. Tavernier Lib. 1.
Part 2. cap. 15. p. 85.

If therefore the Pope and a Papist King, were not able, or dared not Protect
one of their own Religion, and Orders against the Injustice of the Inquisition;
much less will a Papist Successor be able to do it. And if both Pope and Papist
King were not able to defend a Papist Priest, much less will they the
Lay-Papist, as to whom they are so Terrible, that as is the common Story, One
of the Lord Inquisitors having a mind to some pleasant Pears in a Countryman's
Orchard, Sent to have him come to him, to buy or beg some of his Pears, which
put the Man in such a fright, that he Dug up the Tree, Root and all, and
carried the same with all the Fruit on it to his Lordship; and when he demanded
the reason of that Unhusbandly action, he told him, He would never keep that
thing in his House which should give any of their Lordships a further occasion
to send for him.

But it will be the Interest of a Protestant Successor, neither to punish
Papist or Protestant for Conscience; neither to Compel Papist or Protestant to
Faith, or form of Worship, nor to impose Penalties for Recusancy in either,
Lay-Papist not to be debarred any thing a Protestant injoys, excep Public
Offices.
nor to debar the Lay-Papists from any thing from whence the Protestants are
not equally debarred, except Public Offices; of which the Reasons are at large
shown before, Lib. 2. p. 401, 402, etc. for as to Idols and Mass, the
Protestant ought to be debarred as well as the Papist.

(4.) It is a great benefit to all Lay-Papists to be protected and freed from
the intolerable Exactions and Cheatings of Money from them by their Priest,
particularly for Offerings to Images, for Confessions, Penances, Absolutions,
for Baptisms, Confirmations, Marriages, Extreme Unctions, Places of Burials,
Dirges, Masses, Pardons, Redemption from Purgatory, all Inventions of their
Priest to Cheat them, their Wives, Children, and Families from Generation to
Generation, of what should pay their Debts, and find their Fatherless Children
Food and Raiment; as likewise from all the Military and Civil Taxes, Tributes,
and Payments they unknown to the Protestant, exact from them, and exhaust their
Estates, all which a Protestant Successor will free them from; but a Papist
will increase upon them.

(5.) If a Papist Successor happen, all Lay-Papists living within the four
Sees, will be Compelled to prostitute their Wives and Daughters, to the Priest
in Auricular Confessions, to have their Nakedness discovered, their Estates
purloined, the Secrets of their Houses, and oftentimes their Lives betrayed to
their Enemies, and they shall be compelled to submit to the false Certificate
of the Insolent Priest to disinherit their True and Natural Children, and
Heirs, and to appoint false and adulterous Heirs, and fills de Prestre to
Succeed to their Inheritances, and no Probation shall be admitted to the
Contrary, from which more than Pagan slavery, a Protestant Successor will free
them; but never a Papist.

(6.) If a Papist Successor happen, all Lay-Papists shall Suffer for every one
Offense two Punishments, and shall pay all Fees, Fines, Taxes, and Tributes
double, one to the Pope and his Officers, the other to the King and his
Officers; one to the Spiritual Court, another to the Temporal Court. It is said
of the Ass in the Fable, That when he was let out of the Camp where his Master
was, to Graze, he was admonished by his fellow Ass, not to go too near another
Camp which was in sight of them, because that was the Enemies: To which the
other answered, If the Enemy took him, he would lay no worse Burdens on him
than his Master did; therefore it mattered not which he went nearest.

A Lay-Papist therefore (though the pampered Papist Priest persuade him
otherwise) would show less Discretion than that gross-headed Animal; should he
not less fear to be in the Camp of a Protestant Successor, though the supposed
Enemy, who would Load him but with half the Burden of his Master, than to be in
the Camp of a Papist Successor, though his Master who will assuredly lay double
the Punishment and double the Burden on him which a Protestant will do, whose
Camp will be like the Camp of Alexander the Great, where the Persians found as
courteous entertainment as the Macedonians. And he used to say, He would be the
Common Father, and his Camp should be the Common City of the World.

Dominicans and Jesuits.
(7.) If a Papist Successor happen, he will either favor the Jesuits and their
followers, or the Dominicans and their followers; if he favor the Jesuits, the
Dominicans will be ruined; if he favor the Dominicans, the Jesuits will be
ruined; and so consequently the Lay-followers of both. Again, If a Papist
Successor happen, Guelphs and Gibellins.
he will either favor the Guelphs or the Gibellins, the one being for the
Papal, the other for the Regal Supremacy; if he favor the Guelphs, the
Gibellins will be ruined; if he favor the Gibellins, the Guelphs will be
ruined. Were not the Lay-Papist better have a Protestant Successor, who will
free them from both these sorts of Botefe^ Papist Priests, who set their own
Papist Flock to tear one another, that they may prey on both? Were it not more
wise for the Lay-Papist to do with their Guelphs and Gibellins as Bodin says
they did in all the Cities of Italy, where these two Factions raged? namely, to
Elect Strangers for their Magistrates, Judges who were neither Guelphs nor
Gibellins, of all which Miseries which will assuredly be imposed and continued
on them by their Priests and Princes, whom no Covenant-Oath, or Sacred
Obligation of Conscience can tie, if they happen to fall into the hands of a
Papist Successor.

Let all Lay-Papists therefore but seriously consider if it be not more happy
for them to be freed by a Protestant Successor, Lay-Papist to be Prohibited
nothing, from whence a Protestant is not Prohibited, except Public Offices.
than inslaved to them by a Papist. Let them but consider, whether it is not
better for them to be permitted to them by the Protestants, the same Liberty
from all penal Laws, Taxes, Tributes, Oaths and Tests, as Protestants have
themselves, than to have the same taken from both by a Papist Successor? It
will be the Interest of a Protestant Successor to prohibit the Lay-papist no
other Idols, no other Priests, no other Sacrifice, no other Offenses,
Recusancies, Crimes, Arms, Conventions, nor any thing else (except public
Offices, which if really considered, are rather Burdens than Benefits in all
respects, besides that of public Safety) than he prohibits equally his own
Protestant Subjects. It will be the Interest of a Protestant Successor to Rule
by Laws and Love; but a papist Successor will believe that it is his Interest
to Rule by an Arbitrary power, and Fire and Sword.

To Conclude, Let the Lay-papist but consider at what rate they themselves who
were Papists were Ruled by H. 8. a Papist King, together with the Protestants,
who hanged the one for not acknowledging him Supreme Head of the Church; and
burnt the other for not believing Transubstantiation; insomuch that a French
Papist who came over hither and saw it, Cried out, Deus bone quomodo hic vivunt
gentes, ubi suspenduntur Papistae and comburuntur Anti-Papistae? Good God (said
he) what shift do people make to live here, where Papists are hanged, and
Anti-papists burnt? And let them consider the more fresh example of Philip the
Second of Spain, the Son-in-Law of H. 8. after his Death by Marriage with Queen
Mary, for did he not Rule his Papists as well as Protestants Subjects in
Holland and the United Provinces, after the same rate as H. 8. had done his
here in England; for he first by Oath and Agreement, bound himself as well to
his Papist as Protestant Subjects not to infringe their Laws and Liberties, nor
to increase the ancient Number of their Bishops, which was but three: But he
notwithstanding his Oath, endeavored to bring in amongst them the Inquisition,
increased the Number and Power of their Bishops, from three to seventeen, for
every Province one, both of them destructive to their Consciences, Laws,
Liberties, and Propriety, but being after a long War overthrown by the United
Provinces, and their Confederates, he acknowledged them free and Sovereign
States; whereby they recovered again their lost Liberties.

And though as is noted by Sir William Temple in his Excellent Observation on
the United Provinces, Cap. 5. p. 200. the Roman Catholic Religion was alone
excepted by the States from the Common Protection of their Laws, making Men as
they believed worse Subjects than the rest, by the acknowledging of a Foreign
and Superior Jurisdiction; for so must all Spiritual Power needs be, as
grounded on greater Hopes and Fears than any Civil, at least where the
persuasions from Faith are as strong as from Sense; of which there are so many
Testimonies Recorded by the Martyrdoms, Penalties, Conscientious Restraints and
Severities suffered by infinite persons in all sorts of Religion; besides this
Profession seemed still a Retainer of the Spanish Government, which was then
the greatest Patron of it in the World. Yet was the Care of the States to give
all Men ease in this point, who asked no more than to serve God, and save their
own Souls, in their own way and forms; Of the great good Effects of not
compelling Men to Faith or form of Worship in Holland.
which shows Protestants better than their words to Papists. That what was not
provided for by the Constitutions of their Government, was so in a very great
degree by the Connivance of their Officers, who upon certain constant Payments
from every Family, suffer the exercise of the Roman Catholic Religion in their
several Jurisdictions, as free and as easy, though not so cheap and avowed as
the rest.

This I suppose has been the reason, that though those of this Profession are
very numerous in the Country amongst the Peasants, and considerable in the
Cities, and not admitted to any Public Charges; yet they seem to be a sound
piece of the State, and fast-jointed with the rest: And have neither given any
Disturbance to the Government, nor expressed any inclinations to a Change, or to
any Foreign Powers, either upon the former Wars with Spain, or the latter
Invasions of the Bishop of Munster: Of all other Religions every man injoys the
free exercise in his own Chamber, or in his own House unquestioned and
unespied. And so far they appear to be free from all Penal Laws of Recusancy,
and from all Penal Oaths, and Penal Tests to rack and punish the Conscience,
That as the same Author farther mentions, p. 205 it is hardly to be imagined
how all the Violence and Sharpness which accompanies the difference of Religion
in other Countries, seem to be appeased and softened here by the general freedom
which all Men enjoy, either by Allowance or Convenience; nor how Faction or
Ambition are thereby disabled to color Ambitious and Seditious Designs with
pretenses of Religion, which have cost the Christian World so much Blood, for
this last Hundred and fifty years. No man can here Complain of Pressure in his
Conscience of being forced to any public Profession of his private Faith, of
being restrained of his own manner of Worship in his own House, or obliged to
any other abroad; and whoever asks more in point of Religion, without the
undisputed Evidence of a particular Mission from Heaven, may be justly
suspected not to ask for God's sake, but his own; since pretending to
Sovereignty instead of Liberty of Opinion, is pretending the same in Authority,
to which consists chiefly in Opinion. Let here any Papist show a reason why in
Holland Papists do not live more happily under Protestant Laws, Papists in
Holland live more happily under Protestant Governors, than ever they did before
under Papists.
and Protestant Governors, than they did there under King Philip, or here in
England, under Hen. 8th. who were Papist Governors, and their Episcopal
Jurisdiction; and then he may pretend a Papist Successor better than a
Protestant.

Of Destruction inevitable to Protestants, if the Assuming the Crown by a
Papist Successor Male, is not prevented by the King and Parliament, by
declaring a Protestant Successor.
IT is already shown how dangerous a Papist Successor is to Papists themselves,
though there were no other reason in it; but that it is impossible to lay any
Obligation of Conscience on him, or of Promises, Covenants or Oaths: But if it
be dangerous to Papists, it must needs be totally destructive to Protestants;
if he will break Oaths to his own Papists, what will he do to those whom he
calls Heretics and Protestants?

The Doctrine of his Bishops and Priests is sufficiently known, that Fides non
est servanda cum Haereticis, and the horrid Practicks of that Diabolical
Doctrine against Protestants, is fitter to be writ in Blood than in Ink, and
the number of Protestants destroyed by the Papists perjury are innumerable; and
to touch farther on the same principles, it is to be noted, That the Pope and
his Cardinals have this Proverb, Mercatorum est non Regum stare Juramentis. It
is for Merchants and not for Kings to keep their Oaths. Pope Urban the Second
made an ungodly Decree, That an Oath is not to be kept with an Excommunicated
person, Let all the Protestants of England consider by what Oath they think to
bind a Papist Successor, who have stood Excommunicated by the Pope from
Generation to Generation; an Oath on a Papist, is like a Collar on a Monkey,
which they will as easily slip; which makes Pascentius scoff at the Invention
of the Oath of Allegiance for Men of his Religion: All which shows that his
Holiness, his Cardinals and Jesuits, are in the Judgment of the Judicious Poet
all Atheists.

Sunt qui in fortunae jam casibus omnia ponunt,
Et nullo credunt mundum Rectore moveri
Natura volvente vices and lucis and anni,
Atque ideo intrepide quaecunque altaria tangunt.
And these are the Men according to Aristophanes, Queis nec fides nec ulla
firma Pactio est, Minthanes the Persian General charged the like on the Romans,
that Romany promittere promtum est, promissis autem quamquam Juramento
firmatis minime stare.

Anno 1308. The Pope promised the French King Aid to obtain the Empire, but
underhand writ and wrought all he could against him. Naucler Francis the First,
the French King, bound himself by an Oath to the Emperor Charles the Fifth for
performance of Articles; but for Money he easily obtained from Pope Clement the
Seventh, an Absolution from his Oath. Sigismond the Emperor, having granted
Letters of Safe Conduct unto John Hus, and Jerome of Prague, but by the Bishops
of the Council of Constance, who decreed that no Faith was to be kept with
Heretics, he was persuaded to break his Faith, and cruelly to Burn those
Martyrs, after which time the said Emperor never prospered in any thing he took
in hand, he died without Issue Male, and his Daughters Son Ladislaus died also
Childless, whereby in one Age his name was quite extinct, and his Empress
became a dishonor to the Royal place she held, and God's Judgments justly
followed him for his Perjury.

Philip the Second of Spain, took an Oath when he came to the Government of the
United Provinces, not to increase the ancient Number of their Bishops, who were
then only Three, and not to change their Church and Laws from the state wherein
he found them; but the Pope and the Spanish Bishops, ruled him to break his
Oath, and to add Fourteen new Bishops to the Three old, to bring in the
Inquisition amongst them, to cut off the Heads of the Protestant Nobles, and
Massacre the Protestant People; in part of the Execution of which, the Duke of
Alva going with an Army to Naerden in Holland, was peaceably admitted into the
Town, and himself and his Soldiers feasted by the Burghers; after which, he
commanded them and the rest of the Inhabitants, to go into a certain Chapel,
where they should be made acquainted with such Laws as they were to be
regulated by; but when they thus Assembled, he sent his Soldiers to Murder
them without sparing any one. The Men were Massacred, the Women were first
Ravished and then Murdered, the Children and Infants had their Throats cut.
Clark's Martirol. 265. like those Heathen Cruelties described by Lucan.

Nobilitas cum plebe perit, lateque vagatur
Ensis, and a nullo revocatum est rectore ferrum.
Stat cruor in Templis multaque rubentia caede
Lubrica saxa madent, nulli sua profuit aetas;
Non senis extremum piguit vergentibus annis
Praecipitasse diem, nec primo in limine vitae
Infantis miseri nascentia rumpere fata:
Crimine quo parui caedem potuere mereri,
Sed satis est jam posse mori.
And will any Protestants be Self-Murderers, by committing themselves to the
Oaths of such a Religion, to return home from Foreign Popish perfidiousness and
Perjuries to those in Great Britain; Queen Mary of England, most Cruel and
perfidious to Protestants.
there has been but one Papist Successor in England since the Reformation,
which was Queen Mary, and she promised but perfidiously, Liberty of Conscience
to the Protestants, and used their help to obtain the Crown; which perhaps if
they had not afforded her, she might have missed; but as soon as she became
possessed of the Royal Power; how faithlesly she broke her promise to them, is
well known, and with what Cruelty incited by the Bishops prodigious in her Sex,
she delighted to see them Burning with her own Eyes; and what a Tophet she made
of the Land appears in the Acts and Monuments. What eyes can behold the fiery
Pictures there, or read the bloody Characters of her Butcheries without tears?
And she had increased the number of them to so many, as no Volume could have
contained, had not God in his Mercy sortned those days. Queen Mary of Scotland,
and her Agents there most perfidious and cruel to Protestants.
It is known likewise Queen Mary of Scotland likewise broke Promise and Oath,
the Papist Faith, and Oaths were no better kept to Protestants in Scotland,
than in England; of which I shall only mention one Example of Mr. George
Wischard persecuted to Death by the Bloody Cardinal Beton, as is mentioned in
Buchanan, Lib. 15. rer. Scot. 536. and in the History of the Reformation of the
Church of Scotland, p. 48, Mr. George Wischard a Protestant Minister, first
endeavored to be assassinated by Cardinal Beton.
etc. Mr. Wischard was a Diligent Preacher of the Gospel, and most acceptable
to the people; for which reason Cardinal Beton prohibited him to Preach, and he
not desisting, he corrupting with Money a desperate Priest named Sir John
Weighton to kill the said Mr. Wischard; and upon a Day the Sermon ended, and
the People departing, no man suspecting Danger; and therefore not heeding the
said Mr. George the Priest that was corrupted, stood waiting at the foot of the
Steps, his Gown loose, and his Dagger drawn in his Hand under his Gown; the
said Mr. George marked him, and as he came near, he said My friend what would
you do? and therewith he clapped his hand on the Priests hand where the Dagger
was, and took it from him; the Priest abashed fell down at his feet, and being
heard by other Company, they cried out, Deliver the Traitor to us, or we will
take him by force, and so they burst in at the Gate; but Mr. George took him in
his Arms, and said, Whosoever troubles him, shall trouble me; for he has hurt
me in nothing, but has done great Comfort to you and to me; to wit, he has
let us understand what we may fear, in time to come we will watch better.

The Gentlemen of the West had written that Mr. George should meet them at
Edinburgh; for they would require Disputation of the Bishops, and that he
should be publicly heard, whereto he willingly agreed. He lays a Second Plot
for the same.
The Cardinal dared not let it come to a public Dispute; therefore he Plots
the second time to kill Mr. George, as the surest way to defend their Murdering
Religion; and to that end he causes a Letter to be Counterfeit in the Name of
the Lord of Keimeir, Mr. Wischard's familiar Friend, which desires him with
all possible diligence to come to him, for he was stricken with a sudden
Sickness, and in the way lays an Ambush of Threescore Men, with Jacks and
Spears to dispatch him; but this was likewise discovered, the Cardinal vexed to
be twice thus disappointed in his wicked design, and got Intelligence that Mr.
Wischard, lodged at the House of John Cockburne Lord of Ormeston Seven miles
from Edinburgh, whereupon a Party of Horse was sent thither to demand Mr.
George to be delivered them as a Prisoner, to be carried before the Assembly of
Prelates at Edinburgh, the Lord made many Excuses and Spun out the time it
being late, hoping to pass Mr. Wischard out at a private Postern to escape when
dark, of which the Cardinal having notice by his Spies, came together which the
Governor thither at an unseasonable hour of Night, and beset round all
passages whereby none could escape; Mr. Wischard betrayed by trusting to the
perfidious Faith of Earl Bothwell.
yet neither by Promises, Flatteries, or Threats could he get Mr. George
delivered into his hands, till he called thither the Earl of Bothwell from his
Country House which was near at hand, to whom it was agreed he should be
delivered, on which the Earl gave his Solemn Faith, and Promised on his Honor,
that he should be Safe; and that it should pass the Power of the Cardinal to do
him any harm, and that neither the Governor or the Cardinal should have the
Custody of him; but he would retain him in his own hands, and in his own House,
till either he should make him free, or restore him to the same place whence he
received him. But being Corrupted by the Cardinals Gold, and by the Queen, he
most perfidiously broke his Faith and Honor, and delivered him a Prisoner into
the hands of his Enemies, the Prelates assembled at Edinburgh, who having got
their long sought for prey, send him away to St. Andrews where the Cardinal had
a Castle, as he thought Impregnable, where he was kept in hold in the Sea Tower
of the same Castle, which was done in the end of January, Anno Dom. 1546. The
Cardinal delayed no time, but caused all the Bishops, yea all the Clergymen who
had any pre-eminence, to be called to St. Andrews against the Seven and
Twentieth day of February, that Consultation might be had against this great
Protestant, who had so dangerously shaken the Foundations of Babel, upon the
last of February, was sent to the Prison, where Mr. George Wischard lay bound
in Chains, the Dean of the Town, by Command of the Cardinal, to Summon him to
be before the Judge the morrow following, to give account of his Seditious and
Heretical Doctrine; upon the next morrow the Lord Cardinal caused his Servants
to address themselves in their most Warlike Array, with Jack Knapscall, Splent,
Spear and Axe; and when these armed Champions, marching in Warlike Order, had
conveyed the Bishops into the Abbey Church, incontinently they sent for Mr.
George, who was conveyed into the same by the Captain of the Castle, with the
number of an Hundred Men addressed in manner aforesaid, like a Lamb lead to the
Sacrifice.

After a Sermon made by the Sub-Prior, concerning Heresy, there stood up a
Priest, who with great Revilings in general, and at Random against Mr. George
spat in his face, Mr. Wischard Appeals to an equal Judge.
and pressing him to answer, Mr. George appealed to be heard before an equal
Judge. To whom the Priest replied, Is not my Lord Cardinal the second Person
within the Realm, Chancellor of Scotland, Archbishop of St. Andrews, Bishop of
Merepose, Commendator of Arbroth, Legatus Natus, Legatus a Latere; and so
reciting as many Titles of his unworthy Honors as would have loaded an Horse.
Is not he, quoth the Priest, an equal Judge? To which Mr. George answered, I
desire the Word of God to be my Judge, Appeals to a Temporal Judge, but denied
all.
The Temporal Estate with some of your Lordships to be mine Auditors, Because I
am here my Lord Governors Prisoner. Whereupon the Scornful Ecclesiastics who
stood by mocked him saying, Such a Man, such a Judge; meaning the Nobles to be
Heretics as well as he: Yet was there never a more just exception against a
Judge, than that he is Judge in his own Case, and for his own Profit, for so
appears all the 18 Articles they charge him with, to be no matters of
Godliness; but only of gain to the Priest. They proceed next to the particular
Articles against him.

Articles of the Popish Charge against Mr. Wischard.
ARTICLE I. THou false Heretic, Runnagate, Traitor, and Thief, Deceiver of the
People, despisest the Church, and in like case contemns my Lord Governor's
Authority, and this we know of surety, that when thou Preachedst in Dundee, and
was charged by my Lord Governor's Authority to desist: Nevertheless thou
would not obey, but perseveredst in the same; and therefore the Bishop of
Breachen Cursed thee, and delivered thee into the Devil's hand, gave thee then
Commandment that thou should Preach no more; yet notwithstanding thou did
continue obstinately. ARTICLE II. Thou false Hertick did say, That a Priest
standing at the Altar saying Mass, is like a Fox wagging his Tail in July. ART.
III. Thou false Heretic Preachedst against the Sacraments, saying, That there
were not seven Sacraments. ART. IV. Thou false Heretic have openly taught,
That Auricular Confession is not a Blessed Sacrament, and thou say, We
should only confess us to God, and to no Priest. ART. V. Thou false Heretic
did say, That it was necessary for every Man to know and understand his
Baptism; which is contrary to General Councils, and the Statutes of holy
Church. ART. VI. Thou false Heretic, Traitor and Thief, Thou saydst that the
Sacrament upon the Altar was but a piece of Bread, baken upon the Ashes, and no
other thing else, and all that is there done, is but a Superstitious Rite,
against the Commandment of God. ART. VII. Thou false Heretic did say, That
extreme Unction is not a Sacrament. ART. VIII. Thou false Heretic did say,
That Holy Water is not so good as wash and such like, thou contemnest
Conjuring, and say that holy Churches cursing avails nothing. ART. IX. Thou
false Heretic and Runnagate have said, That every Man is a Priest; and
likewise thou say, That the Pope has no more Power than another Man. ART. X.
Thou false Heretic said, That a Man had no free will, but was like to
Stoics, who say, That it is not in Man's will to do any thing; but that all
Desire and Concupiscence comes from God, whatsoever kind it be.
This Charge he denied, That he taught Stoicism, or denied the Doctrine of free
will.

ART. XI. Thou false Heretic did say, It Is as lawful to eat flesh upon
Friday, as on Sunday. ART. XII. Thou false Heretic did say, That we should
not pray unto Saints; but to God only, say whether thou have said this or no,
say shortly. ART. XIII. Thou false Heretic have Preached plainly, That there
is no Purgatory, and that it is a feigned thing after life to be punished in
Purgatory. ART. XIV. Thou false Heretic have taught plainly against the Vows
of Monks, Friars, Nuns and Priests, saying, That whosoever was bound to such
Vows, they vowed themselves to the state of Damnation. Moreover, That it was
lawful for Priests to Marry Wives, and not to live sole. ART. XV. Thou false
Heretic and Runnagate say, Thou will not obey our General or Provincial
Councils. ART. XVI. Thou false Heretic say, That it is vain to build to the
Honor of God costly Churches, seeing God remains not in Churches made by
Men's hands, nor yet can God be in little space as betwixt the Priests hands.
ART. XVII. Thou false Heretic contemnest fasting, and say thou should not
fast. ART. XVIII. Thou false Heretic have Preached openly, saying, That Souls
of Men shall sleep to the latter day of Judgment, and shall not obtain life
Immortal until the last day.
He denied that he taught any such thing as the sleeping of the Soul.

All which Articles, though an Equal Judge, a Copy of the Accusation, time to
Deliberate, Friends, Books, and the Scripture it self unjustly kept from him,
though mocked, baited, wearied, and kept bound in Iron, in the midst of a
multitude of Enemies; yet he answered with such Patience and Power, that as is
said of Stephen, Acts 6.10. They were not able to resist the Wisdom and the
Spirit by which he spoke. Mr. Wischard Condemned by the Popish Bishops and
Cardinal to be Burnt for an Heretic, in a Cruel manner.
But neither his Truth nor Innocence availed, the wicked Bishops condemned him
to be Burnt for an Heretic, not having respect to the Judgment of God. And not
long after, the Cardinal sent Two of his Hangmen to him in Prison, where he was
spending his time in Prayer, one of whom put upon him a Coat of Black Linen
Cloth, and the other tied about all Parts of his Body many little Bags of
Gunpowder, and clothed with these Ornaments, they bring him out of his
Lodgings, to an outer Room, near the Gate of the Castle, and there commanded
him to stay till he was sent for: Then the Fire was made ready, and the Stake
at the West end of the Castle near to the Priory, over against the place of
Execution, the Castle Windows were hung with rich Hangings, and Velvet
Cushions, laid for the Cardinal and Prelates, who from thence did feed their
Eyes with the Torments of this Innocent Man. The Cardinal dreading lest Mr.
George should be taken away by his Friends, before had Commanded to bend all
the Ordnance of the Castle right against the place of Execution, and Commanded
all his Gunners to be ready, and stand beside their Guns, unto such time he was
Burnt. All this being done, they bound Mr. Wischard's hands behind his Back,
and with sound of Trumpets, led him forth with a Rope about his Neck, and an
Iron Chain about his Middle, by Soldiers, to the place of their wicked and
Cruel Execution, where scarce allowing him time to pray, the Trumpet sounding,
he was tied to the Stake, and the Fire kindled; The Captain of the Castle, for
the love he had to Mr. Wischard, drew so near the Fire to encourage him, that
he was hurt by the Flame. To whom Mr. Wischard answered, The fire Torments my
Body, but no way abates my Spirit. And then looking toward the Cardinal, said,
He who in such state, from that High place, feeds his eyes with my Torments,
within few Days shall be Hanged out at the same Window, to be seen with as much
Ignominy, as he now leans there in Pride. Then with this the Executioner
drawing the Cord about his Neck, strangled him, and presently after, the Fire
being very great, he was consumed to Ashes. Wherein contrary to the Custom of
Scotland, Mr. Wischard Burnt alive, contrary to the Custom of Scotland.
who use not to Burn alive, but Strangle first, and Burn after when Dead; they
extended the Cruelty of that Execution to two Deaths, Burning and Strangling.
This was the Mercy of the Cardinal and Bishops. But Blood cries for Blood. And
as Buchanan goes on, p. 540. Hac Sacerdotum supra modum Luxuriante Victoria,
non promiscuum modo Vulgus sed plaerique genere and opibus illustres magis
irritati quam fracti, rem co sua segnitie rediisse indignabantur, ut praeceps
aliquid cum periculo esset audendum, aut omne cum Ignominia foret patiendum.
Jam etiam pluribus and apertius Erumpentibus vi doloris querelis, de Cardinale
tollendo coire, and ad Libertatem recuperandam aut vitam projiciendam hortari.
Quam enim spem dignitatis reliquam fore sub arrogantissimo Sacrisiculo,
Eodemque Tyranno Saevissimoque, bello adversus deum hominesque suscepto, non
inimicis modo id est qui aut rem haberent aut pietatem colerent; sed quocunque
esset leviter offensus, eum velut pecus exhara suae libidini mactaret? Quin
public Bellum and civil and Externum alat, privatim meretricum amores Nuptiis
copulet, nuptias Legitimas pro arbitrio Dirimat, Domi cum scortis volutetur;
foris in Caede innoxiorum and sanguine debaccaretur. In this so over Luxuriant
Victory of the Prelates not only the promiscuous Vulgar, but many Illustrious
in Nobility and Wealth, more irritated than discouraged, began to disdain
Affairs should run to that pass by their sloth, that either something must be
desperately dared headlong, or they must Ignominiously suffer all that should
be laid upon them. Now also many their Complaints by Violence of their Griefs
more openly breaking out, concerning taking away of the Cardinal, met together
and exhorted one another either to recover their Liberty, or lose their Lives.
For what hope of Esteem could they ever have under a most Proud Priest, and
Cruel Tyrant, who fighting both against God and Men, drew not only his Enemies,
whom he accounted all that were Rich or Religious, or any other who in the
least manner displeased him, as Beasts from a Stye, to be Sacrificed to his
Lust, who when he pleased raised publicly both Foreign and Civil Wars,
privately Coupled Whores in Matrimony, and what was Lawful Marriage destroyed
at pleasure, at home wallowed amongst Whores, and abroad in the Blood of
Innocents. Norman Lesly, the Son of the Earl of Rothes, having had a Quarrel
with the Cardinal, concerning a Promise which the Cardinal had made and broke
to him, resolved to be revenged, and entered into Confederacy with others to
effect the same; and to that Intent, to prevent all Suspicion, rid himself with
only Five Companions to St. Andrews, and lay at his usual Inn; there were only
Ten more in the Town of the same Confederacy, who waited only for Notice from
Norman, when they should join in the Attempt intended, with so small a Company,
being in all but Sixteen, in a Town full of the Cardinals Creatures, did he
dare do such an Exploit as follows; and though many purposes were devised how
the wicked Cardinal might have been taken away; yet all failed but this. The
Cardinal with mighty Diligence fortified his Castle, and employed many Workmen
therein; The Surprizal of Cardinal Beton's Castle.
on Saturday Morning the 29th of May, the Days in that Country being very long,
Norman Lesly, John Lesly, William Kirkaldies, and others, were in sundry
Companies in the Abbey Churchyard, not far distant from the Castle, when the
Gates being open, and the Drawbridge let down to receive Lyme-stones, and
other things necessary for Building, William Kircaley with Six Persons getting
entry, kept talk with the Porter, and asked if my Lord Cardinal were stirring,
who answered No, which was true enough; for he had been busy with Mrs. Marion
Ogleby that Night, who was espied to depart from him by a Privy Postern that
Morning, which made the Cardinal sleep the longer. While William and the Porter
talked, and his Servants looked to the work and workmen, Norman Lesly came in
with his Company, and immediately came John Lesly somewhat rudely, and four
Persons with him; the Porter fearing, would have Drawn the Bridge, but the said
John being thereon staid it, and kept in; And while the Porter made him for
Defense, his Head was broken, the Keys taken from him, and he cast into the
Ditch; and so that place was seized. The shout rises, the Workmen to the
Number of more than an Hundred ran off the Walls, and were without hurt put
forth at the Wicket. The first thing that was done, William Kircaldy took the
Guard of the Privy Postern, fearing lest the Fox should have escaped; then went
the rest to the Gentleman's Chambers, and without violence done to any Man, put
Fifty Persons more out at the Gate. The Number which did all this was but
Sixteen Persons. The Cardinal wakened with the shouts, asked from his Window,
what meant that noise? It is answered, That Norman Lesly had taken his Castle;
which understood he ran to the Postern, but perceiving the Passage to be kept
without, he returned quickly to his Chamber, took his two-handed Sword, and
caused his Chamberlain to cast Chests, and other Impediments to the Door. In
the mean time comes John Lesly to it, and bids open, but the Cardinal requiring
first Conditions before he would open, and the Door being very strong, John
Lesly cried, Fire, Fire, at which Call was brought to him a Chimney full of
burning Coals; which being perceived, the Cardinal or the Chamberlain opened
the Door it is uncertain, and they without thereon rushing in, the Cardinal
sat down in a Chair, and cried, I am a Priest, I am a Priest, you will not
slay me. Cardinal Beton killed in revenge of Mr. Wischard.
Then the said John Lesly, according to former Vows he had made, struck first
once or twice, and so did Peter, but James Melvin perceiving them both in
Choler, withdrew them and said, This work and Judgment of God, although it be
secret, it ought to be done with greater gravity. And presenting unto him the
point of the Sword, said, Repent thee of thy former wicked Life; but especially
of the shedding of blood of that notable Instrument of God Mr. George Wischard;
which albeit the fire Consumed before Men, cries for Vengeance before God on
thee. And we from God are sent to revenge him; for here before God I Protest,
That neither hatred of thy Person, nor love of thy Riches, nor the fear of any
Trouble thou could have done me in particular, moved or moves me, to strike
thee, but only because thou have been an obstinate Enemy of Jesus Christ, his
Holy Gospel; and so he struck him twice or thrice through with a Stog-Sword,
and so he fell and never a word heard out of his mouth, but, I am a Priest,
fie, fie, all is gone. While they were busied with the Cardinal, the Fray rose
in the Town, the Provost Assembles the Commonalty, and comes to the House side
crying, What have you done with my Lord Cardinal? Where is my Lord Gardinal?
Have you slain my Lord Cardinal? They were first answered gently, Best it were
for you to return to your own Houses, for the man you call, the Cardinal, has
received his Reward, and will trouble the World no more; But then more
inragedly they cry, We shall never depart till we see him; on which, Showed
dead from the place whence he had proudly viewed the burning of Mr. Wischard.
his Body is shown dead over the Wall, from the place, whence he had so proudly
fed his Eyes with the burning of Mr. Wischard.

So hear appears to the full the sad Story of a Pious Protestant Minister,
betrayed by breach of the Faith of a perfidious Papist, to be miserably Burnt,
and the Judgment of God on him who betrayed and Burnt him. And can any
Protestant Minister, who is so truly in Heart as well as in Name; whoever reads
the Persecutions under Emperors, and the Perfidious Murders by Popes and Papist
Princes, give Faith again to a Papist Successor?

Of the Cruelties of Popish Prelates against Protestants.
It would amaze the most barbarous Nations in the World, should they but hear of
the Cruelties of Papist Priests toward Protestants; yea, those Indian and
American Nations themselves, who are immediately governed by Apparitions or
Oracles of the Devil, or Pontifical Magicians, inspired by him; for we do not
hear in History that they burn alive any for difference in Religion, or
difference in Conscience from themselves, nor put them to such Racks or
Tortures, or to double Deaths of Strangling and Burning, or Strangling and
Disemboweling; for the very Mexican Priests, They think one Death not
sufficient unless it be double.
so abhorred for their Butcheries of Sacrificing their Enemies to the Sun, do
only speedily cut open their Breasts, and neither Strangle nor Dismember them.
The Persians in the height of their Empire, though in High Treason did only
Strangle, and neither Burn, Disembowel, nor Dismember; as appears in the
Example mentioned, Hist. Cap. 2.21. In those days when Mordecai sat in the
King's Gate, Two of the King's Chamberlains, Bigthan, and Teresh of those who
kept the Door, were wroth and sought to lay Hands on the King Ahasuerus, and
the thing was known to Mordecai, who told it to Esther the Queen, and Esther,
certified the King thereof in Mordecai's Name, and when Inquisition was made of
the matter, it was found out; therefore they were both Hanged on a Tree. Et
Cap. 7.10. Haman was Hanged on his own Gallows. So the Turk Strangles
Offenders, so did the Jew, but neither Jew, Mohammedan, or Pagan, Strangle and
Burn, or Strangle and Disembowel, or Strangle and Dismember, or lay two kinds
of Deaths on the same Person, at the same time; but those were Inventions of
Papist Priests, though to the Dishonor of the Protestant Religion, in some of
them their Example is too much followed; so that Papist Priests against
Religion are worse than the Jew, Mohammedan, Pagan, yea, than the very Indians
and Americans, the Devil himself; for though it may be doubted whether he
exceed them in good Nature, Truth, and Honesty; yet it is clear he does in Wit,
not to draw the Infamy of so much Cruelty and Perjury on his Kingdom, as they
do on theirs.

Sir John Oldcastle, Lord Cobham, was Cruelly Burnt by the Papist Prelates.
In the Time of Henry the Fifth, Sir John Oldcastle, Lord Cobham was censured by
the Bishops, at a Synod in London, for maintaining of Wickliff's Doctrine,
which was the Protestant Religion; and after in a Synod at Rochester, was by
the Archbishop, of Canterbury, pronounced to be an Heretic, and the same
Archbishop, then Enacted by Decree, That the Scripture should not be
Translated into English. But some mark it as a Judgment of God upon him, That
his Tongue both the Root and Blade swelled so big, that he could not long speak
the English Tongue with it, for the swelling hindered him from swallowing his
meat; whereby he was at last starved, and miserably died.

In the mean time, Sir John Oldcastle, Lord Cobham presents his Belief to the
King himself in Writing, who being then a Papist, and ruled by the Bishops,
they supplying him with great Sums of Money, refused it, and suffered him to be
Condemned for an Heretic, and Committed to the Tower of London, whence making
an Escape, The King promised a Thousand Marks to any that should bring him; But
the Protestant Doctrine of Wickliff, was then so much favored by the People,
that he continued 4 years after undiscovered, till at length being taken on the
Borders of Wales, he was brought to London, where he was Drawn from the Tower
to St. Giles's Fields, The Prelates thought Phalaris Brazen Bull not sufficient
Torment for a poor Protestant. Mrs. Anne Askew first rackt, tortured, and her
bones distorted, and then Burnt.
and there Hanged in a Chain by the Middle, and afterward Consumed by Fire,
the Gallows and all. Bak. Hist. 177.

Another of the Followers of Wickliff, was Burnt by the Bishop's Sentence in
Smithfield in an Iron Pipe or Butt; They thought Phalaris Brazen Bull not
Torment enough for a poor Protestant.

Mrs. Anne Askew a Protestant in the time of H. 8. was Condemned by the
Bishops; see herein the Romish Episcopal Mercy, they caused her, one of that
weak Sex, twice to be so miserably Rackt and Tortured, that her Bones thereby
was so disjoynted, that she was not able to go to the place of Execution, in
Smithfield, whither they had Condemned her, but they carried her thither in a
Chair, and set her to the Stake, and cruelly Burnt her.

Neither does the Cruelty of these Monsters spare the Innocent Babes any more
than the Mothers. A Babe Burnt with the Mother.
The Acts and Monuments relate of a poor Protestant Woman great with Child,
whom the Bishop had Condemned to be Burnt for an Heretic, and whilst she was
Burning in the violent Flames, the Child miraculously sprang from her beyond
the Fire, and might have been saved, but the cruel Executioner threw it in
again to be Burnt with the Mother.

Double deaths.
Here we see the Romish Bull with his two-horned Miter, gores with double
Deaths; Mr. Wischard, with Burning and Strangling; Sir John Oldcastle, Lord
Cobham, with Hanging in Chains and Burning; Mrs. Anne Askew, with Racking,
worse than Death, and Burning; And this poor Woman, great with Child, to be
Burnt once her self, and a second time in her Child.

The Cruel Massacres of Protestants of Merindoll.
How miserably have our Neighbors, the French Protestants, suffered from
Cruelty of their Bishops, Inciting the Temporal Sword against them in the
Massacre of Merindoll. Anno 1545. the Instrument being Minier, the President of
the Council of Aix; for having Condemned this poor People of Heresy: He
Mustered a small Army, and set Fire to their Villages; They of Merindoll, to
avoid the Flame, with their Wives and Children fled into Woods, but were there
Butchered or sent to the Galleys; One Boy they took, and placed him to a Tree,
and shot him to Death with Calivers. 25 who had hid themselves in a Cave, were
some Stifled, some Burned.

Of Chabriers.
In Chabriers they so Inhumanely dealt with the young Wives and Maids, that most
of them died-immediately after; the Men and Women they put to the Sword, 800
Men were Murdered in a Cave, and 40 Women put together in an old Barn, and
Burned, Heylin Geogr. 79.

Anno 1655. Emanuel Duke of Savoy, caused many Cruel Massacres and Outrages,
to be Committed by his Soldiers on his Protestant Subjects, in the Valleys of
Piedmont, Of Piedmont.
for which there were Days of Humiliation kept in England, and Collections of
Money made for their Relief, Bak. Hist. 644. And can the Horrid and Perfidious
Massacres in the late Civil Wars in Ireland be so soon forgot, wherein as
estimated no less than Two hundred thousand English Protestants, Of Ireland.
Men and Women, and Children were destroyed, who lived with the Irish, not
suspecting the Plots of the Popish Priests, under the Trust and Faith, of a
Peace made with them, which was most Treasonably by them broken.

Of the Parisian Massacre with the horrid Perjury of the French King.
The most Horrid and Hellish Parisian Massacre, of an Hundred thousand of his
Protestant Subjects, Committed by that Popish and Perjured French King, Charles
the Ninth, Anno Dom. 1572. is already mentioned, and the Inhumane barbarousness
of the same before, Lib. 2. Chapter 1. p. 242, 243, 244. He Swore, and Damned
himself; and Swore over and over again he would Inviolably keep the League and
Peace he had made with his Protestant Subjects; but when he had got them
thereby to be secure, and Trust themselves in his hands, Let any see who will
but take the pains to read the forementioned History of that Massacre, how he
used them, for trusting of him. Let any Papist Prince or Claimant to be a
Papist Successor show by which of his Gods he will Swear, No Papist Successor
can Swear deeper.
which Charles the Ninth did not Swear and Forswear himself by, That he will
give Liberty of Conscience to his Protestant Subjects. And let such Protestant
Subjects as are willing to have an Hundred thousand of them, their Wives and
Children Butchered with Inhumane and Barbarous Tortures, while on trust of his
Oath they put themselves into his Power, give Faith to Perjury; but let them
Pardon their weaker Brethren, if they are afraid to bear them Company.

Let Papist Priests transformed into Protestant Angels of Light, Preach up
blind Obedience and implicit Faith to Perjury; But let them Excuse those sheep
of their Flock who know the voice of the true Shepherd, if they hear a true
Protestant Pastor in another Fold. Let the true Protestant Pastor hear likewise
what is said, Ezckiel 32.2. When I bring the Sword upon a Land, if the People
of the Land take a man of their Coast, and set him for their watchman, If when
he sees the Sword coming upon the Land, he blow the Trumpet, and warn the
People; Then whosoever hears the sound of the Trumpet, and takes not warning,
if the Sword come and take him away, his blood shall be upon his own head. He
heard the sound of the Trumpet, and took not warning, his blood shall be upon
him: but he that takes warning, shall deliver his soul. But if the watchman
see the Sword come, and blow not the Trumpet, and the people be not warned: if
the Sword come and take away a person from among them, he is taken away in
iniquity: but his blood will I require at the watchman's hands. And do the true
Protestant Pashor's Sheep, Protestant Ministers to give the People warning
against Papist Successors, or their Blood will be required at their hands.
if it should happen the Sword of a Papist Successor should be coming on the
Land to act over again in Great Britain all the Murders of Protestants by the
two Mary's, all the Fires and Tortures on such Pious Martyrs as have been in
Italy, Spain, France, Germany, England, and Scotland; All the Massacres of
Merindol, Chabriers, Ireland, Piedmont, and Paris; Do they think if they should
not awake, nor blow the Trumpets, nor give the People warning of the Imminent
Dangers appearing of the Discoveries of their Secret Plots shown by God
himself; and of the Dangers and Destructions ensue thereby, that the blood of
so many Thousand Innocents shall not be required at the hand of the Watchmen?
Will this be to follow the Precept of Christ? Matthew. 10.16. Behold, I send you
forth as sheep in the midst of wolves: be ye therefore wise as serpents, and
harmless as doves. Is this to be wise as Serpents, to suffer the old Romish
Serpent to thrust in his head in a Papist Successor? will he not quickly get in
his Body? will this be to follow the Precept of Christ? Matthew. 4.7. Thou shall
not tempt the Lord thy God. To cast down all Protestants from the Pinacles of
the Temple into the fiery furnaces of Popish Priests, the incidents necessary
of a Papist Successor, and without warrant to expect God will show Miracles to
deliver them thence; is not this most presumptuous wickedness, and a tempting
of God, when God shows lawful means by Declaring a Protestant Successor by Act
of Parliament, to prevent any Papist Successor whatsoever, with all the Train
of Appurtenances of Popish Priests, and fiery Furnaces at their Tails? Let it
be considered what these Popish Priests will probably most do, as long as they
have hopes to advance a Papist Successor, to bring in them and all their
Instruments of Superstition and Engines of Cruelty with them; Have not their
Plots and Practices already discovered what they have intended; To Pistol,
Poison, or Stab the Protestant King, and his Protestant Eldest Son; To make way
for a Papist Successor. A Papist Successor will seize on all the Protestant
Treasure, Arms, Fleets, Forts, etc.
And what would a Papist Successor do? He would first seize upon all the
Protestant Treasuries and Treasure, then on all the Protestant Armories, Arms
and Magazines; on all the Protestant Forts, Cittadels, and Castles; on the
Protestant Navy, and Land Militia. It is wonderful what mighty strength of Foot
and Horse Q. Mary kept for the Train in all the Counties of England and Wales,
to Oppress the Protestants ten times more than what the Protestants now keep to
defend themselves against Papists; as appears 4 and 5. P. and M. Cap. 2. in
Rastall's Statutes, The incredible Provision for Arms by Papists in Queen
Mary's time.
where it is Enacted, That every Person having 400 l. per annum, or above; and
under the value of a 1000 Marks, shall have, find, keep, sustein, and maintain
two Horses, or one Horse, and one Gelding, able for Demy-Lances, with
sufficient Furniture of Harness, Steel, Saddles, and Weapons for the same, and
4 Geldings able for Light-Horsemen, with sufficient Harness and Weapons for the
same; and also 20 Corslets furnished, and 20 Almain Rivets furnished; and one
Stead of Almain Rivets, 20 Coats of Plate Corslets or Brigandines furnished, 20
Pikes, 15 long Bows, 15 Sheefs of Arrows, 15 Steel Caps, or Skulls, 6
Harquebusses, and 6 Morians or Sallets. So the Children of this World are in
their Generation wiser than the Children of Light.

Q. Mary a Papist Successor to K. Edward a Protestant, provided it seems the
proportion of above ten to one more Arms to destroy Protestants, than her
Protestant Successors have to defend them; for there is now but one Horse
appointed for 500 l. per annum, whereas Q. Mary sets six Horses on 400 l. per
annum; besides that Mass of Foot Arms appointed in the same Statute. And though
400 l. per annum might be in those times according to the intrinsic value of
Silver, more than 500 l. now; yet the proportion of Horse and Foot laid on 400
l. Land then, If the Protestant yield or lose Possession of Treasure or Arms,
or Offices to the Papists, it is not to be recovered again, without a Miracle.
seems ten times more than now.

It is further to be Considered, That by God's Mercy the Protestant is as yet
Possessor of the Treasure, Militia, and all Public. Offices; and the
Protestants are by the same Mercy increased and multiplied, and grown far more
numerous in Great Britain, and the same Mercy has likewise given them
Victories against Papists: The Protestants have by God's Providence a
Protestant King the Rightful Possessor of the Crown, whom God grant long to
live: And hopes of a Protestant Successor, the next Lineal right Heir of his
Blood, according to the Moral Law of God, and the Law of the Land, and the
Protestant Religion. And what is likewise a singular Mercy of God, derived from
a Marriage by the Moral Law of God, and contrary, and, as is hoped,
inconsistent with the Ceremonial Law of Marriage and Succession, Papal or
Episcopal; and therefore of a contrary Interest to them.

To yield therefore the right of the Law of God to the Law of Man, the right of
a Lineal Heir to a Collateral, to yield the Possession of a great Number to a
lesser Number, of a greater power to a lesser power, of a victorious Religion
to a vanquished, of a protestant Successor to a papist Successor; were not only
against all Piety, but Prudence; and all Laws either of Right or Possession.

9. The Danger of seizing Offices by the Papist or his Trustees in name of
Protestants.
9. How great a plunge will it put the Protestants to, who is now in possession
of all public Offices, if through neglect of barring his door of Possession by
an Act of Parliament, declaring a Protestant Successor, a papist Successor
seeing the door left open for him should slip in; and after he has Treasure,
and Arms, should likewise seize on the Power of public Offices; For then may
he make Sheriffs of Counties Papists, Mayors of Cities and Towns Papists; He
would make all the Military Officers by Land and Sea Papists, Then may he cause
to be chosen the greatest part of Burgesses and Knights of Shires Papists; He
may make Bishops Papists, all Preachers Papists, Lords of Parliaments Papists;
He may make Judges on the Woolsacks Papists, for if the Successor be a Papist,
as the Supreme Officer is, so will all Inferior Officers be Papists. He may
then repeal all former Acts of Parliament made against Papists, vacate all
Oaths taken against Papists. The Inquisition Office of Spiritual Courts, and
Excommunicato Capiendoes is ready prepared for him, and he can as easily
restore the Haeretico Comburendo Office again. Did not so weak an Instrument as
a Woman, even Q. Mary her self do all this and more, when once she became a
Papist Successor to a Protestant King; though he had confirmed the Protestant
Religion as much as possible by Acts of Parliament? How much more is a
Masculine Papist Successor then to be feared, whose Designs and Accomplishments
are of higher and easier Achievements than any Feminine. When he sees all this
done, and the Abomination of Desolation stand in the Holy place, what will then
become of the miserable Protestant, when by his own Supine Negligence, he sees
himself dispossessed of Treasure, Arms, Laws, and all these public Offices,
and Officers, which should under God have protected him, and the Judgment of
God come upon him, for his casting away all those Lawful means, vouchsafed him
of prevention of so great a Judgment. Praestat therefore Cautela quam Medela,
it were a presumptuous tempting of God, for the Protestant to deliver the
possession of all his Treasure, Arms, and Offices to a Papist Successor, when
God has given him Lawful means to prevent the same; for when all these things
are once delivered into the hands of a Papist Successor; though God should by a
Miracle send again a Protestant Successor, how difficult and dangerous a matter
it it would be to get again the power out of the Papist possession, appears by
the Example of Queen Elizabeth her self. For when it pleased God, to give her
the Kingdom, the Alteration of Religion, Q. Eliz. her self not able to restore
the Protestant Religion by more than six Voices, after the Papists had got
Possession. Queen Eliz. not able to remove what did Protestants more harm than
Images.
from Papist to Protestant in Parliament, was carried by no greater plurality,
than only of six Voices, and the Protestant party, though with a Protestant
Queen in the Head of them, was able at that time to Enact no more against
Popery, than only two points, viz. The Abolishing of the Mass, and the
Establishing the Liturgy in the English Tongue. After, Images were likewise
removed out of Churches, and broken or burnt, Bak. Hist. 350. But the High
places of the Inquisition in Spiritual Courts, The Excommunication, Capiendo's
and Haeretico Cumburendo's; The Romish Altars, and Ceremonies, which did
Protestants more harm than Images, she was not able to move; the Sons of
Zerujah, were too hard for her; so it was an easy matter for Queen Mary, who
was a Papist Successor, to lose Callice to the French, The Possession of
Callice once lost, could not be again recovered.
which was done by King Philip's drawing out the Strength of the English
Garrison Soldiers, in his Wars against other Towns, and the neglect of the
Queens Council, to send Recruits, until too late; though they had notice of a
Seige intended against them. The Town of Callice, which was first taken by
Edward the Third, after Eleven Months Siege, was esteemed of so high Import,
that on a Treaty of Marriage by King Edward, between his Nephew Richard of
Bordeaux, and Mary a Daughter of Charles the French King; Charles made an offer
to King Edward to leave him Fourteen hundred Towns, and Three thousand
Fortresses in Aquitain, upon Condition he would render Callice, and all that he
held in Picardy. But before any thing could be concluded, King Edward died; And
the Lord de Cords a French Lord, would commonly say, He would be content to
lie in Hell seven years, so that Callice were in the French Possession, Bak.
Hist. 240. But it seems since they got it in possession, some of them would be
content to lie in Hell for ever, if Perjury will lay them there so long. For
there being, Anno Dom. 1559. in the First year of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth,
a Treaty of Peace between her and the French King, and Commissioners of both
sides to that end appointed; and the Commissioners meeting accordingly, the
Chief point in difference was the Restitution of Callice; for which the English
Commissioners by the Queens Appointment offered to remit Two Millions of
Crowns, that by just Account were due from France to England. At last on much
Altercation, it was Concluded and Agreed, Perjury in the French King in not
restoring Callice.
That Callice should remain in possession of the French for the term of Eight
years, and those Expired, it should be delivered unto the English upon the
forfeiture of Five hundred thousand Crowns, for which Hostages were given: But
all this notwithstanding, though the Conditions were Sealed and Sworn to, and
though Hostages were assigned to remain in England till one or other were
performed; yet all was frustrate, and came to nothing, Bak. Hist. 351. So
little Faith is there in the Oath of a Papist Prince.

And the same Danger will be in the delivering the possessions of Garrisons and
Forts in England to Papists, or Papist Successor, though on Conditions Sworn to
by them, and the same difficulty, yea, impossibility for a Protestant Successor
to recover again the Possession of Treasure, Arms, Offices, Religion, Liberty,
Propriety, as it is of Life it self, when once left to a papist Successor,
though he take an Oath to preserve all these: By which, and all former Examples
appears, That a papist Successor, if he happen to be, is of great Danger and
Mischief to all Lay-papists themselves; but totally and inevitably Destructive
to all Protestants. See other Examples of Perjury by Popes, Bishops, and Papist
Princes before, Lib. 2. p. 377.

Of the Destruction double to Protestants, if the Crown happen to fall to a
Papist Successor Female; and not prevented as before.

Destruction double to Protestants in a Papist Successor Female.
It is before spoken of the Destruction inevitable, must follow to Protestants,
if a Male Papist Successor happen. But if a Female happen, it must be doubly
Destructive; for she will Marry a Foreign Papist Prince; so the Protestants
will be left naked, and exposed to the rage and Cruelties, both of a Papist,
and a Foreign Sword. Has not God given us already warning, fresh in Memory in
the late Examples of Queen Mary of England, and Queen Mary of Scotland; one of
whom Married King Philip of Spain, the other was sold by Cardinal Beton, and
Married to the French Dauphin? And did not God even by Miracle, though we most
unthankfully so soon forget it, Catch this Island as a Brand kindled at both
ends out of the Fire, Protestants barred of Succession to Papists by Salique
Laws, yet are not Papists barred to succeed to Protestants.
and has he in vain given Sense, and Reason, and Strength to the Dull
Protestants, so far to tempt him, and provoke his Judgment, as to cast it
thither again; while the busy Papist has barred all his Doors of Succession
with his Laws against Heretics, and his Salique Laws, to exclude alike both
Female and Male Protestants?

(10.) The next Danger is, If no Successor should be Declared by the King and
Parliament in regard of Foreign Princes.

10. Danger of Foreign Princes.
That Danger is likewise very well expressed in the Statute 25 H. 8. Cap. 22. To
have been the cause of great Bloodshed in this Realm, and to be one of the
Causes why the King desired to declare his Successor by Act of Parliament; as
appears in these words, viz. And sometimes other Foreign Princes and Potentates
of sundry Degrees, minding rather Dissentions and Discord ot continue in this
Realm, to the utter Desolation thereof, than Charity, Equity, and Unity; have
many times supported wrong Titles, whereby they might more easily and facily,
aspire to the Superiority of the same; The continuance and sufferance whereof
deeply considered and pondered, were too Dangerous and Perilous to be suffered
within this Realm any longer; and too much contrary to the Unity, Peace, and
Tranquillity of the same; being greatly Reproachable and Dishonorable to the
whole Realm.

The not Declaring Edgar Atheling Successor by Act of Parliament in the Life of
Edward the Confessor, William the Conqueror let in by not Declaring Edgar
Atheling Successor.
let in the Foreign pretense of William the Conqueror; which if it had been
done, it is probable that never any Norman Invador had dared to have set his
foot on English Ground.

So it is probable the King of Spain had never been able to have seized on the
Crown of Portugal, had not the Superstitious Portuguese inslaved their Blood
Royal, to be Judged by the Papal and Episcopal Laws of Marriage and Succession,
contrary to the Moral Law of God, whereby they left it in the Power of Popes or
Bishops; if the Spaniard, or any other Papist Prince, would give or promise
them Money, to Legitimate, or Illegitimate whom they would, and sell the
Succession to the Kingdom at what rate they pleased; Philip the Second of
Spain, seized the Crown of Portugal, by the not Declaring Don Antonio Successor.
for as appears in that Judicious Author, though Anonymus who writes The
interest of Princes, p. 95. The Case was this, Henry the Third Son of Emanuel,
being according to the Papal Law, Heir to the Crown of Portugal, was
accordingly Crowned Anno Dom. 1578. And being an Old Man, without Children, and
sensible of the Disputes would arise after his Death about the Succession,
erected a Judicature to hear and Determine the several Claims pretending to the
same: Of which were Five, viz.

1. Don Antonio Son of Lewis, second Son of Emanuel. 2. Philip the Second King
of Spain, Grandchild to Emanuel, by his eldest Daughter Isabella. 3. Philibert
Duke of Savoy, Grandchild to Emanuel, by his second Daughter Beatrix. 4. Mary
Duchess of Rarma, eldest Daughter of Edward youngest Son of Emanuel. 5.
Katherine. Duchess of Brigance, youngest Daughter of Edward, youngest Son of
Emanuel.
Of the Exceptions Declinatory Don Antonio might have made to this Judicatory.

(1.) That 'twas no Convention of Estates Elected by the People.

(2.) That the Judges were Elected by the King, who became thereby Judge in his
own Case; for King Henry was only the third Son of Emanuel, whereas Antonio's
Father Lewis was second Son to Emanuel; so he being Son of Henry's elder
Brother, Henry would be adjudged to restore the Kingdom to him, if the Judges
were equal, and not of Henry's choosing.

(3.) That the Pope and Bishops were inequal Judges, they assuming the only
Jurisdiction of Marriage and Succession, according to the Papal Laws, who take
Bribes, and Sell the Successions of the Kingdom, and so become Judges in their
own Causes; as it is well known in the Case of the Natural Son of Henry King of
Castile, who bought a Legitimation of the Pope, and thereby excluded his
Brother Peter born of a Canonical Marriage, after Peter had been admitted to
the Throne, and acknowledged for King diverse years.

(4.) That Pope Julius the Third put forth a Decree against the Promotion of
Bastards, without the Assent of Don Antonio, or the people of Portugal, he
ought not to be Judged by the Law of a Foreign Prelate, who thereby makes
himself a Judge in his own Case.

The Reasons pretended why King Henry 's Judges Adjudged Don Antonio
Illegitimate.

1. Because he was a Bastard in Reputation, but what is this to the purpose?
what the vulgar think, who are Educated, and blinded in Popish Superstition,
and thereby neither understand what Legitimation, or Illegitimation means;
Judges of Legitimation ought to be Wise men, and not Fools. 2. Because when
Pope Julius the Third, put forth a Decree against the Promotion of Bastards,
Don Antonio sued to be exempted, and thereby owned his Bastardy; and what is it
to the purpose what a Foreign Pope, who ought to have no Jurisdiction in
Portugal Decrees there, without the Assent of the People? or what Antonio did
terrified with the superstitious fear of his Excommunications? 3. Because Lewis
his Father declared him by his last Will and Testament his Bastard Son; To
which it may be said, That it was Testamentum inofficiosum, against the Law of
God, and against the Law of Nature, and void; and he himself was therein worse
than an Infidel, to Illegitimate him, whom in the same Testament he
acknowledges to be his Son. 4. Because Lewis never acquainted any of his
Friends with his Marriage, nor told his Brother Henry in his Sickness. To which
it may be said, Marriage or no Marriage, is a Matter of Law, and not of Fact;
and Lewis being a Papist, understood not what it was, but according to the
Papist Laws, which are contrary to the Law of God: But it is manifest he
acquainted his Friends, and Lewis himself, with what was Marriage and what was
not; according to the Law of God, viz. Carnal Knowledge of the Mother, with
whom he was not Prohibited to Marry by the Law of God, and begetting Don
Antonio of her; besides Henry was no Competent witness in his own Case, of what
his Brother told him or not. 5. Because the witness brought to prove the
Marriage of his Mother with his Father, Confessed they were suborned thereunto.
To which may be said, These Witnesses prove themselves to be Witnesses
Incompetent, and are of no value; for a suborned Witness will as well Swear
false in his Recantation, as in his first Testimony; It being the common
practice of wicked Persons to hire Knights of the Post, to testify at first,
the same which true Witnesses or other Lawful Probation have proved; and after
discover they were suborned, to draw Suspicion on the true Testimony. Too much
of the same wicked practices, have been to dishonor the true Evidence, has
been given against the late Horrid Popish Plotters.
The Reasons alleged by the other Pretenders to the Crown of Portugal.

(1.) Grandchild by a Daughter, and great Grandchild by a Son. Couzin German of
the first Degree by a Daughter, and of the Second by a Son.
The King of Spain, by his Learned Lawyers alleged against the Dukes of Parma
and Brigance, that he was Grandchild to Emanuel; whereas the two Dukes were
great Grandchildren, and he was Couzin German of the first Degree to Henry the
present King in Possession, whereas they were only Couzin Germans of the second
Degree; and so the next Degree of Consanguinity was to be preferred before a
more remote Degree, and this the Civilians pretended to be a strong Argument in
their Law. (2.) That when John the Base Son of Pedro, was Crowned King of
Portugal, it was to the Injury of the King of Castile, the right being in him,
as having then Married Beatrix, the Legitimate Daughter and Heir of Ferdinando
King of Portugal, Legitimate Son of Pedro, and Bastard Brother to Ferdinando
Father to Beatrix. (3.) Because Portugal was given away by a former King of
Castile, in Marriage with one of his Daughters, contrary to the Law of the
Land.
Son of the eldest Daughter of the Son, and Son of the eldest Daughter of the
Father.
The Duke of Parma pleaded by Farneso Bishop of Parma, That being Son of the
eldest Daughter of Edward fourth Son of Emanuel, he ought to be preferred
before the King of Spain, being but Son of a Daughter of Emanuel; and therefore
he deriving from the Male Line, ought to be preferred before him who derives
only from the Female.

Alien, and Native Born.
The Duke of Brigance pleaded his Cause himself, and against Spain alleged the
same as Parma did, and to Bar Parma, who was descended from the eldest
Daughter, as himself was from the younger; Pleaded that Parma was an Alien,
because an Italian, and he a Natural-born Portuguese.

The Duke of Savoy pleaded his Cause by Charles Renero, afterward a Cardinal;
but he being descended from a younger Daughter of Emanuel, as the King of Spain
was from the eldest, he was presently excluded, as having no color of Right.

Besides these Pretenders, Queen Catherine of France would have put in her
Claim, as descended by her Mother from Alphonse; but the Claim being
groundless, they denied to receive it, and so the dispute remained between the
King of Spain and the two Dukes of Parma, and Brigance; But King Henry dying
while the business was in hot debate, and before he had decided the
Controversy, the King of Spain making himself Judge in his own Case, King
Philip Claimed his own Kingdoms from Natural Children, but would not allow it
in others.
seized on the Kingdom; which he, his Son and Grandson enjoyed, near Threescore
years after.

Had Antonio been allowed equal Judges, or the Law of God been the Rule of
their Judgment, or had he been allowed to have pleaded the Law of the Land, and
Custom of both Portugal or Spain, for Natural Sons to succeed the Crown, he
needed not have looked for more Examples of Natural Children, than those from
whom King Philip himself derived his many Spanish Kingdoms; and according to
the Customs of Portugal, Don Antonio a Natural Son, Crowned King of Portugal.
Don Antonio was on the Death of Henry chosen, and Crowned King of Portugal, at
Lisbon their chief City, till Philip sent the Duke of Alva thither with a
greater Army than the Portuguese had, put Don Antonio to flight, Overcome by
Philip, flies to England.
whom the People had Elected King, and within Seventeen Days subdued all
Portugal. Don Antonio thereon flies into England, where he is kindly received
of Queen Elizabeth, as descended of English Blood, and of the House of
Lancaster, and having entertained him here diverse years, his Title of being
right Heir to the Crown of Portugal, is so far approved by the Queen and
Council, Queen Elizabeth approves his Title as right Heir to Portugal.
and the Protestant Doctrine, That she gave leave to Sir John Norris, and Sir
Francis Drake, to undertake an Expedition at their own private Charges,
requiring nothing of her, but a few Ships of War, who took along with them Don
Antonio, the Heir of the Kingdom of Portugal, and of Soldiers Eleven Thousand,
and of Seamen about Fifteen Hundred. And setting Sail from Plymouth the Fifth
day of April, they arrived at the Groyne of Galizia, whereof with great Valor
they took first the Lower Town, and afterward the Higher; and after Sailing
toward Portugal, they met Robert Earl of Essex, who without the Queens leave,
had put to Sea; after two days they arrive at Penycha a Town of Portugal, which
they took, and left the Castle to Don Antonio. And from thence they march by
Land toward Lisbon, Threescore Miles off; the Foot Companies led by Norris,
whom Drake promised to follow with the Fleet, being come to the West Suburbs of
Lisbon, they found no body there, but a few poor disarmed Portugals, who cried
out, God save King Antonio. The day following, the Spaniards made a Sally, in
which Skirmish Bret, Caresly, and Carre, three stout Commanders were Slain; yet
did the Earl of Essex drive the Spaniards to the very Gates of the City. And
now having tarried here two Days, and no likelihood of the Portugals revolting,
which Don Antonio had hoped (but was not probable, that the strict hand of the
King of Spain then in full Possession on them, should give them that Liberty)
sinding fresh Supplies to come into the Town, their own Army Sickly, Victuals
and Powder failing, and what was most of all, Sir Francis Drake not bringing
the great Ordnance, as he promised; They departed from the Suburbs of Lisbon
toward Caseais, a little Town, at the Mouth of the River Tagus, which Town
Drake had taken this mean while; who excused his not coming to Lisbon, by
reason of the Flats he must have passed, and the Castle of St. Julian Fortified
with Fifty Pieces of great Ordnance. Near this Place, they found Threescore
Hulks of the Hans-Towns of Germany, Laden with Corn, and all manner of
Munition, which they took, as good Prize toward their Charges, in regard the
Queen had forbidden them to carry Victual and Munition to the Spaniard. From
hence they sailed to Virgo, a Forlorn Town by the Sea side, and Pillaging all
along that Quarter, returned for England, having lost in the Voyage Soldiers
and Mariners about Six thousand; yet not so much by the Enemy, as eating
strange Fruit, and Distemper of the Climate; on which I shall only further
observe, That Kingdoms are not so easily got again, as they are lost, and that
the Disinheriting of the Natural Heir of the Crown of Portugal, was the cause
of the seizure, and Conquest by the Spaniard of that Kingdom.

Foreign Princes, when the Successor is uncertain, will stir up so many
antiquated Genealogies, Antiquated Genealogies used to be raked up by Foreign
Princes.
that every one may pretend a right to the Crown, and it has been already
mentioned, that there were no less than Five or Six to the Crown of Portugal;
no less than Ten Titles Foreign and Domestic in Scotland, in the time of
Basiel and Bruce; and no less than Sixteen in England before the Death of Queen
Elizabeth; and how far Papist Foreign Princes will go, when they have none
nearer to draw Genealogies as high as the Man in the Moon, and when they have
no substance to raise the Ghosts of Titles again from their old Purgatories,
nor Kif nor Kin, to the last Possessors, appears by the next Example.

Hacket endeavors to raise a Papist Title to the Crown.
Richard Hacket, was sent from the English Fugitives beyond Sea, in the Reign
of Queen Eliz. to persuade Ferdinando Stanly E. of Derby, Son to Henry newly
Deceased, to assume the Title of the Kingdom of England, by right of Descent
from Mary Daughter to Henry the Seventh; and threatening him unless he undertook
the Enterprise, and withal concealed him the Abettor, he should shortly die in
a most wretched manner: But the Earl fearing a Trap was laid for him, revealed
it, and Hacket was thereon Condemned, and Executed for Treason; but this
Fellow's Threatenings proved not vain four Months after; for then the Earl being
in the Flower of his Age, was miserably Tormented, and Vomited Stuff of a dark
rusty Color, being thought to be Poisoned or Bewitched; There was found in his
Chamber, a little Image of Wax, with Hairs of the Color of his Hair, which
some thought was done on purpose that men should not suspect him to be
Poisoned; his Vomit so stained the Silver Andirons, that it could never be
gotten out; and his Body though put in Cere-Cloths, and wrapped in Lead, did so
stink and putrify, that for long time none could endure to come near where he
was Buried, Bak. Hist. 402.

When good Correspondence between Queen Elizabeth and King James of Scotland,
gave the Papists small hopes that ever he would prove an Instrument to restore
the Catholic Religion, they begun thereupon to bethink themselves of some
English Papist that might succeed the Queen; but finding none of their own Sect
a fit Person, they fixed their thoughts on the Earl of Essex, who always seemed
a very moderate Man, and him they advised to have some right to the Crown, by
Descent from Thomas of Woodstock, King Edward the Third's Son. But the English
Fugitives were for the Infanta of Spain, English Fugitives seek to se^ up a
Title for the Infanta of Spain, and to exclude all Protestants from the Crown.
and desiring to set the King of Scots, and the Earl of Essex at odds, they set
forth a Book which they Dedicated to Essex, under the Name of Doleman; but was
written indeed by Parsons ( Doleman's bitter Adversary) Cardinal Allen, and
Francis Englefield; the Scope of which book was, to exclude from Succession all
Persons whatsoever, and how near soever, unless they were Roman Catholics;
contending farther for the Right of the Infanta of Spain, as being descended
from Constance Daughter of William the Conqueror, Foreign Papist Princes will
declare a Successor for the Protestants, if they shall not declare one for
themselves. Protestant Princes Marrying foreign Papists, shall lose their own
Kingdoms, but not gain theirs
from Eleanor Eldest Daughter to Henry the Second, Married to Alphonse the
Ninth King of Castile, from Beatrix Daughter to King Henry the Third; so if the
Protestants will not take the pains to declare a Successor for themselves, it is
plain the Foreign Papist Princes, will declare one for them to the purpose; and
first they declare for Religion, he ought not to be a Protestant, but a
Catholic; Then for Blood, he ought not to be a British, but a Foreign Blood.
And in all Countries the Pope's Laws shall be a Salique Law, to exclude
Protestant Blood from Catholic Dominions, and to entitle Catholic Blood to
Protestant Dominions, so as if Protestant Princes Marry with Catholics, they
must play all against nothing. Most Excellent Nonsense in the Papist Law of
Successions.

11. Danger of Counterfeit Wills and Testaments.
It exposes Succession to Counterfeit Wills and Testaments.

Though the Law is sufficiently clear, That Kingdoms which are Public Offices
of Trust, are not devisable by last Will and Testament, as private Inheritances
are; yet because the Papist Power of the Sword may pretend to any thing unless
the Protestant Subjects have an Act of Parliament declaring a Protestant
Successor, as a Shield under God to defend themselves against it, the same will
be necessary to prevent even this Danger likewise. For what Monarch or Emperor
is so great, as when sickness has arrested and bound him with the fatal Cords
of his Deathbed (where every Woman, every Priest, every Doctor are his
Gaolers) can promise himself Liberty to make a free Will? Yea, that he shall
not have less than a private Subject, when his Keepers shall make use of his
own Public Name and Authority against himself, to exclude from him those
faithful Friends, who will force their way through to relieve a private Person
from those Furies of his Bed which Torment him: Or how can he promise himself,
though he make his Will in his perfect Health, that as soon as he is dead it
shall not be destroyed? For did not H. 8. use all the Caution possible to
secure his Will after his Death? Had he not an Act of Parliament which gave him
Power to Nominate Successors by his Will, and made it High Treason for any to
prejudice the Titles of the Persons so Nominated? Did he not solemnly inrole it
in Chancery? yet when before the Death of Queen Elizabeth, an inquisition was
made after the Will of H. 8. to see whom he had Nominated to succeed, The Will
of H. 8. stolen off the file where inroled.
in case she should happen to dye without Issue, they found the same to be
taken by Bribe, or Stolen off the Cursitors File by some who intended to advance
their own Title; for there were Sixteen Titles then on foot, Osborn. Tit. Queen
Eliz. 99.

Plotina the Empress, Wife of the Emperor Trajan who was with him at his
Decease, Adrian got the Empire by a Counterfeit Will.
in regard she had a great favor for young Adrian, Plotted with him to help
him to the Empire; and to that end, feigned that Trajan had adopted him for his
Son, and showed a Counterfeit Instrument or Writing to ^^at Effect; which
matter was so cunningly handled, that it took such effect as she desired. And
the Army presently swore Obedience to Adrian, notwithstanding he was absent at
Antioch in Syria, where he was left General, who being advertised thereof, and
the Legions whereof he was General consenting thereto, he presently wrote to
the Senate, entreating to be Confirmed in the Empire. And when the Senate had
received his Letter, and understood what had passed, his Request was easily
granted; for there was no denial by old Men to young Men when once they had
given so great a share of the Sword as they had not retained a greater in their
own hands, wherewith to recall the same when they thought good.

William the Conqueror pretended a Will and Promise, and thereby excluded Edgar
Atheling the right Heir.
William the Conqueror likewise pretended a Will and a Promise of the Kingdom
of England from Edward the Confessor; which though Edward notwithstanding his
Holiness had no Authority, or any thing to do, to give away from the Right Heir
Edgar Atheling, nor to enslave the Land to a Foreigner; yet its known how ill
effect these Pretenses had, and the same might have been prevented if Edgar had
been declared Successor by Act of Parliament in the lifetime of Edward.

It incourages Usurpers.

For the ascertaining the Heir by Supreme Authority, 12. Danger of Encouraging
Usurpers.
wherein both the Assent both of the King and People is included takes away,
and the not ascertaining feeds Pretenders and their Parties with hopes. So
Tacitus lib. 3. Annal. Sic Cohibere pravos aliorum spes rebatur, by declaring a
Successor in certain, he thought the wicked hopes of others were Checked; and in
another place, Plena Caesarum Domus, Juvenis filius, Nepotes adulti moram
cupitis Sejani adferebant; his House full of Caesar's, his Son in Strength of
Youth, his Nephews grown up, deterred the Ambition of Sejanus. And the best
remedy King David used against Adonijah Proclaiming himself, was to Proclaim
Solomon.

In Titles Doubtful, 13. Danger.
it leaves an Interregnum.

The infinite mischiefs of Interregnums, either on doubtful Titles of
Successions, or on doubtful Powers or Elections appearing in Histories, are too
many to be here recited; and lest some should be so far deceived as to believe
there can be no Interregnum by the Law of England, he is desired not to place
his Faith in the Fictions of Lawyers, That the King never dies, and there is no
Interregnum, lest if by not declaring a Successor in his Lifetime, whom God
grant long to live; the contrary Effects appear when it will be too late to
provide a Remedy.

It Cantons Kingdoms.

14. Danger of Cantonizing Kingdoms.
For so writes Justin of Alexander the Great. Alexander rogatus quem Haeredem
faceret Imperii, respondit dignissimum; qua voce veluti Bellicum inter Amicos
cecinisset, aut malum discordia immisisset; ita omnes in aemulationem
consurgunt, and ambitione vulgi tacitum favorem Militum. Alexander being asked
whom he would make Successor to his Empire, answered, The most Worthy; By
which, as though amongst his own Friends, he had sounded a Charge to Battle one
against another, or had thrown the Apple of Discord amongst them, so did they
rise together in Contention, and by courting the vulgar seek the secret favor
of the Soldiers, and afterward Cantoned out to themselves severally all the
Provinces of the Empire. Ptolomy seized Egypt, and Cyrene, Laomedon Syria,
Phylotus Cilicia, Pitho Media, Eumenes Capadocia, Antigonus Pamphilia, Licia
and Phrigia major, Cassander Caria, Minander Pontus and Phrigia minor, Leonatus
Assyria, Seleucus Persis, Lysimachus Thrace, Antipater Macedonia. The other
Parts of the Persian Empire being left in their hands, unto whom Alexander in
his lifetime had entrusted them. And the reason of this pulling to pieces of
the Empire was, because as Curtius says, Sine certo Regis Haerede, sine
Haerede Regin' Publicas vires ad se quemque tracturum, without a declaring in
certain of the Heir of the King, and of the Heir of the Kingdom, every one will
catch what he can of the Public strength to himself, and to what purpose but
to destroy himself by destroying the Public? For this Division continued not
long, neither would it have done though they had been all Brothers; for every
one thinks his share is not equal to his worth, when they have no public Judge
to judge equally between them; and in the end, the greatest part of them by
Mutual Wars destroyed one another, and left their shares for a prey to their
Enemies. Clapmarius as to this Destruction ensuing the not declaring of a
Successor, says farther, Sumo hoc pro arcano Regio adversus Regni Proceres,
ubi enim Successor in incerto est ibi facile ad pristinum statum relabitur, ut
olim Caroli Magni stirpe sublata cum postremus Germanorum Rex Neminem
adoptasset, Regnum momento Devolutum est ad quinquaginta quatuor Imperii
Principes. Sic Longobardi Mortuo sine Legitimo haerede Cleophonio in Populi
potestateni lapsi sunt. Et in Polonia post quam stirps Lechi defecisset
Comitiis de Constituenda Republica habitis Regnum duodecim invaserunt Nobiles.
Et rursum cum stirps Craeci defecisset ad eandem Oligarchiam eadem occasion
reversi sunt. I take this for an Arcanum of Kings against their great Men; for
where the Successor is not declared in certain, a Commonwealth does easily
relapse to its Original confusion. As when the Issue of Charles the Great
failed, and the last Emperor of the Germains had Adopted no Successor, the
Empire in a Moment fell into the hands of Four and fifty Princes of the Empire.
So the Lombards, Cleophonius their King being dead without Lawful Heir fell
into the hands of the People. And in Poland after the Issue of Lechus failed,
there being a Convention of Estates to constitute a Commonwealth, Twelve
Nobles seized on the Kingdom. And again, when the Issue of Cracus failed, they
fell back again on the same occasion into an Oligarchy.

It Exposes the Succession of Kingdoms to Sale.

15. Danger of exposing the Succession to Sale.
Buch. Rer. Scot. lib. 7. page 206. says, Mackbethus ut Regnum male partum
stabiliret, potentiores Magnis Largitionibus sibi conciliat, securus de Regis
liberis ob aetatem, de vicinis Regibus ob Mutuas simultates, Potentioribus
delenitis Populi favorem aequitate parare severitate retinere decrevit.
Mischiefs of buying Crowns to Princes themselves.
Mackbeth that he might Establish his ill-got Kingdom, binds to himself the
great Men by great Gifts, being at that time secure from the King's Children,
in regard they were under Age, and from the Neighboring Kings by their mutual
Quarrels one with another, having obliged the great Ones, he resolved to catch
the People with Equity, and to keep them with Severity. In the time of H. 3.
Richard Earl of Cornwall begging the King's Brother, and Alphonsus King of
Spain, Empire of Germany exposed to Sale to Richard Earl of Cornwall, and
Alphonsus King of Spain.
were each Competitors to be elected to the Empire of Germany. And the Seven
Electors were ready to elect him who would give most to Buy it. In the end
Richard being in Person in Germany and nearest at hand, and his Money readiest;
he is preferred by the Bishop of Ment^, the Bishop of Cologne, and the
Palsegrave, whose Voices he is said to have bought; and was thereupon Crowned
Emperor at Aquisgrave: And to reimburse himself of the great Sums he had
disburst, and to confirm his Estate, he was set on by his Salesmen and
Courtiers, who expected likewise to have a share in Purchase. And proceeded in
all Violent and Hostile manner against those who opposed his Election, and
having consumed himself by excessive Gifts to Buy Suffrages and Assistants; and
by this Prosecution he came to be again dispossessed and forsaken, and with the
loss of his Money, and contracting Debts; besides, he was forced to return home
to England to his Brother, who was then in War with his Nobles, Simony in
Churches and Kingdoms, corrupts Religion and Justice in both.
Dan. Hist. 174. It were infinite to recite all the Buyers and Sellers of
Successions to Kingdoms, there having rarely been any Age or Nation wherein the
Simony of Churches and Kingdoms has not been alike common, either by the
Priest, Nobles, or Soldiers, and corrupted both the Divinity and Justice of
both, except where an House of Commons has had an hand in the Actual declaring
the Successor; when therefore a Successor is not declared by Act of Parliament,
but left to buy his Right, these horrible Mischiefs ensue. First, To the Prince
himself. Secondly, To the People. As to the Prince himself, these Mischiefs
ensue.

(1.) If to buy a Kingdom he is known to give Donatives or Pensions, he raises
a greater Party against him than he can oblige for him; for if he give a
Donative or Pension to one, he can oblige only that one; but for him disobliges
an hundred.

(2.) No Person that receives a Bribe can be obliged by that Bribe, because
what he does is for Money, and not for Conscience; and if any offer him another
Bribe, he will as readily be for the last giver, as he was for the first; for
the first giver of Money cannot take his Gift from him again: And the
Mercenary, if he has but half so much giver by the second giver as the first,
will think he shall be richer with a Gift and half, than only with a single
Gift. Hence it is that,

Perdurat non empta fides, nec Pectora merces Alligat.

Claudian. Bought Faith indures not, nor will hire bind
The Traitor's heart, if greater hire he find.
And the Roman Mercenaries who were corrupted with great Donatives by one
Emperor, before he was scarce warm in his seat, used to kill him, and if a new
offered another Donative, set up him for the like time, till another offered
them a new Donative. And so they perpetually Murdered them from Generation to
Generation. It Is true, many good Princes have been compelled to buy their
Rights; and better it were they did so, than the same should be taken from them
by one that has no Right; but this can only be understood where there is a
Necessity, and no Remedy: But where God is pleased to offer a just King, and a
just Parliament to Judge equally, there is no Necessity of using any unjust
means, though to obtain Right.

(3.) If a Prince buy not with ready Money, or Donatives given in Possession,
but oblige himself in future Promises, if he obtain the Kingdom, the
Mercenaries are so many who will expect to be promised, and their Nature so
unsatiable, That no Prince can be so rich who is to obtain, nor can any Kingdom
be so rich when it is obtained, as to be able to satisfy a small part of them,
and who fail of their Expectation turn Enemies. As Rich. 3. promised the Duke
of Buckingham, if he obtained the Kingdom, very great Rewards; but after he was
King failed to perform the same, the Duke of Buckingham became his Mortal
Enemy, and King Richard paid his Promises by cutting him off for Treason, when
he had first ruined Richard, by laying the Plot for Henry the Seventh.

(4.) If the Kingdoms are left exposed to Sale, a Papist Successor will be
richer than a Protestant; and so carry it by Money, though not by Right.

Impoverisheth the Prince.
(5.) It impoverisheth and weakens the Prince and his Posterity. So the German
Emperors have impoverished and weakened themselves by giving away so many
Royalties to 7 Electors to buy them in Elections; That the Electors are greater
than they.

The Mischiefs as to the People are.

Mischiefs of buying Crowns to the Subject.
(1.) The Sale of the Successions of the Three Kingdoms, and buying of them
Destroys all Religion and Justice among the People; for your Kingdom-Sellers
usually receive a great share of their Money out of the Power, they Contract to
have of the Sale of all Public Offices of Gain, both Ecclesiastical and
Temporal; If therefore Bishops and other Ecclesiastical Persons buy their
Offices, they will neither Form nor Preach any Divinity, but for Gain. If
Temporal Judges, or other Judicial or Ministerial Officers buy their Offices,
those who buy will sell, and take Bribes; and none shall have Justice unless he
buys.

In Turkey all the great Officers buy their Places of the Grand Seignior,
whereby they run themselves into great Debts; which they rake out again of the
poor People, by all manner of Rapine and Oppression. And though the fame is of
the Great Turk's great Severity on the Bribery of Judges; yet no Courts in the
World are more corrupt for that Vice than they: For what color can the Emperor
have to punish those Thieves to whom he himself is accessory, by selling their
Licenses to Rob at so dear a rate as he usually puts them to buy, and will
afterward take the whole spoil if it grow to any bulk?

(2.) The Exchequer will be engaged under unsupportable Debts, and charged with
Pensions to a Multitude of Pretended Claimants of Promises, which will totally
exhaust the Public Treasure, load the People with insupportable Burdens and
Taxes, and destroy all the Military Defense of the Kingdoms by Sea and Land for
want of Pay.

(3.) Kingdom-Sellers will usually have Commissions to take all Penalties on
the Penal Statutes, to Dispense and Pardon Offenses against those Statutes, and
to Pardon or make Composition for the Penalties, which Penal Statutes
concerning both Religion, Justice, Trade, Military Affairs, and the whole
Policy of the Kingdom will be totally subverted by Money, by such said
Kingdom-Sellers.

It Exposes the Kingdom to Conquest.

16. Danger of exposing this Kingdom to Conquest.
For if a Successor is not declared by King and Parliament, a Multitude of
Competitors may arise, and having no Judge of greater Power than themselves do
try their right by Battle, and Civil Wars, wherein he who Joins will declare
himself a Conqueror; from which these two Mischiefs will arise.

(1.) There cannot be a free Parliament, for the Sword will awe and overpower
the Elections both of Burgesses and Knights; and when they come to sit, the
greatest part of the Members will be Military Officers. The Conqueror will
grant no Law except for Money, and the Army will have a Negative Vote on the
Parliament.

(2.) All the Nation, especially the Rich and Noble which happen to be of the
side that is Vanquished, whether right or wrong, will be either Fined or
Confiscated, and many of their lives taken by their own Brethren of the same
Religion and Nation; and therefore it most concerns the Nobles, and not the
Poor, to prevent Civil War, as is visible in all the Victories obtained between
the Houses of York and Lancaster, wherein both Princes and Nobles destroyed one
another, and set up their Heads upon Poles by turns. And it was the usual
saying of Edward the Fourth in all the Battles he fought, Kill the Nobles, but
save the People.

Some further Examples of declaring Successors by Parliament.
Some further Examples of declaring Successors follow, besides what before
mentioned; To this purpose of declaring a Successor by Parliament, Grot. de
Jur. Bell. and Pac. 111. says, Sic Euphaes Rex Messeniis permisit dispicere quem
ex Regali Aepitidarum genere Regnaret. Et de Xerxis and Artabarzanis
Controversia Populus Cognovit. Et 179 sive in conventu ordinum ut factum in
Anglia and Scotia, test Cambdeno; sive per Delegatos ad id Negotium, ut factum
in Aragonia, test Mariana lib. 20. So King Euphaes permitted the Messenians to
consider who ought to Reign of the Royal race of Epitidae. And the People of
Persia had Conusans of the Controversy between Xerxes and Artabarzanes; Or the
same is determined in Parliament, as Cambden testifies is done in England and
Scotland, or by Delegates of the People as Mariana testifies lib. 20. was done
in Aragon. So King Edward the Third, the Wise Author of this great Statute
whereon this Discourse has proceeded to prevent Civil Wars on any doubt
arising on Succession to the Crown, not only declared his eldest Son by this
Statute; but likewise he happening to Die in his Father's Lifetime, caused (to
prevent all farther Scruples) his Grandchild Richard of Bourdeaux, to be
declared Successor by Act of Parliament.

Moses Declares a Successor.
Moses being told that he should die, Numb. 27.15. desires God to declare a
Successor. And Moses spoke unto the Lord saying, Let the Lord the God of the
spirits of all flesh, set a Man over the Congregation, which may go out before
them, and which may go in before them; and which may send them out, and which
may bring them in. That the Congregation of the Lord be not as sheep which have
no shepherd. And the Lord said unto Moses, Take thee Joshua the Son of Nun, a
Man in whom is the Spirit, and lay thine hand upon him, and set him before
Eleazer the Priest, and before all the Congregation, and give him a Charge in
their sight; and thou shall put some of thine Honor upon him, that all the
Congregation of the Children of Israel may be Obedient. And he shall stand
before Eleazer the Priest, who shall ask counsel for him after the Judgment of
Vrim before the Lord, at his word shall they go out, and at his word shall they
come in, both he and all the Children of Israel with him, even all the
Congregation. And Moses did as the Lord commanded him, he took Joshua and set
him before Eleazer the Priest, and before all the Congregation; and he laid his
hands on him, and gave him a Charge, as the Lord commanded by the hand of Moses.

Here appears that Joshua is declared Successor by Counsel from God by Moses,
and the Priest, and the Assent of the People; and it is very likely, if a
Successor had not been declared, the People would have fallen together by the
Ears as soon as Moses had been Dead. And as is usual in all Armies divided, the
Government by Military Elections, and recourse to the Sword to be Judge,
whereby they had never Conquered the Cananites, but the Cananites them. --

David Declares a Successor.
King David likewise to leave his House and Kingdom in Peace, and to prevent
Civil Wars, declares Solomon his Successor, and Inaugurates him while he was
yet alive, 1 Kings 1.32. And King David said, Call me Zadock the Priest, and
Nathan the Prophet, and Benaiah the Son of Jehoiedah; and they came before the
King, and the King said unto them, Take with you the servants of your Lord, and
cause Solomon my Son to ride upon my own Mule, and bring him down to Gihon, and
let Zadock the Priest and Nathan the Prophet anoint him there King over Israel,
and blow ye the Trumpet and say, God save King Solomon, Then ye shall come up
after him, that he may come and sit upon my Throne, for he shall be King in my
stead. And I have appointed him to be Ruler over Israel, and over Judah. And
Benaiah the Son of Jehoiedah answered the King and said, Amen. The Lord God of
my Lord the King say so too; As the Lord has been with my Lord the King, even
so be he with Solomon, and make his Throne greater than the Throne of my Lord
King David. So Zadock the Priest, and Nathan the Prophet, and Benaiah the Son
of Jehoiedah, and the Cherethites, and the Pelethites went down, and caused
Solomon to ride on King David's Mule, and brought him to Gihon: And Zadock the
Priest took an horn of oil out of the Tabernacle, and anointed Solomon; and
all the People came up after him, and the People piped with Pipes, and rejoiced
with great Joy; so that the Earth rent with the sound of them.

FINIS.
Errata's in Verse.
LIb. 1. p. 131. line 5. for Moon read Morn, p. 135. l. 36. for lease r. cease,
p. 223. l. 28. for I see r. is with me, p. 224. l. 9. for all r. such, p. 225.
3. 8. for thanks r. there, and in the same line after, for there r. and, l. 39.
for lightnings r. lightning, p. 228. l. 5. add the word (next) before the word
(expel) p. 392. l. 11. for who burn would not? r. who burn would? Lib. 2. p.
239. l. 31. for Mariners r. Mariner, l. 36. for why r. who, Lib. 3. p. 89. l.
8, for their r. them, l. 16. for not babbling r. no babbling.

Errata's in Prose.
COntents to the First Book relating to p. 88. for in vitam r. invitam non
diserturum, Lib. 1. p. 88. l. 8. add invitam before deserturum, p. 90. l. 42.
for invitum r. invitam deserturum, p. 1. l. 11. for or any Subject r. on any
Subject, p. 4. l. 28. for Harecloth r. Hayrcloth, p. 17. l. 36. for women were
divorced r. women did divorce, p. 23. l. 21. for Affinity r. Consanguinity, p.
43. l. 11. for Canon Law r. Common Law, p. 93. l. 27. for Common Law r. Canon
Law, p. 106. l. 31. for pity relieve him r. pity to relieve him, p. 110. l.
40. for invitum fore Matrimonium r. Irritum fore Matrimonium, p. 132. l. 36.
add and shall cleave to his wife, p. 180. l. 11. for established r. abolished,
p. 180. l. 42. for Chancellors of State r. Counselors of State, p. 210. l. 20.
for Sacrament r. Sacrifice, p. 215. l. 28. for Tyrant r. Pyrat, p. 282. l. 23.
for there were Judges r. and Judges, p. 120. l. 1. leave out no, l. for Secreta
Fori r. Secreta Thori, p. 121. l. 25. for false r. and the false, p. 121. l.
43. for take off Exequenda officia Matrimonialia r. talk of Exequenda officia
Matrimonialia, p. 257. l. 30. for thinks r. think, l. 27. for that binds r.
binds, p. 265. l. 17. for Obligatio libelli r. Oblatio libelli, Lib. 3. Preface
p. 10. l. 1. for Algine r. Algive. In the Contents relating to p. 160. for
Successor or Male r. Successor Male, leaving out (or) p. 2. l. 16. for ever
that be r. Over that be, p. 13. l. 10. for wages r. ways, p. 188. l. 25. for
Basiel r. Baliol. In the Index see Bail, in line 36. for Canon Law r.
Common Law.


