A LETTER From a Gentleman of the Lord Ambassador HOWARD's Retinue, To his
Friend in London: Dated at FEZ, Nov. 1. 1669.

Wherein he gives a full Relation of the most Remarkable Passages in their
Voyage thither, and of the present State of the Countries under the Power of
TAFFALETTA, Emperor of MOROCCO; With a brief account of the Merchandising
Commodities of AFRICA;

As also, The Manners and Customs of the People there.

Published for Public satisfaction.

LONDON, Printed by W. G. for Moses Pit, at the Sign of the White Heart in
Little Britain, Anno Dom. 1670.

To his very Loving Friend T. G. in LONDON.
Sir,
ACcording to your earnest Request, you have here a full Account of the Estate
of this Country, as much as I have received from very good hands. I wish that
it may give you that satisfaction that you request. It is certain that all that
have written any thing of Africa, have spoken of it as blind Men of Colors, by
guess, and by hearsay. The Truth is so mixed with Fables and Tales, that it is
not easy to distinguish them. This Part of Africa is much changed within these
two hundred years, and the Names of Places and People altered; so that we shall
lose our labor to consult the ancient Writers, concerning the present
condition of this Country. It might give great satisfaction to the Learned in
the Northern Climates, to be informed of all the Transactions of this unknown
World, but that we can never expect whilst Trading is so much neglected here
and Strangers, especially Christians, do run so many hazards when they enter
into the Land; it being one of the Articles of the Moors Faith, that he that
sheds Christian Blood in their Ramedam, merits Heaven, and purchases the
Eternal Favor of God with this Sacrifice: So great an invitation to Cruelty,
may justly stop us, that are not weary of our Lives, from running too far
amongst them, unless it be upon a good account of Trading or Peace, and then
none dares expose himself alone to the Peoples mercy without sufficient guard
to defend him; yet I have seen some French Merchants riding abroad without
fear, and return safely: I conceive they were known to the People, who are
sensible that the acquaintance with foreign Nations, is very necessary for
their more convenient subsistence.

The Jews are to be seen every where in this Country, they are very serviceable
to the Inhabitants, for they furnish them for the most part with foreign
Commodities, and make those things that are necessary for them. They never grow
rich, but the Mahumetans do accuse them of some Crime, to have a pretense to
seize upon their Treasure, as it happened lately to a Jew, who was grown a
petty Prince; he Commanded a Place strong by Situation and Art, called
Darbinmeshaal, there was but one ascent, and that so difficult, that without
his leave all the Moors of Barbary might have spent their days in the Siege of
it; for besides that it is impregnable, it contains so much ground within the
Mountain as might very well nourish a thousand head of Cattle, and supply them
with Corn and Fodder. This Jew had won the esteem and favor of the Grandees
round about by his courteous behavior and good hospitality; for it was his
custom to invite all the Persons of Note into his City, and there entertain
them very kindly: This dealing made every one, especially the Arabs, to love
him, and got him a great Name. When Muley Archeid, otherwise called Taffaletta,
flung himself into the protection of the Arabs, and that they had all owned him
for their Prince, he was also entertained by this courteous Jew, and at a small
provocation he was inassacred: Taffaletta found one Point in the Law of Mahomet
to justify the Murder, which was approved of, and applauded by the ignorant
Multitude. Another Jew named Joseph Ben-simon, a very great Trader, and one
that had Correspondents in many Places, did run the same Fortune. He supplied
the Moors with many Commodities, especially with Powder and Shot, Guns and
other Weapons, which he conveyed out of Spain by stealth. At last his Wealth
made him guilty of Death, for he was accused of Adultery, and although common
report pronounced him innocent, he lost his Life, and had his Estate seized for
the Kings Use. Thus all the Princes of these Countries do treat this miserable
Nation. When they have occasion for Money, they force it from the Jews, either
by right or wrong. Gayland, as I am informed, did entertain Jews in Arzilla,
for no other end but to have some on whom he might prey: He raised a
considerable Sum of Money from them on this occasion: About thirty or forty
Families of the Jews had managed all the Trade of that part of the Country, and
were grown rich; Gayland consults his Cadir, and asks from this deceitful
Oracle, whether it was lawful to suffer Jews, Infidels, to dwell amongst the
Musulmans? He answered, That it was not lawful, but that if they would not turn
Mahometans, he was commanded by the Law of Mahomet to punish that contempt with
present Death. This sad News frighted the Jews, especially when they heard that
the day was appointed for their Execution; in the mean whiles they Petition the
Sultan, and make their Peace by offering a large sum of Money, all they had
gathered in many years. This satisfied Gayland's weak Conscience, concerning
the bloody clause of Mahomets Law, and made him free them from the great danger
that threatened them. You see by that what favor Strangers may expect from
this treacherous People.

But before I begin to inform you of my Journey from Tangier, and of the Estate
of this Count^y, I will relate unto you something of our Passage thither* and
of that famous Garrison: You may know many Particulars from them that have
dwelt there some years; but from very few you may learn what I have observed in
that Place: Some things I have taken notice of, which if they were well known
in England, and minded, might make it a happy City.

At our departure from England, we sailed near the Sylly Islands, where we met
with a North-west Wind that blew very fresh a day and a night; we made such
Advantage of it, that in that time we were carried near 80 Leagues from the
Lands End, into the Bay of Biscay; a most dreadful Sea, at the least breath of
Wind the Waves swell into Mountains: It is a grievous thing to be tossed in this
Sea by a Tempest: The danger is able to try the stoutest Courage. I know it by
our Passage over this Place, the wind began to turn about, and then we heard
that doleful Cry of the Seamen, No Near That begat in us a longing to see the
pleasant Shore; but we were not long before the wind favored us again, which
did sometimes toss us till we were come near the Coast of Portugal, where we
met with these Particulars that I cannot omit:

In a lovely calm Morning, as the Sun began to look upon us, and visit us with
his Beams, the Air being clear, and the Weather most pleasant, we spied a Face
of a Rising of the Water; the Seamen called it a Spout: I know no other Name
for it, unless I call it the greatest Miracle in Nature; The Figure was like a
Pyramide, sharp at the top, and large at the bottom, about the compass of two
or three Acres of Ground; the Top reached so high, that I could not well
discover it: I wondered at the sight, so did many of the Seamen, who professed
to have never seen the like in the Northern Parts. I admired from whence such a
Violence in Nature could proceed; That the Water should leave its own Element,
and ascend up into the Air, and in such great quantity, it is not possible
without some most powerful Agent: I began to reason with some who esteem
themselves of the more refined Souls, and to ask their Judgment about it; but*
I found their Answers so dull and impertinent, that I quickly discovered their
ignorance. We sailed within two Leagues of the Place, and had time to behold it
at our leisure; as we approached nearer, we found a Current turning that way,
which, if we had ventured farther, might have endangered our Lives; but the
wind being pretty fresh, and all our Sails open, the Current at such a
distance, could not prevail upon us. One thing we took notice of, which seemed
very wonderful; out of the Pyramid of Waters about a hundred Yards high, leapt
something that was Bulky; for it made a Plunge in the Water, that appeared to
us, we imagined it to be a Fish of a considerable Bigness, which the violent
Ascent of the water had sent up in the Air, but then meeting with a lesser and
a weaker motion, at a distance from the Sea, it had the power to free it self
from that Captivity from which it was hurried, by casting it self again into
the Ocean. This happened several times, whether it was the same Fish, we could
not well distinguish: This Relation may seem very incredible, but you may have
it confirmed by many that venture to the Indies, who do often meet upon the
Coast of Guiny with such Wonders of Nature.

Immediately after this strange sight, we felt the Wind more violent, and saw
the Air darken, and filled with many threatening Clouds; therefore we prepared
for a storm, which did quickly overtake us to our great advantage; for it drove
us with such violence, that we made six Leagues in an hour with our Main Sail
spread: All that day it continued, and was accompanied with such grievous Rain
that I never savv the like in England: It was fearful to us that had never
exposed our Lives to the Mercy of the Liquid Element, especially when we felt
our ship crack under us, and the main Mast bend as a Bovv. But the Evening
delivered us from all fear; for then a handsome Gale of Wind succeeded the
Tempest, and dispersed all the fearful Clouds that did surround us, and the
setting Sun took his leave of us with a pleasant countenance.

The next day we saw afar off a Whale spouting Water into the Air very high for
its Pastime: And about forty Leagues off on this side of the Southern Cape, we
beheld two Vessels chasing one another; the Wind being North-west, and they
making toward the Land, we could only discover their Colors; the one was a
Turks Man of War, the other a Hamburger; the Turk overtook his Enemy, and then
began a furious Fight, which lasted about two hours; the Guns did thunder on
both sides, to our satisfaction that were not engaged in the Peril: We could
not discover how they ended their Quarrel, because the Christian Ship
maintained a running Fight, and made with all Sail toward the shore.

The next morning we had a sight of the Cape St. Vincent, otherwise the
Southern Cape, a noted place to all strangers; we were not long ignorant of the
Maritine Customs of that Place, which were signified unto us by the
Ship-Company, that demanded their usual Fees from all that had never been there
before. I Will assure you, Sir, the Joy that we did feel at such a sight, to be so
happily escaped out of the danger of the Sea, made us be liberal of our Purses,
and of our strong Drink; for we were not far from Tangier, our Landing-Place,
which the next day we discovered, and were most joyfully received by the
Governor and Inhabitants, that caused the Eleven Guns of the Town to proclaim
our Arrival.

Before I go from hence, I will give you a short Account of this Renowned City.
It is situate upon the Decline of a Hill; the Houses are so built, that from
most you have a pleasant Prospect into the Straights Mouth: It is almost
triangular, and stretches it self along the Sea shore: A high Hill overlooks
the Town on the North-side, where a strong Castle is built capacious enough to
hold a thousand or two thousand men in Garrison. Don Sebastian King of Portugal
fortified it with high Bastions of square Stone: Over against there is a large
Bay, where, some say, Coral is to be found. Round about on the Land-side
several little Hills do stand that are now fortified with Lines and Forts for
fear of the Enemy. A considerable Compass of Ground is enclosed within the
outtermost Lines. I had the curiosity to take a view of every part of the Town,
and its Dependencies. An Officer of my Acquaintance, Mr. T. by name, offered
himself to satisfy me: We entered first into the Castle, and there I took
notice of many Stones that did bear the Names of those that governed that
Province in the time of the Romans; these were fixed in the Wall of the
Governors House. Out of the Castle I found an old ruined Building, almost all
buried in its own Rubbish: A little farther, some ancient Graves cut out of the
hard Rock, about four foot broad, and nine in length; by which I discovered the
great diminution in the stature of men, that are nothing near so large and so
high as in primitive times, Nature still falls into Decay. The Spaniards of
Andaluzia are the least men I have ever seen; our Boys of twelve years old are
higher. I took notice also thereby of the great care the Ancients had to
preserve their Dead Bodies and Ashes from being dismembered and dispersed, which
doubtless did proceed from their Belief of a Resurrection. We continued our
Walk farther into the Fields, and there I had an excellent Prospect over all
the Works and Forts built by that great Captain for whom Tangier may ever
mourn; I mean the Renowned Earl of Tiveot. My Friend related unto me his
unhappy Death, and showed me besides, the Wood in which he was killed in the
company of 600 stout men, with most of the Officers of the Garrison. He was a
man of great experience in Martial Affairs, having done so good service in the
French Wars, that Mazarine appointed unto him during his Life a yearly Pension.
The occasion of his Misfortune was this; He had sent into Portugal for Lime and
Materials for the Fortifications: The Ships being not yet arrived, and that
Party of Men that came from the Guard, wanting employment, he resolved to make
some execution with them upon a Wood that did serve as a Retreat unto some
straggling Moors, who from thence did kill our Scouts undiscovered. In order to
their going out, he dispatches several Run-aways of the Moors, that lived in
the Town, to discover if any Party was thereabouts to keep Guard. They returned
with this information, that no Moors were to be seen round about the Country,
The unfortunate General believes them, yet he had a presentiment of his
misfortune, and specially because it was the same day of the year, that the
English had lost six hundred men, massacred under their Walls by Gayland in
person. Therefore he was often heard that morning to say, Remember, Gentlemen,
that this is the Third of May; he did discover some kind of apprehension, which
one Major Knightly labored to overcome, by offering himself to lead out the
Party; but he would not be thought to be less daring than any man, therefore he
adventures out, most of his men being fitter to encounter with boughs and
shrubs than with an Enemy, for they were more armed with Hatchets than with
Muskets. He was no sooner advanced into the Wood, but immediately there appear
as many Alhags as Trees. Gayland's Army of Foot and Horse it seems had marched
all night from Alcazor, and (as some say) he had an intention to conclude a
Peace. This appearance struck such a fear into our men, that they minded more
how to save themselves by flight than to fight; but being about three miles
from Tangier, and many thousand Horse in the Valley, they were all cut off to
three men, who recovered the Sea, and hid themselves in Rocks, until hunger
forced them to adventure to Tangier again. According to the Moors information,
some of our men did fell their lives at a deer rate; about forty rallied in a
place where the Horse could never come, and began such a desperate fight with
the Foot, that filled the Wood, that as many of their men ended their days as
of ours. Had Gayland made use of his Victory, and assaulted the Town, it had
yielded without resistance, the remainder of the Garrison was so astonished at
this Defeat. Our Horse, it seems, were then Commanded by an old Soldier that
was grown rich, and knew how to save his own Pate. Therefore they were not
concerned in this fight, but as standers by and lookers on. Had the three
Troops advanced out of the Lines, they might have saved some of our Men.

My Friend having ended his Relation, we went from the sight of this unhappy
place, unto Charles Fort, and to the Decline of a Hill, where he told me that
some of our men, to the number of three or four encountered with a Troop of
Moors, and took from them their Colors, a Dishonor that had never happened to
them before in the space of twenty years. We continued our walk round the
outtermost Lines, and there I took notice of the Wisdom and great Skill of my
Lord Tiveot in the Art of Fortification: Nothing could be better begun, and
were it continued, the City might stand in defiance of any Enemy. We had here
very pleasant sights into the neigbouring Valleys that are all covered with the
natural Tapestry of Flowers and green Grass; for this is the first Spring of
the Year, the time that the dry Land of Africa yields most excellent Herbs fit
for all uses. Now when the first Rains do fall, I took notice of nothing else
worthy your knowledge, but of a wild Boar of a strange bigness, a little after
the Rain had wet the ground, he was turning it up, to seek for some dry Roots
fit for food; he was at some distance from us, yet I could judge him to be
about five or six foot high; a desperate enemy if angered: since I have
encountered some of a lesser size, and found them to be full of Courage and
Strength. We saw also some ruined Walls, the ancient Relics of Tangier's
large extent. It reached according to all probability, about five or six miles
in length.

My Friend did entertain me with many excellent Relations of the several
Affairs and Transactions of this Place, which I will reserve for our next
Meeting

I must not forget one Story that he affirmed to be true, and which I had
afterward from other persons; That in the fatal year of 66, the Portugueses,
the Dean and Canons of the Cathedral Church of Tangier began to rejoice and to
feast their Friends in the Months of March and April, and being questioned
about this unusual Mirth, they said it was because the time was now come when
Don Sebastian King of Portugal, who was reported to have been slain near
Alcazar; should return from his wandering up and down Africa: And that he should
enter again by the same Gate that let him out; it is now stopped up, at the East
end of the City joining to the Sea. This old Tale they did believe so assured,
that several of them began to prepare an Entertainment for his solemn Reception
in their Covent, and did show their Book of Prophesies to confirm this Belief;
but either these ignorant Fools are mistaken about the time, or the good Prince
has forgot his way home again; for he has not yet paid them any Visit that I
could hear of.

I had the Curiosity to see the Mould in the next place: It is thirty yards
broad at the top, and it is built about 300, or 350 yards in the Sea: At the
end some great Guns are planted that command the Harbor, and that carry over
the Bay. A Story was told to me by the Sergeant of the guard, that will please
you. About the Month of April last in a dark night, about Eleven of the Clock,
the Soldiers upon the Guard heard such fearful Outcries and Shouts, that they
were all astonished; for it being at such a distance from the Town, and such
strict Guards being kept at all the Avenues that none could pass to them, they
could not imagine what was the matter, until there appeared unto them a great
Giant, attended by lesser shapes, some like Men, others like Cats, others like
Dogs. The Centry asks Who Is there? and is answered with silence; he threatens
Death with his Gun; but the Appearances remained unmovable until the Sergeant
with his Guard was alarmed with the Centry's angry Speeches; and then they
began to dance about, and to offer them many Affronts, and to fill the Air with
fearful shrieks and Cries a long while. The next morning all the Guard
protested before the Governor that it was no Illusion, and that they had been
grievously disturbed that night; but none would credit their Relation, until
the next night, that there happened so violent a storm that 100 yards of the
Mould were carried and washed away; a thing almost incredible: The Waves could
never have had that power to destroy so much Work, had they not been assisted
by some Infernal Spirits; for the Stones of the Mould are very large; besides,
the upper are linked together with Iron Bars; but the Iron and all the Art of
man was not able to resist the fury of the Sea and Wind. That vast heap of
Stones so well disposed and settled, was tossed away, and carried at a
considerable distance. I leave it to you, Sir, to judge of the true cause of
the wonder: You Will give me leave to offer unto you my thoughts, and to tell you
how the thing stands: This Accident did a little discourage the Overs^ers of
the Mould, but yet they continue with great reso^ution to repair the breaches
that the violence of the Sea has caused; and maugre all the Infernal Spirits,
to build in the middle of the Sea a safe Harbor for our Ships I wish the
success may at last answer their expectation and endeavors.

Now you may expect my Judgment of that Place, which I send to you freely: It
is a most pleasant Seat as is in the world; the Air is pure and refined, the
Territory good and fruitful, the Climate very moderate, neither too hot nor too
cold, by reason of the continual Brizes or the Etesiae Winds that refresh the
Air in the heat of Summer. It were to be desired that such industrious and
public spirited persons did inhabit there as might make an improvement of the
goodness of the Soil, and of the Conveniences of the Place. If wine were
prohibited, so many of our English Nation had not found here their Graves.
Scarce any die here but by Excess and Intemperance; some having brought
themselves to that capacity of Drinking as that they will make no difficulty to
swallow above a Quart of strong Nantz Brandy at one time. We see therefore in
the most of them Death appearing in their faces long before they die. Their
inward parts are burnt up with the hot Spirits of their strong Liquors. They
seem to take pleasure to destroy themselves. If this reigning Vice and some
others were restrained, I doubt not but that City might flourish in English
hands, as much as it has done in former Ages; for it is one of the ancientest
of the world: it was first built by the Canaanites that fled from the fury of
the Children of Israel, and since it has always been the Chief Place of that
Province; the Seat of a Pro-Consul when Africa did submit to the Roman Power.
It has been several times destroyed* in the time of the Goths and Vandals an
Earthquake overthrew the old Walls, and tumbled them far into the Sea, where
they remain to this day: since by the Saracens or Arabs this City was destroyed
by the Sword, and all the Inhabitants massacred, because it did resist the
Power of the Infidels, and by a Sally that was made, had killed the Generals
Eldest Son. It continued next under the Empire of Morocco till the year 1523.
when the King of Portugal attempted to win several Places upon the African
Coast.

THus have I given yo^ an account of the City of Tangier, which might be made
as beneficial to Our King, as any City of his Dominions, if Men did but mind
the Public good, as much as they do their fordid Interest.

We continued here some few days, and found a kind Entertainment, especially
from the Officers, that are most obliging Gentlemen. But as my Lord's business
was not to pitch his Tents in this place, He dispatched C. W. toward the
Emperor, with my self, and another, as well to give notice of His Excellencies
arrival, as to procure from him a Pasport, in order to His Journey to Fez. We
set forward with a Flag of Truce in Our Hands, and were met by 20 Horse about a
Mile from the Lines. The Commander came up to Us first, and asked from us our
business; We told him by our Interpreter, that His Imperial Majesty of Great
Britain had sent an Ambassador to the great Emperor of Barbary his Master, a
Person of a very eminent Quality, and of a most Illustrious Family, to Treat
with him about the Concerns of both Nations. The Captain seemed to suspect the
truth of what we had said, and asked if we had any Letters; We showed him some,
but would not part with them: at that He was offended, and lead us about a Mile
further behind a Hill where we saw 6 Tents erected for Us, and two old Women
miserably deformed, with half a dozen Lancers to Guard them: There was a great
Contest among them at our first appearance; and I thought they had intended to
use their Weapons. As soon as the Commander in Chief, (that was a little
behind) was come, all was calm again, We labored to know the reason of their
contest; and found by our Interpreter, that they were disputing about a Clause
of the Law of Mahomet: both maintaining their different Opinions and
Interpretations with much eagerness. The one was not satisfied to enjoy his own
Fancy, but he was resolved to impose it upon his Comrade, and make him submit
unto it by violence. So general is that madness amongst Men, not to allow what
Nature cannot refuse a freedom ^f Judgment; and to be so fond of our Opinions,
as to disturb the Public Peace, rather than to suffer them to be contradicted:
An unsufferable Pride possesses their minds. Every petty Coxcomb would erect a
Sovereignty in the invisible world of our Fancies, and would see all Men bowing
and rendering homage to his Judgment. I Will warrant you if those two nasty Moors
had but had a little more breeding, and a little more Authority, they would
have been content to have made a Schism about Trifles, and to have endangered
Men's lives, in the maintenance of their mistakes. This particular I could not
forget, because it relates to our own condition at home.

As soon as the Commander, whose Name was Zidi Abdala, was entered into the
Tents, and that the Dispute was over, We saw them draw aside, to consult what
should be done with Us. The Resolution, as we understood, was, that we should
remain in custody, until one was sent to the new Town, to have the Order of
Taffaletta's Lientenant that was then there. In the mean while they entertained
us with all civility, and presented to us their greatest dainties, moist
Cheese, Butter as thick of Goats Hairs, as our English clay Mortar with Straw;
some musty Bread, and for our desert we had some wild Honey; a sad Food to our
English Palats. It is like our English French Beans, but black. It grows upon
stalks every where in the Country wild. I never was in such a trouble to eat;
for our Interpreter advised us not to contemn the Moors kindness by a refusal.
We were long at a stand, but He began by his Example to show us what We should
do: I deceived them all, for with a Crust of our English Bread, that I pulled
out of my Pocket, I kept my Teeth a going. Our Lodging was answerable to our
Diet. Our Bed was the cold Ground, our covering a pitiful Tent, Our Bedfellows
stinking Moors; and that which was worse than all this; it rained all Night
upon us, so that the Musketo's, a venomous Fly did creep under our Clothes, to
seek a dry shelter, and did sting us to some purpose; I wishing my self again
in your good company at the King's Head at Charing Cross. We were afraid that
our continuance should be longer in this place; for the Moors dispatches are
but slow. They observe the Spanish gravity in their proceedings with
Christians. An expression of Grandeur, that well becomes this miserable People.
About 2 a clock in the afternoon the next Day, We had a few Horsemen came to
us to be our guides to Salley, for that was the place unto which we had Order
to go. They intended to remain there all Night, because We could not reach
Arzilla that evening, while it was Day; But our earnest entreaties prevailed
upon them, for we pretended our business to require have, to oblige them to set
forwards; which accordingly they did 6 in number, about 3 a Clock in the
afternoon: as it began to be dusky, we came in sight of Arzilla, a place
situate upon the Sea shore in a plain Ground; before it there are yet the
Ruins of an old Haven, upon which the main Ocean discharges the fury of its
Waves. It yields a pleasant sight afar off; for the Turrets of the Wall are
Painted with many curious colors, and many Storks do make their Nests upon the
Battlements. So that it appears to the ignorant Beholder a most pleasant
Palace: but We were never so deceived, as when we entered the Gates, and viewed
the next day the curiosities of the Town, the greatest was Gayland's Palace,
and the Castle of Arzilla, that has the name of being strong. The Palace is
toward the Sea, and like our old English Houses; there is a little Court at
the entrance embellished with Painted Tyles of diverse colors: at the left
hand, a low Gallery with Rails; before it about 20 Foot long, and to broad,
where Gayland lay in State to receive the Ambassadors of Foreign Princes. The
good Prince was content it seems with a mean Lodging, the apartments of his
Officers were not better. That of his Secretaries did look rather like a
Swine-keepers Lodge, than a Dwelling for an Officer of State. We were here
received with more kindness than Pomp. The Governor came to visit us, and sent
us from his own Table, such Victuals as he himself did eat: here I met with
several Renegadoes, one English that had been in the Country, He informed us of
several things. One I must not omit: Lately when Gayland's Army was routed, and
the Chack of Angiers Son killed. The City of Tetuan would not submit to
Taffaletta's Summons, but seemed willing to endure a Siege, but by his Agents
in the Town, He did work so effectually upon the Inhabitants, that they opened
their Gates, and yielded themselves. This good success was followed by the
reducement of all the Country, which has a great dependency upon the Mart
Town. Taffaletta places there a Governor for himself, and appoints one of the
City to Rule as our Mayors and Bailiffs. This Governor forgetful of his
Benefactor, entertained some correspondency with them of Argiers, which gave
his Master cause to suspect that he intended a Revolt. Taffaletta having learnt
that by his Spies dispersed in all the Cities of Barbary, and how he was
affected, concealed his intentions, and came with a flying Party of Horse
toward Tetuan. The Governor hearing of his coming, prepares for his
reception, and with a small company goes out about a League from the Town, to
meet his Sovereign Prince. He met him at the head of his Army, attended by all
his Great Officers: according to his duty, he alighted, and kissed the Hem of his
Garment, a Ceremony that signifies as much as the kissing our Princes Hands.
Muley Arsheid commands him to mount upon his Horse; which being done, He comes
close to him, and with his Stab, a desperate Weapon amongst the Moors, He cuts
off his Head, takes it by the hindermost lock, and there commands all his Army
to pass by, showing and shaking the Head now and then at such as he suspected
of unconstancy and unfaithfulnes. This is a sign of his great resolution and
courage. The sight of this Head did not a little terrify the rest of his
Grandees, who are become wonderfully faithful to his Interest.

Immediately after this Execution He goes to Tetuan, acquaints the People with
the Traitors Guilt, and he wanted not the applauses of the fawning Moors, that
are for him who has the greatest Power. Taffaletta places over the City
another Governor, a Person most intimate with Him, because it was a place of
great Importance: He likewise incurs his displeasure by some misfortune, and
ended his days soon after his Predecessor, in this manner. A Gentleman
accompanied only by two lusty Blacks, comes to Tetuan, and asks for the
Governor; the People show him a little Hill, where he was gone to take the
Air: thither He comes with all speed, and falutes the Governor, delivering to
him some Letters from the Sultan; which were received with all expressions of
Joy. The poor Governor not thinking that his death was so nigh at hand; He
invites the Gentleman to his House, and did not so much as dream of the
Mischief prepared for him. All this while the other keeps his design secret,
and being entered with the Governor into the House, and sat down upon Carpets,
as the manner of that Country is; He discoursed with him about several Affairs;
and at the conclusion, when he saw his opportunity, He pulls out of his Pocket
a Sentence of Death Signed by Taffaletta, which he bid the Governor read.
These unwelcome Lines did strike such an amazement into his Mind, that he
became unmovable. The other commanded his Blacks, that had been careful to
follow him to the Chamber door, to come in, and do their Office. They presently
take the Cord that they had prepared on purpose; and without delay, fall upon
him. The miserable Governor seeing no remedy, begs on his knees the savor to
be Strangled with the Shash about his Middle. That satisfaction was granted
unto him Thus he that was intimate with his Prince, and that did slatter
himself in his Prosperity, ended his days when he least suspected it The
Gentleman goes next into the Streets of the City with his naked Cimeter, and
causes it to be Proclaimed by his Attendants: That the Prince, for just cause,
had commanded the Governor to be put to death; and that he was appointed in
his stead to Rule in that City, and that if any would oppose his Reception,
that he should appear. The Citizens approved the Fact, cursed the dead
Governor, and received the new with all Honor. An infallible sign of the
Peoples great Respect and Submission to their Princes Judgment and Actions,
That none did dare to search into his Proceedings, or to examine the Justice of
his commands. This expresses also his great confidence and trust that he
reposes upon his Peoples Obedience. To dispose in such an absolute manner of
their Lives and Fortunes; and in such a powerful City, to think to bring to
pass such an unexpected change by such weak Agents in a moment. He could never
have ventured to give such a Commission, had he not been assured of the Moors
condescension to his Pleasure. I have since heard at Fez, that there is a Cloud
that hangs over this Governor of Tetuan also, which may have the same effect
upon him, as upon the former It is certain, Taffaletta removes, destroys,
strangles, and banishes all that he suspects in the least.

We remained one Night in Arzilla, and the next Day we Journeyed through the
Country called Elfas, that is to say, the Plow Land; It reaches as far as one
can discover from Tangiers a great number of little Hills do appear, upon
which, and in the Valleys the best Corn of Africa does grow. It was the custom
of the Moors in Gayland's time, to repair thither from all parts to Plow and
Sow, and every one had a certain Portion of Land appointed for him, which he
Manured, and at the Harvest he paid only the tenth part to the King, unto whom
all the Land belongs. It is a very fruitful Soil in that part, and yields a
great increase, especially of Wheat In our Journey this day, which was the most
pleasant that we ever had we met with some few Tents, and out of one came forth
a little dirty Rogue about 12 years old, cursing us because we were Christians;
He spoke so much Spanish, as to name us Peras Christianos, you Christian Dogs.
This People is bred up with a prejudice against Us, and taught from their
Cradle to abhor our Religion. It is the Devils policy to keep them thus in
their Ignorance, by giving them in their tender years an inveterate hatred of
the Truth, and its Professors, unto which their Reason might otherwise incline
them, when they attain to an age of discretion, and understanding.

We arrived that night at Alcazar, Gayland's unhappy City, where he was
overcome, and where four of his Wives were taken for the Conqueror's use: It is
an ancient City, such as the most of that Country are; pitiful for the
Buildings: It has a few Streets that are straight as a Line at both ends.
There are Gates joining to the Houses, I conceive, to defend them from wild
Beasts; for it is not possible to shelter them from Men; the Gates that are at
the end of every Street are like our good great Barn Doors, so old that they
can scarce hang upon the Hinges. This is that Famous City where three Kings
were killed in a day, and the Arch Rebel of Ireland, Stukely, created by the
Pope, Earl of Wexford, and Marquess of Leinster, died also, with those Troops
that were intended for the disturbance of Qu. Elizabeth's Dominions: But here
Divine Justice overtook them, and prevented their bloody Designs. We had the
Governors House for our Lodging; for it is the Custom in all those Countries
to repair to the House of the Chief Person in the Place, who is prepared for
your Entertainment; having, as all the Eastern People, a Guest-Chamber or Room
to keep Strangers dry. Every one brings his own Provision with him. There are
no public Houses of Entertainment, or Inns; but he that is a man of any
esteem, is bound to receive strangers. Now the Custom is amongst the Arabs that
live in Tents, That when a Stranger comes, and desires to be received, he
stands at a distance over against the Principal Tent praying to Mahomet: The
Master when he sees him, either sends for him, or goes himself to fetch him in
for Mah^met's sake, whether he be poor or rich; according to the custom of the
Ancient Fathers, who were thus hospitable to Passengers.

We found here very much Civility, when our Business was known and divulged,
many persons of quality flocked together to bid us welcome; for this Country
desires nothing more earnestly than to entertain a good correspondency with the
English, for whom, above all Nations, they have a particular kindness and a
great esteem, because their Slaves are so well treated amongst us, and because
we bow not to Images, which they abhor. Amongst those that did visit us while
we were at Supper, a famous Negromancer came in to see us, and bid us be of
good cheer, and that he desired to show his respect to us by a Dance and
Music. He had under his Arm a long Instrument with a Wire instead of a String,
upon which he played most dexterously. He had no sooner begun, but in steps an
ill shaped Rogue as black as the Devil, followed by a furious Goat and a Dog;
these three began the Dance, the Goat and Dog striking the Ground according to
the sound of the Instrument. The Sport had been pleasant, had we not been
informed by a Stander by that these shapes were not real, but that they were
Devils or Evil Spirits that did thus appear at his Command. This Fancy did make
us desire that the Pastime would end a little sooner than otherwise we would
have done. The Negromancer perceived it; therefore he concluded; and all these
Appearances vanished to our Eyes, the Door being then shut, leaving such a
horrible Stench as made us all rise to seek the open Air to breath; Which the
Negromancer labored to excuse, telling us we had affronted his Devils, by
expressing a Dislike of their Kindness, and therefore we might thank our selves
if they had left such an ill Sent to punish our Contempt: We told him by our
Interpreter, that we did not desire such Entertainment, and that the Devils
Company was never grateful to us. This Accident made us fall to our Prayers,
and be more devout than otherwise we should have been: We afterward inquired
what this Fellow was; some told us, that his Name was Zidi Lamed, a man highly
esteemed amongst the Moors because of his Art in Negromancy, and his
Acquaintance with Familiar Spirits, by which he knows the News of all the
world, and foretells many things to the People which they are desirous enough to
know; so that he is consulted as an Oracle in all urgent occasions. There are
many that study the Black Art, but this man was the most eminent. As he went
from us, he let fall some threatening words, which we did not understand till
the next day, that we all fell from our Horses and bruised our selves. That
night we forgot not to say our Prayers, and to recommend our selves to Gods
Protection. And as soon as it was day we departed toward Saley, and that night
we came to the Mountain called Istibel, where one Belief commands, as being his
Inheritance; I should be too tedious to write every Accident that happened to
us in the way. Our next Stage was Sarsar upon the River Sbom, where one of our
Guides, a Spanish Renegado showed me the Place where a great Battle had been
fought between Gayland and Ham del Hag, otherwise called Bembouqua; in which he
told me he did fight for Gayland, and was present during the Encounter. The two
Princes were at variance for their Limits, which caused them to expose the
Lives of their Subjects, and to give many Battles: this that was fought upon
the Banks of the River Sbow, was a bloody one, and fatal to Bembouqua's
Interest through his own eagerness; for he being with his Horse and Foot beyond
the River, ventured over to charge the Enemy; Gayland keeping his men close,
expecting his Coming, at last he gave such a furious Onset, that the Santo's
men gave back with much loss; notwithstanding the Generals Courage rallies them
and brings them on again; here Victory was long uncertain; sometimes one Party
flies, sometimes the other; and had it not been for a fresh Supply of Men led
on by Gayland's second Brother, which came at that moment, he had lost the Day;
but his Number increasing with this unexpected Recruit, and by consequence, his
men's hearts being thereby filled with new Courage, he had not much difficulty
to overcome his Enemies, who had at their Retreat two sorts of Enemies to fight
withal, Gayland's men, who pursued with all Fury behind, and a deep River
before; for the Bridge over which B^mbouqua saved himself was broken down. Many
were killed that day, but more were drowned, in all of the Saint's men about
5000 stout Soldiers. This Success of Gayland caused many of the Saints
Subjects to revolt to him, and to set up his Banner in their several
Jurisdictions: So that he became by this Battle a most powerful Prince, very
dreadful to his Neighbors. This happened in the Year 1663.

By the way as we passed, we had a sight of several Spanish Garrisons upon the
Seaside: Larache, where Gayland's Power received a very great check by a
handful of Spaniards, who made such a brisk Sal^y upon them, that they killed a
good number of his Men, took Gayland's Brother, and hanged him up upon their
Walls: A bold Action! that rendered them odious to the Country and to Gayland;
so that he never would have any peace with them.

The next is Mammora, a noted place in Spain; for there they banish the
malefactors. As we were over against this Garrison, our Company being advanced a
little before, there happened an Accident that scared me more than it hurt me,
a Horseman having spoken with our Guides, who told him our business, and who we
were, came up to me, having but one Moor with me, and brandished his Lance as
he rid tilt at me; I understood not his meaning, and thought he had intended
Mischief, yet I was afraid to discover my Fear, and therefore I would not put
myself upon a posture of Defense till I felt his Weapon; but I was surpised,
when in stead of a Blow with his Lance, which I expected, seeing him gallopping
at me, he most dexterously turned the Point, and laid the other end upon the
Pommel of my Saddle; a great expression of Civility and Kindness amongst them,
as I understood by our Interpreter; resigning by that Action, the Weapon* into
the hands of him whom they treat in that manner: When I saw his Intentions were
not evil, I saluted him according to our fashion: after a little Discourse with
the Moor, he went his way, and I made up to my Company.

We came through the Country of Elhalat, a Plain Ground, so named from that
Tribe that dwells there, and within three days we arrived at Saley: The City
stands very pleasantly; it is divided into two parts, a River passing in the
middle of the City. It is two Miles about, having a very strong Castle at one
end, with a scurvy Harbor for Ships before it. We were led directly to the
Governors House, where we met with a kind entertainment, especially C. W. who
was well known to the Town. Here we found many English Slaves, taken in English
Bottoms by the Pirates of this place; some were newly brought in. We gave them
all the assistance our Purses or Favor could afford, and put them in some
hopes to obtain their Freedom, if my Lord was so happy as to obtain a firm
Peace, a joyful news to those poor wretches, that had left all hopes of
returning home to their beloved Soil.

Here we remained some days, viewing the ancient Monuments of the Town, that is
possessed by the Arabs. And here we took notice of the miserable condition of
the Barbarians. There are a great number of them in the Country round about,
dispersed up and down. The Arabians are their Lords, having Power of Life and
Death over them. Each Arab has his particular Servants that he sends to Till
his Ground, and from him requires so much Tribute either in Corn or Money every
year. Sometimes he rides about to view his Territories, and then his Tenants
are bound to provide him with all necessaries: Besides, he takes from them what
he pleases, and Sells them and their Family, and disposes the poor Brabbers as
he lists. For as the Arabians are entered into the Country by way of Conquest,
they accordingly behave themselves there as Conquerors, treating the
Inhabitants as Slaves and Captives. But at the death of the last King, they
freed themselves from the Arabian Tyranny, and under the Conduct of several
Princes did subdue the Arabians themselves. Gayland, Bembouqua, and several
others, had many successful Battles with the Arabs, their Masters, for near
Twenty years; and because of some Divisions amongst them, and that their Lawful
Prince was slain, they could not recover their former Estate, until
Taffaletta's late Victories over the Barbarians, Gayland, and the rest. When
the Governor of this place was acquainted with Our business, He freely gave us
a Pass through his Government, for he commands much of the Country round about
almost as far as Fez; unto which City, We set forward next through a Tribe of
the Arabs, called Mouktar; and by the way we desired to know the meaning of
several Pillars and Monuments; Our Guards told us, that they were set up by the
Army of the Arabians that came from the East, when they over ran this Country,
in memory of some signal Battles given in those places against the Inhabitants;
for as amongst the Israelites they give Names to several places, according to
the accidents that happen there. We thus past without any molestation, being
sometimes obliged to show our Pasport to the Chief Men. As we were come about
10 Leagues on this side of Fez; We past through a delicate Champaign Ground,
over fruitful for such lazy Inhabitants as the Moors. In a pleasant Valley
about 2 Leagues further, We passed by above a thousand Tents, distinguished by
their several Families, which were separated at some convenient distance, round
about many thousand head of Cattle were a feeding. Now these that live in Tents
are the Arabs, the People that came from Arabia by the solicitation of the
ancient Sultan of Morocco, who made use of their assistance to recover his
Dominions from an Usurper, that in his absence had revolted from him; since
they have overspread all this Country: and as their manner is, they live in
Tents, and as the Nomades remove from place to place with all their Substance.
They are distinguished into several great Tribes, as the Children of Israel,
whose Brethren they are: for they are the Saracens, Aagarens, or Ishmaelites,
or the Posterity of Ishmael, the Son of Abraham. Their manner of living may be
a very good Commentary to several Passages of the Old Testament. The chief
Tribes are named Heldauquella, Vle^desees, Spenet, Elholot, Mouktar, Shregga,
Hiaina, Soubba, Dama, Themsna, Hel^eela, Elanyad, etc.

These are divided into Families, Governed by the first born, who has a
jurisdiction over the several Members. They have all a dependency upon him, and
received from him their livelihood. He is their Captain in War, their Father in
Peace, their Judge when any difference arises in his Precinct. Therefore, all
their Tents do keep close to him; His Tent is planted Westerly, being bigger
and handsomer than the rest: then the others are erected on both Hands, as a
half Moon, open toward the East, as well that they might salute the Rising Sun,
for whom they have a great Reverence, as that they might look toward Mecha,
the place of Mahomet's Birth, for which also they have a particular Devotion.
In the middle of the Tents, there is one which is appointed for their Meeting
to Prayer. This Barbarous People have that good Instinct to set apart a place
for the Worship of God. Where there are many hundred Tents together, a Priest
also, had in great esteem amongst them, is set a part for that Service; unto
some they appoint 100 Dollers, to some more, to others less, according to their
Number. His Office is to Read Prayers 5 times a day, unto which he calls the
People, standing at the Door of the Tent with his Alla illa Mahomet resul all^,
and many other expressions of Humility and Devotion: His Office also is to
teach the Children to Read and Write Arabic, and to instruct them in the Law
of Mahomet. An excellent Custom, but ill applied. By that means, these Talouts,
for that is their names, do render themselves serviceable, and do train up
their Children in awe and respect of their Order, and of Religion, Imprinting
in their tender minds those Impressions, as may make them for ever faithful to
Mahomet, and his Interest. That is the cause that every one is so Devout, and
that Profaneness finds such little entertainment amongst them. It were to be
wished that our English Clergy would practice the same Custom, and take into
their tuition the Children of their several Parishes; We might then hope that
the next Generation of Men would be less Atheistical and Vicious, and more
Devoted to the Service of God, and their Prince. Their constant Preaching
should not hinder the Catechizing of Youth* I am sure that would be the means
to expel Ignorance which reigns in Cities, and Country. It would also be the
means to settle their Interest in the Kingdom, and to raise their Holy Order in
the esteem and favor of the People, from whence (it is unhappily fallen by
their own miscarriages. Besides, these ordinary sort of Priests, there are
others called Elftees, Itinerary Preachers, who are esteemed Learned in the
Mohammedan Law; these do upon the Solemn Days, and when they are required,
ascend up into a Pulpit, and there they Expound a Text of the Alcoran. It is
wonderful to see the Veneration, and the respect that is paid to these Men.
There is nothing too precious for them, no company too Honorable. They are
looked upon as so many Gods amongst the People, and received with the greatest
expressions of love and kindness. I did often wish that our English Clergy were
as happy as these Men. But that may be desired, but never expected in our days.

Several other sorts there are; some called Hages, or Saints; they are those
that have visited Mahomet's Tomb. Of their other Orders several have written.
Now the chief of every Family appoints a Thaloub, to instruct his People, and
Pray for them. If any difference arises between them, or any injury be done,
they come before Him: His Sentence is a Law to them; so great is the privilege
of the first born. They have no Judges, but in Cities: Those that live in
Tents, do submit to the pleasure of their Chieftain. I saw a Fellow, that in
his anger had stabbed his Comerade in the Belly; the Wound was not so Mortal,
but he came immediately before the chief of the Family; who presently ordered
him to be sent for, to pay for his Cure, and 10 Dollers besides; and then
taking a sound Stick, commanded him to lie upon his Belly; which was
immediately done, then he gave him 10 blows upon his Breech. The Fellow having
received his Punishment, made a profound Reverence, and seemed to be as
contented as ever, only for his 10 Dollers; He desired his Party to compound
with him. Another had stolen a Hen from a Thaloub, with some other trifles:
the crime being known, He was sent for, and all the stolen Goods, that weighed
about 20 Pounds, were hung at his Ears, through which wide holes were made, and
he condemned to stand thus at the entry of their Mosque; or Tent consecrated to
Prayer. I have seen many other Punishments of the like nature inflicted. Their
ordinary is the Bastinado for small offenses; Empalling for grievous; and for
some they Burn, they Hang, Strangle, and Poison. There is another manner of
Execution very strange; they put a Fellow naked, only something about his middle
to hide the Privity, which they can never abide to behold. They shackle his
Feet, so that he may only go and then they let loose upon him the Boys and
Children, who with their sharp Canes, do make him bleed to death, pricking him,
till he gives up the Ghost: this is the most cruel death practiced amongst them.

One thing I cannot forget of their Customs. If any kills another, the next
Brother or the next Kinsman is bound to seek the Murderer out, and to kill him
where ever he meets him; Besides, they swear to maintain their Captains, and to
die in their Quarrels. So that one Company of Tents many times do fall out with
another. For they are disposed of in the Country of so many little Villages,
making the appearance of a Town.

These Arabs, by what I have said, you may perceive that they hate the
Government of Barbary, and love a free Life. Since the last Emperor of Morocco
that was Massacred by his Servants, never any had any rule over them, but they
maintained a kind of an Aristocracy amongst themselves, until Muley Arsheid
cast himself into their Protection, when he fled from his elder Brother Muley
Mehammed. He behaved himself so bravely, and did ingratiate himself so
cunningly with them, that they made him first their General, or Great Moukadem.
In which Employment he had wonderful Success against the East Arabs: a People
that cannot endure the West. After he led them against his elder Brother, and
enriched many of them with Plunder and Spoil. That made them proceed to this
Election, in which he was so happy, that all consented to make him their King
or Emperor. This was his first rise after the death of his elder Brother, that
he took Prisoner, and then killed. The chief of the Kingdom of Taffaletta made
him also their Sovereign Prince. He has a younger Brother named Muley Zidan,
and that he might oblige the People to a greater obedience, and more fidelity,
he has given out, that he is of the Race of their Prophet Mahomet, and that
acording to that Law none ought to Command in Chief, but one lineally descended
from Mahomet. This Persuasion prevails much upon the superstitious Moors, and
disables them from resisting or opposing his proceedings, for fear of their
Prophet, makes them revolt from their former Governors, and submit to his
Dominion. He has Conquered all Gayland's Country, and the Territories of
Bembouqua, called Si^^ Mehamed, Boubquer del ^ago, the King of Morocco, who had
been an Usurper. The Kingdom of Sous, the Countries where these Tribes do
dwell, Themsna, Heldedla, Moukter, Hiania, Widlobar, Elangad, Heldouquella,
Uleidezin, Dama, and many more; all making up 43 Tribes, with the Country of
Hell Ishbel: All these Kingdoms and Places do acknowledge him for their Prince.
Only some Petty Lords of the Craggy Mountains do resist his Power. Against
these he is now marched with his Army, and as we hear, has reduced some to
Obedience, having executed great Numbers of them in a cruel manner* to terrify
the rest. These are Barbari, the ancient Inhabitants of that Country, who have
been forced to submit to the yoke of the Arabians; yet in these latter days
they were become Masters over them, and did use them very hardly when their
last Emperor was killed; for then they fell into Divisions. Alcaide Issa, a
great man amongst them, commanded the chief of their Tribes: Next was Zidi
Douckag, with Zidi Boumhedi. All three had under them Sheirs, Governors of
Tribes, that they had engaged in their Parties; but when they fell out amongst
themselves, Bembouqua that commanded the great Country called Helishbel and
Fez, where the Barbarians do live, took the advantage, and made War upon the
Arabians, and reduced them to Obedience, using them in the same manner as they
did before his People, as so many Slaves; which made them put themselves more
willingly under one Head, that by his means they might free themselves from the
Barbarian Bondage. The Case here is much like that of the Children of Israel;
by Joshua's means they conquered Canaan, and did domineer over the Inhabitants;
but those of the Sea Coast could not be driven out: when therefore they saw an
opportunity, they did revenge themselves upon the Posterity of Israel, until
Israel made Saul their King, and after him David; then they returned to their
former Command over the Inhabitants and the Country round. Thus is it with
their Brethren the Arabs; they conquered all this Country, and made the
Inhabitants bear the Yoke; but sometimes those that live in strong Places and
high Mountains, do revolt from them, and give them no little disturbance, as
they have done in these late years under several great Commanders. A memorable
Battle was given about Saley between them, where ten or twelve thousand
Arabians were killed, and their Families and Cattle taken by Bembouqua at the
River Widlobar.

Now these Arabians do never mingle themselves with the Brabbers, thinking
themselves an abler Generation of men; neither does one Tribe mix with another:
they observe in that the Law of Moses. At the Division of the Land, they had
for every Tribe a parcel of Ground appointed, in which they live up and down in
their Tents, never going with their Cattle out of their own Limits, unless some
urgent occasion calls them; as when they fight: Then all the Tribes join, and
form an Army: over which they elect a General. Now every Tribe keeps a Record
of all the Members of Persons that do belong unto it, and therefore every one
is able to give an account of his Ancestor; All the Royal Blood pretends to be
come from Haly, Mahomet's Son in Law. The Arabians acknowledge none other for
Prince, but he that is believed to be thus descended. Taffaletta or Muley
Arsheid is so; his Ancestors have long commanded in the Kingdom of Taffalet,
being entered there with the Conquest of that Country.

In our Journey to Fez, we met with many thousand Arabs removing with their
Substance from place to place, and they were the Tribes of Vlaidezin Dama
Saubba, amongst whom we lodged one night; and were invited by one of the Sheirs
to Supper: We had a Table spread with all the Variety of that Country, and very
good Water to drink, mixed with a sweet Stuff much like our Mead. Our Seats
were Carpets, our Table the Ground. When we came at the Gate of Fez, we were
commanded to light off of our Horses, because no Christian is to ride on a
Horse in that City. You may expect an account of this City; but that I reserve
for some other time, when I can write to you. I think this Letter is long
enough to weary your Patience. At our Arrival, we found Taffaletta gone with
his Army against some Barbarians in the Kingdom of Sous, beyond Morocco: And it
is reported here that he has obtained a great Victory over a considerable
Number of them, and that the rest are retreated into the Mountains. We hear
that he will be here within a few Months, and then we hope to have our
Dispatches: Some are sent to acquaint him with the Honor our King has done
him, to send him a Person so eminent in our Nation, and of that great Wisdom.
In the mean while, we have here a Civil entertainment, and have liberty to
divert our selves in hunting the Wild Boar with some Persons of Quality in this
Place, who love the Sport, but make no use of the Flesh. I have seen abundance
of rare things in this City; for it is a very sumptuous one, because of the
Quarries of Marble that are here.

You see, Sir, that I have leisure to write a long Letter; it is to satisfy
your Curiosity. I send it to you by one that goes from hence to Tangier, and
there my Friend has promised to take care of any thing that I shall send. God
keep you, and send us a happy Meeting.

Yours to Command, S. L.
Fez, November. 1. 1669.
A Brief Account of the Native Commodities of AFRICA.
AFrica yields most excellent things fit for the use of man: The Ground may
dispute in Fruitfulness with any part of Europe: it only wants Rain to moderate
the heat of the Climate; when the showers come, every where green Herbs appear
amongst the driest Sand. Here are excellent Simples sit for Physic. It has
often been observed that many Creatures when offended by their Enemy, and
wounded, have sought after some of these Herbs that are proper to cure and heal
them; Gods Providence has therefore planted that part of the world with such
good and healing Roots as might oppose the Malice, and prevent the Mischiefs of
Venomous Creatures, whereof here are a great number, especially in the Land;
and in the Woods there are great Numbers of Scorpions as black as a Coal,
Serpents that cast themselves from Trees and surprise and wound the unwary
Passenger. Here are venomous Aspes, whose least touch brings present death, let
it be never so small; for it conveys its Poison secretly into the Veins,
through the least wound, and that infects the next blood; thus the Infection
spreads by degrees until it reaches the heart. Here are many Basilisks; a
dreadful Creature, that kills by the infection of the Air. There is also
another kind that causes a present dryness in the Palate as soon as it has
wounded the man, and therefore called by the Ancients Dipsas. The Inhabitants
speak of a new sort of Creature that they see almost every Year; for when all
the Creatures do come to the fresh Springs and Fountains, the heat carries them
to unnatural Copulation, and from these extraordinary Conjunctions do proceed
Monsters that are of several Species, which have not the power to propagate or
to increase. Beyond the City of Fez there is a great Wilderness full of wild
Beasts and Fowls. The Arabs do live in all the fruitful places; but in the Land
nothing is to be seen but Mountains of Sand, that are very dreadful in a storm
of Wind, because it carries and transports them from place to place, and buries
the Passenger under the weight of it alive. The Commodities of this Country
are very many; it were a happy thing to have a Prince there that did command
all the Land, and that were a Lover of Trade; then Carovans might go safe from
place to place without fear of robbing: But the nature of the Arabs inclines
them to thieving and violence; so that although one should have a Pasport from
the Prince, it is a great hazard, if you be not provided with a good Guard,
that you will be set upon by these Rogues, who are notwithstanding, in their
esteem, the best Gentlemen, and the noblest in the World. The chief Commodities
are Hides, they kill as many wild Bulls and Cows in the Land, as they of the
East*Indies do in their Plantations. Besides Goat Skins, Marok^, or Spanish
Leather, that are excellent, here is great store of Honey; the Bees do increase
in the Woods and Mountains, and as there are excellent Flowers that grow in all
the Valleys, so naturally the Country is full of Bees and Wax. There is also a
kind of Silk Stuff that is made by the Inhabitants of the Seashore, of the
Bark of Trees. Here is also Raw Silk; the Country breeds Silkworms in great
abundance about Fez and Morocco. Here are many other things useful to the life
of man, if Peace were established in the Country, and with our Nation, then we
might fetch from Guiny, and the Negro's Country, the rich commodity of Gold
dust.

Now every Month some of the Blacks do adventure to Fez, with Camels laden
with that superfluous Earth, of which they have too much, and carry back other
trifles that are esteemed amongst them. Some say that the Sun has burnt the
Sand of the Wilderness in some places, and that it is become perfect Gold. It
is certain, that in the Sandy Deserts the Blacks do gather up Gold; This Gold
is the best in the World, it is as pliable almost as Paper, and does not so
easily consume and waste. If some would adventure in the Land, to search out
the Country, and bring a just and a true Report, he might discover many things
which our Traders might improve to their advantage. In the Wilderness there are
great store of wild Asses, Horses, Lions, Jaccals, etc. It is wonderful of this
last, that smells a dead Carkase many Miles; and toward the Night, they run
howling out of their Dens and Caves in great numbers right to the place where
lies their Prey. The Lions and Leopards, and other furious Creatures are
presently awakened with the noise, and therefore they follow them always. A
Jaccal is a kind of a Fox, bigger and longer, just of the same shape, but for
the most part of a blackish Gray, as high as a good Mastiff Dog. In the Night
they surround the Tents of the Arabs, and if they meet any dis-armed, he serves
to satisfy their hunger; for then such a company do over power him, that he is
overcome, and torn in pieces in a moment. Here are also many Apes and Baboons.
The Apes do dwell in Forests and Woods on the tops of Trees: Sometimes they
venture down in the Valleys in Troops, 6 or 7 hundred at a time, and do a
considerable execution upon the poor Corn. Many are undone by this scurvy
Vermin. They never suspect the comeing of any Creature, but presently save
themselves by slight at the least discovery or appearance of Man or Beast* It
is remarkable, what has been observed of them, that he that comes first to a
Tree, he skips, and seizes upon a bow, which he labors to bend to the Ground,
then all his companions do follow, and run upon the Tree over his Back that
comes first to the place. Here are many strange Insects, and Birds of diverse
colors. There is one remarkable, that our English call a Be eater; It is Red,
Blew, White, Yellow, Green, and very handsomely painted with diverse colors: It
appears in the Months of April, May, June, July, the hottest Months of the
Year. They pursue the swarms of Bees, and devour them, and have a cry much like
a Frogg. They dwell in the Land during the Rains, and come to the Seacoast in
Summer and Spring. Here are also excellent Roots, that are brought from the
East and West Indies to us, such as do fill the Shops of our Druggists. Were
that Country in the hands of an ingenious and laborious People; it is not to be
doubted, but that it would furnish the rest of the World with excellent
Productions: But since the Conquest of the Country by the Arabs, War and
Oppressions have hindered the Inhabitants from the improvement of their Soil.

Errata.
Page 1. Line 5. for request, read expect. p. 4. l. 22. for race, r. far. p. 5.
l 16. for from r. into p. 7. l. 18. for twelve, r. sixteen.

FINIS.

