William Rogers's Christian QUAKER, Manifested to be Antichristian.

BY Thomas Lawrence OF MARLBROVGH.

LONDON: Printed for Benjamin Clark, in Georgeyard in Lombard Street. 1681.

WILLIAM ROGERS's Christian QUAKER, Manifested to be ANTICHRISTIAN.
WIlliam Rogers of Bristol, in behalf of himself, and his Friends with him
concerned, has Written a Book against Apostates, containing 100 Sheets of
Paper, price 4 s. 4 d.

In Answer to that Book, Thomas Lawrence of Marlbrough, their opponent, has
Written a Book against Separatists, containing one Sheet of Paper, price one
half Penny; Perspicuity and Brevity are two chief points in writing, that, is
plain and short; But this Voluminous Book of William Rogers and his Friends
concerned, is neither plain nor short, but Ambiguous and Tedious, Doubtful and
Long; Loaded with many Letters Suppositions and Jeallousies; Reiterations and
Parentheses; many and long objections and observations, that will both trouble
and weary the Reader.

More to the purpose you might have Written in the tenth part of the Paper
(having so many in Council) to make a Book, And Children of Light too, as you
call.

Note, that envious Spirit, slanderous to truth, and the ground of differences
and contention, whereof you charge your opposers, it will fall upon your own
Heads like a Millstone; nor is it likely, that your Book will gather any one to
your side, that has any sense of truth in them, but rather cause many to
depart from you.

Thou beginnest thy Preface with Christ's saying, As I hear, I Judge, that is,
hear the party not report; William Rogers did thou ever hear George Fox
advise Nathaniel Crips and Robert Arch to buy their Tithes, or hearsay? did
thou ever hear G. F. advise Mary Penington to hide or secure her goods from the
Spoilers, in time of danger? else thou have judged by hearsay; Notwithstanding
thou did hide some part of thy own goods, and use many arguments for hiding
goods, as appears in the first part of your Book, Page 32, 33. --

Thou have muddled that point, as thou have many others in your Book, that were
plain enough before; why had thou not made it more intelligible and plain?
as how much goods may be hid; what sorts of goods; and who may do it; Thou have
abused George Fox double; first judged him by hearsay, secondly, judged him
for advising to hide goods in any case, and yet do it thy self in some case;
condemning another, and do the same things; so thou art inexcusable.

In your second part, you treat on principles of Religion, but not so
satisfying, as was done by Ancient Faithful Laborers in the Ministry, by Word
and Writing, Doctrine and Government; You Preach up Doctrine, but leave out
Christ's Government, and so you are rightly called Separates, putting asunder
what God has joined together; Parting Husband and Wife, cutting off the Body
from the Head, as if they were all Traitors; you name your selves in a peculiar
manner, Children of Light; what are none else Children of Light but William
Rogers and his Friends concerned? Sure enough your Book is a work of Darkness,
as appears; for you have asserted many things in your Book that are not true:
Your first Assertion is. That some say that God has Anointed and chosen George
Fox to be in that place, among the Children of Light, in our day, as Moses was
among the Children of Israel in his day; to set up forms of Church Government,
part first, page 9. This you charge on them you call your opposers; Now it is
your part to prove who they are; or if any such be, thou know not whether
George Fox does own their Testimony.

Second Assertion, You charge your opposers (as you call them) with Folly and
Hypocrisy, that profess themselves members of the true Church, and believe as
the Church believes. Answer, To believe as the Church believes, for no other
reason, but because the Church so believes; Whether the Church of England, or
Church of Rome is Popery; but to believe as the true Church believes, is true
faith, not FOR, but AS; but your sense concerning them, you call your opposers
is, That they believe as others do, without Gods grace in their hearts, which
you can never prove.

Third Assertion, The place of Christ's Government is only within, in the heart,
part first, page 29. Q. Who then shall govern in the Life? What Scripture have
you for the word only within? You quote Esaias the 9th. but that Scripture is
against you, and says Christ's, Government is upon his Soulders, that is
without; the parable in the Light opens it self, declaring Christ's Divine and
Humane Nature, One God; begin at the 6 v. Unto us a Child is Born, his Human
Nature; unto us a Son is given, his divine Nature; one Lord, one King, one
Government, not divided, but in unity with his members.

Christ is not suffering now by himself in Heaven, but suffering together with
his members on Earth, bearing up his Government in them, and suffering with
them, within and without. Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? in all their
afflictions I was afflicted, pressed as a Cart with Sheavs.

The increase of his Government and peace have no end; but the Separates will
have no increase of Christ's Government, no more than was in the beginning; then
no increase of peace there will be, but Wrangling and Differences with such.

Fourth Assertion, It is repugnant to the Light in our consciences, to believe
that Christ's Government should rest upon any Man, or Men, to be rulers over
others. Answer, These and the like words of governing, ruling and lording over
others, is so often charged, and so much of the Book spent, and so little or
nothing proved, that it does manifest the Author of this Book to be more crazy
and flashy, then sollid and weighty; yet still trying up the Light within, and
are not in it; None more able to betray his Master than a Disciple; none could
more advantagiously betray his Master than a Judas; What a sad thing it is for
any to lose a good condition, and not know it, nor will they know if one should
tell them.

Fifth Assertion, That George Fox was the first that did begin the difference
among Friends, by setting up Monthly and Quarterly Meetings. Answer, The body
of faithful Friends agreed, that the Monthly and Quarterly Meetings were set up
by the Spirit and Power of Christ, through G. Fox, not by imposition upon, but
recommendation to the Church; John Wilkinson, and John Story, both said they
would not say, They were not set up by the Power; yet John Story said another
time, He would not say, they were, or were not; the third time, John Story
said, He did not believe George Fox had Gods Spirit to do it by; and John
Wilkinson said to me and others, He did not own the Monthly and Quarterly
Meetings, when they were first set up.

If this be not confusion, what is? Nathaniel Crips, in his answer to my Book,
concerning the Man of Sin revealed, said, He did not own George Fox's orders,
many years before he knew any Man disown them. So he and the John's seem to be
wiser in their own conceits, than the body of faithful Friends.

Now let the Reader judge in the true Light who were the first beginners of the
differences, he that set up useful and decent Orders in the Church, by the
Spirit and Power of Christ, or they that did begin quarelling and pecking at
them?

These three Dissenters do themselves disprove what they first asserted.

Many more such Assertions might be named; but first prove these true if you
can: what you charge in your Book concerning George Fox* His flying persecution
at Bristol, I leave it for Bristol Friends to answer, that were eye witnesses
of what was done; as for the rest of your Book, I leave for you to weary your
selves with; only let me tell you, that cursed Cham uncovered the nakedness of
his natural Father; but you have endeavored to uncover the nakedness of a
Spiritual Father, if he had any, which you have not proved; having shot many
Arrows of envy at him, even bitter words, and hard Speeches.

Haman thought to destroy Mordecai, and all the Seed of the Jews; but the
destruction fell upon himself, and his confederates; but as Joseph said unto
his Brethren, Ye intended evil against me, but God turned it to good; so your
Printing your Book, and Jsaac Peningtons, and George Foxes Letters, compared
with William Rogers and John Wilkinsons, will prove an advantage to truth; and
it will rejoice such as live in the life of Truth, to see the Torch flame, by
knocking against the post^, and so may recover some from the Beast and false
Prophet, that are now in their heat of Contention.

William Rogers, If any man or men, that never heard of any difference among
Quakers, should understand upon what grounds thou have justified the John's, and
vilified George Fox, and Robert Barclay, they would wonder at thy unadvised
forwardness, so to exceed in hard speeches; many of your own side reading J.
Wilkinson's, and G.F's. Letters from one to each other, would sink their esteem
of thy unreasonable proceedings, but such as have well known what George Fox
and the John's have been, in doing and suffering the benefit of comparison, may
be useful in this matter.

1. George Fox was the first public Preacher of that glorious day, the Light
of Christ within since the apostasy. John Wilkinson said, as in the fourth part
of their Book, page. 77. That God appeared in George Fox* in the beginning of
the day of Life, and reached unto us (says he) with his word, which gave us
faith to believe his Testimony, that God gave of his Light in our hearts; John
Story told me, That George Fox was detained from them in Lanson Prison; so they
were at a great loss for want of Council, until George Fox came to them again;
Then the John's were not the first nor the most ancient Ministers.

2. George Fox has been a great traveling Minister, not only all over
England, but beyond the Seas, many hundred miles also; But the John's were never
beyond the Seas. (as I know,) nor never over England, neither as I know, but
from Kendal to Bristol, and so to Reading, and back again to particular
Meetings, with much weariness and caution in times of danger; nor bore no great
Burden nor Heat, but by a good fire in their free quarters, and are little
known or minded, but in their separations.

3. George Fox has begotten many to God by Gods power in his Ministry, that
reached my heart at first hearing, which the John's did not; though I heard them
often before, yet much has been spoken of their gathering of People in part of
the South and West; but what have they gathered them to? but a profession of
true words out of the Life; Witness some particular Meetings, from Wickham to
Bristol, and thereabout.

4. George Fox has suffered in many Prisons, where he lay in the Rain and
Dirt, which were promised to be mended by the Judges, but were not; but the
John's never suffered in any Prison, as I know, except it was two or three
Months in Fisherton-Anger; where they had a dry House, a good Bed, and Food
convenient, I saw it. William Rogers, if thou and all thy Friends concerned,
can prove all your Writings true, and mine false; then I will willingly submit
to the truth in you; But if you cannot prove your Writing true, nor mine false,
then you are to submit to the truth in me; and so Controversy will be ended.

Marlbrough the 3d. Month, 1681. Being the 81 year of my Age. THOMAS LAWRENCE

IT is desired that this may be dispersed only amongst Friends called Quakers,
and such others as have seen or do receive W. R. his said Book against them.

THE END.

