THE LAW OF EJECTMENTS, OR, A TREATISE SHOWING The Nature of EJECTIONE FIRM,
the Difference between it and Trespass, and how to be brought or removed where
the Lands lie in Franchises. In what Cases this Action lies, or not. Of the Old
Way of Sealing Leases, and of the New Practice. Of Confessing Lease, Entry and
Ouster. Of what things Ejectione Firm lies, or not. Of Declarations in this
Action, and what Special Pleadings are now in use. Of Venues, Issue, Trial.

As also Who are good Witnesses or not in the Trial on Ejectment, and what
shall be allowed good Evidence or not, either as to Records, or Matters in
Fait. Where Bills, Answers and Depositions shall be read on a Trial or not,
Together with The Learning of Special Verdicts at large, relating to Titles of
Land and Estates in several Rules, and of Judgments with their several Forms of
Entries in Special Cases, and of Habere facias possessionem, how to be
executed, and in what Cases a new Habere fac' possessionem shall be granted.
And lastly, of Erroneous Judgments and Writs of Error; and several other
Matters, all relating to Actions of Ejectments.

Very necessary for all Lawyers, Attorneys, and other Persons, especially at
the Assizes, etc.

LONDON, Printed for John Deeve at Bernards-Inn Gate in Holbourn. 1700.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
UPon the first View of the Title of this Treatise, I doubt not but many
Persons will slight it, being upon a Topic well known and understood (as they
imagine) by even every Pretender to the Law: There Is not the least Solicitor
or Attorney in any Nook of Cornwall, or Corner of Cumberland, but thinks he is
privy to the whole Learning of Ejectments. And yet if they would take the Pains
to peruse the ensuing Sheets, they doubtless may be of another Opinion, and
will find very useful and proper Matter relating to an Action which concerns
the greatest Titles in the Kingdom, and has made so great a Noise at the Bar,
and in the Circuits for Sixty Years last past.

Besides, if there happen any material Mistake in this Action, the Remedy is
very chargeable. I remember Mr. Levett's Case of the Inner Temple (the Argument
whereof made by a very Ingenious Professor of the Law, I have herein inserted.)
The Record was an Issue of Trinity Term 1696. and the Demise is laid the 10th
of April 1697. Habendum from the 25th day of March then last past; whereas the
Demise should have been laid the 10th of April 1696. And though Mr. LeveTt had a
Verdict; yet he could not have Judgment, but was forced to a new Trial at Bar.
And many more such Instances might be given.

I shall not dare to deliver my Opinion concerning the Change of Real Actions
into Ejectione Firm, but I know many Grave Lawyers have grumbled at the
Inconveniences of a Man's being too obnoxious to be trickt out of Possession.

However, this we must all allow, That since the said Alteration, the Common
Law has lost a great Part of the Beauty and Nicety of its Pleading.

I have been large under two of the ensuing Titles; I mean that of Evidence,
and the other of Special Verdicts; Who shall be allowed as good Witnesses, or
not; and what shall be looked upon as sufficient Evidence both as to Matter of
Record, or Matter en Fait, in this Action, is of great Use to be understood;
and the Cases that lay dispersed in our Books for that purpose, I have reduced
to some Method.

And as for the right and exact drawing of Special Verdicts, we all own it to
be an undeniable Argument of a good Understanding in the Law, and of very great
Consequence, especially those which concern Title of Lands and Estates.

As for the Errata's of the Printer, the Judicious Reader will find that they
will not much interrupt the Sense; and as for my own I humbly beg Pardon.

THE CONTENTS OF THE CHAPTERS.
CHAP. I. THE Nature of the Action of Ejectione Firm, and the Reason of the
change of Real Actions into Ejectments, with the Lord Chancellor Ellesmore's
Opinion thereon. The Difference between Actions of Trespass and Ejectment in
seven Diversities. The Difference between Ejectione Firm and Quare ejecit
infra terminum. In what Court this Action to be brought, or not. Ejectments how
to be brought in respect of the Place where the Lands lie. Where to be tried.
Of Removal by Procedendo into inferior Courts. CHAP. II. Who shall have
Ejectione Firm, and in what Cases this Action lies, or not, in respect of
Possession, in respect of Entry congeable, in respect of Exility of Estate. By
Lessee of Copyholder, and how, and whether before Admittance, and the manner of
declaring. Of Ejectment by Executors, by Infant, by Lessee of a Simonist. On
Elegit. On undue Extent, and in case of holding over. By Intruder, by the
King's Lessee, by a Person Outlawed, by Lessee of Bail on Extent and on
Judgment against the Principal, by Issue in Tail liable to a Statute, who comes
not in and pleads to the Sc' fac', on Entry of the Grantee of Rent with Proviso
for Retainer till Satisfaction of Arrears; by Cesty que Trust; by Vendee of
Commissioners of Bankrupts. CHAP. III. Of Process in Ejectione Firm. Of the
Original. What Mistakes in the Original are Error after a Verdict, or not. Of a
vicious Original Of the want of an Original. Of an Original taken out before
the Cause of Action. Of Amendments of Originals. Where Amendment shall be by
the Paper-Book. Of the Retorn by Stat. 13 Car. 2. c. 11. Of Appearance. Infant,
how to appear, sue or defend. The true Difference between Guardian and Prochein
Amy. Of want of Pledges. Of Bail. Of Stat. 13 Car. 2. c. 2. Of Bail on Writ of
Error. When common Bail to be filed. Imparlance. CHAP. IV. Against whom
Ejectione Firm lies, or not, Of the casual Ejector. Of the old way of Sealing
Leases of Ejectment, and in what Cases now to be used. And of the new way of
practice. CHAP. V. Of the Rule of confessing Lease, Entry and Ouster. Whether
such Rules may be made in inferior Courts. Rules of Court relating to
confessing Lease, Entry and Ouster. Of Refusal to confess Lease, Entry and
Ouster, and the Consequence. Of how much the Defendant shall confess Lease,
Entry and Ouster. In what Cases there must be an actual Entry, and where it is
supplied by confessing of Lease, Entry and Ouster. Rules concerning ones being
made Defendant, and of altering the Plaintiff; of enlarging the Ejectment,
Lease. CHAP. VI. Of what things an Ejectione Firm may be brought, and of what
not. General Rules of Declarations in Ejectments. Of Variance between the
Issue-Roll and the Imparlance-Roll. Of Entry and Ejectment supposed before the
Commencement of the Lease. Virtute cujus He entered, how expounded. Uncertainty
in the Limitation of the Commencement, and no Day of the Date showed. Et postea
how expounded. Mr. Levets of the Temple's Case. Argued about amendment of a
Declaration. Declaration by Coheirs, by Tenants in Common, by Baron and Feme.
By Joynt-tenants, by a Corporation, by Copyholder, by Administrator. CHAP. VII.
Where in the Declaration a Life must be averred, and where it need not. Of
Delivery of Declarations at or after the Essoyn-day. Declations when to be
entered, as of the same Term; where the Copies need not to be paid for
Declarations, when amendable or not. Of expressing the Vills where the Lands
lie. Of the Pernomen. If it need to be of more Acres than the Plaintiff was
ejected out of. Of the Forms of the Declaration, Vi and Armis omitted, Extr.
tenet. omitted. The President of Declarations in B. C. in B. R. and in the
Excheq. The Indorsment of the Copy left with the Tenant, and what the Tenant is
to do thereupon: The Rule of confessing Lease, Entry and Ouster in C. B. and B.
R. Affidavit in Ejectment to move for Judgment against the Casual Ejector.
CHAP. VIII. What shall be a good Plea in Abatement in this Action. Of Entry of
the Plaintiff hanging the Writ. Entry after Verdict, and before the day in
Bank. After Imparlance no Pleading in Abatement, and why. Abatement, because
the Plaintiff shows not in which of the Vills the Land lies. Ejectment against
Baron and Feme; Baron dies since the Nisi prius, and before the day in Bank. Of
pleading to the Jurisdiction. Conisance not allowable on Suggestion, but it
must be averred or pleaded. How Prescription to the Cinque Ports to be made.
Ancient Demesne a good Plea in Ejectment, and why. Its a good Plea after
Imparlance, and why. Of Plea of Ancient Demesne allowed the same Term, and how.
Of Pleas puis darrein Continuance. Entry puis darrein Continuance pleaded at
the Assizes is resceivable, and the Consequence of a Demurrer to this Plea.
Release of one of the Plaintiffs in a Writ of Error, whom it shall bar. Of
Release puis darrein Continuance, Plaintiff demurs to Plea of Entry puis
darrein Continuance, Quid Sequitur. Accord and Satisfaction pleaded. Aid prier,
and why the Defendant shall not have Aid pryer of the King, aliter of a common
Person; A Writ not to proceed Rege inconsulto allowed. Recovery and Execution
in a former Action pleaded in Bar. Bar in one Ejectione Firm, how a Bar in
another. CHAP. IX. Of Challenge. What is principal Challenge or not. Of
Elisors. Of Venue. Where the Parish and Vill shall be intended all one. Where
it shall not be de Corpore Comitatus. Where the Venire fac' is amendable.
Venire fac' to the Coroners, because the Sheriff was Cosen to one of the
Defendants. A Venire de Foresta. Venire de Novo for Baron and Feme. CHAP. X.
XI. Of Joining Issue and Trial. In what Case no Verdict shall be Entered. One
Defendant Pleads Not guilty, the other Demurs, no Judgment upon the Demurrer
till the Issue be tried. Writ to Prohibit the Trial Rege inconsulto. Trial in
the Marches Consent to alter the Trial. New Trial denied. Of consent to a Trial
in a Foreign County. Of Trial in other County than where the Land lies. Of
Trial by Mittimus in the County Palatine. Who shall be good Witnesses in this
Action or not. Copy of a Deed. Deed cancelled. Conditions, Collateral Warrants
found by a Jury. What is good Evidence in Reference to a former Mortgage. Where
the probate of a Will is sufficient Evidence or not. In Case of a Rectory, what
is good Evidence, and what things the PaRson must prove. Ancient Deeds.
Scirograph of a Fine. Constant Enjoyment. Evidence as to an Appropriation.
Deposition of Bankrupts. Depositions in Chancery. Transcript of a Record.
Inrolment of a Deed. Doomsday Book. Of variance between the Declaration and the
Evidence. Of Demurrer to an Evidence. ExEmplification of a Verdict. Verdict. Of
a General Verdict. Of Special Verdict. Of Council subscribing the Points in
Question. Of finding Deeds in haec verba. Eight Rules of Special Verdicts in
Ejectment. Of Estoppels found by the Jury, and how they shall be binding. What
is a material variance between the Declaration and the Verdict. Of Priority of
Possession. Where the Special conclusion of the Verdict shall aid the
imperfections of it. Where and in what Cases the Verdict makes the Declaration
good. Verdict Special taken according to intent. Difference where the Verdict
concludes Specially in one Point, and where it concludes in General, or between
the Special conclusion of the Jury, and their reference to the Court.
Circumstances in a Special Verdict need not be precisely found. Where the
Judges are not bound by the Conclusion of the Jury. Of certainty and
uncertainty in Special Verdicts. Of the finding Quoad residuum, certainty or
uncertainty in reference to Acres, Parishes, Vills and time of Verdicts, being
taken by Parcels. How the Ejectment of a Manor to be brought. Of a Verdict on
other Lease or Date than is declared upon, which shall be good or not. Where a
Verdict shall be good for part, and void for the Residue. The time of the Entry
of the Plaintiffs Lessor where material. Where the Jury ought to find an actual
Ouster on him that had the right. Prout lex postulat how to be understood.
Where, and in what Cases Special Verdicts may be amended. Where the Jury may
conclude upon a Moiety or not. Where a dying Seized or Possessed, must be found.
Where the commencement of an Estate Tail is to be found. CHAP. XII. Where the
Defendant shall have Costs. How the Plaintiff may aid himself by Release of
Damages. Executor not to pay Costs. Lessor of the Plaintiff where to pay Costs.
Where Tenant in Possession liable to pay Costs or not. Feme to pay Costs on the
Death of her Husband. Infant, Lessor to pay Costs of the Writ of Enquiry; the
Entry. If Writ of Error lies upon the Judgment, before the Writ of Enquiry and
why. Writ of Enquiry how abated. Costs for want of Entering, Continuances. Where
the sole remedy for Costs in the first Trial is to be had. CHAP. XIII. The Form
of entering Judgments in this Action. How the Entry is, when part is found for
the Plaintiff, and part against him. Quoth. Def. sit quietus. Quod Def. remaneat
indefenss. Against several Ejectors of form. Of the Entry in case of the
Plaintiff or Defendant. One of the Plaintiffs died during a Curia advisare
vult. If the Death of one Defendant shall abate the Writ. One Defendant dies
after Issue joined. After Verdict and before Judgment the Plaintiff dies. What
Notice the Court takes of the Lessor of the Plaintiff. Ejectment for the whole,
and a Title but for a Moiety, how Judgment shall be. In what Cases, and for
what Causes Judgment in Ejectments are Arrestable as Erreneous. Judgment for
the whole, where it ought to be for a Moiety. More Damages found than the
Plaintiff Counts. Judgment against Guardian and Infant. Not severing entire
Damages. Against Baron and Feme quod capiantur, Vi and Armis omitted in the
Declaration. Plaintiff brings a Writ of Error, and the Judgment is reversed,
what Judgment he shall have. What Judgment shall be, if the Lease expires
before Judgment. In what Cases Judgments shall be amended. Mistakes of Acres.
Omission, Defalts of Clerk. Variance of parcel. If Scire facias on a Judgment
in Ejectment may be brought by the Administrator of the Lessee. No Judgment
upon Nihil dicit, but upon motion in Court of Judgment given against ones own
Ejector in several good Cases, and of a Practice to gain Possession. CHAP. XIV.
Habere facias Possessionem, how to be executed, and when, and in what Cases a
new Habere facias Possessionem is to be granted or not. The manner how the
Sheriff is to deliver Possession. How the Sheriff is to esteem the Acres. How
the Sheriff is to give Possession of Rent or Common. How Habere facias
Possessionem awarded into Ireland. In what Cases a new Habere facias
Possessionem, shall be granted or not; And of the Sheriff' s demeanor therein.
After the Writ of Habere facias Possessionem returned and filed, whether the
Court may award a new Writ. Where the first Writ is not fully executed, if the
Court will grant a new one. Where Hab. facias Possessionem shall be after the
year without Scire fac'. Return of Habere fac' Possessionem with a Fieri
facias. Of Misdimeanors in giving Possession. Sheriff's Fees. CHAP. XV. Of
Action for the mean Profits. In whose name it shall be. What Evidence shall be
given in this Action or not. The Writ of Enquiry for mean Profits, how it
abates. If upon Confession of Lease, Entry and Ouster, the Lessee may have
Trespass for the mean Profits, from the time of the Entry confessed. In
Trespass for mean Profits, Special Bail is always given. CHAP. XVI. Writ of
Error Where it lies. Of what Error the Court shall take Conisance without
Diminution or Certificate. Variance between the Writ and Declaration. Variance
between the Record and the Writ of Error. One Defendant dies after Issue and
before Verdict. Nonage in Issue on Error where to be tried. Amendment of the
Judgment before Certiorari awarded. Release from one of the Plaintiffs in the
Writ of Errors bars only him that Released, and why. Outlawry in one of the
Defendants pleaded in Error. Of Release of Errors by the Casual Ejector where
its a fraud. Error without Bail a Supersedeas. Ejectment against eight. And
Judgment was only against three, And Error brought grounded upon the Judgment
ad grave damnum ipsorum. Error of Ejectment in Ireland.
THE LAW OF EJECTMENTS.
CHAP. I.
The Nature of the Action of Ejectione Firm, and of the Change of Real Actions
into Ejectments. Difference between an Action of Trespass and Ejectment in Five
Diversities. Difference between Ejectione Firm and Quare Ejecit infra
Terminum; in what Court this Action is to be brought or not, and of Removal by
Procedendo into inferior Courts.

THIS Action of Ejectione Firm includes in it self an Action of Trespass, as
appears by the Beginning, Body and Conclusion of the Writ; for the Writ begins
thus: Si A. fecerit te securum de clamore suo prosequendo tunc pone, etc. and
so begins the Writ of Trespass. The Body of the Writ of Ejectione Firm is,
Quare unum Messuagium vi and armis fregit and intravit; and all the Addition in
the Ejectione Firm is, Et ipsum a firma sua inde ejecit, etc. The Conclusion
of both is, Et alia enormia ei intulit ad grave damnum; and the Trespass and
Ejectment are so woven and intermixed together, that they cannot be severed; and
the Entry in an Ejectione Firm is, In plito' Transgressionis and Ejectionis
Firm. In 6 R. 2. Tit. Eject' Firm a. it is called an Action of Trespass in
its Nature. The Consequence of this is, That in this Action, Accord with
Satisfaction is a good Plea. And Accord and Satisfaction for one shall
discharge all the Trespassers and Ejectors; and though the Term (which is a
Chattel Real) shall be recovered as well as Damages, yet it is a good Plea.

Now though we find few Titles of Ejectione Firm in our Old Books, yet it was in
use all along; it was used in Bracton's time, and, Term and Damages were
recovered therein. In tempore H. 3. he says, Si quis ejiciatur de usu fructu
vel habitatione alicujus tenementi quod tenuit ad terminum annorum ante
terminum suum, there the Lessee shall have a Writ of Covenant against his
Lessor; and against his Vendee he shall have a Quare Ejecit infra Terminum; and
as well against the Lessor as a Stranger, an Ejectione Firm.

But this Action came to be more frequent in my Lord Dyer's time, as may appear
by his Complaint in Court when he was Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas;
The Reason of the Change of Real Actions into Ejectione Firmes.
which also gives us the Reason of the change of Real Actions into Ejectments;
All Actions (says he) almost which concern the Realty, are determined in the
King's Bench by Writs of Ejectione Firm, whereby the Judgment is, quod
recuperet Terminum, and by that they are soon put into Possession. And
therefore in a Formed^n it was prayed by Council that they might proceed
without Essoyns, and feint Delays, because the Plaintiff's Title appeared,
which my Lord Dyer granted, Because (said he) this Court is debased and
lessened, and the King's Bench does increase with such Actions which should be
sued here, for the speed which is there: And (continued he) no Action in Effect
is brought here, but such Actions as cannot be brought there, as Formedons,
Writs of Dower, and the like. And it is my Lord Chief Justice Hale's
Observation in his Preface to Rolls's Abridgment: The Remedy by Assizes and
several Forms and Proceedings relating thereunto, were great Titles in the
Year-Books; and although the Law is not altered in relation to them, yet Use and
common Practice has in a great measure antiquated the use of them by
recovering Possessions, and the Remedy by Ejectione Firm used instead thereof.
So that rarely is any Assise brought, unless for recovering Possesion of
Offices. And so of Real Actions, as Writs of Right and Writs of Entry, which
are seldom brought, unless in Wales, by a Quod ei deforceat. But now the Entry
of him that has right being lawful, Men choose to recover their Possessions by
Ejectione Firm. But there was a new way invented to try Titles of Land in
personal Actions, but was not allowed, as in Jeremy and Simson's Case, 16 Car.
2. B. R.

It was moved for Trial at Bar on a feigned Action on the Case, upon a Wager by
Agreement of Parties, to have the Opinion of the Court of the Validity of a
Will; but though the Action was laid in Middlesex, yet being an Innovation, and
the way to subvert Ejectione Firme's, which have subverted the Formedons, and
it sufficiently appearing feigned on the Record, in that the Title of Land is
hereby to be tried in personal Actions, it was totally denied; but had it been
by direction of Chancery, the Court would do it, but would in no wise grant
this.

It was said by Ellesmere Lord Chancellor, that until the 14. H. 7. it was
never known that a Possession was removed by an Action of Ejectione Firm, and
said, It was great pity it was allowed at this day for Law in England; and
therefore was of Opinion, That an Action of Trespass Quare clausum fregit, was
much better to try the Title than an Ejectione Firm. 1. Because no Possession
was removed by the one. 2. Because a Man may so plead in an Action of Trespass,
as that he may make the Plaintiff disclose his Title; whereas by his Ejectione
Firm it is no more than Non culp', and then a Trial, and so out of Possession
without more business, which, he said, was a Pick-pocket Action. Ex M. S. 3
Leon, p. 49.

This Action is grounded on two Things, ( videlicet) the Lease and the
Ejectment.

It was well observed in Eyres and Banister's Case, Meor Rep. 418. That
Ejectione Firm in former times was not thought to be an Action which concerned
the Lessor, but only the proper Interest of the Lessee; but now of late times
it is put in ure by the Experience of the Judges and all others, that an
Ejectione Firm is the Suit of the Lessor, and the Lease made only to try his
Title, and to recover the Possession to him, and the Suit is prosecuted at his
Charge, and his Lessee is but his Instrument to this purpose; and all this to
avoid the Charge and Delay of a Real Action, and the Peril of being barred by a
single Verdict. And Partridge and Strainge's Case, Plo. 78. was cited for the
purpose; if one being out of Possession above a year, makes a Lease for years,
this is Maintenance within the Stat. 32 H. 8. and the Lessor and the Lessee
shall lose the Value of the Land; but if such a Person be at this day possessed
of such a Lease to try the Title, and not by Contract, that the Lessee shall
hold the Land, this is no Maintenance, as has been resolved in B. C. B. R. and
Star Chamber.

But for the better understanding the nature of this Action, I shall show
wherein it differs from an Action of Trespass and a Quare Ejecit infra
Terminum; for though, as was observed before, it is in a sort a Trespass, yet it
differs from it in several Things.

In Trespass Damages are only to be recovered, Diversity where the Damages are
only recovered, and where the Term.
but in Ejectione Firm the Thing or Term it self is to be recovered as well as
Damages: And from hence another difference is observable in respect of
Certainty. If in Trespass the Plaintiff declares in one Acre, and abutts it,
and the Jury find him guilty in dimidio Acrae praedict', or in one Foot of it,
this is good, though the Moiety is not bounded; they have found the Trespass in
the Moiety of the Acre bounded, and this suffices ^n this Action where Damages
are only to be recovered: But if it were in Ejectione Firm it had been ill;
for it is not certain in what part the Plaintiff shall have his Habere fac'
possessionem. And from this Diversity it is, that if an Ejectione Firm be
brought against two Defendants, the one confesses the Action, and the other
pleads in Bar, Not guilty, the Plaintiff cannot release his Suit as to one of
the Defendants, and proceed against the other; but in Trespass in such Case he
may, because this Suit is only in point of Damages. Yelv. 114. Winckworth and
Man. 2 Bulstr. 53.

Diversity, Possession a good Title in Trespass, but not in Ejectment, and why.
Possession is a good Title for the Plaintiff in Trespass, if the Defendant has
not a better to show, aliter in Ejectment; for in Ejectione Firm if the
Plaintiff has not a Title according to his Declaration, he cannot recover,
whether the Defendant has Title or not, as was Cotton's Case. An Infant
leaseth Land to C. at will* who entered and ousted S. who thereupon brought an
Ejectione Firm, on a special Verdict no Title appeared to be in the Plaintiff,
and it was objected against the Lease at will, because it was made by an
Infant, and no Rent reserved upon it, nor the Lease made upon the Land, and
therefore the Lessee should be a Disseisor Per Cur' be the Defendant a
Disseisor or not, its not material here, for if the Plaintiff has not Title
according to his Declaration, he cannot recover; and it is not like to
Trespass, where the very Possession without other Title, is good. 1 Leon, 215.
Cotton's Case.

Naked Color is not sufficient in Ejectione Diversity, color not sufficient
in Ejectione Firm, and why.
Firm, as it is in Trespass; therefore if the Plaintiff make Title in
Ejectment, this Title of the Plaintiff ought of necessity to be answered (
viz.) either by matter of Fact, or in Law, which confesses and avoideth the
Title, or traverseth it: For a naked Color in this Action is not sufficient,
as it is in Assise or Trespass, which comprehend not any Title or Conveyance in
the Writ or Count, as this Action does in both; and in Godb. 159. in this
Action a Man shall not give Color, because the Plaintiff shall be adjudged in
by Title. Dyer, 366. Godb. 159. Piggot and Goddet's Case.

Allowance of Conisance of Franchise in Conisance of Trespass includes not
Ejectments.
Trespass, will not warrant an Ejectione Firm, unless the Franchise had
Conusance of all Pleas, as was adjudged in the Case of the Bishop of Ely, Ter.
P. 18 Car. 2. B. R.

In Clerks Case the Venire fac' was ad faciend' juratam in Placito
Transgressionis, where it should have been in Placito Transgressionis and
Ejectionis Firm, and the Court would not amend it: For though Ejectione Firm
be but a Plea of Trespass in its Nature, yet the Actions are several, and
therefore the Venire fac' ought to be accordingly. Cr. El. 622. Clerk's Case.

In Ejectment against two, one pleads to Issue, and the other demurs Issue
first to be tried.
Ejectione Firm against two Defendants, one pleads Not guilty, the other
pleads, the Plaintiff replies, and so Demurrer; no Judgment shall be given on
the Demurrer, till the Issue be tried; for in this Action the Possession of the
Land is to be recovered, and it may be for any thing that appears he who
pleads the General Issue, has Title to it; but if it had been an Action of
Trespass, and the Plaintiff will release his Damages on the Issue joined, he
shall have Judgment against the other. 2 Leon. 199. Drake and Monday.

Trespass is deins Stat. 21 Jac. which names Trespass generally, but Ejectment
is not, 1 Keb. 295. Power's Case.

Trespass in one Acre, and abutts it, the Jury find him guilty in dimidio Acre
praed', this is good; but if it were in Ejectione, the Verdict had been ill;
for it is not certain in what part the Plaintiff shall have his Habere fac'
possessionem, Yelv. 114.

Ejectione Firm and Trespass of Battery were both in one Writ, Note. Ejectione
and Trespass for Battery, both one Writ.
and upon Not guilty, Verdict was given for the Plaintiff both for the
Ejectment and for the Battery, and entire Damages. Q. of the Judgment; for the
Damages for the Battery could not be released, because they were entire with
the Ejectment, Hob. 249. Bird and Snell.

Ejectione Firm against a Baron and Feme, which are but one Person in Law, yet
if the Baron dies, the Suit shall proceed against the Wife; for it is in the
nature of a Trespass, Hardr. 161.

Of the Difference between Ejectione Firm and Quare ejecit infra Terminum.
Ejectione Firm lies against the immediate Ejector, but Quare ejecit lies
against him who has Title, as against him in Reversion, 7 H. 4. 6. b.

Ejectione Firm is vi and armis, the other is not.

Quare ejecit infra Terminum lies against him who is in by Title, as against
the Vendee of the Lessor, but Ejectione Firm is against him that is the wrong
Doer.

In Ejectione Firm if the Term expire hanging the Action, this shall not abate
the Writ, but the Plaintiff shall have Judgment for his Damages; aliter in
Quare ejecit infra Terminum.

Note, No Ejectione Firm was brought against a Stranger before 14, H. 7.

At Common Law the Lessee had no Action but of Covenant against his Lessor or
Ejectione Firm. The Quare ejecit infra Terminum is given by the Stat. W. 2. c.
24. for Recovery of his Term against the Feoffee; for Ejectione Firm lies not
against him, because he came to the Land by Title of Feoffment, (...)

In what Court this Action is to be brought, or not, and of Removal by
Procedendo to an Inferior Court.
It lies in B. R. and Banco Communi.

It lies in the Exchequer, and for a Party privileged by Bill, 1 Rep. 3.
Pelham's Case.

Note, Where the King's Revenue is concerned, the Ejectment ought to be brought
in the Exchequer, In the Exchequer.
as if a Man claims Title to Lands of a Person outlawed. Ejectione Firm was
brought in the Exchequer by Garroway against R. T. upon an Ejectment of Lands
in Wales, and it was maintainable as well as Intrusion on Lands in Wales upon
the King himself.

Upon Ejectment brought in the Court of Common Pleas by the Defendant in the
Exchequer, the Plaintiff moved that the Action might be laid in the Exchequer,
because his Title was under an Extent out of this Court for Debts in Aid; and
so it was ordered, Hardr. p. 193. Sir Ralph Banks and Sir Tho. Bennet. Hardr.
p. 176. Hammond's Case. Godb. 1. 296. Case 416.

This Action lies not in the Marshalsea, 10 Rep. 72.

It lies in the Court of Ancient Demesne, How Ejectment lies in Ancient Demesne.
if it be of Ancient Demesne Lands, and not in the King's Courts; and therefore
in Ejectione Firm brought above, Ancient Demesne is a good Plea. Vid. infra
Tit. Pleading. 5 Rep. 105. Alden's Case.

Ejectione Firm depends in B. After a special Verdict found in G. B. the
Plaintiff may bring a new Ejectment in B. R. aliter of the Defendant.
C. and a special Verdict is found. The Plaintiff may bring a new Ejectment in
the King's Bench, and it shall not abate, for it is no Inconvenience to any
Person, the same being Plaintiff here and there; but if the Verdict had been
for the Defendant in the Common Bench, then the Plaintiff cannot bring a new
Action in B. R. till Possession be given in Baneo Communi according to the
Verdict, Tr. 17 Car. 2. B. R. Shepard and Griffith.

By Twisden in Crisp and Jackson's Case, Ejectment will not lie of Land in
Jamaica, and why.
the Reason why Ejectment will not lie of Lands in Jamaica, or in any of the
King's Foreign Territories, was, because the Courts here could not command them
to do Execution there, for they have no Sheriffs, 1 Ventr. p. 59.

Tr. How Ejectments to be brought, if the Lands lie in Middlesex or London. Not
removable by a Procedendo to a Franchise.
14 Car. 2. It was ordered in B. R. that in every Action of Trespass and
Ejectment to be brought after that time in the King's Bench, if the Land did
lie in the County of Middlesex, then a Bill of Middlesex should be brought; and
if the Lands lay in London, then a Writ of Laitat should be taken out against
the casual Ejector named Defendant in every such Action.

If Ejectione Firm be removed from an Inferior Court by Habeas Corpus into the
King's Bench, it is not removable by Procedendo to a Franchise, as Oxon, Pole,
Canterbury, etc. which only hold Plea of personal Actions, but in this Action
he shall recover Possession, and have a Writ of Habere fac' possessionem, and
thereby he that has a Freehold may be put out of Possession. And in Sabin's
Case M. 13 Car. 2. B. R. Ejectione Firm was brought in the City and County of
Canterbury, Procedendo denied, because Bail was put in B. R.
and removed into the King's Bench by Habeas Corpus, and a Procedendo was
prayed; but because Bail was put in in B. R. the Court denied the Procedendo,
because they were thereby seized of the Cause, Cro. Car. 87. Halley's Case. M.
13 Car. 2. B. R. Sabin's Case. Siderfin, p. 231.

Now in such Cases of Franchises, as Canterbury, Oxon, the Cinque Ports, etc.
they suppose the Lease elsewhere in the County, To be tried where its supposed
the Lease is made.
and it shall be tried where it is supposed the Lease to be made; and so by Wild
in Sabin's Case. Upon Ejectment in the County of Canterbury one may declare
upon a Demise in any part of the County of Kent, and so try it at Maidstone;
Canterbury.
for the Venire comes always from the place of the Demise, which was denied by
Windham, the Body of the County being as another County from that of Canterbury.

But the reason why the Court denied a Procedendo in Allen and Burney's Case,
was because the Plaintiff below had not actually sealed a Lease, as he ought to
have done, being an Inferior Court, M. 18 Car. 2 B. R. Allen and Burney.

Action was brought in the Court of the Marches of Wales in nature of Ejectione
Firm, Marches of Wales.
and a Prohibition granted, because they are not to meddle with the Possessions
of Men, unless in respect of force, plena Curia, 2 Rolls Rep. 309.

CHAP. II.
Who shall have Ejectione Firm, and in what Cases this Action lies, or not, in
respect of Possession, in respect of Entry congeable, in respect of Exility of
Estate. By Lessee of Copyhold, and how, and whether before Admittance, and the
manner of declaring. Of Ejectment by Executors. Infant-Lessee of Simonist. On
Elegit. On undue Extent, and in case of holding over. By Intruder, by the
King's Lessee, by a Person Outlawed, by Lessee of Bail on Extent, by Judgment
against the Principal, by Issue in Tail liable to a Statute, who comes not in
and pleads to the Sc' fac', on Entry if the Grantee of Rent with Proviso for
Retainer till Satisfaction of Arrears; by Cesty que Trust; by Vendee of
Commissioners of Bankrupt.

THE next to be handled, is, In what Cases this Action lies, and in what not;
whereby the Reader may be so well informed, as not to hazard his Client's
Cause, and his own Reputation.

Note, If the Heir bring an Ejectment, and the Ancestor dies subsequent to the
Action, he shall not recover, because every one shall recover only according to
the Right which he has at the time of the bringing his Action, in Wedywood and
Bayley's Case, Raym. 463.

It has been laid down for a constant Rule in our Books, In respect of
Possession.
That upon a Possession in Law, a Man shall never maintain an Ejectione Firm,
but he ought to have actual Possession at the time of the Ouster, as if Tenant
for years makes a Lease at will, and the Tenant at will is ejected; the
Question was in Stone and Grubham's Case, 1 Rolls Rep. 3. if the Tenant for
years for this Ejectment of his Lessee at will shall have an Ejectione Firm,
and it was resolved that he should not. So if Lessee for years be the Remainder
for years, the Lessee for years is ousted, his Term expires, he in Remainder
for years cannot have an Ejectione Firm, because he had no actual Possession
at the time of the Ejectment. So if a Lease for years be made, and before the
Lessee enters, a Stranger enters, he shall not have this Action. And upon this
Reason of Law it is, that by the new Rule of Practice, the Defendant shall
confess Entry and Ouster; but it has been resolved, That if Inquisition upon
Elegit be found, the Party before Entry has the Possession, and a Fine with
Nonclaim shall bar his Right; for before actual Entry he may have Ejectione
Firm or Trespass, and it is not like to an Interesse Termini.

In Smith and Rawlin's Case no Entry was proved to be by Dean and Chapter since
1631. yet in regard Rent had been actually paid, there the Lessee may bring
Ejectment (without any Lease actually sealed on the ground.) 2 Keb. 127. Smith
and Rawlins.

Possession of the Lessor of the Plaintiff must appear to be within Twenty
years, though the special Verdict be on another Point; so Keb. 364. but 32 H.
8. c. 2. extends not to Common; but the Reversion in the King will privilege
the Lessor of the Plaintiff being but a Lessee for ninety nine years against
such want of Possession, 3 Keb. 681. M. 28 Car. 2. B. R. Piggot and the Lord
Salisbury.

Lessee for years shall only have this Action, N. B. 120. F.

He whose Entry is not congeable by Law, In respect of Entry congeable.
cannot have Ejectione Firm, as in case of a Formedon in Remainder and
Discontinuance.

Lessor grants the Reversion to A. Lessee Attorns, A. ousts him, Lessee shall
have Ejectione Firm, N. B. 221. a. 1 H. 5. 3. pl. 3.

The Action of Ejectment is maintainable, if it appear by special Verdict, that
any former Lease made by the Lessor que etc. be in force, 1 Rep. 153. Rector of
Chedington's Case.

How Copyholder or his Lessee shall bring an Ejectment, Ejectment by Copyholder
or his Lessee.
there have been uncertain Opinions in our Books; but the Law therein stands
thus.

Lessee of a Copyholder for one year shall maintain Ejectione Firm, in as much
as his Term is warranted by the Law, by force of the general Custom of the
Realm; and it is but Reason, if he be ejected, that he shall have an Ejectione
Firm; and it is a speedy course for a Copyholder to have Possession of the Land
against a Stranger; but in the Guardian of the Monastery of Otlery's Case
cited, it was objected, That if Ejectment be maintainable by Lessee of a
Copyholder (as it was adjudged in B. 4 Leon. p. 18.
C.) then if the Plaintiff recover, he should have an Habere fac' possessionem,
and then Copyholds should be ordered by the Common Law, 4 Rep. 26. Cr. Eliz.
676, 717. Erithe's Case. Moor, 709. Stoner and Gibson. Leon. p. 118.

The Lessor for years of a Copyhold which is made without License of the Lord,
By Lessee of a Copyholder without License of the Lord.
may maintain an Ejectione Firm, because he is Lessee against all but the
Lord; and the Lease is good between the Lessor and Lessee, and against all
Strangers, but not against the Lord; and so in Hardres's Rep. p. 330. The Lease
of a Guardian or Copyholder, will maintain the Declaration in Ejectment, though
void, against the Lord and Infant. And therefore Jackson and Neale's Case in
Cro. El. 394. seems not to be Law, which was; The License to a Copyholder was
to let for twenty one years from Michaelmas last past, he makes a Lease for
twenty one years to begin at Christmas following, to the Plaintiff, who entered,
and being ousted by the Defendant, brings an Ejectione Firm; the Court was of
Opinion, That the Lease not being warranted by this License, no Ejectione Firm
lies upon it.

But in Petty and Evans's Case, in Ejectione Firm brought by the Lessee of a
Copyholder, Declaration by Copyholder in Ejectment.
it is sufficient that a Count be general without mention of the License; and
if the Defendant plead Not guilty, then the Defendant ought to show the License
in Evidence; but if the Defendant plead specially (as in those times it was
usual) then the Plaintiff ought to plead the License certainly in the
Replication, and the Time and Place when and where it was made. 2 Brownl. 40.
Petty and Evans.

In Ewer and Astwick's Case it was doubted by the Court (and so in several
other Cases in former times) Whether the Plaintiff in his Declaration ought to
set forth the Custom of the Manor that the Copyholder may Lease, Copyholder in
his Declaration need not set forth the Custom.
etc. and then to show that the Lease is warranted by the Custom. But now it is
fully agreed, That the Plaintiff ought not to show that the Lease is warranted
by the Custom; but that shall come on the other side, and so is the Practice
not to declare on the Custom, Rumney and Eve's Case. 1 Leon. p. 100.

It has likewise been a Question, Ejectione Firm by Copyholder before
Admittance or Presentment, and where not without Admittance.
Whether one ought to be admitted before he can maintain this Action; but it is
resolved in Rumney and Eve's Case, if customary Lands do descend to the younger
Son by Custom, and he enters, and leaseth it to another, who takes the Profits,
and after is ejected, that he shall have an Ejectione Firm, without any
Admittance of the Lessor, or without any Presentment that he is Heir, 1 Leon.
p. 101. Rumney and Eves, Pop. 38 Bullock and Dibler.

But a Copyholder Mortgagee must be admitted before he bring this Action,
Copyholder Mortgagee must be admitted before he brings this Action.
and he may bring his Bill against the Lord to be admitted to enable him to try
the Custom; 2 Keb. 357. Towell and Cornish.

Ejectione Firm may be brought by By Executors.
Executors of Land let to their Testator for years upon ouster of the Testator
for years per Stat. 4. Ed. 4. c. 6. which gives an Action for Goods taken out
of the Possession of the Testator; the Reason is, because it is to recover the
Term it self, 7 H. 4. 6. b. 2 Ventr. p. 30.

If a Man ousts the Executors of his Lessee for years of their Term, they may
have a special Action on the Case, or they may have Ejectione Firm or
Trespass, 4 Rep. 95. a. Reg. 97. N. B. 92.

In Ejectment the Plaintiff was an Infant at the time of the Bill purchased, By
Infant.
and sued by Attorney where he could not make an Attorney, but ought to have
sued by Guardian per Cur', it is erroneous, and Error en fait, Cro. Jac. p. 5.
Rue and Long.

Deprivation in the Spiritual Court for Symony, By Symonist.
disables from bringing Ejectment, because he can make no Lease, per H. Windham
Buck's Lent Assizes, 1668. Dr. Crawley's Case.

In Jefferson and Dawson's Case Council prayed, The Sheriff only to deliver
Se^sure on Elegit to enable the Plaintiff to maintain Ejectment.
That delivery of Possession might be awarded on Elegit, but the Court denied
it, the Party having no day to interplead; and the Sheriff ought only to
deliver Seizure to enable the Plaintiff to maintain Ejectment, and the Tenant
may plead on the Ejectment, or else the Tenant may be turned out unheard, and
so be remediless, and per. Cur' actual Possession ought not to be delivered;
but if it be, it is remediless; and yet before Entry the Plaintiff for whom the
Inquisition is found, Ejectione Firm be for actual Entry on Elegit.
has Possession, and before actual Entry he may have Ejectione Firm, and is
not like to an Interesse Termini, M. 25 Car. 2. B. R.

In some Cases Remedy against an undue Extent may be by Ejectment; Remedy
against undue Extent on Elegit by Ejectment.
as, The Inquest by Practice of the Sheriff on Elegit, find the Defendant had
Lands in A. where he had nothing, and so extended all his Lands in B. as a
Moiety, this is avoidable by Ejectment, as to a Moiety, and the Evidence may
be, That the Defendant had nothing in A. or to file the Writ of Elegit, and in
Ejectment thereon (which else cannot be brought) to plead the same; Ejectment
against Tenant by Elegit in case of holding over, not so of a Judgment, and why.
or in case of holding over, Ejectment lies against Tenant by Elegit, if he be
satisfied at the extended Value, contra of a Judgment which is uncertain for
Costs and Damages, 1 Keb. 891. Dakin and Hulme. 1 Keb. 858. Lord Stamford and
Hubbard.

Intruder on the King's Possession, By Intruder.
cannot make a Lease whereupon the Lessee may maintain an Ejectione Firm, though
he may have an Action of Trespass against a Stranger; Stranger may enter,
notwithstanding Judgment in Informat' in Intrusion.
but a Judgment in Information of Intrusion pro Rege binds not a Stranger, but
that he may enter and bring Ejectment; if it were otherwise this would be a
Trap for any Man's Possession by lawful Title; and the Judgment on Intrusion is
not in the nature of Seisin or Possession, Judgment in Intrusion, what.
but only quod pars committatur and capiatur pro fine, and an Entry may be made
by the King's Patentee, Hardress, p. 460. Friend and the Duke of Richmond.

If a Stranger enters upon the King's Fermor, by such Entry he has gained the
Estate for years; and if he does make a Lease to another, his Lessee may
maintain Ejectione Ferme. A Lessee may have Ejectione Firm, though the Reversion
be in the King. So that it seems the Ejector by his Entry has gained the Land,
2 H. 6. 6. Dyer 116. b. 3 Leon. p. 206.

The Lessee of the King may bring Ejectione Firm, The Lessee of the King.
though the King be not put out of the Freehold by the Words, He entered and
expulsed him, Cr. El. 331. Lee and Morris.

It Is said in Leonard, 1 part 212. Lessee of Tenant in Common of one Moiety, By
Tenant in Common of one Moiety.
without actual Ouster, cannot maintain Ejectione Firm against the Lessee of
his Companion.

J. Entry taken away by lapse of time for not entering.
M. covenants to stand seized to the use of himself for life, and after to the
use of his Daughters, until every one of them successive shall or may have
levied 500 l. Remainder to his eldest Son. He had four Daughters at the time of
his Dea^^ and the Land was worth 100 l. per Annum; the Father died in 30 El.
the eldest Son immediately entered, the eldest Daughter entered in 42 Eliz. and
made the Lease to the Plaintiff; Per Cur', she has overpast her time, and
cannot enter; for then she should prejudice her other Sisters, so as they
should never levy their Portions, Cr. El. 809. Blackbourn and Lassells.

A Person outlawed may bring Ejectione Firm: By a Person outlawed.
For though a Person outlawed cannot after an Extent, prevent or avoid the King's
Title by Alienation, yet the Outlawry gives no Privilege to the Possession of
a Disseisor, but that the Disseisee may enter and bring the Ejectment; for by
the Outlary the King has only a Title to the Profits, and no Interest in the
Land, Hadr. 156. Hammond's Case vide.

If a Man ousts the Executors of his Lessee for years of their Term, By
Executors.
they may have a special Action on the Case, or they may have an Ejectione
Firm or Trespass, 4. Rep. 95. a. Reg. 97. N. B. 92.

One seized of Lands in Fee-Simple, The Bail lets Lands to B. Judgment is
against the Principal, and Extent on the Lands leased. B brings Ejectment.
becomes Bail in an Action of Debt in B. R. and after Issue joined, let the
Land to B. the Plaintiff; Judgment is afterward given against the Principal,
and an Extent taken upon the said leased Lands, B. the Plaintiff being
thereupon ousted, brings this Action of Ejectione Firm, Crok. Jac. 449.
Kervile and Brokest.

Tenant for life, Where the Issue in Tail is (...) to Execution on a (...). on
Sc' fac' returned, and he comes not in and pleads, he shall not bring his
Ejectment.
Remainder to his Issue in Tail; Tenant for life enters into a Stat' and dies,
Conisee sues a Scire fac' against his Heir, who was Issue in Tail, and the
Sheriff retorns Scire feci; and upon this, Execution without any Plea pleaded
by the Heir, and the Heir being ousted by the Execution, brought Ejectione; Per
Cur', the Heir shall be bound by this Execution, and he has no Remedy, neither
by Ejectment, Writ of Error, nor by Aud' Querela, nor by any other way, but
against the Sheriff, if he have made a faux Retorn of the Scire fac', Siderfin,
p. 55. Day and Guilford.

Rent granted with a Proviso, Upon Entry of Grantee of a Rent and Retainer till
Satisfaction for Arrear, he may upon such Interest quousque maintain an
Ejectment; and so the Lord upon Scisure of a Copyhold till the Heir come to be
admitted. 1 Keb. 287. in Pateson's Case.
that if it be Arrear the Grantee may enter and retain until he be satisfied.
This Proviso shall enure to grant a certain Estate to the Grantee when he
enters for Non-payment. And though the Grantee by such Entry cannot gain a
Freehold, yet he had such an Interest as he may make a Lease of it, and his
Lessee may have an Ejectment; for the Law does not give an Interest to any, but
it also gives a Remedy for it; and if he have Remedy to hold such Possession,
he ought to have this Action, which is the lowest Degree of gaining Possession.
So in the Countess of Cumberland's Case, Anno 1659. of Copyholds, there was a
Custom, That if such Tenant who claims Tenant Right, does not pay his Fine, the
Lord may enter and retain the Land until he be satisfied, and adjudged that his
Lessee upon such Entry for Non-payment, may maintain Ejectione Firm, Siderfin,
p. 223. Jemot and Cowley. 1 Roll. 784. 2 Keb. 20. mesme Case. Cro. Jac. 511.
Havergell and Hare.

Hill. 13 Jac. B. C. Rot. 868. Brown and Hagger cited in Price and Vaughan's
Case, is full in the Point; and Trin. 14 Car. 2. Roll. 2511. Eyer and Malin.
Ejectment upon a Lease of the Lord Byron, special Verdict found, Sir J. Byren
seized in Fee by Indenture, grants a Rent Charge for life, to commence after
the Death of the Grantor; and if the Rent be Arrear, that the Grantee may euter
and take the Profits without Account, till the Rent and Arrears shall be paid.
The Rent was Arrear, and the Grantee enters and makes a Lease to the Plaintiff;
and Bridgman and the rest ( praeter Brown) agreed for the Plaintiff.

It was said in the Case of Holmes and Bailey, By Tenant at Will.
That Tenant at Will may make a Lease for years to try a Title of Land, and so
may a Copyholder, Styles Rep. 380.

Ejectment is brought by Cesty que Trust. By Cesty que Trust.
Now if the Trustee of the Lease be Lessor in Ejectment, he may disclaim in
pays (if he have not accepted the Trust) which will avoid the Plaintiff's Title
at the Trial; 2 Keb, 794. Cheek and Lisle.

Vendee of the Commissioners on the Statute of Bankrupts of Lands by Deed
Indented, By a Vendee of the Commissioners of Bankrupts.
cannot maintain by his Lessee an Ejectione Firm, before Inrollment of the
Deed, although it be enrolled after the Action brought: And the Difference
between this and the case of a common Bargain and Sale per Stat. 27 H. 8. c.
10. of Uses, is, For there the Estate passes by the Contract, and the Use is
executed by the Statute; then comes the Act of Inrolments of the same year, and
enacts, That no Estate shall pass without Inrolment, and this within Six
Months. But the Commissioners here have not any Estate, but only a Power which
ought to be executed by the Means prescribed by the Statute, with the
Circumstances there directed, which is not only by Deed indented, but enrolled
also; Sir Tho. Jones, p. 196. Perry and Bowers.

Note, Lessor of Tenant in Possession has no Privilege in Ejectment, though he
be a Lord of Parliament, unless he be Tenant in Possession himself, 1 Keb. 329.

CHAP. III.
Of Process in Ejectione Firm. The Original. What Mistakes in the Original are
Error after a Verdict, or not. Of a vicious Original. Of the want of an
Original. Of an Original taken out before the Cause of Action. Where Amendment
shall be by the Paper-Book. Of Amendments of Originals, Stat. 13 Car. 2. c. 11.
Of Appearance. Infant, how to appear, sue or defend. The true Difference
between Guardian and Prochein Amy. Of want of Pledges. Of Bail. Of the Stat. 13
Car. 2. c. 2. Of Bail or Error.

The Original is thus.
REX, etc. Vic Midd salutem. Si A. ^. fecerit te securum tunc pone p (...) pleg
C. D. nuper de London (...). Ita quoth sit coram Iusticiariis nostr apud (...)
(tali die) ad respondend W. ^. ^e Plito quare vi and armis unum Mess^^g december
Aeras Terre and tres. Aeras Pasture cum pertinen in D. in Commit tuo que S. W.
vid eid W. dimisit ad terminum qui nondum preteriit intravit and ipsum a Firma
sua ejecit, and alia enormia ei intulit ad grave damnum ipsius W. and contra
pacem nostram and Dom Regis nunc, etc. T. etc.

On the Retorn in B. R. quindena Pasche ubicunque.
Writ, Process.
In Ejectment upon a Demise by the Lord L. who was no Peer, yet upon Non Culp',
good, he being the same Person that did demise, Allen 58. Bernard's Case.

So you see the Original Writ in C. B. in Ejectment, is an Attachment, or a
Pone per vadios and salvos plegios, etc. and Summonitus in Ejectment was held
to be an Error.

In Ejectione Firm brought by Original Writ out of Chancery; Summonit. for
Attachment, is Error after Verdict.
the Record upon the Issue-Roll was entered in this manner; ss. Simo Edulph
nuper de C. summonit fuit ad respond Tho. R. de plito quare vi and armis, etc.
And after Verdict pro Quer', it was moved, That this was a Vicious Original,
and not aided by any of the Statutes of Jeofail's; for it appears by the Entry
of it, that the Original was a Summons, where it ought to have been an
Attachment, which the Court granted; but upon search there was no Original
filed; Aliter if there be no Original.
and then per Cur' seeing there is no Original filed, it shall be intended
after Verdict, that once there was a good Original, which is now lost, and that
the Plaintiff's Clerk had mistaken in the Recital of it, which after Verdict is
not material, Reg. Orig. 227. b. Saunders Rep. 1. p. 317. Redman and. Edolph.
Sider. 423. mesme Case. 2 Keb. 544. mesme Case.

So in Jennings and Downe's Case Error was assigned, because that it appeared
by the Record that the Declaration was before the Plaintiff had any Cause of
Action; but the Council of the other side said, There is a wrong Original
certified, and prayed to have a new Certificate to have the true Original
certified. Original taken out before the Cause of Action, is Error.
Per Cur', Take it, for it is in Affirmance of a Judgment, which ought to be
favored. But in John's and Steyner's Case the Original bore Date 24 Junij 6
Car. and the Ejectment is supposed 31 Januarij: Per Cur' it is Error, because
the Original (upon Diminution alleged) was certified as an Original in this
Action, which is between the same Parties, and of the same Land, and of the
same Term; and being taken out before the Cause of Action, it is a vicious
Original, not aided by any Statute, Styles Rep. 352. Jennings and Downs. Cro.
Car. 272, 281. John's and Steyner.

It Is a Rule in the Register, That in the Writ of Ejectione Firm there may not
be Bona and Catalla, because that for Goods taken away a Man shall have an
Exigend', and in this Writ Distress infinite, Plo. 228. b.

So was Johnson and Davies's Case. The Suit was by Original Writ, which is of
one Message, Sixty Acres of Land, Three hundred Acres of Pasture; but per
Curiam this shall not be intended the Original upon which the Plaintiff
declared, but that there was another Original which warranted the Declaration,
which is now imbesilled; and this want is aided by the Statute of Jeofayls,
especially as this Case is; because the Writ is Test 18 Apr. Ret' 15 Pasch.
etc. This Declaration is in Trinity Term, and here is no Continuance upon this
Writ, Cro. Car. 327. Johnson and Davis.

In Ejectione Firm the Paper-Book was right, Where Amendment shall be by the
Papre-Book, or not.
scil. Acram Terrae, and the Bill upon the File was ill (scilicet) Clausum
Terrae; and the Bill was amended by the Paper-Book; and the Difference is,
where there is a Paper-Book in the Office of the Clerk, this being right, all
shall be amended by it; but if there were not any Paper-Book, and the Bill upon
the File is ill, there can be no Amendment: and in this Case the Amendment was
according to the Paper-Book which was in the Hands of the Plaintiff's Attorney,
Palmer, 404, 405. Todman and Ward.

It was an Exception in Haines and Strowder's Case, because the Suit was by
Original Writ, and the Clause ( ostensurus) was not in the Writ, Palmer, 413.
Haines and Strowder. Godb. 408. Case. Crouch and Haines, Case 488.

The Original was Test the same Day that the Ejectment was made, Original
Test the same day of Ejectment.
and adjudged good per totam Curiam, 2 Roll. Rep. 352, 129. Beaumont and Coke.

As for the Amendment of Originals in Ejectione Firm, Of Amendments of
Originals in this Action.
there are many Cases in our Books; I shall name one or two which may be as a
Guide in others.

Ex divisione for ex dimissione was amended; so Barnabiam for Barnabam, and so
what appears to be the Default of the Cursitor, 1 Brownl. 130. 1 Rolls Abr. 198.

In Ejectione Firm, If the PaperBook be perfect, though the Bill upon the File
be not perfect, yet it is amendable after Verdict.
if the Bill be not perfect; but Spaces left for Quantity of Land and Meadow;
and after the Paper-Book given to the Party, is made perfect, and the Plea-Roll
and Nisi-prius Roll, but the Bill upon the File was never perfected; and after
a Verdict is given for the Plaintiff, this Imperfection of the Bill shall be
amended, because the Party is not deceived by this, forasmuch as the Paper-Book
which he had, was perfect, and it was the Neglect of the Clerk not to amend the
Bill when the Party had given him Information of the Quantity, 1 Rolls Abr.
207. Leeson and West.

Original in Ejectment was amended after Writ of Error brought, as divisit for
dimisit, 2 Ventr. 173.

By the Stat. 13 Car. 2. c. 11. In all personal Actions, and in Ejectione Firm
for Lands, etc. depending by Original Writ, after any Issue therein joined, and
also after any Judgment therein had and obtained, there shall not need to be
Fifteen Days between the Teste-day and the Day of Retorn of any Writ of Ven'
fac', Hab' corpora jurat', Distringas jurat', Fieri facias or Capias ad
Satisfaciend', and the want of Fifteen Days between the Teste-day and the Day
of Retorn of any such Writ, shall not be assigned for Error.

If an Original in B. R. be ill, Error upon it lies not but in Parliament, Sid.
p. 42.

Action of Ejectment, and also Battery in one Writ, and it was moved in Arrest
of Judgment, because Battery was joined in Ejectment, the Damages were found
severally, and the Plaintiff released the Damages for the Battery, and prayed
Judgment for the Ejectment, and had it; 1 Brownl. 235. Bide and Snelling.

Of Appearance.
If the Tenant in Possession do not appear in due time after the Declaration
left with him, Judgment against the casual Ejector for want of Appearance.
and enter into the Rule for confessing Lease-Entry and Ouster, then upon
Affidavit made of the Service thereof, and Notice given him to appear, upon
Motion the Court will order Judgment to be entered up against the casual Ejector.

In Ejectment or any other personal Action, if the Defendant do appear upon the
first Retorn in Hillary or Trinity Term, there can be no Imparlance without
Consent or special Rule of Court.

In Actions real and mixed against an Infant, he ought to appear by Guardian,
Infant, how to appear.
and not by Attorney; and Judgment in Ejectione Firm in Banco against the
Infant Defendant upon a Verdict had against him, was reversed for this Cause, 1
Rolls Abr. 287. Lewis and John's.

Ejectione Firm was brought against Thomas the Father and J. the Son; the
Father appeared by T. C. Attornat' suum, and the said J. per eundem T. C.
proximum amicum suum* who was admitted per Cur' ad prosequend', this is Error:
A Guardian and Prochein Amy are distinct, Infant, how to sue or defend.
and a Guardian or Prochein Amy may be admitted for the Plaintiff; and a
Prochein Amy is appointed by W. 1. c. 47. W. 2. c. 15. in case of Necessity,
where an Infant is to sue his Guardian, or that the Guardian will not sue for
him, The Difference between Guardian and Prochein Amy. Want of
and therefore he is admitted to sue per Guardian or Prochein Amy, where he is
to demand or gain; but when he is to defend a Suit in Actions Real or Personal,
it always ought to be per Gardianum, and the Guardian ought to be admitted per
Cur'. Therefore the Defendant ought always to appear by Guardian, and not by
Prochein Amy; and also to admit the Defendant ad prosequend', is ill and
preposterous, Cro. Jac. 640. Maby and Shepard.

Pledges.
Error of a Judgment in C. B. in Ejectione Firm assigned in 1 Cro. Pledges not
assigned for Error, because Diminution was not prayed.
91, 594. in not certifying Pledges (on Diminution alleged) in a Writ of
Error, for that Cause per Cur' Omission of Pledges, or of one, is Error, though
after a Verdict; and the Defendant after in nullo est erratum pleaded, may pray
Diminution, which cannot be granted but on Motion, and then only to affirm the
Judgment; yet when the Record is come in, it may be made use of to avoid the
Judgment; and because Diminution was not prayed, the Court conceived it cannot
be assigned for Error, 1 Keb. 278, 281. Hodges's Case.

Bail.
In Ejectment against Two, one does not put in Bail, it is Error, 2 Rolls Abr.
46. Dennis Case.

In Ejectment on Non Culp. pleaded by the Attorney for the Defendant, Common
Bail entered after the Attorney was dead.
Verdict was for the Plaintiff, who had Judgment, and Error was brought to
reverse it, because no Bail was put in for the Defendant; yet the Attorney
being once retained by Warrant to put in Bail, and took his Fee, and being but
common Bail, though the Attorney was dead, yet the Bail was then entered, as of
the same Term it ought to have been done, 3 Bulstr. 181. Denham and Comber.

Trespass is within the Act of 21 Jac. which names Trespass generally, Stat. 13
Car. c. 2.
but Ejectment is not within that Act. Stat. 13 Car. 2. c. 2. orders Bail on
Error in Trespass, 1 Keb. 295. Power's Case.

Note, Error without Bail, is a Supersedeas in Ejectment, notwithstanding the
new Act, 13 Car. 2. c. 2. it being not within the general Word, Trespass, Id.
p. 308. Lufton and Johnson.

Tr. When common Bail to be filed.
14 Car. 2. B. R. ordered that Common Bail shall be filed for the Defendant
before any Declaration by Bill in such Action shall be delivered to the Tenant
in Possession of the Lands in such Declaration contained, and that if the
Attorney for the Plaintiff in B. R. shall fail thereof, then no Judgment for
the Plaintiff shall be entered against the casual Ejector, nor shall the Tenant
in Possession confess Lease-entry and Ouster at the Trial.

Attorney was made Lessee in Ejectment, Imparlance.
and he would not grant an Imparlance to the Defendant, as the Course is,
because he is Attorney of this Court ( B. R.) and so claims Privilege that the
Defendant may answer him this Term, or else he will enter up Judgment against
him for want of a Plea. Quaere. Styles Rep. 367.

CHAP. IV.
Against whom Ejectione Firm lies, or not, and of the casual Ejector. Of the
old way of Sealing Leases of Ejectment by Corporations; by Baron and Feme; in
what Cases now to be used.

EJectione Firm against one Simul cum, had been ruled to be good, and so used
in the Common Pleas, though heretofore it was adjudged to the contrary, Styles
Rep. 15.

It lies against Baron and Feme, Lib. Intr. 253. 9. Rep. 77. e. Peytoe's Case.
Plo. 187.

It lies against the Ejector or wrong Doer, be who he will.

When the Course was to seal an Ejectment to try a Title of Land, Who was
accounted an Ejector formerly.
the Ejector in Law was any Person that comes upon any part of the Land, etc.
in the Ejectment-Lease, though it be by chance, and with no intent to disturb the
Lessee of Possession, next after the Sealing and Delivery of the
Ejectment-Lease; and such an Ejector was a good Ejector, against whom an Action
of Ejectione Firm may be brought to try the Title of the Land in Question. But
he that was to try a Title of Land in Ejectment, ought not to have made an
Ejector of his own, against whom he might bring his Action; or to consent or
agree with one to come upon the Land let in the Ejectment-Lease, with an Intent
to make him an Ector, and to bring his Action against him; for by that means
the Tenant in Possession of the Land, was after put out of Possession by a Writ
of Habere fac' possessionem, without any Notice given to him or his Lessor of
the Suit; but now the Law is otherwise, and altered by the new way of Practice.
The new course in Ejectments.
For now it is not usual to seal any Lease of Ejectment at all in this Action,
but the Plaintiff that intends to try the Title, feigns a Lease of Ejectment in
his Declaration, and an Ejector, and draws a Declaration against his own
Ejector, who sends or delivers a Copy thereof to the Tenant in Possession,
giving him Notice to appear and defend his Title, or else the Ejector will
confess, or suffer Judgment by Default: But if the Tenant or the Lessor will
defend the Title, then* it is usual for them to move the Court that they may be
made Ejector to defend the Title (that is) the Tenant appears, and consents to
a Rule, with the Plaintiff's Attorney, to make himself Defendant in the room of
the casual Ejector, and this the Court will grant, if he will confess Lease,
Entry and Ouster, and at the Trial stand merely upon the Title; but if they do
not at the Trial confess Lease, Entry and Ouster, then the Judgment shall be
entered against the casual ( viz.) the Plaintiff's own Ejector.

Note, The Court said in Addison's Case, Mod. Rep. 252. That they take no
Notice judicially, that the Lessor of the Plaintiff is the Party interested,
therefore they punish the Plaintiff, if he release the Damages; but in point of
Costs they take notice of him.

But before I proceed further, The old way of Sealing Leases of Ejectment.
I hope it will not be tedious a little to show how the Law and Practice was
taken when Ejectment-Leases were sealed, and Entries to be duly made, and
Warrants of Attorney made to deliver the Lease upon the Land by a Corporation,
Baron and Feme, etc. especially considering that in Inferior Courts the old
way of actual sealing Leases is continued, Winch 50. 1 Brow nl 129. Godb. 72.
Earl of Kent's Case.

And first, The way to execute a Lease to try a Title, the Land being in many
Men's Hands, was to enter into one of the Parcels, and leave one in that place;
and then he must go into another, and leave one there, and so of the rest; and
then after he had made the last Entry there, he seals and delivers the
Lease; and then those Men that were left there, must come out of the Land. But
when a Title was to be tried by Ejectment, and a Lease to be executed by a
Letter of Attorney, the Course was, That the Lessor do seal the Lease only, and
deliver it as an Escrow, and the Letter of Attorney, and deliver the Letter of
Attorney, but not the Lease; for the Attorney must deliver that upon the Land.
And upon Ejectment brought of Land in Two Villages, as of an House and Forty
Acres of Land in A. and B. and a special Entry in the Land adjoining to the
House ( viz.) the putting in of an Horse which was drove out of the Land by the
Defendant, this was adjudged a good Entry for the Land in both the Villages per
totam Curiam. So of Lands in one County, Palmer, 402. Argoll and Cheney.

The Corporation of Mercers were seized of the Lands in Question, By
Corporation.
in the several Possessions of Two Men; and being so seized, made a Deed of
Lease to the Plaintiff and a Letter of Attorney to deliver the Deed and the
Possession. The Attorney entered upon the Possession of one of the Men, and
there delivers the Deed, and after enters in the Possession of the other, and
there does deliver the Deed; the Question was, If it were good for the Land for
which the second Delivery was, because one Deed cannot have two Deliveries; but
the Court held, it shall be intended the first Delivery was good for all, and
it shall not be intended but that the two Men had Possession only as Tenants at
Will to the Corporation, and then the Delivery of the Lease in one place, is
good for all; and it shall not be intended they had an Estate for Years or
Life, except the contrary be showed.

Baron and Feme join in a Lease by Indenture to B. By Baron and Feme.
rendering Rent for Years, and make a Letter of Attorney to seal and deliver the
Lease upon the Land, which is done. B. brought Ejectment, and declares of a
Demise made by the Baron and Feme; and upon evidence to the Jury, it was ruled
per Cur', That the Lease will not maintain the Declaration; for a Feme covert
cannot make a Letter of Attorney to deliver a Lease of her Land, but the
Warrant of Attorney is merely void; so that this only is a Lease of the
Husband, which is not maintained by the Declaration. But Hopkins's Case in Cro.
Car. 165. is against this, where the Plaintiff declared of a Lease made by
Baron and Feme; On Not guilty, it appeared on the Evidence, that the Lease was
sealed and subscribed by them both, and a Letter of Attorney made by them to
deliver it upon the Land; Per Cur' it is a good Letter of Attorney by them both,
and the Lease well delivered, and it is a Lease of them both during the
Husband's Life, Yelv. Wilson and Rich. 2 Brownl. 248. Plomer's Case. Cro. Car.
165. Hopkin's Case. 2 Leon. 200.

CHAP. V.
Of the Rule of confessing Lease, Entry and Ouster, and Rules of Court relating
thereunto. Of Refusal to confess Lease, Entry and Ouster, and the Consequence.
Of how much the Defendant shall confess Lease, Entry and Ouster. In what Cases
there must be an actual Entry, and where it is supplied by confessing of Lease,
Entry and Ouster. Rules concerning ones being made Defendant, and of altering
the Plaintiff; and of the Ejectment-Lease.

HOW necessary the Knowledge of this Practice is to one who would manage his
Client's Cause with Discretion and Success, is sufficiently apparent, and needs
no further Recommendation.

It must be observed (as was adjudged in the Mayor of Bristol's Case) that
there, Ejectment in Inferior Courts.
or in any other Inferior Court, they cannot make Rules to confess Lease,
Entry and Ouster, as in the Courts of Westminster, but they must actually seal
the Lease, as at Common Law. And so it was in Sherman and Cook's Case, where it
was moved, That the Defendant, who by Habeas Corpus had removed an Ejectment
out of the Sheriff's Court, might consent to a Rule of Court, that he should
confess Lease, Entry and Ouster; but the Court refused, the Defendant not being
bound by the Rule below; because they cannot proceed by way of delivering
Declarations to the Tenants in Possession, but as at Common Law by actual Lease
sealed: Trials below, how.
And by Hyde, all the Trials below are tried in the casual Ejector's Name by
him that is Tenant in Possession, to avoid Charge. P. 16 Car. 2. B. R. M. 16
Car. 2. B. R.

Where the Freeholds are several, Where the Freeholds are several, the
Plaintiff must sever his Action.
and one Defendant gives a Note of what is in his Possession, the Plaintiff
must sever his Action, else the Defendant might lose his Costs, for which on
severance he would have legal Remedy. And here is no Inconvenience, because the
Plaintiff may take Judgment against his own Ejector for the rest; and the
Defendant shall not confess Lease, The Defendant not to confess Lease. Entry
and Ouster for any more than is in his own Possession.
Entry and Ouster of all, but only of so much as is in his own Possession,
which is the only way to save his Costs. And Medlicot's Case was, where the
Plaintiff's Title is one by the Demise of A. and the Defendant's several, the
Plaintiff offered to secure Costs severally to all; but he was ordered by the
Court to deliver several Declarations, that none may defend for more than is in
his own Possession, else the Plaintiff might clap in an Acre of his own to save
Costs: and Agreements of Parties are no Guide to Rules, but would make the
Court but Arbitrary; and this Rule is no hindrance of Trials at Bar, where many
Defendants have but the same Title, Tr. 21 Car. 2. B. R. Medlicot's Case.

In Ejectment the Ouster was confessed of a third part of a fourth part of a
fifth part in five parts to be divided, which by Hide is very inconvenient, The
Inconvenience of the new Course of leaving Declarations.
and crept in since the new Rule of leaving Declarations, the Lands being in
several places distinct from each other, and may be held by several Titles,
which could never be, had the old Course of actual Ejectment continued; but on
suggestion that the Title was but one, and one Plaintiff, and one Defendant, it
was admitted, M. 15 Car. 2. B. R. Cole and Skinner.

In Ejectment where there are diverse Defendants who are to confess Lease, Entry
and Ouster, if one does not appear at the Trial, the Plaintiff cannot proceed
against the rest, but must be nonsuited, 1 Ventr.

In Ejectment the Plaintiff showed Copy of four Acres, In what case the Court
will give leave to retract the general Confession of Lease, Entry and Ouster.
to save Costs, the Title being on Will or no Will; but not being able to prove
where particularly, the Court gave leave to the Defendant that claimed by the
Will, to retract the general Confession of Lease, Entry and Ouster as to this,
and to have Judgment against the casual Ejector, M. 27 Car. B. R. Hide and
Preston.

If the Defendant refuse to confess Lease, Entry, and Ouster, the Rules are
thus:
Where the Defendant was by Rule of Court at the Trial (which was to be at the
Bar) to appear and confess Lease, Of the Defendant's Refusal to confess Lease,
Entry and Ouster.
Entry and Ouster, and to stand upon the Title only, yet at the Trial he would
not appear; upon which the Plaintiff was Nonsuit, and yet Judgment was for the
Plaintiff upon the Rule, and he was ordered to pay the Jury. And in Davies's
Case, 13 Car. 2. B. R. H. desired to be made Defendant, confessing Lease, Entry
and Ouster, and at the Trial resolved so to do; but the Court denied that he
should pay Costs, because thereby the Plaintiff has recovered, and so has the
Fruit of his Suit. To pay no Costs.
But in Williams and Hall's Case, on Trial at Bar the Defendants refused to
confess Lease, Entry and Ouster, per quod the Plaintiff was Nonsuited; and it
was moved, that in regard the Default was the Defendant's, that the Plaintiff
might have Attachment against the Defendant, according to the Course of the
Common Bench, which the Court granted. So upon a Judgment aagainst his own
Ejector in default of confessing Lease, Entry and Ouster, without a special
Rule, no Costs shall be paid by H. the Tenant in Possession that made this
Default, because the Plaintiff has Benefit of his Suit ( viz.) Judgment
against the Ejector, whereby he may recover Possession. Styles p. 425. 13 Car.
2 B. R. 15 Car. 2. B. R. 1 Keb. 242.

The Form of the Rule of Confessing Lease, Entry and Ouster in B. sR. and B. C.
Vide infra.

Of the Effect of an Entry according to the Rule, and where it will supply an
actual Ouster, and where not.
Ejectment was brought by Devisee of a Rent, Where confessing Lease, Entry and
Ouster, will supply an actual Ouster, or not.
on Condition, That if a Legacy be not paid yearly, etc. that it shall be
lawful for the Devisee to enter; and after the Demand made of the Rent, this
Action was brought, and the Lease, Entry and Ouster was confessed. Per Windham,
this is only of an Entry sufficient to make the Lease that entitles to the
Action, not of an Entry that gives Title to the Land; and for Non-proving of an
actual Entry, the Plaintiff was nonsuited: But otherwise in case of a Lease
rendering Rent, to be void by Re-entry by Non-payment. In the Ejectment there
was a Rule for confessing Lease, Entry and Ouster, and the Question was,
Whether this be sufficient without Proof of actual Entry? Per Hales C. J. the
Confession is sufficient, else in every Case of Disseisin, etc. the Entry must
be proved; but in Assignment of Assignee of Lessee, such Confession does not
avoid the Assignment, but that must be proved; and this is as actual Lease on
the Land, which cannot be without Entry. And so is 1 Ventr. 248. Anonym. The
Lessor of the Plaintiff had a Title to enter for a Condition broken for
Non-payment of Rent; Lease, Entry and Ouster was confessed, and the Court was
moved, that in regard that the Lessor having such a special Title, and no
Estate till Entry, whether such an Entry shall be supplied by the general
Confession, or that there should be an actual Entry; and it was held, it should
be supplied by the general Confession: But by Hales, If A. lets to B. and B. to
C. to try the Title, the confessing of Lease, Entry and Ouster extends only to
the Lease made to C. and not to that made to B. P. 26 Car. 2. B. R. Abbot and
Sorrel's Case. M. 25 Car. 2. B. R. Wither and Gibson. 1 Ventr. 248. Anonym.

In Okely and Norton's Case, M. 22 Car. 2. B. R. Judgment was prayed for not
confessing Lease, Entry and actual Ouster by one Coparcener against another;
Per Cur' on the former Rule to confess Lease, Entry and Ouster generally,
actual Ouster need not be confessed, and Judgment was against the casual
Ejector. The Rule to confess Lease-entry and Ouster, does not extend to confess
actual Entry upon a Lease which is the Title.
The Rule to confess Lease, Entry and Ouster, does not extend to confess actual
Entry upon a Lease, which is the Title; but the Court said, An Entry shall be
intended, until the contrary be proved of the other side. The Case was upon
Evidence to a Jury at the Bar. The Plaintiff's Title was a Lease for Five
thousand Years, which Lease was sealed and delivered at London; and the Council
for the Defendant would put the Plaintiff to prove an actual Entry by force of
this Lease; for it was agreed, That the Rule to confess Lease Entry and Ouster,
does not extend to it; but per Cur' it shall be intended that he entered, until
the contrary be proved on the other side, M. 22 Car. 2. Okely and Norton. Sid.
p. 223. Langhorn and Merry.

Upon a Trial in Ejectment the Title of the Plaintiff's Lessor appeared to be
by a Remainder limited to him for life upon diverse other Estates, and that
there was a Fine and Proclamation; but he within the Five years after his Title
accrewed, sent two Persons to deliver Declarations upon the Land, as the usual
Course was upon Ejectments brought; Per Cur' this is no Entry or Claim to avoid
the Fine, he having given no express Authority to that purpose, and the
Confession of Lease, Entry and Ouster shall not prejudice him in this respect,
M. 25 Car. B. R. Clark and Phillips.

As for ones being made Defendant, the Rules are thus.
He that desires to be made Defendant in Ejectment for as much as is in his
Possession, The Defendant to give a Note of what is in his Possession.
or of his Under-Tenant, must give a Note to the Attorney of the Plaintiff in
Writing of what the Particulars are, of which he is in Possession, or his
Under-Tenant, to prevent Delay at the Assizes, T. 15 Car. 2. so ordered.

By Pinsent. in B. C. If one move that the Title of the Land do belong to him,
and that the Plaintiff has made an Ejector of his own, and therefore prays,
that giving Security to the Ejector to save him harmless, Difference between
the Course in the King's Bench and Common Pleas.
he may defend the Title, the Court will grant it, but will not compel the
Plaintiff to confess Lease, Entry and Ouster, except he will be Ejector
himself. But it is not so in the Court of King's Bench, for there in both
Cases, they will compel him him to confess Lease, Entry and Guster, Styles Rep.
368.

The Course of the Court is, He that is made Defendant in Ejectment, not to be
charged with Actions by the by.
That one that comes in to be made Defendant in Ejectment, upon his Prayer
confessing Lease, Entry and Ouster, shall not be charged with any Actions by
the by; because he comes in without Process or Arrest, only to defend the Title.

In Ejectment after Declaration and before Plea, Motions to t^r the Plaintiff,
and why.
he which had the Title, moved the Court for to alter the Plaintiff, because he
was to give evidence; and the Court agreed to it, that he should alter the
Plaintiff paying Costs, and giving Security for new Costs; and they may alter
the Plaintiff in this Action upon the same Reason that they may alter the
Defendant, which is usually done, 1 Siderf. p. 24.

Note, After Default in Ejectment the Defendant may confess Lease, Entry and
Ouster.
After Default (in Ejectment) the Defendant may confess Lease, Entry and
Ouster, and may give evidence, and have all Advantages (except Challenges) and
if the Plaintiff becomes Nonsuit, any one for the Defendant may pray it to be
recorded, Trials per pays, 195.

The Defendant was by Rule of Court at the Trial which was to be at the Bar to
appear and confess Lease, Entry and Ouster, and to stand upon the Title only,
yet at the Trial he would not appear; upon which the Plaintiff was Nonsuit,
and yet the Judgment was for the Plaintiff upon the Rule, and he was advised to
pay the Jury. Styles Rep. 425. Harvey and Mountney.

Of the Ejectment-Lease.
You may observe what before is said, That it is a feigned Lease, and by the new
Rule is to be confessed; and it is laid sometimes for three years, or five, or
seven years: And it is good to lay it for longer than three or five years; for
I have known by Injunctions and other Dilatories it has worn five years out,
and then the Plaintiff cannot have Judgment without beginning de novo.
Enlargement of the Lease for a longer Term by the Court.
And therefore Pemble and Sterno's Case being adjourned into the
Exchequer-Chamber, the Court ordered an Enlargement of the Lease or Term from
seven to twelve years, which they may do by Law, no Lease ever being actually
sealed, but declared on, and consented to, Tr. 21 Car. 2. Pemble and Sterne's
Case.

The Lease was 24. Sept. Habend. from Michaelmas next, virtute cujus the
Plaintiff entered, Virtute cujus he entered.
and said not when; Per Cur' it shall be intended on the day after Michaelmas;
but if it had been virtute cujus he entered eod' 24 day of September. it had been
ill. P. 26 Car. 2 Hallam and Scot.

Lease of all Warrants Ejectment of Part.

Ejectment by Lessee of Lessee of the whole by the Daughters and Heirs of Sir
Peter Vanlore, How the Lease to be made where there are several parts uncertain
claimed.
which was made by reason of the uncertainty of the Part claimed by the
Plaintiff, 2 Keb. 700.

Lease made to try a Title in Ejectment, Lease to try Title, no Matenance.
is not within the Statute of Buying of Titles, if it be not made to great Men,
but to a Servant of him that has the Inheritance, 2 Brownl. 133.

Note, Ejectment may be brought upon a Lease made in the same Term, 1 Ventris.

Upon a Lease made by Husbands and their Wives for the Trial of a Title, and
the same executed by Letter of Attorney; the Lease and Letter of Attorney were
only sealed by the Husbands, and so not good; Per Cur' the Wives ought to have
sealed also, and the Entry of the Attorney ought to have been in all their
Names. This by the old Course, 2 Roll. 2. 13.

CHAP. VI.
Of Declarations. Of what things an Ejectione Firm may be brought, and what
not. General Rules of Declarations in Ejectments. Variance between the
Issue-Roll and the Imparlance-Roll. Of Entry and Ejectment supposed before the
Commencement of the Lease, virtute cujus he entered, how taken and expounded.
Uncertainty in the Limitation of the Commencement, and no Day of the Date
showed. Et postea, etc. how expounded. The manner of Declaring by Coheirs, by
Tenants in Common, by Baron and Feme, by Joynt-tenants, by a Corporation, by
Copyholder, by Administrator.

THE new way of Trials in Ejectment by Confession of Lease, Entry and Ouster,
and standing only upon the Title, make some Persons conceive that Cases or
Resolutions about Declarations in Ejectments (whose Form is now generally
settled) to be useless and antiquated. And in truth they are so in a great
measure; and yet notwithstanding there are several good Rules and Resolutions,
as well relating to matters of Law as Practice, and Forms, even since the said
new Method has been taken up, both as to what things an Ejectment may be
brought, or not, and Delivery, Entry, Variance, and Amendments of Declarations;
as also how Declarations ought to be, when Coparceners, Joyntenants,
Corporations, Baron and Feme, Tenants in Common, Administrators, and the like,
are concerned. And yet even those former Cases and Resolutions as to the
Commencement of Leases and Demises on which the Declaration is, and the Dates
and precise Times of Entry and Ouster, deserve well to be considered; not only
as so many curious Points of Law therein argued, of which it is not to be
thought a general Lawyer would be ignorant; but because in Inferior Courts the
old way of delivering Declarations, is and must be used.

I shall therefore in the first place cite some of the principal Cases touching
the manner of declaring in former times, as to the Dates and Commencement of
Demises, etc. and then come to those Considerations and Rules which are of
present Use, both as to Delivery, Entry, Forms, and the like, in which many
Practisers may not be well informed, and which are founded upon late
Resolutions. But first I shall show how Declarations are to be laid in respect
of the Matter and Things for which the Ejectment is brought; concerning which
the Cases in our Books are very frequent, and very useful to be known.

Of what things an Ejectione Firm may be brought, and what not.
Ejectment lies not de una demo, because it may be a Dowe-house or
Dwelling House; De Do^^^
but Cro. Jac. 654. in Royston's Case contra, that it lies de domo, as well as
waste de domibus, but it lies de domo vocat' Holts, 2 Roll. Rep. 487, 482.
Warren's Case. Cr. Jac. vid. in Pasch. 1650. Fry and Pooly. Hard. 76.

Ejectment lies not de uno tenemento. De Tenemento.
Ejectment was brought of an House and the Moiety of a Tenement; it lies not
for the Moiety of a Tenement; Verdict was (in this Case) given for the
Plaintiff and entire Damages. Where the Plaintiff may aid himself by release of
part.
The Plaintiff my well release his Damages, as to the Tenement, and take his
Judgment for the House, and then it shall not be Error, 2 Bulst. 28. Rothowick
and Chapel.

Ejectment lies de uno Burgo, De Burgo.
Hardr. 123. Danver' s Case.

Ejectment de uno cubiculo, De Cubicule.
is good; as it was laid, it was unius Cubiculi, per nomen unius Cubiculi being
in such an House in the middle Story of the said House. The word Cubiculum is a
more apt word than Camera. Ejectment de una Rooma, it was said had been
adjudged good in B. R. So a Praecipe lies of an Upper-Chamber, 3 Leon. p. 210.
2 Rolls Rep. 48.

Ejectment de uno repositorio, De Repositorio.
Judgment was reversed, because it was uncertain, it not being expounded in
English, it was intended a Warehouse, W. Jones 454. Sprig's Case. Cro. Car.
551. mesme Case.

It is not formal to bring Ejectment de una Capella, De Capella.
but it ought to be by the Name of a Message or House, 11 Rep. 25. b.

Ejectment de septem Messuagiis sive Tenementis; De septem Messuagiis sive
Tenementis.
it is ill after a Verdict for the uncertainty, Cro. El. 146.

Ejectment de uno Messuagio sive tenemento vocat' De uno Messuagio sive
Tenemento vocat'.
the Black Swan, is good per Twisden; for the last words ascertain it. Had the
Verdict been general for the Plaintiff for the Messuages, and Non Culp' for the
Tenements, it had been good: And in this case the Plaintiff cannot aid himself
by releasing of part, as it might be, had there been Lands in the Declaration.
De Messuagio sive Tenemento is ill after a Verdict, but if the Judge will allow
the Jury to find for the Plaintiff for the Message and for the residue for the
Defendant, it had been good; but the Plaintiff may not aid himself by Release,
Siderf. 295. Burbury and Yeoman.

Ejectione Firm lies not de Coquina, De Coquina.
but it lies by Bill in B. R. though Coke said it lies by Writ too, and the Law
is all one, 1 Roll. Rep. 55.

It was adjudged in Styles Rep. 215. That Ejectment does lie of a Cottage, De
Cotagio.
because the Description of a thing by that Name is sufficient and certain
enough to show the Sheriff of what to deliver the Possession; but a Recovery
lies not of a Cottage, Styles p. 258. Hammond and Ireland. Cro. El. 818. Hill
and Gibs.

Ejectione Firm lies de Pomario, De Pomario*
and de Domo, for they are certain enough to give Possession, though a Precipe
lies not of it; and many things are recovered in Ejectment, which are not named
in the Register, as Hopyard, etc. Cro. Jac. 654. Royston and Eccleston. Palmer,
337. mesme Case. Cro. El. p. 854. Wright and Wheatly.

Ejectione Firm de quatuor molendinis, De molendinis.
without expressing whether they are Windmills or Water-mills, yet good, Mod.
Rep. 9. Fitz Gerard's Case.

In Palmer and Humphrey's Case it was adjudged, De pcciaterrae.
That Ejectment lies de pecia terrae; but it was after reversed in the
Exchequer-Chamber, Cro. El. 422. Palmer and Humphrys.

And a Declaration de una pecia terrae continen' ducentas and unam Acram sive
plus sive minus jacent' inter terras, etc. this was adjudged ill after a
Verdict, and Nil cap' per Billam entered. So continen' dimidiam acram terrae
vocat'. It was said in Hancock and Pryn' s Case, Ejectment of a Close of Land,
or de pecia terrae containing so many Acres, had been good, W. Jones, p. 400.
Savil 176. Hardr. 57.

Ejectione Firm cannot be of a Manor, De Manerio.
for that there cannot be an Ejectment of the Services; but if they express
further a Quantity of Acres, it is sufficient, and it lies of a Manor or the
Moiety of a Manor, if the Attornment of Tenants can be proved; and there is
none that brings Ejectment of a Manor, but they also add the Acres that contain
it, to the end that if they prove it not a Manor, they may recover according to
the Acres. Vide infra. Hetley 80. Norris and Isham. And p. 146. Warden's Case.

It was doubted by Rolls and the Court, De Crofto.
if an Ejectment lies de Crofto, therefore the Plaintiff moved for a special
Judgment for the rest of the Land contained in the Declaration, and released
the Damages as to the Croft, and had it; but afterward in Meeres and French's
Case it was agreed, That Ejectione Firm lies of a Croft, and Dower, and Assise
will lie of a Croft, because it is put in View of the Recognitors, though a
Formedon nor Praecipe will lie of it, but 2 Car. p. Rot. 301. Holmes and
Wingreve, de Crofto is ill in Ejectment, though good in Assise. Rolls Rep. p. 30.

Ejectment de uno Clauso* De uno Clauso.
without saying how many Acres, is ill. A Man makes a Lease of a Garden
containing Three Roods of Land, De tribus Roods of Land.
Lessee is ousted and brings Ejectment; the Justices differed in Opinion,
whether it were good or not; but all agreed the best order of Pleading to be,
to declare, That he was ejected of a Garden containing Three Roods of Land,
Godb. p. 6.

Parcella terrae does not comprehend a Garden in Ejectione Firm, Parcella
tarrae.
Moor 702. Palm. 45.

Ejectment de uno Clauso continen' tres Acras per estimationem, ill; but
Indictment quare vi and armis in Clausum continen' tres Acras per Estimationem
fregit, is good. Debt or Demise of Seven Acres per estimat', is ill, Dormer's
Case. Brownl. p. 142.

Though in Co. 11 Rep. 55. Savill's Case, That an Ejectione Firm lies not of a
Close, yet the contrary had been since adjudged between Hykes and Sparrow, Tr.
15 Jac. Rot. 774. Cr. Car. 555. Siderf. 229.

Declarat' is Quod cum dimisit to him unum Messuagium, unum Clausum vocat'
Dovecoat-Close continen' tres Acras eidem m^ssuagio spectan', per Cur' it does
not lie of a Clo^e, though coupled with other Words, because the Quality of the
Soil is not alleged, as to say, Land, Meadow, Marsh, etc. And by Coke, if he
had bound the Land without showing the Quality, it had not been good; though it
was objected, that by all the Words put together, here is sufficient certainty
to put the Party in Possession; and yet some Reports are to the contrary.
Ejectione Firm of a Close called White-Close, was said to be held good in
Ellis and Floyd's Case cited in Madonell's Case. But in Ireland Ejectment was
of a Close called the Upper Kibwell, and of another called the Lower Kibwell,
containing Three Acres of Land, was held good. Regula.
And it is a sure Rule, That the certainty of the Land ought to be described,
and the Quality, etc. And therefore the Case of Jones and Hoell seems not to be
Law, which was Ejectione Firm of Seven Closes, one called Green Mead, and so
gave to the others several Names, and the Verdict was for the Plaintiff, and by
the Court there it is well enough; For, said they, when a Name is given to every
Close, though the Contents of Acres are not mentioned, viz. so many of Land, so
many of Pasture, i'ts sufficient, and aided by the Statute of Jeofayls, 11 Rep.
55. Savill's Case. 1 Roll. Rep. 55. mesme Case. Cro. Jac. 435. Wilks and
Sparrow. 2 Roll. Rep. 1. 608, 189. Macdonel's Case. Cro. El. 235. Jones and
Hoell.

In Martin and Nichol's Case Error was assigned, It Is not distinguished how
much of Pasture, and how much of Meadow, ergo ill.
because the Declaration was of a Message, and Forty Acres of Land Meadow and
Pasture thereunto appertaining, and it was not distinguished how much there was
in Land, and how much in Pasture, and the Judgment was reversed, Cro. Car. 573.
Martin and Nichols.

Observe, Acres according to Statute-measure.
In Ejectione Firm or a Praecipe of 100 Acres, this is according to
Statute-measure; but if one bargain and sell 100 Acres of Land to another, that
shall not be according to the Statute-measure, but after the usual Account in
the Country; in Andrews Case cited in Ewer and Heydon's Case.

The Declaration was, De duabus acris fundi, Anglice, Hop-ground.
That he was ejected e duabus Acris fundi, Anglice, Hop-ground. Per Rolls, it
is good in a Grant, but not in Declarations, and the Anglice here does not help
it; for the Anglice is not to interpret a Latin Name by which it is called,
Styles Rep. 202, 203. Meers and French.

Ejectment lies de december Acris Pisarum; for in common Acceptance Ten Acres of
Pease, De december acris Pisarum.
and Ten Acres of Land sowed with Pease is all one, 1 Brownl. 150.

Ejectment of Three hundred Acres of Waste, De 300 Acres of Waste.
inter alia, etc. per Cur' Waste is uncertain, and may comprehend Land of any
Quality, and the Sheriff will be at a Loss what Land to deliver; and after the
Plaintiff released the Waste and Damages, and took Judgment of the Residue,
Hardr. 57. Hancock and Prynn.

Ejectment lies de prima Tonsura, of the first Crop, De prima Tensura.
Cro. Car. 362. Ward.

Ejectment lies of a Cole-mine, De Cole-mine.
for it is a Profit well known. Ejectment of Land and a Colepit in the same
Land, ruled to be good, because it is in a personal Action, aliter in a Real
Action, because it is his petitum, 1 Rolls Rep. 55. Cro. Jac. 21. Harbotle and
Placock.

It lies of a Boillary of Salt Water, De un. Boillary of Salt.
Siderf. 161.

Ejectment lies not de rivulo seu aquae cursu, De R^vulo aquae cursu.
therefore Godbolt, p. 157. n. 213. is not Law; nor a Precipe lies of it, and
Livery and Seisin cannot be made of it; for non moratur, non est firma, but is
always fluctuant, and Execution by habere fac' possessionem cannot be made of
it, but the Action ought to be of so many Acres of Land aqua coopert. but if
the Land under the River or Place appertains not to the Plaintiff, but the
River only, then upon Disturbance his Remedy is only by Action on the case upon
any Diversion of it, and not aliter, Yelv. 143. Challoner and Thomas. M. 6 Jac.
Challoner and Moor. Cro. Car. 492. Herbert and Llanghlyn's Case.

Ejectione firm lies not de Profit apprender, De Profit apprender.
and so not of a Common or Rent, nor of a Pischary, it must be terra aqua
cooperta in such a River, though the Court seemed doubtful of it in M^llineux's
Case, which was Ejectment of an House and Lands in T. nec non de Libera
Pischaria infra Rivulum de Trent in which Action Damages were entirely given;
De Libera Pischaria.
but to avoid the Question, the Plaintiff released his Damages totally, and his
Action quoad the Pischary, and had Judgment for the Residue, Cro. Jac. 146.
Molineux.

Ejectment was brought in Ireland of forty Messuages, De 100 Acres of Bogg.
Five hundred Acres of Land, an Hundred Acres of Bogg in the Villages and
Territories of D. S. and V. Bogg is an usual Word, and well known there, and if
it were not, the Plaintiff may release his Demand as to that, and have Judgment
for the Residue. Another Exception was, because it was in Villis and
Territoriis; In villis and territeriis.
but per Cur' it is well enough, and of the same Sense; and if not, it is but
Surplusage, as to the Territories, De 50 Acres of Mountain in Ireland.
but Ejectment of 500 Acres of Mountain in Ireland, is ill, for it is not of
one Nature, but several, as Turfs, Pasture; but a Precipe is good de Saliceto,
de Stagno, de Dominio, by the general Notice the Country has of them where the
Lands lie, and of their Quality. On Ejectment in Ireland Error was brought in
B. R. here, because he brought Ejectment of 40 Acres of Wood, De 40 Acris
bosci, and 40 Acris subbosci.
and 20 Acres of Under-wood, and so one thing twice demanded, because Underwood
is a Species of Wood, sed non allocatur, because this does not appear to the
Court, and this shall not be alleged for Error, but ought to be taken in
Abatement of the Writ, Cro. Car. 512. Mulcarry and Eyres. 2 Roll. Rep. 166,
189. Macdonnel's Case. 2 Rolls Rep. 487, 482. Warren and Wakeley.

Ejectione Firm be omnibus Decimis is not good; De omnibus Decimis. De quadam
portione D. (...).
it lies not de quadam portione Decimarum generally, but de quadam portione
granorum and foeni is good; the Nature ought to to be showed, though not the
Certainty; and the Ejectment was supposed in May, when there is not any Tithes,
and so not good. It may be that all the Tything consists in Modo decimandi for
Payment of an yearly Sum in Satisfaction of Tithes, whereof no Ejectione Firm
lies. It was a Question in Priest and Wood's Case, Cr. Car. 301. Whether an
Ejectione Firm lay of Tithes only? it may be of a Rectory, or such a Chapel,
and of the Tithes thereunto belonging, whereof an Habere fac' possessionem may
be; but it was adjudged pro Querente. The Ejectment was supposed in taking so
many Loads of Wheat and Barley, being severed from the Nine Parts, 1 Roll. Rep.
68. cited in Worral and Harper's Case. 11 Rep. 25. Harper's Case. Cro. Car.
301. Priest and Wood.

Ejectment of so many Acres Jampnorum and Bruerue, De 20 Acris Jampnorum and
Bruere.
and does not express how many of each, yet good, Mod. Rep. 9. Fitzgerard's
Case.

Ejectione Firm de una virgata terrae lies not, De una Virgata terrae.
and so it was adjudged in the Exchequer-Chamber. Error was brought of a
Judgment in C. B. in Ejectment de Virgata terre on general Verdict, which is
ill, being uncertain in every County; but the Plaintiff below might have
Released Damages as to that, but now it is too late, Cro. Eliz. 339. Jordan's
Case. 3 Keb. 450. Hall* and Johnson.

Ejectione Firm lies not de Pannagio. De Pannagio.
Q. de Parco, Sid. 417.

It lies de Herbagio, De Herbagio.
2 Rolls Rep. 481, 482.

Ejectione Firm was brought for Entry into a Message sive Tenementum, and
four Acres of Land to the same belonging, Per Cur' the Declaration is
uncertain; but it was said, as to the four Acres, it was certain enough, and
the Words to the same belonging, are merely void, and the Plaintiff released
Damages, and had Judgment, 3 Cro. 228. Wood and Pain. Cr. El. 186. mesme Case.

Ejectment lies not of a Free Warren, De libera Warrenna.
1 Keb. 500.

Count of the Moiety of two Acres of Land, De Moiety of 20 Acres of Land.
is well enough, and Trespass lies against the Sheriff, if he does not execute
on the right places, 1 Keb. 278. Lufton's Case.

Per Cur' Ejectment lies de uno Stabulo, De uno stabulo
or wherever the thing is so certain that the Sheriff may do Execution, 1
Keb. 236. Whitacre's Case.

Separalis Pischaria usque ad filum aquae cannot be counted upon, Separalis
Pischaria usque ad C.
but per Windham such Evidence might be given of such Pischary by Metes and
Bounds, 1 Keb. 290. Sir Chr. Griese and Adams.

Ejectment lies de Capella, De Capella.
per Windham, 1 Keb. 438.

Ejectment was laid on Demise at T. Of an House and Land in quodam campo juxta
le Castlehill.
of an House and Land in quodam campo juxta le Castle-hill, which per Cur' is
ill (on motion in Arrest of Judgment;) for no Execution can ever be directed to
any Sheriff; and it must appear where the Land demised lies, 1 Keb. 777. Took
and Atho.

Ejectment of Ten Hides of Land is good; a Hide of Land is the same as
Carucat', De 10 Hides of Land. Carucat. terrae what.
which is as much as a Plow which is usually intended to have six Horses may
manure in a year, and being 100 or 120 Acres in Northamptonshire, 1 Keb. 877.
Wright and Sherrard.

Ejectment de 7 Messuagiis sive Tenementis is ill after a general Verdict, De
Messuag. and Tenement.
and it is on Demurrer; this might have been helped by taking Verdict of either:
So it is when the Ejectment is de Messuagio and Tenement', it is ill after
General Verdict, 2 Keb. 80, 82. Burbury and Yeomans.

Ejectment does not lie of a Light house, Lighthouse.
but Action on the Case, 2 Keb. 114.

Ejectment of the Pannage of a Park, is ill, 2 Keb. 460.

Ejectment of a Close of Meadow doubted in Steel and Stanly's Case. De Close of
Meadow.
M. 22 Car. 2. B. C.

Ejectment of 600 Acres of Fen-Marsh, 600 Acres of Fen-Marsh, Meadow, arable
L^^d.
Meadow, arable Lands: Twisden asked the Plaintiff whereof they would take
their Verdict, if they would have it of Marsh; and as such give Execution of
the Fens in Question, 2 Keb. 23. Downham and Walden.

Ejectment de 20 Villis and Terris in Ireland, De 20 villis and terris in
Ireland.
the Court conceived it wellenough on 1 Cro. 512. the Original Judgment being
in C. B. and affirmed in B. R. there, 2 Keb. 745.

Ejectment of Two Mills, not saying what, good, 2 Keb. 875.

Ejectment of a Message includes a Garden, De messuagio includes a Garden.
3 Keb. 44.

Ejectment de virgat' terrae ill on General Verdict, De virgata terrae.
being uncertain in every County; but the Plaintiff below might have Released
Damages, as to that; but now it is too late. This was in (...) of a Judgment in
B. R. 3 Keb. 450. Hall and Johnson.

Ejectment of Moor or Meadow, Moor or Meadow.
is ill, 3 Keb. 529.

Ejectment lies not of Common or Pischary alone, De Common and Pisdhary.
yet being after Verdict, it should be intended appurtenant, and so well
enough: This was in Ejectment of a House and 40 Acres of Pasture, Keb. 738.
Barton's Case.

Now as to Declarations in this Action, I shall lay down some General Rules.
1. The Plaintiff must declare on one Title only; and therefore in the Case of
the Lord Chandois and Pitts, the Count was of three several Leases of the whole
to the Defendant; the Council prayed that one B. may be made Defendant, and
that the Plaintiff might elect to proceed on one only Title, which the Court
granted, and said, Although the Party may declare on several Leases, one at, and
another from such a Day, yet cannot declare on several Lessors. And the Court
ordered the Plaintiff to elect one Title only, Trin. 22 Car. 2. B. R.

2. In Ejectione Firm of a Close, the Quantity of them and their Nature ought
to be expressed ( viz.) Land, Meadow or Pasture. Its a sure Rule the Certainty
of the Land ought to be described and the Quality, 11 Rep. 55. Savill's Case.

3. In Ejectione firm Surplsage in the Count, is not vicious, Dyer 304, 305.

4. If the Entry and Ejectment be supposed in the Declaration to be before the
Commencement of the Lease, the Declaration is void. Vide Postea.

5. It must be alleged in what Vill the Tenements are. Vide infra.

6. The Plaintiff must make his Title truly. Vide infra p. 72. b.

The Entry to deliver Declarations in Ejectment, is not sufficient to avoid a
Fine, without express Authority to enter to avoid the Fine; so was the Case
reported, 2 Saunders 319. Tenant for Life levies a Fine sur Conisance de droit
come ceo, with Proclamation, and he in Reversion for Life within five Years
after the Death of Tenant for Life, directs one to deliver a Declaration in
Ejectment to the Tenant in Possession; this shall not amount to an Entry to
avoid the Fine, though this was the Declaration which contained the Lease upon
which the Ejectment was brought, Keb. 555. Clerk and Pymell. M. 21 Car. 2. B. R.

DECLARATION.
In Ejectment in B. C. the Plaintiff there declares in the first Declaration,
Variance between the Imparlance-Roll and Issue Roll, as to the Commencement of
the Lease.
which is called the Imparlance-Roll, of a Lease made the 20th of September for
five years then next ensuing; and after Imparlance upon the Issue-Roll (for
there the Plaintiff uses to declare again after Imparlance) the Plaintiff
declares of a Lease made the 30th of January the same year Habend' for five
years from the 20th of December before; and upon Issue found pro Quer' per
Cur', it is erroneous; for he declared upon one Lease, and went to Issue upon
another; for when a Lease is made the 30th of January Habend from the 20th of
December before, this is but a Lease in Interest till the 30th of January, and
not before, and only in Computation from the 20th of December, The
Imparlance-Roll is the material Declaration.
and by the Prothonotaries, the Imparlance-Roll is the material Declaration;
and if Variance be from it in matter of Substance, this is not good nor
amendable, though it was urged, That the last Declaration shall be taken as a new
Declaration, without any Reference to the other, and then it shall be good, 1
Roll. Rep. 448. Millward and Watts. 3 Bulstr. 229. Millward and Watts. Cr. Jac.
415. mesme Case.

But in Merril and Smith's Case, Cro. Jac. 311. the first Declaration was, That
T. S. 25th of March 6. Jan. let to the Plaintiff the Land, etc. for seven
years, by Virtue whereof the Plaintiff entered and was possessed until the
Defendeant postea scil. Anno sexto supradict' entered and ejected him, so there
is not any day mentioned. After Imparlance (as the Course in the Common Bench
is) the Plaintiff made a second Declaration, and there (without any space made)
the Ejectment is supposed to be the 26th of May Anno supradict', and the Writ
was brought of this Ejectment 7 Jac. The Defendant pleads Non Culp', and found
against him, and Judgment; and this was assigned for Error; The first
Declaration is most material.
per Cur' the first Declaration is the principal and material Declaration, and
the second is but a Recital of the first. And if any matter of Substance be
omitted in the first, it cannot be aided and amended by the second, for that
begins with an Alias prout patet, so it is but a mere Recital; and therefore if
the first be not good, though the second be good, and he plead thereto, and the
Trial is thereupon; yet the Judgment is erroneous: But as this Case is, the
first Declaration is well enough; for he declares of a Lease the 25th of March
6 Jac. which is the first day of that year, and the Declaration quod p^stea
scil' 6 Jac. The Defendant ejected him, is certain enough for the year wherein
he made the Ejectment; so it appears to be after the Lease made and in the same
year 6 Jac. wherein the Ejectment was, and the Action is brought the. 7 Jac.
and the Ejectment being made between the making of the Lease, and the Action
brought, it is good enough, though there is not any certain day alleged, Cro.
Jac. 311. Merril and Smith.

Original in Ejectment was brought against H. Simul cum.
and three others, and the Plaintiff counts against three of the Defendants,
and no Simul cum against the fourth, and Judgment was arrested for this, 2
Brownl. 129.

It Is a sure Rule, Entry and Ejectment supposed before the Commencement of the
Lease.
if the Entry and Ejectment be supposed in the Declaration to be before the
Commencement of the Lease, the Declaration is void, as in Power and Hawkins's
Case cited, Yelv. 182. in Davis's Case. The Plaintiff declares upon a Lease of
E. 27 April. Anno sexto, and lays the Ejectment to be the 26th of April Anno
sexto supradict', the Declaration was adjudged ill for this cause; but the
Court will, and have helped it by as favorable Construction as may be, as in
the principal Case in Yelv. The Plaintiff declares of a Lease made by C. 6 of
May Anno septim^, of a Message, etc. and that the Plaintiff entered and was
possessed qu^usque postea the Defendant 18 die ejusdem mensis Maij Anno sexto
supradict' ejected him; it was moved in Arrest of Judgment upon Verdict for the
Defendant (to save Costs) that the Declaration was insufficient, This Action is
grounded on two things ( viz.) the Lease and the Ejectment.
for that this Action was grounded on two things ( viz.) upon the Lease and
upon the Ejectment, and these two ought to be one after the other; and in this
Case the Ejectment is supposed an Year before the Lease made; for the Lease is
Anno septimo, and the Ejectment supposed to be made Anno sexto, yet the
Declaration was adjudged good, and the word sexto to be void: For the day of
the Ejectment being the 18th day ejusdem mensis, it shall be intended to be in
the same year in which the Lease is supposed to be made, Brownl. p. 146. mesme
Case. So in Adams and Goose's Case, Cro. Jac. 97. In Ejectment the Plaintiff
declared of a Lease the 6th of September. and that he was possessed, and that
postea scil. the 4th of September. the Defendant ejected him, and by three
Justices the Declaration was held good, and the 4th of September is impossible
and repugnant, and the postea ejecit is well enough. But in ^^odgaine's Case, 1
Siderf. the Jury found that J. N. let to the Plaintiff for five years the 24th
of June Anno 1650. by force whereof the Plaintiff enters the 24th of June 1650.
(the Lease being to commence a die datus) and that postea scil. 24th of June
1650. the Defendant ejected him; so that the Entry and Ejectment was supposed
before the Lease, and Judgment was against the Plaintiff for this Defect. The
Council of the contrary side stood much upon the Case of Adams and Goose; but
per Cur' that Case differs from this; for in Adams's Case it appeared to be,
that he entered by sorce of the Lease, and was possessed thereof till he was
ejected; but in this Case he entered the 24th of June, which was before the
Lease commenced; and Judgment was given, 1. Because he said, he entered the 24th
of June, and so was a D^isseisor. 2. Because the Declaration is contrary in it
self. And Clifford's Case, Dyer 89. a. and Gr^en and Moody's Case were cired.
Bridgman said, He found no reason for Adams and Goose's Case, Yelv. 182. Davis
and Pardy. Cro. Jac. 97. Adams and Goose Siderf. p. 8. Goodgaine and Wakefeild.

Ejectione Firm of a Lease of H. Virtute cujus and iisdem die and anno he
ejected him, how construed.
P. 22 of May 20 Jac. of, etc. Hab. a primo die Maij for three Years, virtute
cujus the Lessee entered and was possessed quousque postea scil. eisdem die and
anno the Defendant ejected him. It was assigned for Error, that iisdem die,
etc. refers to the first day of May, which is ultimum antecedens, and then the
Ejectment is alleged before the Lease made, so the Declaration not good; but
per Cur' the Allegation of the first day of May is but for the beginning of the
Term; and the Declaration being quod virtute dimissionis, he entered postea
iisdem die and Anno, etc. that refers to the day of the Lease made, otherwise
he cannot be possessed virtute dimissionis, and Judgment was affirmed in the
Exchequer Chamber, Cro. Jac. 662. Rutter and Mills.

The common Mistake has been (as is observable in our Book-Cases) in laying the
Lease to be a die daius, and the Entry the same day, which is a Disseisin not
purged by the Commencement of the Lease; for where an Interest passes [ a] is
exclusive, and so the Entry the same day was before the Lease was to commence,
and is a Disseisin; but where no Interest passes, as in Cases of Obligations,
Contra. In Douglas and Shank's Case. Cr. El. 766. the Plaintiff declares of a
Lease for years Habend' a die datus, virtute cujus dimissionis he entered,
Virtute cujus.
and was possessed until he was ejected by the Defendant. Not guilty pleaded.
The Declaration is ill, because the time of the Entry is not alleged; for if
he entered at the day of the Demise, he is a Disseisor, and the Action not
maintainable; Virtute cujus. how taken.
the strongest shall be taken against the Plaintiff ( viz.) That he entered the
day of the Lease made, and that is not supplied by the words virtute cujus; but
no Judgment was given, because two against two: yet in Dyer 89. in margin it is
said, because he did not aver in facto, that he entered after the day of the
date (for the Lease does not commence till the next day) that Judgment was
arrested absente Popham. And another case is there cited, M. 44. or 42. El. B.
R. in Ejectione Firm upon a Lease made to commence at Michaelmas, and the
Plaintiff declares, That he, virtute dimissionis, etc. And it was moved in
Arrest of Judgment, because he says not, he entered after Michaelmas. And Dyer
89. was cited, and Gaudy and Fenner held it ill; but per Popham it is aided by
the Statute of Jeofayis, because it is Form only, and the Demise is the
Substance; and per Popham after Michaelmas he is Termor by the Continuance of
the Possession, quod Fenner and Gaudy negaverunt. But in Wakely and Warner's
Case Ejectment was brough in Ireland, and Judgment pro Querente. Virtute cujus
and praetextu cujus, he entered.
It was assigned for Error that the Plaintiff shows a Lease made to him to
commence at a day to come, virtute cujus he entered, and was possessed until
ejected by the Defendant, and shows not when he entered, either after or before
the day at which the Lease commenced; sed non allocatur, because he said
virtute cujus, etc. But by Lea Chief Justice, if he had said praetextu cujus,
it had been otherwise, Moor 466.

Ejectment of a Lease made the 12 of Dec. Commencement.
Habend' a primo die. On Not guilty, the Jury find a Lease made in haec verba,
which was dated primo December. Hab. from henceforth, but delivered the 12th of
December. and the Question was. Whether this be according to the Declaration? It
was objected, That from the day of the Date, and from henceforth are several
Commencements, for the one begins the day it was sealed, the other the day
after, but per Cur' they are all one, being a Computation of time from the time
past, Habend. a die datus expounded.
and both shall be pleaded to begin from the day of the Date, when the Lease is
afterward sealed another day. But if he declares of a Lease the first of
December, Hab' a die datus, the Ejectment cannot be alleged the same day; but
if the Lease be made the first of December. Hab. henceforth, the Ejectment may be
alleged the same day. So was the Case of Osborn and Ryder: Ejectment on a
Lease made 1 Jan. 3 Jac. Hab. a die datus, and the Ejectment was the same day,
and ruled to be good; though the Hab. is as much as to say, from the day of the
Date; but per Cur' the Date is the time of the Delivery, and it differs from
the day of the Date; wherefore the Ejectment alleged postea the same day is
good enough, Cro. Jac. p. 258. Lluellyn and Williams. And p. 135. Osborn and
Ryder.

Ejectione Firm of a Lease dated the 6th of December 17 Jac. Hab. a die datus,
upon Evidence the Lease was showed, and was dated the 6th of December. 19 Jac.
Hab. a die confectionis, the Plaintiff was Nonsuited, Cr. Jac. Scavage's Case.

The Plaintiff declares upon a Lease made the 10th day of October Hab. from the
20th day of November. for five years; the Question was upon a special Verdict,
Whether this was a good Lease or not. Judgment was arrested. It shall not begin
from the time of the Delivery; Uncertain Limitation of the Commencement of the
Lease.
but it is an uncertain Limitation, and cannot be known what November he meant,
last past, or next ensuing. But the Law will reject an impossible Limitation,
as from the 31st of September. because it cannot be any part of the Parties
Agreement. The Declaration was, Quod cum J. H. by his Indenture bearing date
the 20th of May, 32 Eliz. No day of the Delivery showed.
had let to him an House, and shows not when the Lease was made; for he does
not show any day of the Delivery, per Cur' it is good: For it shall be intended
to be delivered at the day of the Date, Mod. Rep. p. 180. 3 Leon. p. 266.
Kniver and Cope.

In Ejectment of the Manor of D. Variance.
containing 250 Acres, be it more or less, with Letters of Attorney reciting,
Whereas J. the Lessor had made a Lease of a Manor containing 250 Acres, and
Authority to make Livery according to the recited Lease, per Cur' the Variance
is fatal, and the Plaintiff was nonsuited, 3 Keb. 691. Smith and Talbot, M. 18
Car. 2.

Plaintiff declares, In what Vill.
That P. C. by Indenture apud S. let unto him an House and 20 Acres of Land by
the Name of all the Tenements in S. After Verdict Judgment was Arrested,
because it was not alleged in what Vill the Tenements are, Per nomen.
and the naming of the Vill in the Pernomen is not material, Cr. El. 822. Gray
and Chapman.

50 Hobert 89. Rich and Shere. Declaration was, That at E. in Com' praedict' he
did demise one Message, four Gardens, Two hundred Acres of Land, Eighty Acres
of Pasture called East-Dizard in the said County. On Not guilty the Plaintiff
had Judgment; it was Error, because the Plaintiff in his Declaration did not
show in what Town, Parish, Hamlet or Place the said Tenement called East-Dizard
lay; and Judgment was reversed in the E^ chequer-Chamber.

Declaration was of a Lease of Sergeant Hele, That he, the 16th of January, 44
El. by Indenture dated the 2d of January, demised, etc. it was moved, That the
Declaration was not good, because it is that he demised the 16th of Jan. by
Indenture dated the 2d of Jan. When the Lease shall be intended to be delivered
on the day of the Demise, and not of the Date.
and he does not say primo delibat' the 16th of Jan. for otherwise it shall be
intended to be delivered the day it bears date. But per Cur' it is good; for
though a Deed shall be intended to be delivered the day it bears date, unless the
contrary be showed, yet when it is said, he demised such a day by Indenture
dated such a day before, it must be necessarily intended it was not delivered
the same day it bears date, but upon the day of the Demise, as it is alleged,
Cro. El. 890. House and Laxton. Cro. El. p. 773. Hall and Denby.

And the Verdict often aids and intends, that it was delivered the same day it
bears date, as in Heaton and Hurleston's Case. The Declaration was, Whereas J.
S. by* Indenture the 9th of June 19 Jac. dimisisset, etc. Habend' terminum
praedict' a die datus sigillationis Indenturae praedictae for three years;
virtute cujus the Plaintiff the 10th of June 19 Jac. entered, and was possessed
until, etc. and Verdict pro Quer' on Not guilty, per Cur.' when the Verdict has
found him guilty upon the Declaration, and the Ejectment is alleged according
to the Declaration, it may well be intended, that the Indenture bore date, and
was sealed and delivered the same day mentioned in the Declaration of the
Lease, though it was objected, That neither the day of the Date, nor of the
Sealing and Delivery of the Indenture are mentioned, and so the Declaration
uncertain; but Judgment pro Querente, Cro. Jac. 646. Heaton and Hurlestone.

Now in Wakely and Warren's Case, Virtute cujus and praetextu cujus he entered;
the difference between them.
though the Plaintiff does not show in his Declaration when he entered, either
after or before the day on which the Lease commenced, yet it is good enough;
because he says, the Lease to him made, was to commence at a day to come,
virtute cujus he entered, and was possessed until, etc. aliter had it been, if he
had said praetextu cujus, 2 Rolls Rep. 466. Wakely and Warren.

Now the Judges favor Declarations in Ejectment, as may be seen, 1 Ventr. 136.
The Plaintiff declares in Ejectment, That J. S. demised to him per quoddam
Scriptum Obligatorium, etc. Habend' a die datus Indenturae praedictae; per Cur'
the Writing shall be intended an Indenture, though it be called Scriptum
Obligatortum, and every Deed obliges; but if it shall not be intended
Indented, then the Lease shall begin presently, as if it had been made from the
4th of September.

But a Declaration was of a Lease Hab. a die datus Indenturae praedictae, and
does not speak of any Indenture before, and the Declaration was adjudged
naught. But Ejectione Firm of a Lease made the 20th of August Hab. from
Michaelmas then last past ante datum hujus Indenturae, and neither showed the
Indenture nor the Date thereof, and per Cur' it is well enough. The Addition
ante ^^tum Indenturae shall be void, the other being good, Et postea how
expounded.
and the beginning of the Lease appearing certain enough, Hetley 63. Brady and
Johnson. Cro. El. 606. Darrel and Middleton.

Ejectione Firm of a Lease made the 21st. of October. 4 Jac. and quod postea
scilicet eodem 21 die October. Anno tertio supradicto he ejected him: And the
Addition of an Year, which was not mentioned before, and which is repugnant to
that day which was mentioned, is idle, and shall be taken for null, and postea
the same day shall be good enough, Cro. Jac. 154. Brigate and Short.

Error was assigned, Ejectment of the 4th part of an House in 4 parts to be
divided, and declares de tenementis praedictis.
for that the Plaintiff did Count of the Lease of the fourth part of an House
in N. in four parts to be divided, by force of which he entered in tenementum
praedictum, and was inde possessionat' till the Desendant did eject him de
tenementis praedictis, whereas he ought to suppose his Entry into the fourth
part, and the Ejectment of the fourth part, sed non alloc'; for the Entry and
Ejectment supposed de tenementis praedictis shall not be intended of the entire
Tenement, but of the fourth part of the House, according to his Declaration,
Cr. El. 286. Rawson and Mainard.

Ejectment for Tithes, not saying by Deed, Judgment was reversed, 2 Keb. 376.
Angel and Rolf.

The Declaration was of several Messuages in the several Parishes of St.
Michael, St James, St. Peter and St. Paul, and that part of the Premises lay
in the Parishes of St. Peter and St. Paul; but that there is no Parish called
the Parish of St. Peter, nor none called the Parish of St. Paul; per Cur' the
Copulation ( Et) shall be referred to that which is real, and has existence,
ut res magis valeat, to make them both one Parish; and the words, several
Parishes, is supplied by the other Parishes aforenamed, Hardr. 336. Ingleton
and Wakeman.

By Coheirs or Coparceners.
Declaration by Coparceners, Quod demiserunt.
Quod dimiserunt is good; therefore Molliner and Robinson's Case, Moor 682.
where the Lease was made by two Coparceners, and it was declared, Quod
dimiserunt: To which it was excepted, that the Lease is the several Lease of
each of them for his Moiety, which was there ruled a good Exception, is not
Law, 2 Brownl. 207. Cro. El. 615. 2 Keb. 192. Moor 682.

And now Ejectments in such Cases are by the Lessee of a Lessee of the whole by
many Coheirs, Coheirs declare by the Lessee of a Lessee, and why.
which is by reason of the Uncertainty of the part claimed by the Lessors; and
per Cur' a Lease of all parts warrants the Lease of all, 2 Keb. 700.

By Tenants in Common.
If Two Tenants in Common join in a Lease for years to bring Ejectment, and
Count quod dimisissent, it is naught, for it is a several Lease of their
Moieties, and they must declare, Quod cum one of them dimised the one Moiety,
and the other the other Moiety, 1 Brownl. 13. Cr. Jac. 166. Mantley's Case.

If one Tenant in Common take the whole Profits, the other has no Remedy by Law
against him; for the taking the whole Profits is no Ejectment, but if he drive
away the Cattle of the other Tenant in Common off the Land, or not suffer him
to enter and occupy the Land, this is an Expulsion, and he may have Ejectione
Firm for the one Moiety, and recover Damages for the Entry, but not for the
mean Profits, 1 Instit. p. 199. b.

By Baron and Feme.
The Plaintiff declares of a Lease made to him by Baron and Feme generally, and
does not allege it to be by Deed; it was a great Question in our Books,
whether this be good or not; but now it is ruled to be good by many Precedents,
2 Rep. 61. Wiscot's Case.

By Joyntenants.
C. and R. and W. Daughter to R. are Joyntenants for years; W. lets her part to
C. and C. and R. join in this Lease of the entire Land to the Plaintiff for
three years. Popham and Fenner held, That this Lease well warrants the
Declaration; for upon the matter they both let the entire, and upon this
general Count it is good. Yelverton and Williams e contra, because the Count
supposes they both let the entire as Joyntenants; for so it is intended by the
general Count, which appears to be false, for they two let two Parts jointly,
and the one of them having a third Part, as Tenant in Common, Two as
Joynt-tenants, and one as Tenant in Common, demise the Commons, in such Cases
how to declare.
lets that only, and so the Declation ought to have showed the Truth and the
Special Matter. And because it is difficult, they use in such Case to make a
Lease, and the Lessee to make a second Lease, and the second Lessee to declare
generally; and so all the matter shall come in Evidence. Fleming, before whom
it was tried by Nisi prius, overruled it, that this Declaration was well
maintained by the Lease, and the Jury gave a Verdict according to his Opinion,
Cro. Jac. p. 83. Jordan and Steer.

Upon a Lease by Tenant for life and him in Remainder.
A. Tenant for life, Remainder to B. in fee, they both by Indenture join in a
Lease to the Plaintiff; Per Cur' this is the Lease of A. during his Life, the
Confirmation of B. and after the Death of A. it is the Lease of B. and the
Confirmation of A. And because the Plaintiff in Ejectment had counted of a
joynt-Lease by A. Verdict.
and B. it was adjudged against him, 6 Rep. 15. Treport's Case.

So is the Case in Popham p. 57. upon a Demise by Dorothy Pool and Robert
Smith, it was thus on a Special Verdict: Dorothy was Tenant for Life, Remainder
to Smith in Fee, and they being so seized, made the Lease in the Declaration,
Per Cur' the Lease found per the Verdict does not warrant the Lease alleged in
the Declaration; for during Dorothy's Life it is her demise, and not the demise
of Smith, but as his Confirmation for that time; for he had nothing to do to
meddle with the Land during the Life of Dorothy, and after her death it shall
be said to be the demise of Smith, and not before, Poph. 57. King and Berry.

By a Corporation.
The Plaintiff declares upon a Lease to him made by the President, Fellows and
Scholars of St. John's College, Oxon. and in the Conclusion he does not say,
hic in Curia prolat', Per Williams it is not good. The Ejectment-Lease being
made by a Corporation, they sealed the Lease and delivered it by their
Attorney, having a Letter of Attorney from them to deliver the same; they
cannot do this in any other manner than by their Attorney, 1 Bulstr. 119. Lord
Norris's Case.

Hill. 36 El. Carter and Cromwell, in Ejectione Firm, the Plaintiff counts per
Lease made by the Warden of All Souls College in Oxon. And Exception was
taken, because the name of Baptism of the Warden was omitted, but adjudged
there need not; the difference is where a Corporation is sole Person, as Bishop
there may be his Name, aliter aggregate. Dyer 86. Marg.

Ejectment was brought on a Demise of a Corporation, not saying by Deed, per
Cur' Judgment shall not be arrested for this on Judgment by cognovit Actionem
at the Assizes, but it shall be intended after this as well as after a Verdict.

Upon a Lease by Commissioners of Bankrupt.
Commissioners of Bankrupt had assigned the Land in Question to the Lessor of
the Plaintiff, which Indenture was afterward enrolled, but the Declaration was
of a Demise made after the Indenture and before the Inrolment; and whether that
Demise were sufficient to entitle the Lessor of the Plaintiff, was the Question
in Perry and Bowe's Case; Per Cur' it is not sufficient. Vide le case, 2 Ventr.
360. Perry and Bower.

By Copyholder.
If a Lease be found made by a Guardian or Copyholder, such a Lease will
maintain the Declaration, though their Leases are void against the Lord and
Infant, Hardr. 330. Wheeler's Case.

Vide supra Tit. Who shall have Ejectione Firm.

By Administrator.
He ought to show how the Archbishop granted it, either as Ordinary, or by his
Prerogative; and therefore Exception was taken to a Declaration in Ejectment,
because the Plaintiff conveyed his Interest by an Administrator of all the
Goods of the Lessee in Sussex and Kent, but shows not how the Archbishop
granted it, either as Ordinary, or by his Prerogative; Presidents not to be
changed.
and this was held by the Court to be a material Exception. But because all the
Presidents in B. R. and B. C. were so in general, without showing how, and
because they would not change Presidents, they disallowed the Exception, Cro.
El. p. 6. Dorrel and Collins.

In Gillam and Lovelace's Case, it was moved in Arrest of Judgment, That the
Declaration (brought by Administratrix) was not good; because the granting
forth Letters of Administration was in this manner ( viz.) Administratio
commissa fuit querenti per William Lewin vicarium generalem in spiritualibus
Episc. Rot. without averring, that at the time of the granting Letters of
Administration, Vicar General.
the Bishop was in remotis agendis, for a Bishop present in England, cannot
have Vicarium; but per Cur' the Vicar General in spiritualibus amounts to a
Chancellor; for in the Truth, a Chancellor is Vicar General to the Bishop. 2.
The Declaration is not Episcop. Roff. loci illius ordinarii, but per Cur. all
the Presidents are so, and in a Declaration such Allegation needs not, but by
way of Bar it is necessary. 3. The Plaintiff declares of Ejectment, and also
quod bona and catalla ibid. invent. cepit; and in the Verdict the Damages for
the Ejectment and Goods are entirely taxed Quaere de hoc. 1 Leon. p. 312.
Gilham and Lovelace,

Ejectione Firm was brought of a Lease of Tithes, and shows not that it was by
Deed, and ruled to be ill, because Tithes cannot pass without Deed, Cr. Jac.
613. Swaddling and Peers.

CHAP. VII.
Where in the Declaration a Life must be averred, and where it need not. Of
Delivery of Declarations at or after the Essoyne-day. Declurations when to be
entered, as of the same Term where the Copies need not be paid for.
Declarations, when amendable or not. Of expressing the Vills where the Lands
lie. Of the Pernomen. Declaration need not be of more Acres than he was ejected
out of. Of the Forms of the Declaration, Vi and Armis omitted, Extr. tenet
omitted. The President of Declarations in C. B. in B. R. in Scacario. The
Indorsement on the Copy to be left with the Tenant, and what the Tenant is to
do thereupon. The Rule for confessing Lease, Entry and Ouster in B. C. and in
B. R.

IF one do declare upon a Lease in Ejectione Firm, and that by Virtue of that
Lease he was in possession of the Lands thereby let to him until that he was
ejected by the Defendant, it is supposed that the Lessor who made the Lease to
him, was alive at the time of the Action brought, Pract. Reg. 110.

The Plaintiff in Ejectment declared of a Lease for three years, if the Wife of
the Plaintiff shall so long live, and does not show that the Wife is yet in
Life; yet per Cur' this being after a Verdict, is made good by the Stat. 21
Jac. of Amendments after Examination by the Sheriff. And in Arundel's Case, in
Ejectment the Plaintiff declares that the Lady Morley being only Tenant for
life, made a Lease to him for three years, if she should so long live; virtute
cujus intravit and fuit possessionat' until the Defendant entered upon him, and
illum a firma sua praedicta termino suo nondum finito extratenet, etc. and he
did not averr the Life of the Lady Morley. But per Cur' this amounts to an
Averment; for he says his Term is not yet ended, which implies she is alive,
and the years not expired; and this was after a Verdict. But had it been
demurred to, it had been more ambiguous. So Dyer 304. in Ejectione Firm on a
Lease, his Supposition that the person adhuc seisitus existit, implies his
Life, Siderf. p. 61. Palmer Rep. 267, 268. Arundel and Mead. Cro. Jac. mesme
case. 2 Browl. 165.

It was the Opinion of the Court in Cro. El. p. 18. Higgins and Grant's Case,
That if in Ejectment one declares of a Lease by a Parson, he ought to averr his
Life; for by his death his Lease is void, but it is now otherwise, 2 Bulstr. 79.
Cr. El. 18. Higgins and Grant.

Of the Delivery of Declarations, Filing and Entry.
The Court, A new Declaration delivered on the Essoyn-say.
in Car. 2. Snow and Cooley's Case, upon Motion, ordered, That a new
Declaration delivered on the Essoyn-day, should be sufficient (the old one
being delivered before) the Lessee dying, and the Name was changed, there being
sufficient Notice; and this being the Act of God, shall not prejudice, 1 Keb.
755.

If the Declaration in Ejectment be delivered after the Essoyn-day, The
Declaration is delivered after the Essoyn-day, and the Consequence.
it is but entered of that Term (and not of the Term before) and the Plaintiff
in such case cannot have Judgment the same Term; but if he does not move the
following Term to have Judgment (especially if any Assizes intervene) he cannot
have it without new notice left at the House of the Defendant, and the Default
made at first, 1 Keb. 721.

If the Declaration in Ejectment be of Michaelmas-Term, What day the Bill was
filed, is examinable, whether after the day of the Lease, though it is the same
Term.
which relates to the first day of the Term, yet it is a matter of Evidence, and
examinable what day the Bill was filed, and if it was after the day of the
Lease, all is well. On a special Verdict it was moved for the Defendant, That
the Declaration was in Michaelmas-Term, 2 Jac. 2. and the Demise is laid to be
the 30th of October, 2 Jac. 2. and so after the Term began. Note, the
Declaration cited an Original, and an Original was produced, Test 2. Nov.
which was after the Demise; and the Prothonotaries informed the Court, That
this was frequently allowed, and that no Memorandums of the Originals bearing
Test within the Term, was used to be made upon the Record, Sid. p. 432.
Prodger's Case. 2 Ventr. Tonstale and Broad.

It is the Course of the Court in Ejectment, if the If the Owner prays to be
made Defendant, the Declaration to be entered as of the same Term, but no new
Imparlance.
Owner of the Land comes in and prays to be Defendant, the Declaration shall be
entered as of this Term, although it were of the last Term, against the casual
Ejector; but yet being by favor of the Court admitted, he shall have no new
Imparlance besides that which the casual Ejector had. And by Hide there is
difference between the Tenant in Possession, who is Defendant ex debito on his
Prayer, contra of J. S. who is only concerned in Title, 1 Keb. 706. Roch and
Plumpton.

If the Declaration filed be paid for, Where Copies of the Declaration need not
be paid for.
they need not pay for the Copies, and so a Trial at Bar shall not be hindered
for want of payment of the Copies, 2 Keb. 805.

I find a Rule of Court to change the year, thus: ss. Mich. 13 Car. Ordinat est
per Curiam nono die October quoth quer' narrationem suam in intratione inter parts
de Termino St. Trin ult intxat in Anno dimissionis emendavit Et ubi per
misprisionem Clerici allegavit dimissionem fieri duodecimo die Aprilis Anno
undecimo Caroli fieri debuit Anno duodeeimo and quer' solveret Def. miss per
Magistr^ Gulston taxand pro emendatione illa ex motione Magistri Boon.

Lessee for three years makes a Lease for five years in Ejectment to try the
Title, Lease not warranted by the Declaration.
and the Jury on special Verdict doubt whether the Defendant be guilty for 3 or
5 years; Per Cur' the Declaration is ill, and the Plaintiff can have no
Judgment; Per Hale the Lease is good only for three years, Declaration.
and the Defendant shall be guilty for no more, else the Plaintiff would
recover Terminum praedict', which is five years, but no Judgment can be for
three years, being not warranted by the Declaration, Tr. 27 Car. 2. B. R. Row
and Williamson.

Mr. Levett's Case of the Inner Temple. Sir Roger Puleston, Knight. Plaintiff. Sir
Peter Warburton and others, Defendants.

Ejectment upon the Demise of John Levet and his Wife, wherein the Plaintiff
declares that John Levett and Margaret his Wife, the 10th of April 1697.
demised to the Plaintiff Habend. from the 25th day of March then last past for
five years.

THIS was tried at the Bar, Argument.
and a Verdict for the Plaintiff; and the Defendants have moved in Arrest of
Judgment, Argued at the King's Bench before Lord C. J. Holt, etc.
for that the Demise is laid the 10th of Apr. 1697. which is not yet come,
whereas it should be 1696. which the Plaintiff has moved to amend, and the
same ought to be amended, etc. for these Reasons, wherein I shall only apply my
self to the Statute of the 16 and 17 of King Charles the Second Cap. 8. which I
humbly conceive has not been sufficiently spoken to in this matter, which
says, That no Judgments shall be staid or reversed after Verdict for any
Mistake in the Christian Name, Day, Month or Year, by the Clerk, where the
right Name, Surname, Day, Month or Year in any Writ, Roll, Plaint or Record
preceding, or in the same Roll or Record are once rightly named, but that all
such Omissions, Variations, Defects, and all other matters of the like nature,
being not against the right of the matter of Suit, nor whereby the Issue or
Trial are altered, shall be amended by the Records.

That we are within the Benefit of this Statute, I shall offer this to your
Lordship.

The Declaration against the casual Ejector delivered to the Tenants in the
Country was right, that expressing the Demise to be the 10th of April 1696.
which ought to have been the time mentioned in this Declaration, for all the
mistake was only betwixt septimo and sexto; and there is an Imparlance entered
on the Roll in Easter-Term last against the casual Ejector, which is right.

As in all Actions brought by Bill, the usual Method of proceeding, is to file
the Bill or Declaration in the Office; and as all Defects on the Roll are
amendable by that, so this being brought by Original instead of Filing a Bill
in the Office, an Imparlance is entered on the Roll, and the Method of
proceeding is in the same manner, as in the Common Pleas, the Issue is as much
amendable by the Imparlance-Roll as it would have been by the Bill, if the
Action had been brought by Bill.

The Objection made to this, Pulestone and Goodluck.
is, That though Tenants in Possession being not all duly served in the Country,
the Tenants agree to appear so as the Plaintiff would consent to try it at the
Bar, and that thereupon there was a new Declaration delivered, which had this
Mistake, and seems to infer, that the former Declaration was waved, and this
was altogether a new Proceeding, wherein the Court was misinformed; for there
was no new Declaration delivered, and that which the Defendants produced, was a
Copy of the Issue only, and proved nothing but that there was a Mistake, which
appears by the Roll, and is admitted by the Plaintiff, otherwise we need not
this motion.

Now, my Lord, that the Defendants Appearance was to the Declaration delivered
in the Country, is plain, for there was no other Declaration delivered, nor was
therein any other for them to appeal to; besides, it appears by the Rule
wherein it is written Pulestone and Goodluck, and under that the now Defendants
shall be made Defendants in the room of Goodluck, and shall confess Lease,
Entry and Ouster for the Lands in that Declaration mentioned, and shall receive
a Declaration, and plead the General Issue, and insist upon the Title only; and
that if the Plaintiff shall become Nonsuit for default of the Defendants
confessing Lease, Entry and Ouster, then that Judgment shall be entered against
the Defendant Goodluck, etc.

Now, my Lord, I would know what Declaration the Defendants were to appear to;
it must be a Declaration against Goodluck; and what Lease the Defendants were
to confess; it must be the Lease mentioned in the Declaration against Goodluck;
and what Judgment the Plaintiffs were to have, if the Defendants did not
confess Lease, Entry and Ouster; it must likewise be upon the Declaration
against Goodluck.

Now, my Lord, if the Defendants will show a Declaration that was delivered
them against Goodluck, wherein there was this Mistake, it would be hard upon
us; but if they cannot, then the Declaration delivered against Goodluck is
right, and the demise they are obliged to confess, is the demise in that
Declaration, and only mistaken by the Clerk's transcribing it.

Now, My Lord, if the Defendants have confessed a good and right demise, and
this has been tried, then it would be the greatest hardship in the World, if
the Court should not let the Plaintiff have the Benefit thereof; and it is
plain that the Demise the Defendants are by Rule to confess, is the Demise in
the Declaration against Goodluck. So that, My Lord, if there were no Statute to
help it, (...) take it with Submission, the Court having tried the Fact, ought
to make the Record according to the Fact they have tried.

As to their consenting to appear for several of the Tenants that were not duly
served, on Condition the Plaintiff would try it at Bar; My Lord, that is an
Argument against them, and brings us within the Benefit of the Case betwixt
Crawley and Parr, where there was a Judgment in Ejectment by Confession, and
the Demise laid after the Judgment, and amended after a Writ of Error brought,
because it was a Judgment by Warrant of Attorney; for it should not be supposed
that the Defendant gave a Warrant of Attorney to confess a void Judgment.

Now, My Lord, the Defendants consenting to appear, shall never be intended to
a void Declaration, but to a good Declaration in order to a fair Trial. And, My
Lord, we are the more entitled to the Benefit of it, because we are Purchasors,
for we give a Consideration for it, viz. agreed to try it at Bar, and they
themselves opened it so.

As to what was objected, That when the Tenants have appeared to this
Declaration in Ejectment, and are made Defendants, it is a new Action, and that
the Declaration against the Casual Ejector is rejected, and that therefore this
defect cannot be amended, though right in the Declaration against the casual
Ejector:

I give this Answer, that the Declaration against this casual Ejector, is not
rejected, but is by the common Rule in Ejectment made part of the Cause,
insomuch that if the Plaintiff be nonsuited he shall have his Judgment upon
that Declaration, and the Return of the Postea is Warrant for that Judgment; so
that by the common Rule in Ejectment they are so tied together, that it is all
but one Action, and the now Defendants are to stand in the casual Ejector's
place. But, My Lord, the Words of the Statute are not so strict which are in
any Proceedings precedenti Now, My Lord, the Declaration in Ejectment is a
Proceeding, and it is precedent, and it is within the equitable meaning of the
Statute, which intends all Amendments that are by neglect of the Clerk if it
appears that they are right in any of the Proceedings, and for that end a
Philiser's Note, though no part of the Record has been sufficient to amend by.

And, My Lord, the same may be said when the Defendant is arrested by a Lat. de
Placito transgr', and the Plaintiff declares in Debt or Case, and mistakes the
Christian Name Surname, whether shall it be amended by the Lat. and whether the
Lat. shall be looked upon to be a Proceeding precedent to the Declaration,
because in another Action, and so it would be if a Man be arrested de Placito
transgr', ac etiam Bill', and the Plaintiff declares in Debt only, this is
likewise departing from the Writ; but these are warranted by the Practice and
Course of the Court, these Processes being made use of only to force an
Appearance; and the Plaintiff may then declare in Case of Trespass or Debt, as
he sees good. Now My Lord, Declarations in Ejectment are the same thing,
because only made use of to force an Appearance, and are by the common Rule in
Ejectment become no more part of the same Action, than a Lat. is. But this, My
Lord, we have a full Answer to; for the Declaration against the now Defendant,
is entered on the Roll, and is right.

But with Submission, My Lord, the Declaration is sufficient to warrant its own
Amendment, it being by Original, viz. Que Johan' Levett and Maria eidem Rogero
demiser' ad terminum qui nondum praeteriit, intraver' and ipsum a firma sua
praedicta ejecer'. Now, My Lord, the Count may be amended by the Original,
which is, that the Plaintiff's Lessors had before that time demised the
Premises to the Plaintiff for a Term not then past; and if the Count be made
of a Demise then in being, it is all the Amendment we desire. But, My Lord,
here it may be objected, When must that Demise bear date and commence? Must the
Court set a Date and Commencement to Plaintiff's Demise?

To which I answer, That the Commencement is certain by the Declaration,
videlicet, from the 25th of March last, and that must be the 25th day of March
last before the Term the Issue is entered on, which is from 96. and then the
Date of the Demise must be betwixt Trinity Term, 96. and the 25th of March
before, which points directly at the Mistake which is in Michaelmass. If the
10th of Aril 1697. instead of 1696. and where the Court can by the Record take
notice what was intended; it is the same thing as if it had been once rightly
named before, and is within the meaning of that Statute, which after the naming
of many Mistakes, has these general words, and all other Mistakes of the like
nature, which My Lord, must be of no Signification, if this be not the meaning
of this Statute.

And, My Lord, as to this being the fault of the Clerk, I need no Argument to
prove it, for the matter shows it self; and the Declaration against the casual
Ejector being right, proves this the Fault of the Clerk in transcribing this
wrong, though the Declaration may properly be said to be the Act of the Client,
yet that shall be intended the Declaration against the casual Ejector, that
being the first Declaration, and all that is necessary for the Client to
instruct his Attorney in, the rest only depending on the Forms and Practice of
the Court, wherein the Attorney needs no further Instructions from his Client.

Now, My Lord, I do admit that the general words in this Statute are
restrained; that is to say, All other matters of the like nature, not being
against the right of the matter of Suit, nor whereby the Issue or Trial are
altered. But, My Lord, this Restriction has no relation to the particular
defects that were mentioned before, whereof ours is one, but to the general
words only; and, My Lord, we are within the intent of these general words also.

For this Amendment is not against the Right of the matter of Suit; for that
was whether the Plaintiff's Lessor had a Title, and that has been tried and
found for the Plaintiff; nor is the Issue or Trial altered; for had this been
amended before Trial, the Defendants must have pleaded the same Plea, and the
Trial would still have been the same. The danger only was at the Trial on the
Plaintiff's side, whether this was not Cause of a Nonsuit, and therefore it was
his Business to have had it amended before Trial for fear of being nonsuited at
Trial; but having tried his Cause, and the Right found with him, he is much
more entitled to the Benefit of this Amendment, because it is to support a
Verdict; Nay, My Lord, a Verdict that was found according to the Right and
Merits of the Cause, which all Courts have been always very tender of.

Lastly, My Lord, I shall offer this to your Lordship. That the matter we pray
to amend, is not matter of Substance, yet ought to be amended to avoid
Absurdity.

I must confess, that if this had been a Demise to commence in futuro, it would
have admitted of a greater Argument; but, My Lord, this is a Demise in being at
the time of the Declaration, and not yet expired, and so much appears by the
Record.

My Lord, the Record is an Issue of Trinity Term 1696. and the Demise is laid
the 10th of April, 1697. Habend. from the 25th of March then last past, and the
words in the Declaration are dimiser', in the Writ, and demisissent in the
Count; and that the Plaintiff entered by Virtue thereof, and was possessed, and
the Defendant ejected him, his Term being not ended, etc. all which the
Defendant confesses.

This Demise must be before Trinity Term 96. or else the words demiser',
demisissent are to no purpose; and it is impossible that before Trinity Term
1696. the Plaintiff's Lessors should have demised the 10th of April 1697. for
that time was not come. But it is possible that the 10th of April, 1696. the
Plaintiff's Lessors might make a Lease dated the 10th of April 1697. before the
time of the date.

And if that be the Construction of it, then this is a Deed from the time of
the execution, and the Term commences from the 25th day of March before.

Or else this being an impossible date, must be altogether rejected, and then
Trinity Term and the 25th day of March being all the times that are certain in
the Declaration, the Confession is that betwixt the 25th day of March 1696. and
Trinity Term following the Plaintiff's Lessors demised, the date being no
essential part, and then this is a good Demise for five Years from the 25th of
March 1696.

Greater Mistakes than these have been amended after Verdict.

Lees and Sir Nathaniel Curson, Mich last.
Bar. in Ejectment, wherein the Plaintiff's Lessor being an Infant, the
Declaration was, That the Infant demised by his Guardian, which was no Demise,
and the Cause being tried at Staff. last Summer Assizes, the Defendant's
Council insisted on the Mistake, and relied thereon, and it being referred by
consent to the Judge, and a Verdict given for security, the Judge referred the
matter to the Court of Common Pleas, who amended it, though never right in any
of the Proceedings.

The Bishop of Worcester's Case in this Court, 15 Car. 1. Haslefoot and Cade,
after Verdict the day in Record is altered after Verdict.
where there were five Defendants and but three of them pleaded, and after
Verdict amended, and the Verdict was recorded against two, that no Issue was
jonyed against in the Record of Ni. pr.

Camberlain against the Hundred of Tundring upon the Statute of Hue and Cry, 14
Car. 2.
where it was ordered, That the Record both of the Declaration and Issue should
be amended by the Attorneys, and this was before Trial.

Ours is a far stronger Case; for this Amending, if it had been before Trial,
would not have altered the Issue, or anywise influenced the Merits of the Cause.

Now, My Lord, we are entitled to the Favor of the Court, in respect we moved
this matter before Trial, and were bid by the Court to move it afterward; and
if this had been a fatal matter, the Plaintiff ought to have been nonsuited,
which was then insisted on by the Defendants, and denied; and so the Plaintiff
expose his Title. paid the Charges of the Jury and other things, which cost him
above 100 l. and if he had been nonsuited, was by Rule but to pay Country
Costs, and the Plaintiff's Lessors are Purchasors for a valuable Consideration
under a Title of above Sixty years Possession. And having now upon a fair
Trial, and a full Evidence obtained a Verdict, we hope your Lordship will put
them in a Capacity of reaping the Fruit of it.

The Judgment in Ejectment is double, one as to his Damages, upon which the
Costs are attendant, and the other as to the Term whereupon his Possession
depends; and the Plaintiff may take out two Executions, one for his Costs, and
the other for his Possession. Now if there be cause to stay the Possession,
there is more cause to stay Judgment as to Damages and Costs, because the Issue
has been fairly tried, and the Defendants have confessed that the Plaintiff
was in Possession, and that the Defendants did eject him; now if his Term was
not commenced, but his Possession tortious, yet he is not to be turned out by a
Stranger that has no Title, as the Defendants were, the Jury having found
against them, and the Damages are for the entering upon our Possession and
ejecting us.

But the Court said, It could not be amended, and Mr. Levet brought a new Trial
and recovered.

Declarations when amendable or not.
In Ejectment where the Title is material, Declaration amended after Plea,
without paying Costs.
the Plaintiff amended his Declaration after Plea (but while all was in Paper)
in the date of his Action, without Costs paying, 1 Keb. 14.

After Verdict and Judgment the Declaration cannot be amended, After Verdict
and Judgment no Amendment of a Declaration.
for that might attaint the Jury: As in Ejectment of the Rectory of H. and
other Tenants, virtute cujus intravit in tenementa praedicta. Verdict and
Judgment de Rectoria and Tenementis praedict', Aliter in Judgment and Acts of
the Court.
it cannot be amended; but on such Omission in Judgment or Acts of the Court it
were amendable, but not of the Declaration. But in this case the Court
conceived it well enough, (Tenements) include a Rectory.
and that the word Tenements includes Rectory, whether there be Glebe or not,
but not so of a Manor, Hill. 25 and 26 Car. 2. Bale's Case.

If the Plaintiff in Ejectment declare of an House lying in two Parishes,
Declaration of an House lying in two Parishes, and the House lies in one, it is
good.
if the House do lie in either of the Parishes, and do not lie in both of them,
yet the Declaration is good; for there is certainty enough in it, Pract. Reg.
110.

It must be alleged in what Vill the Tenements are; It must be alleged in
what Vill the Tenements are.
the Plaintiff declares that P. C. by Indenture apud F. let unto him one House
and twenty Acres of Land by the Name of all her Tenements in S. per Cur' the
Declaration is not good, because it is not alleged in what Vill the Tenements
are; for the naming of the Vill in the Pernomen, was not material, and so Cr.
El. 822. Gray and Chapman.

The Plaintiff declares of a Lease of one Message ten Acres of Land, Where the
Pernomen is not good.
twenty Acres of Meadow, twenty of Pasture by the name of one Message, ten
Acres Prat. be it more or less; after Verdict a Nil cap. per Billam was entered:
For upon the matter by the Plaintiff disclosed in his own Declaration he cannot
have Execution of the Quantity found by the Jury: for in the Lease there is not
but ten Acres demised, and these words in Judgment of Law, cannot be extended
to thirty or forty Acres, and the rather because the Land demanded by the
Declaration, is of another nature than that mentioned in the Pernomen; for this
goes only to the Meadow, and the Declaration is to the arable and Pasture,
Yelv. p. 166.

In this Action it was moved in Arrest of Judgment, That the Plaintiff had
declared of two Demises, ( viz.) that J. S. demised ten Acres of Land to him,
and that J. N. had demised ten other Acres of Land to him Habend. for the Term
of five Years, etc. and that he entered into the Premises demised to him by J.
S. and J. N. in forma praedicta. After Verdict upon Not guilty for the
Plaintiff, it was objected, That in one of the Demises there is no certain Term
or Estate; for the Habend' can only be referred to the Demise of J. S. for that
begins a new Sentence; but per Cur' the Habend' shall be a good Limitation of
both Demises for five Years, and when it is showed that the Plaintiff entered
into the Premises demised to him in forma praedicta, Forma praedict' how
construed.
that is an Averment that all was demised to him, for that it is forma
praedicta, 2 Ventr. 2. W. and M.

In Ejectment the Plaintiff need not count of the demise of more Acres than the
Acres out of which he was ejected; Declaration need not be of more Acres than
he was ejected.
and a demise may be pleaded of any Parcel without mentioning the entire; as if
one demise to me two Acres for Term of Years, and I am ejected out of one Acre
by a Stranger, Now I shall have Ejectione Firm, and count that one Acre was
demised to me, without any mention of the other Acre, 1 Saunders p. 208.

Where one declares on a fictitious Lease to A. One fictitious Lease to A. and
another to B. the same term, the last is not good.
for three years, and within the same Term declares of another fictitious Lease
to B. of the same Lands, the last is not good; for Trespass for the mean
Profits must be brought in the first Lessee's Name, ut dicitur.

As to the Form.

Ejectment was against two, Declaration against two, expulit.
and the Declaration was intraverat and expulit; and it was amended, Yelv. 223.

Vi and armis are left out in the Declaration, The Omission of vi and armis in
the Declaration.
Cro. El. 340. Griffith and Williams's Case, says it is but matter of Form,
and it is helped after a Verdict; but in Cro. Jac. 36. and Yelv. 223. in
Odington and Darby's Case, where vi and armis was left out, and Error was
brought in the Exchequer-Chamber, it was not suffered to be amended, but
Judgment was reversed. So Godb. 286. and so in Sykes and Coke's Case the Want
of vi and armis is not helped by a Verdict; but in Error in B. R. if upon
diminution it be well certified, the Court will amend it, Godb. 286. 2 Bulstr.
35. Cr. Jac. 306. Yelv. 223. Odington and Darby. 1 Keb. 164.

In B. R. the Transcript of Trespass and Ejectment was de Placito
Transgressionis and Ejectionis, omitting Firm, it was amended. And in B. R. it
would be amended in the Record it self before Removal, 1 Keb. 106.

Exception was taken in Godb. The Omission of Extratenet in the Declaration.
60, 71. because the Plaintiff did not say in his Declaration Extratenet; but
per tot' Cur' those Words were not material; for if the Defendant do put out
the Plaintiff, it is sufficient to maintain the Action. So if it be a
possessione sua ejecit instead of a firma sua ejecit, it is good; for ejecit a
possessione inde, inde has relation to the Farm, Godb. 60, 71.

In Ejectione Firm the Writ and Declaration were of two parts of certain Lands
in H. and says not, in two parts in three parts to be divided, and yet it was
good as well in the Declaration as the Writ; and this difference was taken Per
Cur' By intendment and Construction of Law, Demand of a part without showing
into how many parts divided.
when any parts are demanded without showing in how many parts the whole is
divided, that there remains but one part not divided; as if two parts are
demanded, there remains a third part; and when three parts are divided, there
remains a fourth part: But if any demand be of other parts in other Form, there
he ought to show the same specially, as if one demands three parts of five
parts, or four parts of six, etc. 13 Rep. 58.

Declaration in Ejectment is Quod cum such an one dimisit, Declaration in
Ejectment with Quod cum, is good, not so in Trespass.
it is good here, because he cannot have the Action without a Lease; but in
Trespass, as Assault and Battery, etc. it is not so. And Dodderidge took this
difference, Where the thing on which the Action is brought, has continuance,
and where the Action is brought for a thing done and past. In Ejectione Firm
there the Lease has still Continuance, and there such a Declaration with a
Quod cum, is good, because it is in the Affirmative; but where the thing is
past, as Battery, it ought not to be with a Quod cum, 2 Bulstr. 214. Sherland's
Case.

As for the manner of declaring in respect of the thing demised, vid. supra
titulo, Of what things an Ejectment lies: To which I shall add one Case in the
Exchequer. Ejectment for so many Acres of Meadow, and so many Acres of Pasture,
on Non culp' the Jury find a Demise de Herbagio and Pannagio of so many Acres.
De Herbagio.
Per Cur' by the same Reason that an Ejectment lies of a Lease of Herbage, by
the same Reason the Plaintiff ought to declare accordingly; and Herbage does
not include all the Profits of the Soil, Herbage does not include all the
Profits of thd Soil.
but only part of it, Hardr. 330. Wheeler's Case in Scacario.

The Form of a Declaration from a Parson of Rectory and Tenements in B. R. with
an Averment of the Parson's Life, 1 Rep. 149. Chedington's Case.

The Form of a Declaration in Ejectment in the Common Pleas. Mich. 16 Car. 2.
Tempest.
Midd ss. A. B. nuper de London Gen attachiat fuit ad respondend W. I. de plito
quare vi and armis unum Messuagium unum Gardinum december acras terre tres acras
prati and quatuor acras pasture cum pertinentiis in H. que S. W. vid eidem W.
dimisit ad terminum qui noudum preteriit intravit and ipsum a firma sua predict
ejecic and alia enormia ei intulit ad grave damuum ipsius W. and contra pacem
Dom Regis nunc, etc. Et unde idem W. p I. S. Attornat suum queritur quoth cum
predict S. primo die Octobris Anno Regni Dom Regis nunc quinto decimo apud H.
predict dimisit prefat W. Tenementa predicta cum pertin habend eid W. and
assignat luis a Festo Sancti Michaelis Archangeli tunc ultimo preterito usque
finem and terminum quinque annorum extunc proxime sequen and plenarie complend
and finiend virtute cujus dimissionis idem W. in Tenementa predicta intravit
and fuit inde possessionat Et sic inde possessionat existen predict A. postea
scilicet eod primo die Octobris Anno Regni dict Dom Regis quinto decimo
supradicto vi and armis, etc. in Tenementa p^dicta cum pertin que p^dict S.
p^fat W. in forma p^dicta dimisit ad terminum p^rict qui nondum preteriit
intravit and ipsum a firma sua p^dicta ejecit ac alia enormia, etc. ad grave
damnum, etc. and contra pacem, etc. On. de dicit quod deteriorat est and damnum
het ad valentiam december Librarum and inde produc Sectam.

Et p^dict A. p G. I. Attornat suum ven and defend vim and injuriam quandque,
etc. I. Lo. usque Octab Hillarij.

In the King's Bench.
TH. queritur de Iacobo W. Wart ss.
in custod Mar Marese Dom Regis coram ipso Rege existen pro eo videst quod cum
H. M. Gen ultimo die Ianuarij Anno Regni Dom nostri Caroli secundi nunc Regis
Anglie, etc. vicesimo, apud B. in Com predict dimisisset concessisset and ad
firmam tradidisset p^fato T. unum Messuagium and duas A^ras Pasture cum pertiu
scituat jacen and existen in B. p^dice habend and tenend renementa p^dicta cum
pertin prefato T. and assignat luis a vicesimo quinto die Decembris tunc ult
p^teris usque plenum finem and terminum quinque annorum extunc proxime sequen
and plen^r^ and finiend complend virtute cujus quidem dimissionis idem T. in
tenementa p^dicta cum p^tin intravit and fuit inde possessionat quousque p^dict
Iacobus postea scilt eodem ultimo die Ianuarij anno Regni dict Dom Regis nunc
vicesimo supradict vi and armis, etc. in tenementa p^dicta cum pertinen in and
super possessionem ipsius T. inde intravit and ipsum T. a possessione sua
predict termino suo p^dict inde nondum finit ejecit expulit and amovit ipsumque
T. a possessione sua p^dict extratenuit and adhuc extratenet and alia enormia
ei intulit contra pacem dict Dom Regis nunc ad damnum ipsius T. 20 l. Et inde
produe Sectam, etc.

In the Office of Pleas in the Exchequer.
A. B. Derb ss.
debtor Dom Regis nunc venit coram Baronibus hujus Scacarij duodecimo die
Februarij hoc Termino p C. D. Attorn suum and queritur p Billam versus E. F.
p^sent hic in Curia eodem die de plito Transgressionis and Ejectionis Firm pro
eo videlt quoth cum quidam I. B. secundo die Feb Anno Regni dict Don^i Regis nunc
vicesimo primo apud, etc. (prout supra in B. R.) ad vamnum ipsius A. december
Librarum Quo minus, etc. Et inde producit Sectam, etc.

A Copy of the Declaration you must leave with the Occupier of the House and
Land, with this or the like Indorsement.
JAmes B. yon may perceive that I am sued for the Message and Lands within
mentioned, being in your Possession; these are therefore to desire you to
defend your Title, or else I shall suffer Judgment to be entered by default.

Or thus.
UNless the Tenant in Possession, or they under whom he claims, do next Trinity
Term appear to this Declaration, and make him or themselves Defendants
thereunto, and by Rule of Court confess the Lease, Entry and Ejectment, and
insist only upon the Title at the Trial, the Defendant in this Declaration will
confess Judgment, and Possession will be delivered accordingly to the
Plaintiff, and you turned out of Possession.

Your Friend J. D.
To A. B. Tenant in Possession of the Premises within mentioned.
To this the Tenant may appear by his Attorney, and consent to a Rule with the
Plaintiff's Attorney, to make himself Defendant in the room of the casual
Ejector, and to confess Lease, Entry and Ouster, and at the Trial to stand upon
the Title only; or in default thereof Judgment will be entered against the
casual Ejector.

If the Tenant in Possession do not appear in due time, and enter into a Rule,
as is aforesaid, then upon Affidavit made of the Service thereof, and notice
given him to appear, the Court upon Motion will order Judgment to be entered
against the casual Ejector; for if the Defendant plead nothing to this Action,
No Judgment against the casual Ejector but by motion of the Court.
but let it pass by Nihil dicit, the Judgment cannot be had upon a common Rule,
as in Actions of Debt, and such like, but by Motion of the Court, because it is
to alter Possession.

After the Declaration delivered, What is to be done after the Declaration
delivered.
the Person whose Interest is concerned, ought to retain an Attorney, who is to
give his Client's Name to the Plaintiff's Attorney, that so he may be made
Defendant instead of the casual Ejector; and then a Rule is to be entered by
Consent, as follows:

Robinson. Pas. 15 Car. 2. Regis.
D. versus M. in Ejectione Firm de terris and tenementis in H. in Com' M. ex
dimissione E. P.
ORdinat est p Curiam ex assensu I. H. Attornat quer^ and I. R. Attornat pro T.
W. de W. in Com E. p^dict Yeom quod idem T. admittatur defendens qui indilate
comparebit p Attorn suum p^dict and recipiet narrationem and plitabit adinde
generalem exitum hoc Termino and ad Triac^onem superinde habend idem T.
comparebit in propria persona sua aut p ejus Concilium vel Attornat Et
cognoscet dimissionem intrationem and actualem expulsionem vel quod in defectu
inde intretur judicium versus Def. G. M. casualem Ejectorem sed parcatur
ulterior prosecutio versus cum quousque p^dict T. in aliquo p^missorum defalt
fccerit Et ex consimili assensu ulterius ordinat est per Cur quod p^dict T.
nullum capiet advantagium versus querent pro ejus non prosecutione super
Triatione occasionat p hujusmodi defaltam sed quod p^dict T. solvet querenti
custagia Prothonotar^ pro inde taxand Et ulterius ordinat est quod dimissor
querentis sit onerabilis cum solutione custagiorum defendent per Cur aliquo
modo taxand vel adjudicand.

The like in B. R.
Die Lune prox' post Crast' Ascensionis Domini, 23 Car. 2. Regis.
ORdinatum est ex assensu ambarum partium and eorum Attornat quoth W. H. qui
clamat titulum Messuagio in questione fiat Def. and compebit inldiate ad Sect
quer^ and impon commune Ballium and recipiet narrationem in plito
Transgressionis and Ejectionis Firm and plitabit adinde non culp* and super
triatione exitus cogn dimission intration and actualem Ejectionem and stabit
super titulum tantum alit judicium intretur per defalt^ versus modo querent Et
si pdict W. H. super triatione exitus illius non cognose dimission intrac^on
and actual eject' p quoth quer prosequi ulterius non potest quod tunc nu^ mis^
sive custag^ super tali non pros^ adjudicentur Et ulterius ordinat est quoth si
veredict redditum fuerit p^dict W. H. vel predict quet non pros^ foret propter
aliquam aliam causam pro qm non cognost dimission intrac^on and actualem
ejectionem p^dicy quod tunc le Aessor quet solveret talia custag^ W. H. Def.
qualia p Cut adjudicata fuerint p Cur^'.

An Affidavit in Ejectment to move for Judgment against the casual Ejector.
Inter A. S. Quer' and B. C. Def. 'de Terris and Tenementis in R. in Com' H. ex
dimissione J. H.

T. S. makes Oath, That he this Deponent on Thursday the -- day of -- last
past did deliver unto J. D. Tenant in Possession of the Premises in question,
a true Copy of the annexed Declaration, with an Indorsement or Superscription
thereupon, to this effect, viz. J. D. You may perceive by this Declaration,
that I am sued as Casual Ejector for the Land, and Tenements within specified,
in your Possession (whereunto I claim no Title) I do therefore hereby give you
timely Notice, that unless you appear and defend your Title this next -- Term,
I shall suffer Judgment to pass against me by Default, whereby you will be
turned out of Possession. Your Loving Friend, C. R. Dec. 12. 1679. Which said
Indorsement or Superscription this Deponent did then read to the said T. D. and
acquainted him with the Contents thereof.

Note,. It is good Service to deliver the Copy to the Wife, or to the menial
Servant of the Tenant in Possession. If to the Wife, thus ( viz.) I did deliver
to Ann the Wife; or, if to the Servant, to R. W. the hired Servant of J. D. and
desired her to acquaint her Husband therewith; or him his Master therewith.

If there be two Tenants, then say, I did deliver one Copy of the annexed
Declaration to A. R. Tenant in Possession of Parcel of the Premises in
question; and another Copy thereof to C. D. Tenant in Possession of the Residue
of the Premises in question; upon which said several Copies was subscribed or
indorsed to this effect, etc. Which said several Indorsements he the said
Deponent did read to the said several Tenants, etc.

CHAP. VIII.
Of Pleadings in Ejectment. What shall be a good Plea in Abatement in this
Action. Entry of the Plaintiff haenging the Writ. Entry after Verdict, and
before the day in Bank. After Imparlance no Pleading in Abatement, and why.
Abate, because he shows not in which of the Vills the Land lies. Ejectment
against Baron and Feme; Baron dies since the Nisi prius, and before the day in
Bank. Of pleading to the Jurisdiction. Conisance not allowable on Suggestion,
but it must be averred or pleaded. How Prescription to the Five Ports to be
made. Ancient Demesne a good Plea in Ejectment, and why. Of Plea of Ancient
Demesne allowed the same Term, and how. Of Pleas puis darrein Continuance.
Entry puis darrein Continuance pleaded at the Assizes is reasonable; the
Consequence of a Demurrer to this Plea. Release from one of the Plaintiffs in
Writ of Error, whom it shall bar. Accord with Satisfaction pleaded in
Ejectment. Aid prier, and why the Defendant shall not have Aid of the King,
aliter of a common Person; But a Writ not to proceed Rege inconsulto allowed.
Recovery and Execution in a former Action pleaded in Bar. Bar in one Ejectione
Firm how a Bar in another.

THE General Issue in Ejectione Firm is now settled by Rule of Court to be Not
guilty, though formerly the Defendant might have pleaded Non ejecit, or any other
Title; and therefore though this Chap. 2. may seem needless, because by the new
Practice, upon Not guilty pleaded, the Title is only to be insisted on at the
Trial, yet in some Cases special Pleas may and ought to be pleaded in Ejectione
Firm, especially in inferior Courts, which I shall first treat of, and then
give a little touch as to the special Pleading formerly in use in this Action,
that so the Reader may not be totally ignorant thereof. But first,

What shall be a good Plea in Abatement.
Per Cur', That the Plaintiff had another Ejectment depending.
It is a good Plea in Abatement of Ejectione Firm in B. R. that the Plaintiff
had another Ejectment for the same depending in the Common Bench, Moor p. 539.
Digby and Vernon.

In Ejectione Firm, Action commenced* and the Term expires pendant the Suit.
if the Term be expired before the Action brought, the Writ shall abate,
because he ought to recover the Term and Damages; but if he commence the Action
before the Term expire, and it expires pendent the Writ, there it shall not
abate, but he shall recover Damages, Dyer 226.

Entry of the Plaintiff hanging the Writ, Entry of the Plaintiff hanging the
Writ.
shall abate the Writ.

In Williams and Ashet's Case the Defendant would have pleaded Entry after the
Verdict in Abatement of the Writ, Entry after the Verdict, and before the day
in Bank, is not Error.
but it was hold clearly he had not day to plead it, but it is put to his
Audita Querela. But in Parkes and Johnson's Case, in Ejectione Firm the Error
assigned was, That the Plaintiff after Verdict, and between the day of Nisi
prius, and the day in Banco, had entered, whereby his Bill was abated, and
demurred thereupon: Per Cur' this cannot be assigned for Error; for it proves
the Bill is abateable, but is not abated in fait; neither is it material to
assign it for Error; for upon such Surmise which goes only in Abatement, the
Judgment shall be examined, Cro. El. 181. Ashet's Case. Cro. El. 767. Parks and
Johnson.

The Plaintiff declares of one Message and forty Acres of Land in Stone.
Abate, because he shows not in which of the Vills the Lands lie.
The Defendant imparles till another Term, and then pleads, That within the
Parish of Stone are three Vills A. B. and C. and because the Plaintiff does not
show in which of the Vills the Lands lie, he demands Judgment of the Bill, and
quod ob causam praedict' Billa praedicta cassetur. The Plaintiff demurs, and
adjudged for him. After Imparlance no Pleading in Abatement, and why.
For, 1. after Imparlance the Defendant may not plead in Abatement of the Bill,
for he had accepted it to be good by his Entry into defense, and by his
Imparlance 2. Reg. Where a Man pleads in Abatement, he ought to give to the
Plaintiff a better Writ.
The matter of the Plea is not good, because the Defendant does not show in
which of the Vills the Message and forty Acres lie. And where a Man pleads in
Abatement, he ought to give the Plaintiff a better Writ, and upon Demurrer
there shall be a Respondeas Ouster, Yelv. 112. Tomson and Collier.

After Verdict for the Plaintiff (the Question being brought against Baron and
Feme) that the Husband was dead since the Nisi Ejectment against Baron and
Feme; Baron died since the Nisi prius, and before the day in Bank, the Action
continued against the Wife.
prius, and before the day in Bank; and whether the Bill should abate in all,
or should stand against the Feme, was the Question; and because it is in Nature
of an Action of Trespass, and the Feme is charged for her own Fact, it was
adjudged that the Action continued against the Feme, and that Judgment should
be entered against her sole, because the Baron was dead, Cro. Jac. 356. Rigley
and Lee.

Ejectione Firm by J. S. against N. and O. N. Where the Plaintiff by his
demand, confesses the Writ abateable.
appears and pleads the General Issue, and Process continues against the other
until he appears, and then he appears and pleads an Entry into the Land puis
darrein Continuance. Judgment de Brev'. The Plaintiff upon this Plea demurs in
Law, Curia advisare; and in the interim the first Issue was found pro Quer'
versus N. and the Plaintiff prays his Judgment. He shall not have it, because
the Plaintiff by Demurrer in Law had confessed the Writ abateable; and the Writ
by the Entry of the Plaintiff was abated, in as much as the Term is to be
recovered, Dyer 226. Nevill's Case.

To the same purpose is the late Case of Boys and Norcliff.

In Ejectione Firm the Question was, if the Entry into the Land after the day
of Nisi prius, and before the day in Bank, may be pleaded in Abatement; and if
such Entry puis darrein Continuance, be a Plea in Abatement. Note, this was in
Error out of the Common Bench, and held by the Court of the King's Bench, that
it is not Error, yet entry will not revive the Term, because* it is only in
Abatement, Entry before the Nisi prius to be pleaded at the Assizes.
and there is a Diversity between this and Death, 1 Bulstr. 5. And it is usual
if the Entry be before the Nisi prius, to plead such a Plea at the Assizes, and
if it be omitted, the Advantage is lost; but not so in case of Death: By Death
the Writ is actually abated, Difference between Entry after Verdict and Death.
there being no time to plead it in Court, but Entry must be pleaded puis
darrein Continuance in Abatement only, Sid. p. 238. Boys and Norcliff. 1 Keb.
841, 850. mesme Case.

Shall not abate by the Death of the Lessee. Not abate by the Death of the
Lessee.
Vid. 3 Keb. 772.

Of pleading to the Jurisdiction: Conisance of Plea, how to be demanded and
allowed, and how pleaded.
This Plea was formerly allowed of, and so is still in some Cases.

Now every Plea which goes to the Jurisdiction of the Court, Regula, for a Plea
to the Jurisdiction of the Court.
ought to be taken most strong against him that pleads it; and to this purpose
there is a pretty Case.

In Ejectment the Plaintiff declares of a Lease made at Haylsham; Al'
Jurisdict'.
the Defendant pleads, That Haylsham praedict. ^ubi tenementa jacent, is within
the Cinque Ports where the King's Writ runs not; Cinque Ports.
and so he pleaded to the Jurisdiction of the Court. The Plaintiff replied,
That the Town of Haylsham was within the County of Sussex, absque hoc, that it
was within the Cinque Ports. The Defendant demurs, Travorse.
because he ought to have traversed absque hoc quod Villa de Haylsham ubi
tenementa jacent, is within the Cinque-Port; for the truth was, it was part in
the Cinque Ports, and part in the County of Sussex, and the Land lies in the
part which is in the Cinque Ports; but per Cur' the Traverse is good, and the
Bar is naught. The Defendant in his Bar ought to have made his Distinction, and
every Plea which goes to the Jurisdiction of the Court, ought to be taken most
strong against him that pleads it, and the Traverse here ought to be to the
Town, and not to the ubi, which was idle; for the Law said as much, and we do
not imagine any Fractions of Towns, Winch. p. 113. Austin and Beadle. Cro. Jac.
692. mesme Case. Hutton p. 74. mesme Case.

Note, He who would demand Conisance of this Plea, ought to show his Warrant of
Attorney in Latin, Sid. 103. in the Bishop of Ely's Case.

The Attorney General in Hales and Jull's Case prayed Allowance of the Plea,
Cinque Ports.
that the Lands in the Ejectment were within the Cinque Ports, which the Court
granted, there being no Imparlance General or Special, both which affirm the
Jurisdiction of the Court; and at the Venire fac' the Plaintiff may suggest the
Lands to be within the Cinque Ports, and have it of Places adjacent within the
County, 1 Keb. 65,

Sir Edward Turner in Ejectment, (...). Conisance not allowable on Suggestion,
but it must be averred on Record.
ore tenus, showing his Warrant of Attorney, demanded Conisance for the Bishop
of Ely; per Cur' it is not allowable on Suggestion, which is Cinque Ports,
Ancient Demesne, etc. It must be averred on Record; for though the Court takes
notice that Ely is a Royal Franchise, yet this must be so averred or pleaded,
and may be after Imparlance, It must be averred or pleaded, and may be, after
Imparlance in Ejectment.
when any third Person is concerned since the new way of Ejectment used in
Green and Simpson's Case, but Siderfin is contra that it cannot be pleaded
after Imparlance, 1 Keb. 946. 948. Sid. 103.

The Defendant prayed to be admitted to plead in Abatement, Where Conisance of
Plea not allowed of in Ejectment.
that the Lands in the Ejectment are within the Cinque Ports, and the rather,
for that he was made Defendant by the Rule of Court, with a special
Imparparlance (with a salvis omnibus, etc.) Per Cur' let him plead in Chief;
unless in Ancient Demesne no special Plea has been allowed, because the Lord
would be prejudiced in a Trial at Common Law, 1 Keb. 725. Hale and Uppington.

In Hall and Hugh's Case in Ejectment of Lands, Part within and part without
the Cinque Ports, and demur.
part within and part without the five Ports, the Defendant, after Imparlance,
pleads in Abatement, That part of the Lands are in the Five Ports, and so prays
Judgment, si Curia cognoscere velit, etc. The Plaintiff demurs, because it does
not appear but that the Demise was out, and it is transitory, and may be laid
any where, though the Lease was actually sealed in another Place or County; and
the Defendant may plead Non dimisit, Where Non dimisit pleadeded in Ejectment.
as well as Not guilty. The Demise in this Case was laid at Maidstone; per
Twisden this being an inferior Court, they cannot try the Demise, which is
issuable, Why the new Rule of confessing Lease, was introduced.
and the great Mischief that came in want of Proof of the Demise, was the cause
of introducing the new Rule. In this Plea it was said, That the Lands were in
F. parcel of the Cinque Ports, where time out of mind, the Writ of our Lord the
King runs not, and that they of F. have always tried, etc. this is ill;
Prescription must be to the five Ports, and not to F. only.
for the Prescription should have been annexed to the Five Ports generally, and
not to F. only; and the Court ordered him to plead in Chief, and to confess
Lease, Entry and Ouster, or else that the Plaintiff take Judgment against his
own Ejector, 2 Keb. 69, 79.

1. Whether Ancient Demesne pleaded, be a good Plea? 2. Whether it may be
pleaded after Imparlance?

In Cro. Car. 9. it was a Question, Whether Ancient Demesne may be pleaded
after Imparlance. Ancient Demesne a good Plea in Ejectment, and why.
It Is resolved, That Ancient Demesne is a good Plea in Ejectione Firm, and in
Replevin; though it was doubted in our Books formerly, but that is fully settled
in several Reports. In Alden's Case, 5 Rep. the Defendant pleads, That the
Tenements in which, etc. were parcel of the Manor of O. in Com. S. Quod quidem
manerium est de antiquo Dominico, etc. and demands Judgment, si Curia hic vult
cognoscere, etc. The Plaintiff demurs, and per Cur' it is a good Plea. 1.
Because it is the common Intendment that the Right and Title of the Land will
come in Debate in this Action. 2. In this Action the Plaintiff shall recover
the Possession of the Land, and have Execution by habere fac' possessionem, and
this Action savours of the Realty: So in Pymmock and Feilder's Case, where the
Pleading was nice; the Defendant pleads that the Lands were Ancient Demesne,
and pleadable by a Writ of Right, Close, etc. The Plaintiff shows that they
were Copyhold Lands, Parcel of the Manor, and entitles himself by Lease under
the Copyholder, and traverseth, That they were impleadable by a Writ of Right
Close; and it was thereupon demurred, 1. Because Copyhold-Land, parcel of a
Manor of Ancient Demesne, should be pleadable there, and not at Common Law. 2.
Because this Traverse that they were impleadable, is but the Consequence of
Ancient Demesne. Per Cur' the Copyhold-Lands are as the Demesnes of the Manor,
and are the Lord's Freehold, and therefore not impleadable, but in the Lord's
Court, and the Traverse is well enough taken, 1 Bulstr. 108. Cr. El. 826. 5
Rep. 105. Alden's Case. Styles 90. Cro. Jac. 559. Pymmock and Feilder.

Now a Lease for years is intended to be taken real in a Recovery, and because
a Lease for years intended to be recovered in Ejectione Firm, it is a good
Plea to say it is Ancient Demesne, yet a Lease for years is but personal in
Quality, 2 Rolls Rep. 181. Banister and Eyres.

The Defendant imparles in Ejectione Firm, Whether Ancient Demesne is
pleadable after Impalance.
and after pleads that the Land is Ancient Demesne, etc. and unde intendit quod
Curia non vuit cognoscere, etc. The Plaintiff demurs: Per Cur' this Plea is
pleadable after Imparlance, because if Judgment be given here the Lord will
rever^e it by Disceit, and the Judgment will be avoidable, and the diversity is
true, Regula.
A Man may plead that which is in Bar after an Imparlance, but not that which
goes to the Writ; and this holds in all Cases but Ancient Demesne. 2. The last
Conclusion is Surplusage; Conclusion of Plea.
but if he had begun his his Plea. Actio non, it had been ill, notwithstanding
the Conclusion, ut supra. But the Defendant waved his Demurrer without Costs,
and pleaded to Issue, if Frankfee, or not: And yet Hetley says, p. 117. It was
agreed by all, that Ancient Demesne is a good Plea in Ejectment, but not after
Imparlance, Marsham and Allen's Cas. Dyer 210. in margin.

But now if a Man come in and pray to be made Defendant, and to plead specially
Ancient Demesne, he shall do it; and it is now used of Course to plead
Dilatories after Imparlance, New Defendant not to plead Ancient Demesne after
the former Imparlance.
1 Keb. 361. Holiday's Case. But in 1 Keb. 706. by Windham the new Defendant
(one that prays to be made so) may plead Ancient Demesne after the former
Imparlance, because it is not any Ouster of the Court of Jurisdiction. Cur' e
contra. He ought to plead Not guilty personally, Roch and Plumpton's Case. And
in 1 Keb. 755. Plea of Ancient Demesne allowed the same Term,
Snow and Cooley. The Court will allow Plea of Ancient Demesne the same Term,
contrary to the ordinary Rules in Ejectment. And in Sutton and Courtney's Case
it was prayed by Council, That the Defendant might have Liberty to plead
Ancient Demesne to a Declaration delivered before the Essoyn of this Term, And
how.
as of last Term, which the Court granted, and ordered him to attend the
Scondary to settle the said Plea, which is usually done by making the Plaintiff
deliver a new Declaration, as of this Term, and so the Plea comes quasi before
Imparlance, 2 Keb. 725.

In David and Lyster's Case, Rolls said Ancient Demesne is a good Plea after
Imparlance; for it goes in Bar of the Action it self, and not in Abatement of
the Writ, Styles 90.

Plea puis darrein Continuance.
Ejectione Firm was brought for entering into three several Vills: Release puis
darrein Continuance before the Justices of Nisi prius* they can not take it.
The Declaration makes mention of no Vill in certain. The Defendant pleads a
Release puis darrein Continuance before the Justices of Nisi prius. Per Cur' a
Man cannot plead a Release at the Nisi prius after Issue joined, for so none
should have Judgment. When this Plea is pleaded, the Justices of Nisi prius
cannot proceed to take the Inquest, and to this Plea of the Defendant, the
Plaintiff cannot there reply, but he ought to reply in Bank. After Issue
joined, and a Venire fac' awarded in such a Vill, the Sheriff returns null ti^l
Vill, this is not good; for he cannot return that thing which is contrary to
the Issue to avoid the Trial, a fortior' one of the Parties cannot plead such
matter at the Nisi prius; the Authority of the Justices of the Nisi prius is to
take the Verdict of the Jury, and no other Plea: And the Justices of the Nisi
prius have no power to amend any Fault in the Declaration; and when the
Sessions end, their Authority cease. Vid. Cro. Jac. 261. contra. 10 H. 7. 21.
1 Bustr. 92. Moor and Brown. Yelv. p. 180. 1 Cro. Jac. 261.

In Ejectione Firm against two, one appears and pleads the General Issue, and
Process continues against the other, who now appears and pleads Entry puis
darrein Continuance in Abatement of the Writ: Upon which the Plaintiff demurs;
and after Issue was found for the Plaintiff, Demurrer a Confession of the Entry.
he shall not have Judgment, for the Demurrer is a Confession of the Entry, and
shall abate his own Writ; for in this Action the Term is to be recovered,
aliter if he had imparled. Vide supra Plea in Abatement, Dyer 226.

Upon a Special Verdict in Ejectment, Release pleaded at the day of the
Argument.
and a day given for Argument, before which the Defendant procures a Release of
all Ejectments, and at the day for the Argument, pleaded the Release puis
darrein Continuance, and good; aliter of a Release between the Nisi prius and
Day in Bank, because there he had no day in Court, nor has he any Remedy but by
Audita Querela, if the Plaintiff sued Execution, 2 Rolls Abr. 467. Wykes and
Bunbury. Cr. Jac. 646. Stamp and Parker.

Ejectment was brought of Lands in K. and two other Villages. Entry puis dar'
Cont' pleaded at the Nisi prius, the Plea is receiveable.
The Defendant pleads Not guilty; and at the Nisi prius pleaded, That the
Plaintiff puis le darrein Continuance entered into a Close, parcel'
praemissorum, and him expelled; and a Demurrer upon it, because he declared not
in which of the Villages the Close lay. Per Cur' this Plea is receivable, for
it is matter in fait, and peremptory to him who pleads it; for as a Release or
matter in Bar may be pleaded, so may this, and is receivable at the Discretion
of the Justices, if they perceive any Verity therein: So is Rolls Abr. 630.
Moor and Hawkins. Cr. Jac. 261. Yelv. 180. Moor and Hawkins. 1 Brownl. 145.

In Ejectione Firm the Defendant may plead at the Assizes before the Justices
of Nisi prius, That the Plaintiff had entered into parcel of the Land mentioned
in the Declaration puis darrein Continuance, the Justices of Nisi prius may
accept the Plea, and dismiss the Jury; and though they do not give any day to the
Parties in Banco, yet this is not any Discontinuance, although that the Plea be
collateral; for the day of Nisi prius and day in Bank, are one day: For the
Court in Bank gives day to the Jurors in Bank, Nisi prius Justiciarii ad
Assissas venerint, and to the Parties day is given there absolutely. 2 Rolls
Abr. 630. Moor and Hawkins. 1 Rolls Abr. 485. Sir Hugh Brown's Case.

In Ejectione Firm, By this Plea. the first Issue of Not guilty is discharged.
after pleading Not guilty a Release is pleaded puis darrein Continuance
whereby the first Issue is discharged, which the Court granted. And though the
Justices cannot try it at Nisi prius, unless they think it but Color and
insufficient, yet if he think it sufficient, he must sign a Bill of Exceptions,
for the Trial is Error; and so Yelv. Bill of Exception.
181. And in this Case the Release of the Lessor of the Plaintiff is but
Color: Also the Party cannot demur to such Plea; also the Agreement to try and
stand to the Title only, is no Cause to overruled such Plea; and per Cur' the
Plea certified hither, was allowed notwithstanding such Agreement being gained
after, 3 Keb. 67. Mich. 24. Car. 2. Carter and Haggard.

Accord and Satisfaction a good Plea in Ejectment.
H. P. brought Ejectione Firm against R. C. and A. his Wife, and A. D. for an
House in G. in, etc. upon Demise made by A. H. the 7th of April 8 Jac. for five
years, and that the Defendant the 10 of April in the same year ejected him,
etc. The Defendant pleads, That after the Trespass and Ejectment ( viz.) primo
Maij Anno octavo supradicto apud G. praedict' talis inter R. C. praefat' H. P.
tam de transgressione and Ejectione praedict' quam de omnibus aliis querelis
debitis and debatis inter eos ante tunc habitis fact', sive propter al', etc.
habebatur concordia, that in Satisfaction thereof the said R. one of the
Defendants should pay to the Plaintiff 6 l. 10 s. at the Feast of St. Michael
then next ensuing, and that for the true payment of this he shall become bound
in an Obligation of 13 l. and pleads performance of this, and the Receipt of
the said Sum at the said Feast accordingly. And it was resolved, That Accord in
this Action is a good Plea, as being in nature of a Trespass. And though the Term
(which is a Chattel real) shall be recovered as well as Damages, yet it is a
good Plea; and Accord and Satisfaction for one shall discharge all the
Trespassors and Ejectors. Vid. this Case argued, 2 Brownl. 128. 9 Rep. 77.
Henry Peytoe's Case.

But now the Rule is to stand upon the Title only.

Aid prier; where Aid shall be granted in this Action, and in what Cases not.
The Defendant justified as in his Franktenement the Reversion to the King, The
Defendant shall not have Aid of the King, and why.
and prayed in Aid of the King, per Cur' he shall not have Aid in this Action,
which is as a Trespass upon this Plea; for he needs no Aid of the King to
maintain this Plea. So in Allen and Hallowel's Case, the Defendant pleads, That
the Queen was seized in Fee, and let it to J. S. for years by Patent, who let
it to the Defendant, and prays in Aid of the Queen; and it was ruled to be no
Plea, because he is not immediate Tenant; wherefore a Respondeas Ouster was
awarded. And in Bridgman's Rep. 87. it is agreed, That the Defendant shall not
have Aid of the King, because he is not his immediate Tenant, and so no Privity
between the King and him. And to the same purpose is Anderson's Case in
Hardress's Reports. The Defendant prayed in Aid of the King's Lessee for 99
years for his Duchy Land in trust for the Queen, as part of her Jointure, and
as Bailiff to them; and it was denied by the Court. And upon the General Issue
it appears not whether the Right will come in Question; and yet it is said in
the Countess of Kent's Case, 3 Jac. B. R. That in Ejectione Firm the Defendant
shall have Aid of the King, because by Intendment the Freehold shall come in
Debate in this Action, 1 Rolls Abr. 407, 156. Bennet's Case. Cro. El. p. 374.
Allen and Hollowell. Hardr. 179. Anderson and Arundel. 1 Rolls Abr. 148.

But Aid lies in Ejectione Firm (of a common Person) when the Title of the
Land is to come in question. Defendant shall have Aid of a common Person.
And if a Man recover in Ejectione Firm against J. S. who dies, in a Scire
factas against his Heir, the Heir shall have Aid of him in whose Title his
Ancestor claims, 1 Rolls Abr. 161, 162.

In Ejectment the Defendant pleaded Not guilty, A Writ not to proceed ( Regina
inconsulta) allowed.
and after Issue joined, the Queen sent a Special Writ to the Court, reciting,
that how the Defendant was Tenant in Tail with diverse Remainders over, the
Reversion to the Queen, and that her Reversion might be prejudiced by this
Trial. Wherefore it was commanded then not to proceed to the Trial of this
Issue, Regina inconsulta. And it was a Question much debated, whether this Writ
were allowable or not, because it is a personal Action only. Per Cur' this Writ
ought to be allowed (as well as Aid prier) because it appears to them, that the
Queen may be prejudiced in her Title; and by the Writ there is a Recital of a
Title in the Queen; and her Trial of Right is to be discussed in Chancery, In
such Case where the King's Trial of Right to be dismissed.
where the Queen's Records are to prove her Title; therefore per Curiam we
shall not proceed without a Procedendo. Vid. 1 Anders. 280. Blofeild and
Harris. Cro. El p. 417. Sale and Barrington. Moor 421. mesme Case. Hardr. 428.

In Trespass for breaking his Close. Recovery and Execution in a former Action
pleaded in Bar.
The Defendant pleads, That before this he had brought Ejectione Firm against
the now Plaintiff, and recovered, and had Execution, etc. Judgment si actio.
Per Curiam it is a good Bar, and the Conclusion of the Plea is also good.
Judgment, si actio, without relying upon the Estoppel, 1 Leon. p. 313. Kempton
and Cooper.

Ejectione Firm was brought against Drake and five others: Drake pleads Not
guilty, the other five quoad 20 Acras plead Not guilty; and as to the Residue
that long time before, etc. the Plaintiff in his Replicat' said, He was
possessed till by the said five Defendants, who pleaded in Bar, he was ejected;
and by his Declaration he has supposed himself to be ejected by all the six
Defendants, and so a Departure from the Declaration in the number of the
Ejectors: But Curia contra. Several Issue.
For Drake by his several Issue which he has joined with the Plaintiff upon Not
guilty, is severed from the other five Defendants; and then when they plead in
Bar, the Plaintiff ought to reply to them, without meddling with Drake. So in
Ejectione Firm of 20 Acres, the Defendant, as to 10 Acres, pleads Not guilty,
upon which they are at Issue; and the Plaintiff replies, as to the other 10
Acres, and so was possessed until by the Defendant of the said 10 Acres he was
ejected; this is good without speaking of the other 10 Acres, upon which the
general Issue is joined, 2 Leon. p. 199. Holland and Drake.

It was moved for the Defendant, In this Action not to plead specially without
Consent of the Plaintiff.
that he might have Liberty to plead specially in an Action of Trespass and
Ejectment, and not generally Not guilty, because there had been matter given in
evidence at a former Trial, which ought not to have been. By Rolls, if the
other will not consent, you shall not plead specially, but proceed according to
the Course of the Court, Styles Rep. 412.

Note, The Defendant by Rule of Court, Defendant not to plead till Costs
assessed in a former Action was paid, and Security for new Costs.
was not to plead till Costs paid, assessed in a former Action on Nonsuit, and
that another Plaintiff might be named, or that Security be given to pay the
Costs, if the Plaintiff should be Nonsuit again, Styles p. 433.

Bar or Recovery in one Ejectione, how far a Bar or Recovery in another.
It was a Question, Whether a Bar in one Ejectione Firm were a Bar in another?
Bar in one Ejectione Firm, how a Bar in another.
And Justice Berkley said, It was adjudged upon this Difference, That a Bar in
one Ejectione Firm is a Bar in another for the same Ejectment, but not for
another and new Ejectment. Recovery in one Ejectione Firm a Bar in another.
And in Godbolt's Rep. Case 128. in Trespass the Defendant pleaded that at
another time before the Trespass, he did recover against the same Plaintiff in
Ejectione Firm, and demanded Judgment. Per Cur' it is a good Plea prima facie,
and that the Possession is bound by it, for otherwise the Recovery should be
vain and ineffectual. And by Anderson, If two claim one and the same Land by
several Leases, and the one recovereth in Ejectione Firm against the other;
that if afterward the other brings an Ejectione Firm of the same Land, the
first Recovery shall be a Bar against him. Per Rhodes, a Recovery in an ad
terminum qui praeteriit, shall bind the Possession, Godb. p. 109. no. 128. 3
Leon. 194.

In Trespass for breaking his Close, the Defendant pleads, before this, he had
brought Ejectione Firm against the now Plaintiff, and recovered, and had
Execution, Judgment, si actio. Per Cur' in 1 Leon. 313. Kempton and Cooper's
Case, and 3 Leon 194. the same is a good Bar, and the Conclusion of the Plea is
also good, Judgment si actio, without relying on the Estoppel and by two
Justices it is no Estoppel; for the Conclusion shall be Judgment si actio, and
not si serra respond', and it was well pleaded. For as by Recovery in Assise
the Freehold is bound, so by Recovery in Ejectione Firm the Possession is
bound. And by Anderson a Recovery in one Ejectione Firm, is a Bar in another,
especially if the party relieth upon the Estoppel; and although it be in an
Action personal, and in the nature of a Trespass, yet the Judgment is good.
habeat possessionem termini sui, during which Term the Judgment is in force;
and it is no reason he should be ousted by him against whom he recovered, for so
Suits would be infinite; but this grave Advice is now laid aside, 4 Leon. 77.
Spring and Lawson.

Note, In Ejectione Firm against two Defendants, one confesses the Action,
and the other pleads in Bar Non Culp'; per Cur', tho in Trespass against two, 2
Defendants, one confesses, the other pleads in Bar, he cannot leave the one,
and proceed against
and the one makes Default, and the other confesses the Action, he may well
relinquish his Suit against him who makes Default, and proceed against the
other which confesses or pleads in Bar, because this Suit is only in point of
Damages; but not so in Ejectment he cannot relinquish his Suite against one,
and proceed against the other; for if so, any Man may be tricked, 2 Bulstr. 113.

Expiration of the Term in Ejectione Firm, is no Plea, Latch. 106.

Upon a Trial at Bar between Odil and Terril, a Juror was challenged, for that
he said to one of the parties, Provide you to pay, for if I am sworn, I will
give the Verdict against you. And that this is true, the Parties to whom the
Words were spoken, did offer to depose the same; and the Question was, if he
should be suffered to swear this, he being one of the parties; and he was
allowed by the Court to be sworn to prove the Challenge good; the other. The
Juror had bought Land of the Eessor.
and for this Cause the Triers found him not to be indifferent, and so he was
withdrawn. Another Juror was challenged in this case, for that he had bought
Land of one of the parties in the Suit ( viz.) of the Lessor, and that the
Lessor did owe to this Juror 10 l. and notwithstanding this Challenge the
Triers found him indifferent, otherwise per Cur' if the Juror had owed Money to
one of the parties, 1 Bulst. 20, 21. Odil and Terril.

CHAB. IX.
Of Challenge. What is Principal or not. Of Elisors. Of Venue, Where the Parish
and Vill shall be intended all one: Where it shall not be de Corpore Comitatus.
Where the Venire fac' is amendable. Venire fac' to the Coroners, because the
Sheriff is Cousin to one of the Defendants. A Venire de Forest. Venire de Novo
for Baron and Feme.

BY Coke in Guest and Bridgman's Case, Cousin to the Lessor.
it is not a principal Challenge, that the Sheriff is Cousin to the Lessor in
Ejectment, for the Lessor cannot hinder the Action of the Lessee (this is not
Law) 1 Rolls Rep. 328. 2 Rolls Rep. 181. Banister's Case.

Venire fac' awarded to the Coroners upon Surmise that the Lessor was Servant
to the Sheriff. Lessor Servant to the Sheriff.
Q. if it be a principal Challenge; if it be no principal Challenge, then is
not the Writ well awarded, and is not aided per Stat. 32 H. 8. Cro. Jac. p. 21.
Harebotle and Placock.

Challenge to the Sheriff, The Sheriff Cousin to the Plaintiff.
and a Venire fac' prayed to the Coroners, because the Sheriff is Cousin to the
Plaintiff, and shows how; and because the Defendant did not deny it, a Venire
fac' was awarded to the Coroners, and Judgment was arrested, because it was not
a principal Challenge, and a Venire de Novo awarded to the Sheriff, 1 Brownl.
130. Cradock and Jones.

It is not any principal Challenge to a Juror (in Ejectione Firm) That he had
married the Cousin-german of A. That a Juror had married the Cousin-german of A.
who was the Wife of R. from whom is descended H. from whom is descended B. who
have the Reversion of the Land in question after the Death of his Mother, who
is to had an Estate for Life; this is not any princapal Challenge, because the
Estate of B. does not appear in the Record, and he had not the immediate
Reversion, 2 Rolls Abr. 654. Gabriel Dennis's Case.

In the Lord Brooks's Case, the Court was informed, That the Lessor of the
Plaintiff, was High Sheriff of the County, and that the Coroner was
Undersheriff; Elisors.
and it was prayed that that Elisors might return the Jury, but the Court would
not grant it at the Prayer of the Defendant, though the Plaintiff offered to
agree to it, it being in a Trial of Nisi prius; but had it been in a Trial at
Bar, the Court would have granted it; That the Lessor of the Plaintiff is
High Sheriff, a principal Challenge.
but the regular Course is for the Plaintiff to pray it, or else the Defendant
may challenge the Array at the Assizes; for it is a principal Challenge, that
the Lessor of the Plaintiff is High Sheriff, or of Kindred to the Sheriff, Tr.
1657. Hut. 25. Moor 470. Rolls Rep. 320. 15 Car. 2. B. R. Duncomb and Ingleby.

In Ejectment the Plaintiff suggesteth, that his Lessor the Sheriff and
Coroners were Tenants to a Dean and Chapter, Elisors.
whose Interest was concerned, and prayed the Venire fac' to Elisors, and had
it, being confessed by the Defendant, and the Court took it as a principal
Challenge, Duncomb and Inglesby's Case.

In Ejectione Firm the Array was challenged, Challenge of the Array to the
Lessor.
because it was made at the Nomination of the Plaintiff, and by Consent of the
Parties, two of the Attorneys of the Court did try the Array. The Trial of the
Array is good, either by the Coroners or by two Attorneys, Godbolt 428.
Williams and Lloyd. 2 Rolls Rep. 363, and 131.

In Ejectione Firm on Non culp' pleaded, it is not any Challenge to the Array,
that the Sheriff is Cousin to the Lessor of the Plaintiff; for it does not
appear that the Title of him in Reversion, shall be in question; for
peradventure the Lease is not well made, or no Ejectment committed, and he in
Reversion is not any Party to the Action. So in the said Case it shall not be
any Challenge, although it appear to the Court by Averment, that this Lease was
made only in Trust, and to try the Title of the Plaintiff for the Cause
aforesaid. Note.
But now in our seigned Ejectments it is otherwise, because the Title of the
Lessor is only in Question, 2 Rolls Abr. p. 653. Sir Edward Kempston and
Banister Cradock. Id. ibid.

Ejectment for Lands in Sussex tried at the Bar, the Defendant challenged the
Polls for Default of Hundredors, but did not show it for Cause, till the Panel
was perused. Per Hale, Chief Baron, Challenge for Default of Hund^edors on
Trial at Bar.
It is against the common Course to take a Challenge for want of Hundredors,
when the Trial is at the Bar, upon a Jury returned at the Denomination of an
Officer of the Court where there are but four and twenty left by the Parties
themselves. But if this Challenge be taken to the Polls, it must be taken
presently, and the special Cause assigned ( viz.) want of Freehold there,
Hardr. p. 228. Attorney General and Pickering in Scaccario.

In Ejectione Firm upon a Lease made in G. of Land in T. In G. praedict' the
Venue shall not be from G. but from T. for it shall be intended that T. is a
Vill of G. 2 Rolls Abr. 620. Beachamp and Sampson.

The Lease is made apud Curdworth of Lands lying in parochia de Curdworth
praedict', the Issue was de Vicineto de parochia de Curdworth: The Venire is
well awarded. ( praedict.) is such an Averment as that of necessity it must be
taken that Curdworth the Town, and Curdworth the Parish are all one; and if so
be the Venire fac' is of the one or of the other, it must be good: But if the
Parish be a larger Continent than the Town, aliter, because it cannot be
intended that more Towns were in the Parish, unless it were showed on the other
side; and we are to judge by the Record which proves the Town and the Parish to
be all one. So in 43 and 44 Eliz. in Ejectment, the Lease whereupon the Trial
was had, was made apud Abingdon, of Lands lying in Burgo de Abingdon praedict.
The Venire was de Vicineto de Burgo de Abingdon praedict. This is a good
Venire, for ( praedict.) makes this by Intendment of Law to be all one, 2
Bustr. 209. Vale and Field. 2 Rolls Rep. 21. mesme Case. Cro. Jac. 340. mesme
Case.

In an Ejectione Firm, The Issue of Not guilty refers to the Ejectment where
the Land lies.
if the Plaintiff declare of a Lease made apud Ickworth of Land in Berry in
Suffolk, and Not guilty pleaded, the Venire fac' shall be from Berry, and not
from Ickworth; for the Issue of Not guilty refers to the Ejectment, which was
where the Land lies, 2 Rolls Abr. 619. Pell and Spurgeon.

The Award upon the Plea-Roll was against both Defendants, Ven' fac' amended.
they both plead Non culp'. The first Process ( viz:) the Habeas corpora was
against both, but the Venire fac' against one of them, only one of them being
named in the Trial, and Verdict for the Plaintiff against both Defendants. Per
Cur' the Venire fac' was amended after Error brought, because vitium Clerici, 3
Bulstr. 311. Cranfeild and Turner.

Ejectione Firm of Lands in D. and the Visne was from the Parish of D. The
Vill and the Parish intended all one.
and Verdict pro Quer': It was objected as Error, for the Venue ought to be
from D. and not from the Parish of D. for it may be the Parish extended into
several Vills: But per Cur' it is well awarded; for prima facie they shall be
intended all one, if it does not appear to the contrary by pleading; and it
shall not be intended to extend into several Vills, Jones Rep. 205. Gilbert and
Parker. Moor 797, 798, 837.

The Venire fac' was de Vicineto parochiae de Bredon, which was ill; for the
Lease and Ejectment are alleged to be at Bredon, which shall be intended to be
a Vill, and the Lands are intended to be at Workington (which also shall be
taken to be a Vill) in the Parish of Bredon; so that it appears to the Court,
that there is a Town called Bredon, a Parish called Bredon, and Workington a
Vill in the Parish of Bredon, and the Tithes are alleged to be in Workington
and Willesdon (which also shall be intended a Vill) in parochia de Bredon; so
that the Venue ought not to have been out of the Parish of Bredon, Workington
and Willesdon: And though Workington and Willesdon are named Hamlets in the
Pern^men, yet the Court ought to adjudge upon that which is alleged by the
Plaintiff in his Count, 11 Rep. 25. 6. Harpur's Case.

Ejectione Firm versus B. for ejecting him of certain Lands in Creeting St.
Marys, Creeting St. Olaves and in Creeting omnium Sanctorum; and the Venire
fac' was de Vicineto de Creeting St. Mary, Creeting St. Olives and Creeting
Omnium omitting Sanctorum; the Court blamed the Clerk for his Negligence,
Winch. 34. Good and Bawtry.

In the Venire fac' one of the Panel was named Thomas Barker of D. and in the
Distringas Jurat' he was left out, and Thomas Carter de D. put in his place;
and at the Nisi prius Thomas Carter was sworn, and with others tried the Issue.
Per Cur' there is difference between a Mistake in the Name of Baptism and in
the Surname; Difference in Law between a Surname and a Name of Baptism.
for a Man can have but one Name of Baptism, but may have two Sirnames, as
George for Gregory, and being sworn at the Nisi prius, it is a void Verdict,
Cro. El. p. 57. Displyn and Spratt.

Ejectione Firm of a Lease apud Denham in Lands of the Parish de Denham
praedict'; the Venire was de Vicineto de Denham, it is good enough. The Parish
and Village are intended to extend, and to be all one, Cro. El. 538. Bedel and
Stanborough.

The Venire fac' was ad faciend' Jurat' in placito transgressionis, whereas it
should have been in placito Transgressionis and Ejectionis Firm, and it was
not amended; for though Ejectione Firm is but a Plea of Trespass in its nature,
yet the Actions are several, and therefore the Venire fac' ought to be
accordingly, Cro. El. 622. Clerk's Case.

Ejectione Firm of a Lease at Mockas in Lower Mockas. The Defendant pleads Not
guilty, and found against him, and it was moved to be a Mis-tryal; for the
Venire fac' was awarded from Mockas, where it ought to have been from Lower
Mockas, the Issue being Not guilty; but if the Lease had been traversed, it had
been otherwise, Williams and Whitin.

In Ejectione Firm the Plaintiff declares of a Lease of Land in B. Pernomen
of, etc. in B. C. etc. The Venue from B. is good, 2 Rolls Rep. 479. Tailor and
Lenn.

The Appearance and Issue were in Hill. Venire fac' amended.
1 Jac. and the Bail was Crastino Pur', and thereupon was the Declaration, and
Issue, and Venire fac' awarded, bearing date the 23th of January 1 Jacobi, and
upon this a Distringas the 12th of February, moved in Arrest, That the Venire
fac' was awarded before the Appearance and Declaration to try the Issue in the
same Action, and cannot be good. Per Cur' it was amendable, for the Roll is the
Warrant of the Venire fac', which being variant from it, the Test thereof
shall be amended to be subsequent to the Issue joined. And whereas the Test
was the 23th of January, which was Sunday, it shall be amended, it being but
the Fault of the Clerk, and misawarding of Process, which is aided per Stat. 32
H. 8. and 18 Eliz. Cro. Jac. 64. Dolphin and Clark.

William Brown of Bradfeild was returned upon the Venire fac' and Hab. Another
Person sworn on the Jury, who was not returned, it is no Error because Estopple.
Corpora, and William Brown of Metfeld, who was another Person and not
returned, was sworn; yet this cannot be assigned for Error; for it is against
the Record, which is, That William Brown of B. was returned and sworn; and he
is estopt to say the contrary, for then every Record may be brought in Question
upon such Surmise, Cro. Jac. 244. Bowss and Cannington.

A Vill and Parish are intended all one, unless the contrary be showed. Vide
Cro. Jac. 150. Batch and Gilbert.

The Court was moved to change the Venue in Ejectment laid in London, because
the Lands in Question did concern the Poor in London; and therefore it was
supposed they could not have an indifferent Trial. Per Rolls the Action is
local, and cannot be removed, except you draw it from thence by your Plea,
Styles Rep. 395. Hunslop and Johnson.

In Ejectione Firm upon a Lease made at D. Where it shall not come de Corpore
Comitatus.
in Comitat' E. of Land called S. If Not guilty be pleaded, and a Venire fac'
awarded de Corpore Comitatus E. there not being any Vill named wherein the Land
lies, it is erroneous; because this lies in some Vill out of which the Visne
ought to have come to have tried it, and in such case it ought not to come de
Corpore Comitatus, for this is larger, Hob. p. 89. Rich and Sheere.

Venire fac' awarded to the Coroners, ita quod B. one of the Coroners se non
intromittat, because he was Servant of the High Sheriff, who was Lessor of the
Plaintiff; it was said, the same was no Cause of Challenge, but the Court
conceived it was, being confessed, Moor 623. Higgins and Spicer.

In Ejectione Firm against four who plead Not guilty, Where the Sheriff is of
Affinity to the Defendant.
if the Plaintiff suggest that the Sheriff is of Affinity to one of the
Defendants, showing how, and upon this prays a Venire fac' to the Coroners, and
the Defendant does not deny it; and upon this the Venire fac' is awarded to the
Coroners, it is well awarded. For although none of the Defendants may challenge
the Array, because the Sheriff is of Affinity to one of the Defendants, yet the
Plaintiff ought at the Trial either to challenge the Array, and so delay
himself, or he ought not to try this during the time that he his Sheriff, which
would be a great delay, 2 Rolls Abr. 668. Fox and Shepherd in
Exchequer-Chamber.

Vide Raymund 572. Consent may make a Trial had in a foreign County, good.

In Ejectione Firm of three Acres of Land in Forresta de K. Visne de Forresta.
in Com. etc. If the Defendant plead Non culp', the Venue may be de Vicineto
Forrestae, for this is Lieu conus, and by Intendment, forasmuch as the
Defendant had not pleaded this in Abatemenc, this is out of any Parish or Vill,
2 Rolls Abr. 621. Phillips and Evans.

In Ejectione Firm against Baron and Feme; The Wife found Not guilty, and a
Special Verdict as to the Baron, which was insufficient, a Venire fac' de nove
awarded for both, and why.
on Not guilty pleaded, and a Venire fac' granted, the Jury find the Wife Not
guilty, and find a special Verdict as to the Husband, which Special Verdict is
afterward adjudged insufficient, a Venire fac' de novo shall be awarded for
both, as well the Wife as the Husband. And upon this new Writ the Wife may be
found guilty, because the Record and Issue is entire; and for this their
Verdict is insufficient in all, and void. Vid. infra Tit. Special Verdict.

CHAP. X.
Of joining Issue and Trial, and Bill of Exception. In what Cases there shall
be Amendment.

THE Record of the Nisi prius was amended by the Plea-Roll, 1 Brownl. 133. Gaff
and Randal.

Issue was joined, the Defendant pleads Not guilty, and it was entered, and the
aforesaid Lessor likewise, where it should have been and praedict' Querens
similiter, and it was amended. So and praedict' Thomas similiter, where it
should be praedict' Johannes similiter, and it was amended, 2 Brownl. 102.
Weeby's Case. 2 Rolls Abr. 199.

The Issue was Not guilty, and a Venire awarded retornable 3 Trin. and the
Essoyn adjourned by the Plaintiff till Michaelmass-Term; and at the next
Assizes the Plaintiff, notwithstanding the Essoyn, and the adjourning it,
procured a Nisi prius, by which it was found for the Plaintiff: And per Curiam
no Nisi prius ought to issue out in this Case, because the Plaintiff himself by
the adjourning the Essoyn, cast by the Defendant until Michaelmass-Term, had
barred himself of all Proceedings in the mean time. And the words in the Stat.
W. 2. c. 27. Stat. W. 2. c. 27.
are, Postquam aliquis posuerit se in aliquam inquisitionem ad prox' diem
allocet' ei Esson'; import, That the Essoyn shall not be taken at the Retorn of
the Process against the Jury, although the Jury be ready at the Bar. But then it
was surmised, that the Defendant was not Essoyned; for the Name of the
Defendant is E. H. and it appeared at the Trial, that E. K. was Essoyned, and
the Court denied to amend it, and there was no Essoyn, and so no Adjournment,
and the Plaintiff was at large, and Judgment pro Quer'. Note, No Statute gives
Amendment but in the Affirmance of Judgments and Verdicts, and not in
Defeasance of Judgments and Verdicts, 1 Leon. p. 134. Woodel and Harel.

In Dyer 89. the Plea was, quod non ejecit querentem de, etc. modo and forma;
it was moved there, that it is not any Plea; and yet Dyer Vide 121. b.

The Defendant in any case of Misdemeanour may say generally Non Culp' or
traverse the point of the Writ, as ne forga pas, non ejecit, non rapuit, non
manutenuit.

In Ejectione Firm the Parties were at Issue, In what Case no Verdict shall be
entered.
and by the Order of the Court the Trial was staid, yet the Plaintiff privily
obtained a Nisi prius; and the Chief Justice being informed thereof, awarded a
Supersedeas unto the Justices of Assise, before whom, etc. and yet the Inquest
at the instance of the Plaintiff was taken, and found for the Plaintiff; and
all this matter was showed to the King's Bench, and per Cur' no Verdict shall
be entered on the Record, nor any Judgment on it, 2 Leon. p. 167. Field, Leich
and Cage.

Ejectione Firm against Drake and Five others. Drake pleads Not guilty; the
others pleads, the Plaintiff reply; and so a Demur. Per Cur', seeing that one
Issue in this Action was to be tried between the Plaintiff and Drake, and
although the Plaintiff offered to release his Damages on the Issue joined, One
Defendant pleads Not guilty, the other demurs; no Judgment upon the Demurrer
till the Issue be tried.
and to have Judgment against the Five Defendants who had demurred, yet the
Court was clear of Opinion, That no Judgment should be given upon the said
Demurrer, till the said Issue was tried. For this Action is in Ejectione Firm,
in which Case the Possession of the Land is to be recovered; and it may be, for
any thing that appears, that Drake, who has pleaded the General Issue, has
Title to the Land. But if this Action had been an Action of Trespass, there in
such Case, ut supra, upon Release of Damages, and on the Issue joined, the
Plaintiff shall have Judgment presently, 2 Leon. p. 199. Holland and Drake.

In B. R. Writ to prohibit the Trial, Rege inconsulto.
after Issue joined in Ejectione Firm, and the Jury ready to try it, there
comes a Writ to the Justices that they should not proceed, Regina inconsulta,
in the nature of Aid prier, and it was allowed, Moor 421, 583. Nevil and
Barrington.

A Suit in the Spiritual Court pro jactitatione Maritagij, stays not Trial, 1
Keb. 519.

Ejectment in Brecknock-shire, Stat. 27 H. 8. Marches.
it was tried in Monmouth-shire since the Stat. 27 H. 8. it is a Mis-tryal; for
Monmouth-shire was made an English County but in time of Memory by that
Statute, and so it ought to have been tried in Hereford shire, Hard. 66.
Morgan's Case.

Error of a Judgment in B. R. in Ireland in Ejectment, after Verdict for Lands
in the County of Clare. It was excepted, that the Verdict was given by a Jury
returned by the Sheriff of the Queens County, Consent to alter the Trial entered
upon the Roll.
Hob. p. 5. sed non alloc'; for the Consent of the Parties to this Trial was
entered upon the Roll, which was not in Hobart, but only in a proper Rule of
Court, and therefore the Judgment there was reversed, as 1 Rolls Rep. 28. Crow
and Edwards; with this accords Cr. El. 664. Sir Thomas Jones. 199. Devoren and
Walcott.

A new Trial was denied in Ejectment, New Trial denied, and why.
though the Verdict was given contrary to the Direction of the Court in matter of
Law, because it was a Trial, and because it is not final; Sir Thomas Jones 224.
Earl of Thanet's Case.

Ejectment was brought for Lands in the County of Clare in Ireland. Issue was
joined on Not guilty, and then there is an Entry on the Roll, Consent to a
Trial in a Foreign County.
Et super hoc pro indifferentitriatione exitus praedict' inter parts praedict'
eaedem parts ex eorum unanimi Consensu, and Assensu, and Consensu eorum
Conciliat' and Attornat', etc. petunt Breve Dom' Regis Vic' Com' Cork dirigend'
de Veni^e fac' duodecim de corpore Comitatus sui ad triandum exitum praedict.
Ideo praecept' est, etc. then there is a Nisi prius granted to the County of
Cork, and the Cause was there tried, and a Bill of Exception put in; and on
Debate in B. R. Judgment was given for the Defendant. The Plaintiff brings a
Writ of Error, whether Consent can make this Trial in a Foreign County, good;
and per Cur' the Trial is well had, Raym. 372. Vicount Clare and Lynch. Hob. 5.
1 Rolls Rep. 166, 363. Palmer 100.

At the Assizes in Northumberland 15 Car. Nonsuit at Nisi prius discharged.
2. a Plaintiff in Ejectment was called and nonsuited, and this entered upon the
Record before the Venire or Distringas, etc. was put in, and this appeared by
the Postea produced; and so the Justices of Nisi prius had not power of
Nonsuit, for their Power is by the Hab. Corpus, and therefore the Court
discharged the Nonsuit, and gave leave to the Party to proceed again, Sid. 64.
Tomson's Case.

CHAP. XI.
Of joining Issue and Trial. Where Issue in Ejectment shall be tried in other
County than where the Lands lie. Trial by Mittimus in the County Palatine: Who
shall be good Witnesses or not in this Action. What shall be good Evidence in
this Action. Copy of Deed. Deed cancelled. Conditions collateral. Warranties
found by Jury. What is good Evidence in reference to a former Mortgage. Where
Probate of Will is sufficient Evidence, or not. In case of Rectory what is good
Evidence, and what things the Parson must prove. Ancient Deed. Scyrograph of a
Fine and constant Ejoyment. Evidence as to an Appropriation. Deposition of
Bankrupts. Deposition in Chancery. Answer in Chancery. Transcript of a Record.
Inrolment of Deed. Doomsday-book. Variance between the Declaration and the
Evidence. Demurrer to an Evidence. Exemplification of a Verdict. Where Issue in
Ejectment shall be tried.

IT ought to be in the County where the Land lies. If Ejectione Firm be
brought and laid in Com' D. for Lands lying in another County, although this be
by Assent of the Parties, and the Defendant pleads Not guilty, and Verdict and
Judgment given for the Plaintiff, yet this is Error; for this is against the
Law, which cannot be altered by Assent of the Parties: But upon View of the
Record, if it does not appear to the Court that the Land lies in another
County, they will not reverse the Judgment for that Cause. And it was ruled to
be Error in the Exchequer-Chamber in the Bishop of Landaff's Case. A Trial by
Consent in other County than where the Land lies, is good in Ejectment.
But in Sir Thomas Jones's Rep. Devoren and Walcot's Case, it is held, That a
Trial by Consent upon the Roll in other County than where the Land lies, is
good in Ejectment, 1 Rolls Abr. 787. 2 Keb. 260. Sir Thomas Jones 199. Devoren
and Walcott.

In an Ejectione Firm in London upon a Lease made of Lands in Middlesex, Trial
in London of Lands in Middlesex.
if the Defendant plead Not guilty, this may be tried in London, because the
Counties may not join, although the Jury ought to enquire of the Ejectment which
was in Middlesex, 2 Rolls Abr. 603. Herbert and Middleton.

But in Flower and Standing's Case in Ejectment, Moved in Arrest of Judgment,
that the Lease was made at B. of Lands in another County* and the Plaintiff was
not in Possession.
it was moved in Arrest of Judgment, That the Lease is made at B. of Lands in
another County, which was moved to be ill, it appearing that the Plaintiff was
not in Possession; sed non allocatur, for this is matter of Evidence, and it
shall be intended it was after Verdict, and so is the common Course, M. 20 Car.
2. B. R.

In Ejectment one may not have Privilege of Trial of Lands in Wales in the
English County next adjoining, In the King's Case, (...) shall be in the
Exchequer, though the ^and lie in Wales.
for they are to be tried in the County where the Land l^es, otherwise it is if
the King be Party it (...) be tried in the Exchequer. This Action was brought
by one of the Ushers of the Exchequer by Privilege, Savile 10, 12.

Ejectment is brought against one in Custodia in B. Trial by Mittimus in the
County Palatine.
R. of Lands in the County Palatine, and the Action was laid in B. R. and the
Record was sent down by Mittimus from B. R. and a special Indorsement of the
Postea; and thereof one prayed Judgment against his own Ejector in an Action of
Lands in the County Palatine of Chester, which the Court granted; because when
the Defendant has pleaded to Issue, they may try it by Mittimus in the County
Palatine, Redvish and Smith's Case. M. 15. 2 Car. B. R. Holloway and Chamberlen.

Action on the Case on feigned Issue out of Chancery; Per Twisden Justice, the
Lands being in the Isle of Wight, and the Jury of Surrey, this Trial is not
allowable to try Conveyata, or not, this being a Windlace to try Ejectments in
another County. But in 1 Ventr. 66. a Title of Land was tried out the proper
County upon a feigned Wager, whether well conveyed or not (this is the usual
Course of Issues directed out of Chancery) 2 Keb. 634. Meres Case. 1 Ventris 66.

Who shall be good Witnesses in this Action, or not.
It is agreed, That a Trustee cannot be a Witness concerning the Title of the
same Land, Trustee.
the Interest in the Law being lodged in him. But by Hales a Trustee may be a
Witness against his Trust, 2 Sid. 109.

In Ejectment the Plaintiff challenged B. a Witness to a Devise, because he was
Trustee in a Will, and had an Annuity; but he having released both before the
Suit, the Court held him to be a good Witness, or if he has received it, and
though it be after the Action brought, Sid. 315.

Interest in Equity disables a Man to be a Witness, Interest in Equity.
but one who has an equitable collateral Title may be a Witness.

Parishioners may be a Witness to a Devise by which the Parish claims Lands to
the Relief of the Poor. Parishioners.


Exception was taken against a Witness produced to prove the Lease of
Ejectment, Witness had the Inheritance
because he had the Inheritance in the Lands let; but it was urged by the other
side, That the Defendant did claim under the same Person that the Plaintiff
did, and so the Witness was admitted to be sworn, Styles Rep. 482. Fox and
Swann.

One Coparcener cannot be Evidence for another in Ejectment, Coparceners.
because she claims by the same Title, though she is not Party to the Suit; but
the Daughter of her Sister may be sworn; for although she be Heir, yet her Mother
may give the Lands to whom she will, being Fee-simple, P. 13 Car. 2. B. R.
Truel and Castle.

In Ejectment of Tithes the Plaintiff excepted against a Copyholder in
Reversion after an Estate Tail, Copyholder in Reversion after an Estate Tail.
for a Witness to prove the Boundary of a Parish, and he was set aside for the
possibility which makes him partial, M. 20 Car. 2. B. R. Hitchcok's Case.

In Ejectment of the Manor of S. Trespass.
on Issue out of Chancery to try the Number of Acres, the Defendant excepted to
a Witness that had been a Trespassor, as Servant to my Lord Lee in the Lands in
Question, an Action being depending: The Court set him aside, and thereupon the
Plaintiff was Nonsuited, M. 20 Car. 2. B. R. Tuck and Sibley.

Exception was taken against a Witness to prove the Execution of a Deed by
Livery and Seisin, Estate at Will.
because he had an Estate at Will made to him of part of the Land, but it was
dissallowed, vide Mod. Rep. 21, 73, 74, 107. Hob. 92.

In Ejectment at Trial at Bar, Executor of the grant of a Rent.
the Title of the Lessor of the Plaintiff was upon the Grant of a Rent, with
power to enter for Non-payment; the Executor of the Grantor was produced as a
Witness for the Defendant. It was objected against him, That in the Grant of
the Rent, the Grantor covenanted for himself and his Heirs to pay it, and so
the Executor being obliged, he was no competent Witness, 1 Vent. 347. Cook and
Fountain.

On on a Trial at Bar per Cur. If one of the Witnesses had part of the Lands in
Question, The Witness Sells part of the Lnd before Trial.
and he sells or disposes of it after his coming to London, or at any time
after he had notice of Trial; he shall not be received to give Evidence, though
he sell bona fide, and upon a valuable Consideration; and although he himself be
not Occupier of the Land, nor had been after the Writ purchased, but another by
his Commandment, the Court will not suffer him to be a Witness, because if
Verdict pass against him, he who acted by his Commandment may charge him in
Action on the Case; Witness claimed Estate by Title Paramount both there Titles.
but upon Examination it appering, That the Witness claimed an Estate for Life
by Title Paramount both their Titles ( viz.) Plaintiff and Defendant) he was
Sworn, Siderf. p. 51. Wicks and Smallbrok's Case.

Exception was taken against a Witness to prove Execution of a Deed of Feofment
by Livery and Seisin; Two Witnesses were subscribed to prove the Livery and
Seisin, One who had Estate at Will to prove a Livery.
afterward one of those Witnesses had an Estate at Will, made unto him of part
of this Land, and because being produced as a Witness, to prove the Execution
of the Deed was excepted against, because he was a party now interested in the
Land, and so his Oath was to make his own Estate good. But per Cur' he may well
be Sworn a Witness to prove the Livery and Seisin, this being in affirmance of
the Feoffment, 1 Bull. 203.

The Father testified a Deed in Persuance and Affirmance of a Lease, Father a
Witness for the Son.
made to his Son by himself, which the Court allowed, his Interest being past
away, 1 Keb. 280. Jay and Ryder.

In Ejectment on Extent, on Mortgage on Trial at Bar. The Defendant excepted to
the Plaintiffs Witness, because his Father paid a Debt as Security with the
Defendants elder Brother for the Defendants Father; but there being no
Counterbond, and therefore doubtful in Equity, whethere he as Heir could
recover any thing against the Defendant as Heir, the Court Swore him; but if he
were to let himself into a certain Interest, tho but in Equity, the Court will
set him aside, 2 Roll. 345. Vincent and Tirrinsharp.

In Ejectment, one Baker who had been Solicitor for P. the Defendant was
produced as a Witness, concerning the Rasure of a Clause in a Will supposed to
be done by P. The Question was, In what Case Solicitor, etc. not to give
Evidence against his Clyent.
if he ought to be examined about this, because having been Solicitor, he was
obliged to keep his Secrets; but it appearing that B. had made this Discovery
to him, about which he was now to give his Evidence, before such time as he had
retained him, Per Car. He was Sworn, aliter, if he had been retained his
Solicitor before. The same of an Attorney or Councellor, 1 Vent. 179. Cutts
and Pickering.

What shall be good Evidence in this Action and what not.
There are several Cases in our Books concerning Evidence upon Leases made to
try the Title, which I shall not at present meddle with, they being of no great
use since the alteration of Practice in this Action; but I shall mention those
which are of Daily use, and principally aim at such Evidence which is allowed,
or disallowed as to the proving of Title to Land, without the knowledge of
which there are infinite Failures and Non-suits in this Action; and I shall
first begin with Matters of Record, and then Matters of Fait, Bills, Answers,
Depositions and other Sorts of Evidences, as to Antiquities, Pedigrees; and
what Evidence a Man must have to make Title in several Cases. And Lastly, Treat
of Demurrers upon Evidence and Exemplifications of Verdicts.

As to Matters of Record.
If a Deed be Pleaded the Party must show it in Court; Record showed it Court.
so if a Record be Pleaded, it must be sub pede sigilli; but Evidence its not
absolutely necessary to show either, if it can otherwise be proved to a Jury,
as in 1 Vent. 257. In Evidence for Lands in Ejectment in Ancient Demesne, the
Court admitted of Evidence to prove a Record to cut off the Intail (which was
lost) and it may be proved to a Jury by Testimony; as the Decree in Henry the
Eighth's time, for Tithes in London is lost; yet it has been often allowed
there was one. And further in this Case it appeared, That part of the Land was
Leased for Life, and the Recovery with a single Voucher was suffered by him in
Reversion, Long Possession.
and so no Tenant to the Praecipe; yet in regard the Possession had followed it
a long time, the Court would prefume a Surrender.

The Copy of a Record may be showed and given in Evidence to a Jury, Copy of a
Record.
for Records are of so high a nature, and have such great credit in the Law,
that they cannot be proved by any other means than by themselves, and no
Rasure, or Interlineation shall be intended in them; and therefore a Copy of a
Record being testified to be true, is permitted to be given in Evidence; but
the sure way is either to exemplify it under the great Seal, or at least under
the Seal of the Court, 10 Rep. Leyfeild's Case.

In Ejectment for Lands in Brecknockshire; Upon Not guilty and Trial there, The
Defendant gave in Evidence, a Recovery in a Writ of Quod ei deforceat, which is
their Writ of Right at the great Sessions there; and Issue being tendered
therein, the Defendant produced an Exemplification of the Record under the Seal
of the great Sessions, but not the Record it self. The Plaintiff Demurs to the
Evidence, and the Question was, whether the Exemplification maintained the
Issue or not. It was agreed, That a Sworn Copy of a Record in Wales might be
given in Evidence, Exemplificacation.
but not an Exemplification, because the Court here ought not to take notice of
such an inferior Seal; but if it were Exemplified under the great Seal, it
would be Evidence and Proof tho the Record it self were lost. And yet
Whitehead's Case was, That an Exemplification under the Seal of the Mayor of
Bristol, of a Recovery suffered there under the Town Seal, should be given in
Evidence, tho the Record it self could not be found.

Note, It must be given in Evidence in the like manner as it is to be pleaded,
and that is under the great Seal, Hardress 118, 119, 120. Henry Olive versus
George Gowin. And by Hales, Exemplification of a Recovery in the Marquess of
Winchester's Court, in ancient Demesne was allowed because it was ancient. One
had gotten a presentation to the Parsonage of G. in Lincolnshire, and brought a
Quare Impedit, and the Defendant Pleaded an Appropriation, and there was no
License of Appropriation produced, but because it was ancient the Court will
intend it; and in an ancient Recovery, they would not put one to prove Se^sin
of a Tenant in a Praecipe, Mod. Rep.

The Scyrograph of a Fine may be given in Evidence. Scyrograph of a Fine.
(but not delivered to the Jury, 2 Sid. 145, 146.) in a general Issue in
Assize, Plowd. Com. 411.

Note, Fine and Non-claim.
If a Fine be given in Evidence with five years Non-claim, the Fine must be
showed with Proclamations under Seal, and the Scyrograph will not serve.

A Fine or Recovery, Fine, Recovery.
may be found by the Jury without showing it under Seal; but they cannot find
against what is admitted by the Record, Sid. 271.

The Copy of a Recovery was suffered to be given in Evidence, Copy of a
Recovery.
the Recovery it self being burnt, Mod. Rep. 117. Green and Proud.

The Court allowed an old Recovery, No Tenant to the Praecipe proved.
tho no Tenant to the Praecipe could be proved, but it shall be intended, Cro.
Jac. 455. Mod. Rep. 117.

Nothing may be delivered in Evidence to a Jury, but that which is of Record or
under Seal, but by consent, 2 Sid. 145.

As to Letters Patents, vide infra Deeds. Dyer 167. The Jury find the Constat
of Letters Patents.

One may not show in Evidence to a Jury an Inspeximus of a Deed enrolled in
Chancery, Inspeximus.
if it be not a Deed of Bargain and Sale enrolled there; for if it be a Deed of
Feoffment, the Party must show the Deed it self, for the Inspeximus is no
matter of Record, Inspeximus.
Styles Rep. 445. But by Rolls, though the Inspeximus be the Inspeximus of the
Inrolment, and not of the Deed it self, yet if it be an Ancient Deed, it may be
given in Evidence.

The Earl of -- being a Popish Recusant convict, Conviction of a Recusant, the
Record being burnt, proved in Evidence.
presented the Lessor of the Plaintiff to a Rectory, who was instituted and
inducted, but the Record of the Conviction was burnt (as was supposed) in the
Fire at the Inner Temple. The Defendant offered to prove it by the Estreats
thereof in the Exchequer, and by the Inquisition found and returned here of
Recusant's Lands. Per Hale and tot' Cur', in such a Case as this a Record may
be proved by Evidence, because the Conversion here is not the direct matter in
Issue; as was Sir Paul Pinder's Case in an Action of Trover and Conversion for
Goods, the Proof depended upon a Fieri facias and a Venditioni exponat; and yet
in that Case, because the Fieri facias could not be found upon Record, Fieri
fac' proved in Evidence.
it was admitted to be proved in Evidence, Hardr. 323. Knight and Dawler.

But when he that sues an Elegit, brings an Ejectment to try the Title, Elegit
must be showed.
he must in Evidence show the Elegit filed.

A Transcript of a Record, or Inrolment of a Deed, Transcript of a Record, or
Inrolment of a Deed.
may be given in Evidence, for they are things to be credited, being made by
Officers of Trust, but Inrolmene of a Deed which needs no Inrolment, is no
Evidence.

In Ejectment of Lands in the Parish of Long Hope; the Defendant pleads that
they are part, and held of the Manor of Long Hope, which is ancient Demesne;
and on Issue thereupon Doomsday-book was brought in, Doomsday-Book.
by which it appeared, That the Manor of Hope is the Land of W. de B. who held
of the King; which Per Curiam does not maintain the Issue, unless the Defendant
had pleaded further, that the Lands are as well known by the Name of Hope as
Long Hope; this Book is the Trial, and the Court cannot take notice of the
same. Respondeas Ouster, 1 Keb. 520. Holdy and Hodges.

Matters of Fait.
As for Deeds showed forth, and given in Evidence, the Learning thereof is
excellently delivered in Dr. Leyfeild's Case, 10 Rep.

It is a Maxim in Law, That he which is Party or Privy in Estate or Interest,
and he that justifies under him, shall show the Original Deed to the Court, for
this Reason; because to every Deed two Things are requisite. 1. That it be
sufficient in Law, and this is called the Legal Part, and the Judgment of this
belongs to the Judges. The other concerns Matters of Fact ( viz.) if it were
sealed and delivered, and this is tried per Pais; or whether it be rased or
interlined, or upon Limitation, Condition, Revocation, and the like. Therefore
it has been always thought dangerous to permit any upon the General Issue to
give in Evidence, that there is such a Deed which they have heard or read, or
to prove it by a Copy. Deed proved by Copy or Testimony.
But in Cases of Extremity, as where Deeds are burnt by Fire; upon the General
Issue the Judges will suffer to prove a Deed to a Jury by Testimony.

And what has been said as to the Legal Part of a Deed, holds as to Letters
Patents.

A Deed cancelled by Practice, Deed cancelled.
was allowed to be read in Evidence in Action under that Deed, the Practice
being proved, Hetley 138.

Lease and Release were given in Evidence to entitle the Plaintiff, and they
were both named haec Indentura, and were not indented, yet good by Hales, Norf*
Assizes, 1668. Bryant's Case. In Negus and Reynell's Case, in Evidence to a
Jury it was held, 1. That a Proof that there was a Revocation, is sufficient
for the Heir, without producing the Deed it self. Lease and Release.
2. A Lease recited in the Release, was admitted to be proved by Witnesses to
the Release, without showing the Lease it self, which was imbezelled by the
Lessor of the Plaintiff, P. 13 Car. 2. B. R.

And the Copies of Deeds have been admitted in Evidence, the Original agreed to
be burnt. So in Ejectment at the Bar, a Copy of a Deed burnt, made by the
Witness, to carry about to Council, was allowed for Evidence; so was Do^se's
Case at Oxon. and Thyn's Case. The Testimony of a Witness of the Contents of a
Deed burnt, but such Witness was refused at Lent Assizes by Windham, though the
Deed were in the Adversaries own Custody, Mod. Rep. p. 4. M. 21 Car. 2. B. R.

It is said, That a Copy of a Deed is good Evidence where the Defendant has
the Deed, and will not produce it, Mod. Rep. 2 Keb. 483. 15 Car. 2. Stroud and
Hill.

One claimed under a Lease for years of a Prebend, etc. and after he claims
under a Lease from a Nominal Prebendary thereof, founded in the Cathedral
Church of Lincoln; and he offered (at a Trial at Bar in Ejectment) to read a
Copy of a Lease out of the Leiger-Book of the Dean and Chapter of Lincoln, Copy
out of a Leiger-Book no Evidence.
but it was disallowed per Curiam; for the Book it self is but a Copy, and a
Copy of a Copy is no Evidence, P. 27 Car. 2. B. R. Cotterel's Case.
Leiger-Books and Paper-Books cannot be exemplified, but when offered in
Evidence, must be produced themselves, Hardr. 117, 118.

The Recital of a Lease, without showing it, Recital of the Lease.
ruled to be no Evidence upon a Demurrer, Ra. Entr. 318. 1 and 2 P. and M. Rot.
13. B. R. cited. Hardr. 119, 120.

A Copy of the Counterpart of a Lease, Counterpart of a Lease.
the Lease being Lost, allowed to be Evidence.

Though the Seals be broken off a Lease, Seals broken off.
yet the Deed may be given in Evidence, 1 Mod. Rep. fol. 11. Q. if the Deed be
pleadable.

A Copy of a Court-Roll may be given in Evidence, Copy of Court-Roll.
where the Rolls are lost or not lost, 15 Car. 2. B. R. Snow and Cutler.

For if a Deed be pleaded, Difference between pleading a Deed, and giving it in
Evidence.
the Party must show it in Court; but if it be given in Evidence, it is not
necessary to show it, if it can otherwise be proved to a Jury; for Witnesses
may prove the Contents of a Deed or Will, and so the Jury may find them, the
Deed or Will not being found in haec verba, Styles p. 34. Wright and Pindar.

A Deed made before the time of Memory, A Deed made before time of Memory.
Ancient Deed.
may be given in Evidence, though it cannot be pleaded. An ancient Deed is good
Evidence without proving or Seal to it, P. 17 Car. 2. B. R. Wright and Sherrard.

A Will, Will. Probate.
under which a Title of Land is made, must be showed it self; and the Probate
is not sufficient: Contra, if it were on a Circumstance, or as Inducement, or
that the Will remain in Chancery or other Court by Special Order of such Court,
1 Keb. 117. Eden and Thalkill. 2 Rolls 678. So is Brett's A Probate of a Will
by Witnesses for Lands, is not Evidence at Common Law. And nothing can be given
in Evidence against the Probate of a Will, but Forgery of it, or its being
obtained by Surprise, and so it is conclusive, Raym. 405.

Error was brought of a Judgment in C. B. in Ireland in Ejectment: The Question
was upon a Bill of Exception, for that the Justices of the Bench there would
not direct the Jury, Bill of Exceptions on the Probate of a Will.
that the Probate of a Will before the Archbishop of Canterbury (the Testator
dying in his Province) and also the Bishop of Fernes, were sufficient and
conclusive Evidence, but only affirmed it was good Evidence, leaving it to the
Jury. To which the other Party shows in Evidence Letters of Administration of
the Goods under Seal of the Primate of Ireland. The Title was for a Lease for
years in Ireland, claimed by the Lessor of the Plaintiff under the said
Administrator: And Judgment was affirmed Per Curiam.

Where Bills, Answers, Depositions, etc. in Chancery, shall be good Evidence in
this Action, or not.
In Ejectment the Defendant that made Title as a Purchasor under a Devisee,
Bill preferred by the Heir against the Devisee, setting forth the Will.
and showed only a Bill in Chancery preferred by the Heir, under whom the
Lessor of the Plaintiff claims against the Devisee, whereby the Will was set
forth, and confessed in the Answer. But per Curiam it is no Evidence, though a
Possession were proved accordingly in the Devisee, and that this had been
confessed by the Plaintiff in a former Trial, 2 Keb. 35. Evans and Herbert. And
yet in 1 Ventr. p. 66. A Bill in Chancery was said to be given in Evidence
against the Complainant.

On a Trial in Ejectment, it was showed for Evidence, That the Defendant P. was
guilty of Simony for giving 100 l. per Annum to M. the Patron; and to prove
this they showed a Bond conditioned to pay 100 l. per Annum generally: And they
say, That an Action of Debt was brought against P. and P. had preferred his
Bill in Chancery to be relieved against this Bond, and by it disclosed that it
was entered into for the Cause aforesaid. But to that it was Answered, That P.
was presented by G. but it appeared that G. acted as a Servant to M. the
Patron; and it was opposed, Where a Copy of a Bill shall be read as Evidence.
That this Bill is no Evidence, because it only contains Matter suggested
perhaps by the Council or Solicitor, without the Privity of the Party. But per
Curiam the Copy of the Bill shall be read as Evidence, for it shall not be
intended it was preferred without the Privity of the Party, and it being
disclosed by the Party himself; otherwise they would not allow a Bill in
Evidence, if there be not Answer and other Proceedings upon it, Siderf. p. 220.
Dr. Crawley's Case.

But at a Trial, the Plaintiff to prove his Bond, offered a Bill by the
Defendant in Chancery, which Keeling Chief Justice held good Evidence, as in
the Parson of Amersham's Case. Dr. Crawley, where a Bill by P. a Simoniac, to
be relieved against his Bond, was admitted against himself; this being the
Drift of the Bill, and not any particular Allegation: But the Court would not
allow it.

Where an Answer in Chancery shall be good Evidence at a Trial, or not.
In a Trial at Bar between Mills and Bernardiston, an Answer of L. M. surviving
Trustee, under whom the Plaintiff claimed, was offered for Evidence; but being
after a Conveyance by him, the Court refused; but had it been before, it would
be good against all claiming under him. Answer 'good Evidence against the
Defendant himself, but not against other Parties.
But Twisden denied it, because an Answer does not discover the whole Truth,
and therefore shall be only admitted against the Party himself that made it,
and not of one Defendant against another, much less against a Stranger, 2 Car.
2. B. R. And by Ley, Chamberlain and Dodderidge, a Defendant's Answer in an
English Court, is a good Evidence to be given to a Jury against the Defendant
himself, but it is no good Evidence against other Parties, Godb. Case 418. 2
Rolls Rep. 311. Berisford and Phillips. And if the Defendant's Answer be read
to the Jury, it is not binding to the Jury, and it may be read to them by the
Assent of the Parties, Godb. 326.

An Infant answered a Bill in Chancery by his Guardian; Infant's Answer by
Guardian, not to be read in Evidence against the Infant.
and it was a Question in Leigh and Ward's Case in a Trial at Bar in Ejectment,
where the Infant was Party, whether that Answer could be read in Evidence
against the Infant? This Question was sent from the King's Bench by Justice
Eyres to the Common Pleas to know their Opinion; and per totam Curiam it could
not be read; for there is no Reason that what the Guardian swears in his
Answer, should affect the Infant, 2 Ventr. 1 William and Mary.

Where, and in what Cases Depositions shall be read at a Trial, and where not.
Regularly the Depositions in Chancery or Exchequer, Depositions no Evidence,
if the Party be alive.
of a Witness, shall not be given in Evidence, if he be alive: But if Affidavit
be made, that he is dead, they shall in a Cause between the same Parties,
Plaintiffs and Defendants, Godb. p. 193. Sir Francis Fortescue,

Depositions taken in Chancery in perpetuam rei memoriam, Depositions no
Evidence, without an Answer put in.
upon a Bill for that purpose exhibited, cannot be given in Evidence in a Trial
at Law, unless there be an Answer put in and produced, Hardr. 336. Raymund.
Watts's Case.

Depositions taken before Commissioners of Bankrupts, Depositions before
Commissioners of Bankrupts, no Evidence at a Trial.
shall not be used as Evidence at a Trial, although the Witnesses be dead; but
Depositions taken before the Coroner, with Proof that the Party made them, if
dead, shall be good Evidence, P. 18 Car. 2. Bick and Browning.

Exemplification of Depositions under the Great Seal, Exemplificat' (...)
Depositio^^
988. whereby a Conveyance made in 986. was lost and proved: Per Cur', being so
old, and the Records of the Rolls burnt since, it is good Evidence; though the
Bill and Answer were not in it, 2 Keb. 31.

In Ejectment for Lands in Kent, it was held upon Evidence by the Court, and by
Advice of other Judges, whom one of the Barons was sent to consult, That if one
Witness be examined for the Defendant de been esse to preserve his Testimony
upon a Bill preferred, Examination taken before Issue joined, no Evidence,
Hardr. 315. Brown's Case.
and before Answer, and upon an Order of Court for his Examination made upon
hearing of Council on both sides; and if after Answer the Witness die before he
be examined again, he being sick all the while, yet the Examination of such a
Witness shall not be read in Evidence, because it was taken before Issue joined.

Diverse Depositions in Chancery taken de been esse, Depositions de been esse.
without Answer of the Defendant, were produced in Evidence; but the Court
refused to permit the reading of such Depositions for Default of the Answer;
and it was agreed, That the Court is not bound to such Evidence; but the Course
in such Case is by Order of Chancery to require the adverse Party to admit such
Evidence; but this does not bind the Courts of the Common Law, Sir Thomas Jones
p. 164. Poricye's Case.

Two were made Parties to a Bill, one had Title, but the other does not claim
Titile, but in his Answer sets forth many things which made for the Title of
the other Defendant: And between other Parties in B. R. these Depositions were
prayed to be admitted in Evidence to prove the same Title; but it was not
suffered, because whatever the Defendant says, he says it in Defense of
himself and partially. And Chamberlain Justice said, The Answer of a Defendant
is not good Evidence for any purpose but against himself, 2 Rolls Rep. 311.
Berisford and Phillips.

A Voluntary Affidavit made before a Master of the Chancery, cannot be given in
Evidence at a Trial, Styles 446.

Decree or Decretal-Order under the Exchequer-Seal, Decree or Decretal-Order.
which recites the Proceedings; and if it have Bill and Answer, allowed to be
read, 1 Keb. 21. Trowel and Castle.

PEDIGREE.
In Ejectione Firm for the Barony of Cockermouth and the Lands, etc. the
Lessor showed an Inquisition in tempore R. 2. and finds an Intail to Henry Earl
Piercy, and derives his Title under his Third Son, and offers in Evidence
Dugdale's Baronage, but it was not allowed.

In Ejectment the Earl of Thanet makes his Title by a Gift in Tail by King
Edward II. to Robert de Clifford, and the Heirs of his Body; and to prove him
to be Heir of the Body of the said Robert, he produces a Chart of his
Pedigree; which (deriving him from the said Robert) shows him to be his Heir.
And Sir William Dugdale and other Heralds being sworn, they affirm that the
Chart was deduced out of the Recodrs and and Ancient Books in the Heralds
Office; but the Court would not allow this for Evidence, without showing the
Books and Record out of which they were deduced. And after an Ancient Book was
showed by them, which was allowed for Evidence; Sir Thomas Jones 224. Earl of
Thanet's Case.

Office found, is no concluding Evidence, Sir Tho. Jones 224.

What Matter may or must be Pleaded, and what Matter may or must be given in
Evidence.
It is a Rule in Law, Regula.
in all such Actions wherein one cannot Plead, there the Matter to be Pleaded
shall be given in Evidence, and found per Verdict, but where the Party may
Plead the same, is to be Pleaded by him. Therefore in Ejectione Firm,
Trespass, etc. in Action on the Stat. 5 R. 2. cap. 7. and other personal
Actions, Collateral Warranty given in Evidence.
a Collateral Warranty cannot be Pleaded in Bar; but he shall have the benefit
of it, by giving the same in Evidence to a Jury, and the same is to be found by
Verdict of the Jury; so is Seymor's Case, 10 Rep. 97. That Collateral Warranty
may be given in Evidence, on Not guilty Pleaded in Ejectione Firm, because in
that and other personal Actions, that may not be Pleaded in Bar, 1 Bulstr. 166,
167. Haywood and Smith. 10 Rep. 97. Seymor's Case, 1 Rep. Chudley's Case.

The Jury may find a Condition to Defeat a Freehold of Land, Condition to
defeat a Freehold found by Jury.
although it be not Pleaded; but of things in Grant, they must also find the Deed
of the Condition, 21 Ass. 14.

The Jury may find Estoppel, which cannot be Pleaded, Estopple found by Jury.
and Estoppels which bind the Interest of the Land, as the taing a Lease of a
Man's own Land, by Deed indented, and the like, being specially found by the
Jury, The Court ought to Judge according to the Special Matter, 2 Rep. 4.
Goddard's Case.

What Evidence the Jury shall have with them after Evidence given.
The Jury may not carry any other Evidence with them, but what is delivered to
them by the Court, and shown in Evidence. Upon Evidence to a Jury, to prove J.
S. to be Heir to W. S. The Court will not accept the Pedigree drawn by an
Herald at Arms for Evidence, nor will suffer the Jury to have it with them; its
but only Information for Direction, p. 8. Jac. B. Plumton and Robinson.

If an Exemplification comes out of Chancery, of Witnisses there examined upon
Oath who are Dead, the Jury shall have it with them; not so if some are Living
and some are Dead, p. 10 Jac. B. Tomlinson and Croke.

If after Evidence given to the Jury at the Bar, and they depart, the
Solliciter of the Plaintiff come to them and delivers to them a Church Book, to
take an Age which was given to them, in Evidence before at the Bar, and their
showed to them, and after they found for the Plaintiff; yet this shall not
avoid the Verdict, because it was no other than what was given to them in
Evidence before, Vicars and Farthing's Case.

What shall be good Evidence to make Title in several Special Case.
A Verdict for the Lessee is good Evidence for a Reversion in Ejectment, Hardr.
472.

In Ejectment of a Rectory, As to a Rectory the taking of Tithes only no good
Evidence of Ejement.
The Evidence was of the taking of Tithes only, and not Entry into the Gleble,
and the Plaintiff was Nonsuit; so it was in Perry and VVheeler's Case, 1 Keb.
368. for a Rectory consists of Glebe and Tithes, Latch. 62. Hems and Stroud.

A Parson in the Ejectment of a Rectory, What things a Parson in the Ejectment
of a Rectory must prove.
(if he will make out his Title) must prove Admission, Institution and
Induction; his reading and subscribing the Articles, etc. and his Declaration
in the Church of his full and free assent, and consent to all the things
contained in the Common Prayer; and this must be proved to be done within the
time limited by the Statute, but he need not to show a Right in him that
presented him, 2 Keb. 48. Siderf. 221. Dr. Crawley's Case.

In Evidence an Institution without Presentation, Institution without
presentation proved no Evidence.
or Copy of it was refused in Court; albeit, a Presentation may be made by
Parol, but proof must be made of it, ibid.

Admission, Institution and Induction upon the Presentation of a Stranger, is a
good matter to bar him, who had Right in an Ejectione Firm, and to put him to
his Quare Impedit, Sid. 221. Dr. Crawly's Case.

In Ejectment. Evidence as to an Appropriation.
The Defendant had a Lease of a Prebend made in tempore Hen. 8. and expired;
and he now claimed a Lease from a nominal Prebendary thereof, founded in the
Cathoedral Church of Lincoln. The Plaintiff claimed under Letters Patents from
King James 1. and the Possession was according to this Grant; and it was a
Question, if they ought to show how it came to the Crown; but the Possession
having gone with it, The Court did presume the Grant to King James to be lost,
and Judgment pro Quer. as in the Case of an Impropriation: Hales being Council,
It was insisted, the Impropriation was presentative till Ed. 4th time, and
could not be appropriated withouth the King's License, quod Curia concessit,
and he could not produce the License; yet, because it was enjoyed ever since
Edward the 4th time as Appropriate, the Court did intend a License, and that
the Patent was lost before the Inrolment, and a Verdict accordingly, p. 27.
Car. 2. Coterel's Case.

In Ejectment for a several Fishing. On Not guilty, Where constant enjoyment
good Evidence.
if the Plaintiff derive a Title as high as the Abbeys, he need not show any
Patent, or Derivation from the Crown; but the constant enjoyment is sufficient,
unless one be sued by the Crown, 14 Car. 2. B. R. Sir Chr. Guise and Adams.

In Evidence to a Jury at Bar, The Defendant made Title by the Feoffment of the
Lord M. to his Son in Law, the Earl of C. on which there was no Livery nor
Inrolment, but both lived together; but the Father was reputed Owner, and paid
the Rates, and a year after released and confirmed to his Son and his Heirs;
and this Title was opposed, because there was never any inception of an Estate
at Will, no entry being proved by the Son after the Deeds made. What entry
shall be intended and need not be proved
But per Cur. The Feoffment with future Conveyances is sufficient, both living
together, the entry shall be intended, and need not be specially proved;
whereupon the Plaintiff was Nonsuited, M. 20. Car. 2. B. R. Dunaston and Sir
Jerome Whichcoat.

In Berry and Wheeler's Case in Ejectment, Extent of a Rectory on Elegit.
The Council excepted to an Extent, under which the Plaintiff claimed, because
after Execution of Fieri facias for part, Elegit was for the whole, without
mentioning any thing levied by the former Elegit which recited the Fieri
facias, but was returned nihil, sed non allocatur. 2. It was further objected,
That it appears, that more than a Moiety is extended: For its said, That the
Defendant was seized of a Rectory, of the value of 100 l. and other Lands
appurtenant, que quidem Rectoria sine terris Glebalibus is the Moiety. But per
Cur. it may be understood of the Churchyard, etc. distinct from other Lands
pertaining, and as long as the Extent continues, it cannot thus be denied but
there is Glebe, M. 14. Car. 2. B. R. Berry and Wheeler.

In Ejectment, Defendant not to give in Evidence, a former Mortgage made by
himself.
The Defendant shall not give in Evidence, a former Mortgage or Conveyance made
by himself, and therefore in such Cases, its left for him that has the former
Mortgage, to get himself made Defendant before the Cause comes to Trial.

If an ancient Deed of Feoffment be showed, Long Possession.
but not Livery upon it, if Possession have gone along with the Deed; this is
good Evidence to a Jury to find Livery, 2 Rolls Rep. 132.

He which affirms the matter in Issue, ought first to make proof to the Jury;
and when the Priories were suppressed, a Commission issued, Whether par^el of a
Prio^^y Certificate.
and a Certificate upon this, upon all the Possessions, and their values which
belonged to the Priories; and therefore it is good Evidence in Issue, whether
Land was parcel of the Priory or not, that no mention of it is in the
Certificate, Lit. Rep. 36.

Variance of the Evidence from the Declararation, or what Evidence shall be
said to maintain the Issue.
In Ejectione Firm, if the Plaintiff Declares upon a Lease made by two, Lease
by two, and one was Lessor for life remainder to the other.
and gives in Evidence, that one of the Lessors was Lessee for Life, the
Remainder to the other; this is a material variance from the Declaration, in as
much as this is only the Lease of the Tenant for Life, 2 Rolls Abr. 719.
England and Long.

So if a Man Declare a Lease by two, Lease by two, where one had nothing in the
Land.
where one had nothing in the Land, and so void as to him; yet this is a
material variance id. ibid. So if a Man Declare of a Lease made by Baron and
Feme, and gives in Evidence a Lease made by the Husband only, this is a
material variance.

So it is, By Joint Lease, and they are Tenant in Common.
if a Man Declare of a Joint Lease made by two, and it appears upon the
Evidence, That the two Lessors were Tenants in Common, and so several Leases,
this is a material variance. But otherwise it is, if it appear upon the
Evidence, That the two Lessors were Copartners, for this is one Lease being
made by them, Copartners.
Cr. Jac. 166. Mantler's Case.

If the Declaration be of a Lease of three Acres, The Acres and Lease of a
Moiety.
a Lease of a Moiety in Evidence, will not maintain the Declaration, for it is
not the same Lease, but in Seabright's Case, B. R. 40 El. and Cooper and
Franckling's Case, 14 Jac. Ejectione Firm of 20 Acres, the Jury found him
guilty of the Moiety, and Not guilty of the residue, the Plaintiff shall have
Judgment against Plowden 224. Brake and Right's Case.

The Declaration in Ejectment was of a fourth part, of a fifth part, in five
parts to be divided; and the Title of the Plaintiff upon the Evidence was but
of a third part, of a fourth part, of a fifth part in five parts to be divided,
which is but a third part of that which is demanded in the Declaration: And it
was said, The Plaintiff cannot have a Verdict, Verdict to be taken according to
the Title.
because the Verdict in such a Case, ought to agree with the Declaration; but
per Cur. the Verdict may be taken according to the Title, and so it was. Qu.
how the habere fac', Possession in such case shall be executed, Sid. p. 229.
Ablett and Skinner.

The Plaintiff Declares of a Lease made the 14 of January, Variance as to time.
30 El. Hab. from the Feast of Christmas then last past for three years, and
upon the Evidence the Plaintiff showed a Lease bearing date the 13 of January
eodem ann. And it was found by Witnesses, that the Lease was Sealed and
Delivered upon the Land the 13th day. Per Cur. Notwithstanding this variance,
the Evidence is good enough to maintain this Declaration, for if a Lease was
Sealed and Delivered the 13 day, it was then a Lease of the 14 4 Leon. p. 14.
Force and Foster.

The Plaintiff declared in Ejectment of 100 Acres of Land, Evidence of fewer
Acres then delcared.
and showed his Lease in Evidence of 40 Acres. And it was urged, That he failed
of his Lease, for there was no such Lease, as that whereof he did Count. But
per Cur. it is good, for so much as was contained in his Lease, and for the
Residue the Jury may find the Defendant Not guilty, Cr. Eliz. p. 13. Guy and
Rand, and yet it is held, 2 Rolls Abr. 72. Brown and Else.

If the Plaintiff Declare in Ejectment upon a Lease for years of three Acres,
and in Evidence he shows but a Lease of a Moiety, this is a material variance,
for it is not the same Lease. Ejectment of Meadow and Pasture, and the Evidence
is de Herbegio and Pannagio.
Ejectione Firm of so many Acres of Meadow, and so many Acres of Pasture. Upon
Not guilty, the Jury find a Demise de Herbagio and Pannagio of so many Acres;
the Question was in Wheeler and Toulson's Case, Hard. 330. If this Evidence
shall maintain the Issue, The Court inclined it did not. Ejectment does lie of
a Lease of Herbage, and then by the same Reason, the Plaintiff ought to Declare
accordingly, and Herbage does not include all the profit of the Soil, but part
of it.

The Declaration was of a Joint Lease made by two, Joint Lease, by Tenants in
Common.
and on Evidence it appears they were Tenants in Common: By three Justices
against one it is good, Cr. Jac. 166. Mantle's Case, 83.

Ejectment was of Lands in Oxenhope, and the Witnesses upon examination did
swear there were two Oxenhopes, upper, and nither, without Addition; and upon
this the Plaintiff Nonsuited at York Assizes.

If a Man Declare of a Lease made by Baron and Feme, and gives in Evidence a
Lease made by the Baron only; this is a material variance.

Note, The day of the Filing of the Declaration in the Ejectment, may be given
in Evidence, where the Demise is laid the same Term, Vid. Siderf. p. 432.
Perdyer's Case.

Of Demurrer to the Evidence.
It was held by all the Court upon Evidence to a Jury, Demurrer on Evidence.
That if the Plaintiff in Ejectione Firm, or other Action, gives in Evidence
any matter in Writing or Record, or a Sentence in the Spiritual Court, (as it
was in this Case) and the Defendant offers to Demur there upon, The Plaintiff
ought to join in Demurrer or wave the Evidence, because the Defendant shall not
be compelled to put a matter of difficulty to the Laygents, and because there
cannot be any variance of a matter in Writing; but if either Party offer to
Demur upon any Evidence given by Witness, the other unless he pleases shall
not be compelled to join, because the Credit of the Testimony is to be examined
by a Jury, and the Evidence is uncertain, and may be enforced more or less; but
both Parties may agree to join in Demurrer upon such Evidence, and if the
Plaintiff produce Testimonies to prove any matter in fact, upon which a
Question arises, if the Defendant admit their Testimones to be true he may
Demur; but in the Case of the King, the other Party may not Demur upon Evidence
shown in Writing, or Record for the King, unless the King's Council will
thereunto assent: In the King's Case.
But the Court in such Case, shall charge the Jury to find such special matter;
but this is by Prerogative, who may waive the Demurrer, or take Issue at his
Pleasure, Cro. Eliz. 751. Midlet and Baker, 5 Rept. 104. Baker's Case.

And in 1 Inst. p. 72. If the Plaintiff in Evidence show any matter of Record
or Deeds, or Writings, or any Sentence in the Ecclesiastical Court, or other
matter of Evidence by Testimonies of Witnesses, or otherwise, whereupon doubt
in Law arises, and the Defendant offer to Demur in Law thereupon, the
Plaintiff cannot refuse to join in Demurrer, no more than in Demurrer on a
Count, Replicat. etc. and so e Converso, may the Plaintiff Demur in Law on the
Evidence of the Defendant; but the King's Council shall not be enforced to join
in Demurrer. A Demurrer to Evidence never denies the truth of the fact, but
confeseth the fact, and denies the Law to be with the Party that shows the
fact, Plowd. Newis and Scholastica's Case.

If a Demurrer be upon the Evidence, the Evidence ought to entered verbatim,
Keb. 77.

Exemplification of a Verdict.
A Verdict against one whom either the Plaintiff, or Defendant claims, may be
given in Evidence against the Party so claiming; Contra, if neither claim under
it, Mich. 1656. B. R. Duke and Ventres.

If a Verdict pass for two Defendants, although by default of ones not putting in
Bail, They may not have Judgment, yet they may exemplify their Verdict, to
give this in Evidence to another Jury, 2 Rolls Rep. 46. Dennis and Bremblecot.

In Ejectment brought by a Reversioner, or Debt upon the Statute of Tithes, Ed^
6. brought by a Proprietor of Tithes, after a Verdict at Law; the Lessee or the
present Proprietor, the Reversioner of the Lands or Tithes, shall hive
advantage of the Verdict, and gave it in Evidence: And the Reasons are, because
they cannot be immediate Parties to the Action or Suit, for that must be
prosecuted by the Lessee or present Tenant, and they may give in Evidence, as
well as the Plaintiff himself, Hard. 2. Rep. 472.

CHAP. XII.
Rules for Learning of Special Verdicts. Of Estoppels found by the Jury, and
how they shall bind. What is a material variance between the Declaration and
Verdict. Of priority of Possession. Where the Special Conclusion of the Verdict
shall aid the Imperfections of it. Where, and in what Cases the Verdicts makes
the Declaration good. Verdict Special taken according to intent. Difference
where the Verdict concludes specially on one Point, and where it concludes in
general, or between the Special Conclusion of the Jury and their Reference to
the Court. Circumstances in a Special Verdict, need not be precisely found.
Where the Judges are not bound by the Conclusion of the Jury. Of certainty and
uncertainty, in a Special Verdict. Of the finding quo ad residuum, certainty or
uncertainty in reference to Acres, Parishes, Vills, Place. Of Verdict being
taken by Parcels. How the Ejectment of a Manor to be brought. Of a Verdict, on
other Lease or Date than is declared upon, which shall be good or not. Of the
Juries finding parcel. Where Verdict shall be good for part, and void for the
residue. The time of the Entry of the Plaitiff's Lessor where material. Where
the Jury ought to find an actual Ouster, on him that had the Right. Prout lex
postulat, how to be understood. Where, and in what Cases Special Verdict may be
amended.

A General Verdict.
IF at a Trial at Bar there be matter in Law, and the Judges agreeto it, and so
the Jury do not find it Specially, but give a General Verdict, The Judgment
shall be according to the Verdict, and cannot be stayed, 1 Bulstr. 118. Platt
and Sleep.

Ejectment of seven Messuages sive Tenementis, is ill after a General Verdict;
and its ill on Demurrer; but this might have been helped by taking Verdict of
either. So it is where Ejectment is de Messuagio and Tenemento, its ill after a
General Verdict, 2 Keb. 80. 82. Burbury and Yeoman; in this Case the Verdict
was general for the Plaintiff, for the Messuages, and non culp. for the
Tenements it seems it had been good. But Hales Chief Baron, refused to allow of
such finding in the Home Circuit: And it was said by the Court as this Case is,
The Plaintiff may not Aid himself per releasing of part, as perhaps he might,
had there been Lands also in the Declaration, 295 Mesme Case.

But first, Council to subscribe the Points in Question. Special Verdict.
I shall set down two or three things observable, as Rules or Directions of the
Court, in reference to Special Verdicts.

It was made a Rule of Court, That in finding of Special Verdicts where the
Points are single, and not complicated, and no Special Conclusions; the Council
if required, shall subscribe the Points in Question, and agree to amend the
omissions or mistakes in the mean Conveyances according to the truth, to bring
the Points in Question to Judgment. It was likewise Ordered in Roll's time, Of
finding Deeds in haec ^^erba.
That the unnecessary finding of Deeds, in haec verba upon Special Verdicts,
where the Question rests not upon them, but are only derivative of Title, shall
be spared and found briefly according to the substance they bear in reference
to the Deed, be it Feoffment, Lease, Grant, etc.

Note, Attachment against the Defendant, because he would not bring in his
Evidences.
In 2 Rolls Rep. 331. An Attachment was awarded against the Defendants, because
they would not bring in their Evidence, for to have a Special Verdict in
Ejectione Firm; and this by the course of the Court, because there is no other
remedy.

As to the Rules of Special Verdict.
Estoppels, Estoppels found by the Jury.
which bind the Interest of the Interest of the Land, as the taking of a Man's
own Land by Deed indented, and the like being Specially found by the Jury, The
Court ought to Judge according to the Special matter; for the Estoppels
regularly must be pleeded, and relied upon by apt Conclusion, and the Jury is
Sworn ad veritatem dicendam; yet when they find veritatem factis, they pursue
well their Oath, and the Court ought to judge according to Law. So may the Jury
find a Warranty, being given in Evidence, though it be not pleaded, 10 Rep. 97.
vide supra tit. Evidence. And if the Jury find the truth, the Court shall
adjudge it to be a void Lease, vid. Cr. Eliz. 140. Sutton and Rawlin's Case.

In Ejectment, Priority of Possession where a good Title.
if it appear by the Record of a Special Verdict, that the Plaintiff had
Priority of Possession, and no Title be proved for the Defendant, the Plaintiff
shall have Judgment, as in Coryton's Case. J. Hiblin was seized in Fee of the
Lands in Question, and by his last Will devises unto A. H. Lessor of the
Plaintiff, if my Son T. H. happen to have no Issue-male after the Death of my
Wife; and if he have Issue-male, then 5 l. to be paid to A. H. The Devisor died
seized, leaving Issue, Thomas, who had R. Issue-male. Ann the Wife of the
Devisor survives him, and after dies; and they find that A. and Eliz. were
Sisters and Coheirs of the said R. the Issue-male, who died without Issue. And
they found the Entry of the Lessor of the Plaintiff, and the Lease to the
Plaintiff prout in the Declaration; and that the Defendant, as Guardian to A.
and Eliz. ousted him. The Points in Law in this case were not argued, because
it appears by the Record, That the Lessor had Priority of Possession, and there
is not any Title found for the Defendant. For tho it be found that A. and E.
were Coheirs to the Issue-male, that is to no purpose; because it was not found
that they were Heirs of the Devisor; and the Estate-Tail (admitting it were so)
appears to be spent by the Death of Thomas Hiblin without Heir-male, and so
they had no Title; and then the Priority of Possession only gives a good Title
to the Lessor of the Plaintiff against the Defendant and all the World besides,
but only against the Heir of the Devisor, 2 Sanders 112. Allen and Rivington.

In Bateman and Allen's Case there was Special Verdict in Ejectment, sed utrum
the Entry of the Defendant upon the matter be lawful or not, they pray Advice.
And if the Entry were lawful, they find for the Defendant, if not, etc. Now
forasmuch as in all the Verdict it is not found that the Defendant had the
primer Possession, nor that he entered in the Right, or by the Command of any
who had Title; but it is found he entered upon the Possession of the Plaintiff
without any Title, his Entry is not lawful; and the Plaintiff had good Cause of
Action against him, wherefore the Plaintiff shall recover, and so held all the
Court; wherefore they would not hear any Argument as to matter of Law. But if
the Conclusion of the Verdict had been si, etc. whether the Entry of Hill and
his Wife were lawful or not, then the Judgment should have been upon Matter in
Law; for that it should be intended that the Defendant had Title, i^ the Lessor
of the Plaintiff had no Title (...) and that the Plaintiff had not Cause of
Action, but now not, Craw and Ramsey. Vi^ infra. Cro. El. 437. Bateman and
Allen. Pl^ Nervis and Scholastica.

Special Verdict finds W. B. seized, and devised the Reversion of all Messuages
(except in D.) to the Heirs of the Devisor, an^ that Tho. B. was Brother and
Heir, and en^tred and leased to the Plaintiff till the D^^fendant ejected him,
and have found no T^^tle for the Defendant, now being there is (...) Title
found for the Defendant, nor of what Land this Ejectment was ( viz.) That it
was not of that devised before the Verdict, is imperfect, and otherwise the
Plaintiff must have had Judgment upon the prior Possession.

In Craw and Ramsey's Case, 2 Ventr. 3. the Jury find that Patrick who was the
Issue born in England, entered, and was seized; but that he, Anno Dom. 1651. did
bargain and sell, virtute cujus the Bargainees were seized prout Lex postulat,
and then bargained and sold it 1662. Wild and Archer were of Opinion, That the
Plaintiff could not have Judgment upon that Verdict, for that they their
Bargainees seized prout Lex postulat, but they find the Defendant entered, and
so the primer Possession is in him, which is a good Title against the
Plaintiff, for whom none is found, it being not found that Patrick entered. But
Tirrel and Vaughan said, It shall be intended that Patrick entered; for a
Verdict that leaves all the Matter at large to the Judgment of the Court, will
be taken sometimes by Intendment, Intendment.
as well as where the Jury conclude upon a Special Point, Car. Jac. 64. The
Jury find an Incumbent resigned, it shall be intended the Resignation was
accepted. So Hob. 262. And where they find the Bargainees seized, Prout Lex
postulat.
prout Lex postulat, that does not leave it doubtful, whether seized or not
seized; but whether by Right or by Wrong, If the Defendant has primer
Possession first, he shall not have Judgment if no other Title be found for him
for Seism must betaken as found expressly, neither do they find any other in
Possession; yet however if the Defendant had primer Possession, he shall not
have Judgment, if no other Title be found for him, as in Cr. Car. 57. Hern and
Allen The Husband makes a Feoffment in Fee with Warranty, and takes back an
Estate to him and his Wife for their Lives, etc. The Husband dies, the Wife
enters; the Question was, if the Entry of the Wife shall remit to the
Estate-Tail; but the Jury find the Husband was seifed prout Lex postulat, but
no Entry by him; and no Remitter can be wrought without an Entry, 2 Bulstr. 31,
32.

Ejectione Firm of the Rectory of M. of the Lease of Henry Fowler, and that
the Lessor was presented by the Lord Windsor upon Deprivation of A. L. Upon
Evidence it appeared, That the Advowson was the Inheritance of the Lord
Windsor, who granted the next Avoidance thereof to Dr. G. The Church became
void: Fowler, Father of Henry, by Simony procures Henry to be presented, who
was instituted and inducted; and so the King presented A. L. who was afterward
deprived: But ten days before Richard Fowler procures a Grant of the next
Avoidance to J. S. and procures J. S. to present Henry Fowler. Per Cur' his
Presentation is merely void, he being disabled ever after to take the same
place; and every one who is in Possession, has good Title against him and his
Lessee, so as the Plaintiff cannot maintain this Action, Cro. Jac. 533. Booth
and Rich. Potter.

If the Plaintiff has not Title according to his Declaration, he cannot
recover, whether the Defendant has Title or not, and wheiher he be a
Disseissor or not; as where an Infant makes a Lease at Will, who enters and
ousts the Plaintiff, and the Plaintiff brings Ejectment. Vid. 1 Leon. 211.
Cotton's Case.

Ejectione Firm was brought upon a Lease made by Roan of the Rectory of, etc.
Special Verdict found Glover put in a Caveat to the Bishop in the Life of the
Incumbent; the Incumbent dies, and afterward by the Presentation of Mantle,
Morgan was instituted. And after Wingfeild presents Glover, who was instituted
and inducted; and after the King presents his Clerk Roan, who was inducted; and
after Morgan was inducted, and after Roan enters, and lets to the Plaintiff,
who upon the Entry of the Defendant, brought his Action. Now Morgan was
instituted, and after Glover was inducted, which was void; but by that he had
the Possession, and afterward Roan the Presentee of the King is inducted; and
after Morgan is inducted; and after Roan enters, and Glover enters upon him:
The Question was, Who had better Possession Roan or Glover? Per tot' Cur' Roan
had the better Possession, if it be admitted that the King had not any Title to
present; for though Glover had the first Possession, yet his Possession was
defeated by the Induction of Morgan, who had the true Right; and then when Roan
enters upon him, he had the first Possession, and better Right against any
other praeter Morgan; and by Consequence the Action will lie by the Lessee of
Roan against Glover, Moor 191. Hi^thorn and Glover.

On Special Verdict it was found, that it was Copyhold, parcel of the Manor of
S. demisable for three Lives, and that by the Custom of the Manor the first
Name in the Copy should enjoy it during his Life, and sic successive; and that
the Lord A. granted it by Copy to Alice W. R. W. and J. W. her Sons for three
Lives; that R. W. made Waste in cutting down Timber Trees. Lord A. seized it,
and granted it by Copy to the Lessor of the Plaintiff for his Life, and after
licensed him to let Tenements infra script' in quibus, etc. for five years, if
J. the Lessor of the Plaintiff so long lived; that he let to the Plaintiff for
three years, who entered, and the Defendant ousted him. Et si super totam, etc.
per Cur', inasmuch as it is a good Lease made to the Plaintiff, and no Title at
all appears for the Defendant, but that he entered upon the Plaintiff's
Possession, and not by Command of any who had Right, although there were some
matter between the Plaintiff and the first Copyholder, yet Judgment ought to be
pro Quer', Cro. Jac. 436. Worledge and Benbury.

So in Powel and Goodard's Case, Tr. 21 Car. 2. B. R. in Ejectment, Special
Verdict finds W. G. seized in Fee, and devised that P. and J. G. should be
Trustees, and take the Profits till the full Age of H. G. whom he makes his
Heir. W. G. does authorize his Feoffees to sell so much of his Lands for
payment of Debts and Funeral Charges as in their discretions shall seem meet.
The Feoffees for 80 l. Lease for 99 years to begin after the Death of R. G. and
his Wife, to three, one whereof is Lessor of the Plaintiff; it was found at the
time of the Sale, that all the Debts were paid. Per Cur', the Fee being given
away from the Heir of the Devisor, Priority of Title is a sufficient
possession, Priority a sufficient Title.
unless some Title be found for the Defendant; and primer Possession is good
where neither Party has Title; and in this Case the Lease was adjudged void,
the Trustees not being enabled to sell farther than to satisfy Debts.

In Wallis's Case, Where primer Possession makes a Disseisin.
Styles Rep. 291. Special Verdict was on a Copyhold-custom, the primer
Possession will make a Disseisin, if the Custom be not well found; it was not
found in that Case that the Land was demisable according to the Will of the
Lord, and so it may be Free-Land, and the Custom did not extend to it; nor is
it found that the Parties to whom the Lettor of Attorney -- was made to
surrender, were customary Tenants, and then the primer Possession by the
Defendant will make a Disseisin, and Judgment pro Quer'.

In Ejectment prior Possession is a good Title against the King's Presentation,
In Ejectment prior Possession a good Title against the King's Presentation, not
so in a Quare Impedit.
but not so in a Quare Impedit; for there the Incumbent ought (although
Defendant) to make a Title against the King's Presentation without Title, as is
the Book 7 H. 4. 31. but if the Incumbent be in by Entry of his own Head,
without Presentation, it is not sufficient in either, 1 Keb. 503. Brown and
Spencer.

3. Si constare poterit that it is the same Land, it is good.
The Special Verdict is good, si constare poterit, that it is the same place
and the same Land in the Declaration mentioned, although it be not found
expressly; and although the Jury find not that it is the same Land in the
Declaration mentioned, yet if they find the Entry and Ejectment according to
the Declaration, it is sufficient; and therefore the Mistake of a Letter, or
Addition of a Word shall not hurt the Verdict, si constare poterit, etc.
Siderf. p. 27. Hoare and Dix.

4. The Special Conclusion of a Special Verdict, shall aid the Imperfections of
it.
In many Cases the special Conclusion of a Special Verdict shall aid the
Imperfections of it. If the Jury find a Special Verdict, and refer the Law upon
that special Matter to the Court, although they do not find any Title for the
Defendant, which is a collateral thing to the Point which they refer to the
Court, yet the Verdict is good enough; for all other things shall be intended,
except this which is referred to the Court. As in Ejectment, if the Plaintiff
declare upon a Lease made by A. and the Jury find a Special Verdict and matter
in Law upon a Power of Revocation of Uses by an Indenture and Limitation of new
Uses, and then a Lease for years made to the Plaintiff by the Lessor in the
Declaration, and another in which there is a perfect Variance; but they
conclude the Verdict, and refer to the Court, whether a Grant of a new Estate
found in the Verdict, be a Revocation of the first Indenture, or not. The
special Conclusion shall aid the Verdict, so that the Court cannot take notice
of the variance between the Lease in the Declaration and the Verdict, because
the doubt touching, the Revocation is only referred to the Court. And although
they refer to the Court, whether this be a Revocation of the first Indenture,
and not of the former Uses or Limitation of new Uses, as it ought to be, yet in
a Verdict this is good; for their intention appears. Intent.
But where the Jury find specially, and furthermore conclude against Law, Where
the Verdict is good, and the Conclusion ill. Diversity between a geneneral
Conclusion and a special Conclusion.
the Verdict is good, and the Conclusion is ill; and the Court will give
Judgment upon the special Matter without having regard to the Conclusion of the
Jury, 5. Rep. 97. Litt. Rep. 135. 2 Keb. 362, 412. 11 Rep. 10. Moor 105, 269.
So note this Diversity between a special Conclusion of the Jury, and Reference
to the Court, and a general Conclusion and Reference to the Court. A Special
Verdict may make the Declaration good.
A precise Verdict may make the Declaration good, which otherwise would be ill,
as the Declaration is of Lands in Sutton Coefeild; and the Verdict finds the
Lands in Sutton Colefeild, and the Deed is of Lands in parva Sutton infra
Dominium de Sutton Colefeild; so neither the Verdict nor Deed agree with the
Declaration for the Vill where the Lands lie; therefore no Judgment ought to be
given. But per Cur' the Verdict finding Seisin de infra script' messuag', that
is quasi an express Averment; and finding that Sutton Coefoild and Sutton
Colefeild and parva Sutton infra Dominium Sutton Colefeild, are all one, and
that they be all in one Parish, and this being in a Verdict when the Jury found
Quod dedit tenementa infra script' by Name in the Deed, shall be intended all
one. So its aided by the finding of the Jury, who find expressly that the
Bishop, dedit Tenementa infra Script. Cr. Jac. 175. Ward and Walthow, Yelv. p.
101. Mesme Case.

5. The Judges are not bound by the conclusion of the Jury, as in Ejectment on
a void the Jury find Lease, Lease.
that if the Entry of the Daughter was not congeable, the Defendant is Guilty:
Now the Judges are not bound by the conclusion of the Jury, but may Judge
according to Law, as 10 Ed. 4. f. 70. Trespass was brought against the Lord for
Distraining. The Jury found for the Plaintiff. But because the Statute of
Marlbudge, is non ideo puniatur Dominus, etc. The Court shall adjudge for the
Defendant. So is the Rule in Plowd. Com. 114. b. when the Verdict finds the
fact, but concludes upon it contrary to Law, the Court shall reject the
conclusion, as in Amy Townsend's Case. The Jury find precisely that the Wife
was remitted, which was contrary to Law, for their Office is to judge of
matters of Fact, and not what the Law is. So, if the Jury collect the contents
of a Deed, and also find the Deed in haec verba, The Court is not to Judge upon
their Collection, but upno the Deed it self; Moor p. 105. Lane and Cooper.

And yet the Court is sometimes bound by the conclusion of the Jury; as in
Ejectione Firm of one Acre, The Jury find the Defendant Guilty of one Moiety,
and a Special Verdict for the residue, and conclude if the Court shall find him
Guilty of all, then etc. The Plaintiff cannot have Judgment upon this for a
Moiety, if the Court shall not adjudge him Guilty of the whole for the Special
conclusion cited, 1 Rolls Rep. 429.

1. Verdict to be taken according to Intent.
Special Verdict shall be taken according to Intent, and the Court must make no
more doubts than the Jury does; the finding matter of Fact being only the
Jurors Office, as 5 Rep. Goodales's Case, The doubt was, whether the payment of
100 l. with agreement to have some part of it back again, were sufficient upon
a Condition to defeat the Estate of a Stranger: The Court regarded not, that
there was no Title found for the Party that made the Entry, whereupon the
Action was brought. Ejectione Firm was brought by G. against W. upon Not
guilty, the Jury concluded their doubt upon performance of a Condition, When
the Verdict concludes specially on one point, the Court shall doubt of no more
than the Jury doubts, securs where it concludes it the General. General
conclusion depends upon all the Points of the Verdict.
by Payment of Money by Sir J. P. to one W. but yet, in making up their
Verdict, they had given the Possession to the Plaintiff by Lease, and laid the
Entry upon him by W. without any Title under Sir J. P. but that was included
and so not regarded, Hen. 55. 262.

But if the Jury conclude upon the General, whether the Defendants Entry were
lawful or not, which is all one, as if they had referred to the Court whether
he be Guilty or not; this depends upon all the Points of the Verdict
indifferently, that may prove him Guilty or Not guilty, Hob. 262. So is Castle
and Hobb's Case, Cro. Jac. 22. The Verdict was on the passing by Letters
Patents, and the Jury found, that if they were good Letters Patents, then for
the Defendant, otherwise they found for the Plaintiff, and they find no Title
for the Plaintiff: But it is intended, there is a sufficient Title found for
the Plaintiff, unless by this Patent it be defeated and avoided; so that if the
Jury be satisfied, that the Plaintiff has any good Right by any other manner
of Title, the Court ought not to doubt thereof.

How, and in what Cases Special Verdicts shall be taken by Intent or
Presumption, and what things shall be supplied.
I Devise all those my Lands in Shelford called Somerby, to W. in Tail
remainder over, and it is not found per Verdict, that those Lands in the Action
are called Somersby. But per Cur. for as much as the contrary is not found, it
shall be intended, that he had not other Lands in Shalford, than those which
were called Somersby, though that name be not at first given them; for it was, I
Devise all my Lands in Shalford to his Wife for Life, and the remainder in Tail
prout ante, Co. Eliz. 828. Peck and Channel.

It shall be intended, that the Reversion continues in the Party, as if a
Special Verdict find that A. was possessed for years of Land, and that the
Reversion in Fee was in B. Reversion shall be intended to continue.
and that A. Devise the Term to C. after the Death of M. whom he makes his
Executor, and dies, and M. enter, and during his Life C. after releaseth his
possibility to B. and it is not found, that the Reversion continued in B. at
the time of the Release; yet it shall be intended to continue in him in a
Verdict, it being found to be once in him by the same Verdict before, p. 13
Car. 1. B. R. Johnson and Trumper.

A Life shall be intended to be in being though not found, Where a Life shall be
intended to be in being.
as was Fretzvil and Mollineux's Case. If the Jury find the Title of the
Plaintiff to be under one, who was Lessee for Life, and they find the Estate
for Life, but do not find the Tenant for Life is alive; The Life shall be
intended and supplied, the conclusion and reference to the Court being upon
other matter. Special Vedict in Ejectment found, that J. J. was deprived by the
high Commissioners of a Benefice, and it is found in this manner, That such
persons authorizati virtue Literar' Patent' Eliz. Reg. Jury find virtute
Literar' do not find they were under Seal.
and it is not found, that the Letters Patents were under the great Seal; yet
this is good, and shall be intended in a Verdict, Tr. 13 Car. 1. B. R. Allen
and Nash.

In Ejectment, The Verdict was on a Proviso of Revocation of uses, That it
should be lawful for the Covenantor, being in perfect health and memory, under
his Hand and Seal, and by him delivered in the presence of three credible
Witnesses, etc. It was agreed, That though the Verdict do not find the Covenantor
was in perfect health and memory; yet that was well enough, for it shall be
presumed, except the contrary were showed, What shall be presumed unless the
contrary be showed.
and so for the presence of credible and sufficient Persons. Otherwise, if it
were in the presence of sufficient subsidy Men, Hob. 312. Kibbet and Lee.

If the Jury find that J. S. was seized in Fee, and devised the Land to J. D.
although they do not find the Land was held in Socage, yet that is good; for this
shall be intended, it being a Collateral thing, and it being the most common
Tenure.

If the Jury find that J. S. was seized in Fee, Devise.
and made his Will in haec verba, and that he afterward died; although they do
not find he died seized, yet it shall be intended, he died seized, and so good.
But

If the Jury find the Words of the Will, and yet do not find the will, the
Verdict is not good

And if the Jury find a Bargain and Sale, and a Fine, Bargain and Sale.
and do not mention Inrolment or Proclamations, it shall not be intended, Hob.
262.

In Ejectione Firm, the Verdict finds that E. D. the Lessor, and Conisor was
seized in Tail of the Manor of B. at the time of the Recognizance, and that
this Manor was delivered in Extent; but he does not say that the Lands in the
Declaration were parcel of the said Manor, and so its not found, Extent.
that this Land was delivered in Extent, and then the Defendant had no Title.
Per Cur. its not material, it shall be intended in a Special Verdict; otherwise
there is no Cause of a Special Verdict, Cr. Car. 458. Cleve and Vere.

It was objected in Corbet and Stones's Case, p. 1653. B. C. The Jury find that
after a Fine levied, and before the Ejectment, the interest of M. C. F. B. and
K. B. of the Lands in Question, came to the Lessor of the Plaintiff, That the
Interest of the Lands came to the Lessor, but shows not how.
but shows not how. But per Cur. it is good enough, for when the Jury finds the
interest comes to the Lessor, the Court intends all Circumstances, that shall
conduce to that fact; for the Court doubts not when the Jury doubts not, 4 Rep.
65. Fullwood's Case.

The Jury find that J. C. came before the Recorder of London, Statute.
and Mayor of the Staple, and acknowledged himself to T. R. in 200 l. Exception
was taken, that there was no finding of any Statute there; for it was found,
that this was secundum formam Statuti, and that it was by Writing. But per Cur.
its good enough, for all Circumstances shall be intended Raym. 150.

And there is another Rule in our Books persuant to this last, In a Special
Verdict all necessary circumstances shall be intended.
in a Special Verdict the Circumstances shall be intended, or in a Special
Verdict, the Circumstances of every thing need not to be so strictly found as
in pleading. As in Ejectment, the Jury found he delivered the Lease upon the
Land, but found not, that he had entered and claimed, Cr. Eliz. 167. Willis and
Jermin. And in Goodall's Case, 5 Rep. it was resolved, That all matters in a
Special Verdict shall be intended and supplied, but only that which the Jury
refer to the Consideration of the Court.

Also in Molineux's Case, Cr. Jac. 146. It was excepted to a Special Verdict,
That the Life of B. who was Tenant for Life, A Life
and the Lessor in the Action was not found: But per Cur. it shall not be
intended that she is dead, unless it been found. And in a Special Verdict, all
necessary Circumstances shall be intended, unless found to the contrary: Some
things shall not be intended.
But some things the Court shall not intend, as in Sadler and Draper's Case,
Sir Thomas Jones, p. 17. where the Case was whether the next of the Blood being
of the half Blood ( i. e. whether the Brother of the half Blood of the Mother
of an Infant, shall be Guardian in Socage of Land, by descent on the part of the
Father,) Cro. Eliz. 825. But because the Verdict did not find that the Lessor
of the Plaintiff, who claims to be Guardian in Socage, was proximus in sangine a
quel, etc. that the Court shall not intend it, and so no Title found pro Quer.
Ideo nil. cap. per Bill.

If the Jury find a Special Verdict ( viz.) A. devises his Lands to his
Executors quousque they shall Levy such Money, or his Heirs shall pay to them
the said Sum, and conclude upon the matter si, etc. but they do not find the
Heir had not paid the Money. Difference between the Condition and Limitation of
an Estate, as to the finding by the Jury.
This quousque the Heir pay the Money, is parcel of the Limitation of the
Estate which ought to have been found: Otherwise, the Court who is to Judge
upon the whole matter, shall not intend it, Tr. 19. Jac. B. R. Langley and
Pain. But if in a Special Verdict, the Jury find J. S. was seized in Fee of
Land, and made his Will, and by it devises all his Estate to B. paying Debts
and Legacies, and refer to the Court the matter in Law, ( viz.) whether a Fee
passes by this, but find not that B. had paid the Debts and Legacies; yet this
is a good Verdict, because it is a Condition, properly and not a Limitation,
Tr. 1651. Johnson and Kerman; yet if the Verdict find that J. S. was seized in
Fee of Land, and possessed of certain Leases for years of other Lands, and by his
Will devises his Leases to J. D. and after devises to his Executors all the
Residue of his Estate, Mortgages, etc. his Debts being paid, and his Funeral
expenses discharged; this was not a perfect Verdict, the matter in Law referred
to the Court being, whether the Executors had an Estate in Fee by this Devise
in as much as it is not found, that the Debts were paid, etc. which is a
Condition precedent so as the Executors cannot have it till the Debts paid, and
venire de novo granted, Hill. 10 Car. 1. B. R. Wilkinson's Case, Vide 2 Leon.
152. Allen and Hill's Case, Condition must be punctually found.

To this purpose it is laid down often in our Books as a Rule. Finding the
substance of the Issue is sufficient.
That if the Jury find the substance of the Issue it is sufficient, as in
Ejectment of a Manor: If the Jury find there were no Freeholders, and so it is
no Manor in Law; yet it being a Manor in Reputation, and so the Tenants pass by
the Leases, therefore this Verdict is found for him who Pleads the Lease of the
Manor, for the substance is whether Bargain and Sale, de modo irrotulat' and
not said in six Months, its good in a Verdict but not in a Plea, 3 Keb. 180.
vide supra Corbet and Stones's Case.

If in Ejectment a Lease is pleaded of a Manor, etc. and the Issue is quod non
dimisi^ manerium, and the Jury give a Special Verdict, That there were not any
Freeholders but diverse Copyholders of the Manor, and that it was known by the
name of a Manor, though it was not any Manor in Law for default of Freeholders;
and though this was alleged in pleading to be a Manor, Manor in reputation, and
not in strict Law.
which pleading is made by learned Men, and though this was in an Action
adversary and not amicable; yet, for as much as the Issue is triable by the
Lay-gents, and in truth the Tenements in which, etc. pass by the Lease; the
Verdict is found for him that Pleads the Lease of the Manor, for the substance
of the Issue is, whether it were demised or not, Vines and Durham's Case cited,
6 Rep. 77. in Sir Moyle Fincheb's Case.

8. What one cannot plead shall be found by Verdict.
It is a Rule in Law, in such Actions in which one cannot Plead, there the
matter to be pleaded shall be found by Verdict, and this well; but where the
Party may Plead there the same is to be pleaded by him, 1 Bulstr. 166.

The Jury may find a Warranty being give in Evidence, for in Ejectment from
Trespass, and in Act on the Satute of 5 R. 2. cap. 7. A Warranty is not to be
pleaded (or other personal Action:) The nature of a Warranty, and to have
benefit thereby, is to be by way of Voucher and Rebutter in a real Action; and
must Plead or lose the benefit of it, but in personal Actions Collateral
Warranty cannot be pleaded by way of Bar; yet it may be given in Evidence to a
Jury, and the same is to be found by Verdict of the Jury, Vid. ibid. Heywood
and Smith.

9. If any thing be omitted in the Declaration, or if more is put in the
Declaration than is found by the Jury, if it makes a material variance between
the Declaration and the Verdict, the Action shall abate as if a Declaration in
Ejectment be of a Lease of three Acres; a Lease of a Moiety will not Warrant
the Declaration: But if the variance be by way of Surplus or Defect, if it be
not material in the extenuation of the Action, or Damages, Action will lie.

10. Verdict by presumption.
The Jury may give a Verdict by presumption, as to find Livery in respect of
long Possession; but if they find the matter Specially, the Court will not
adjudge this a Livery, 1 Rolls Rep. 132.

11. A Verdict that finds part of the Issue, and nothing for the residue is
sufficient, Vide postea.

12. Fraud ought not to be presumed, unless it be expressly found, 2 Rep. 25. 10
Rep. 56. Cr. Car. 549. Crisp and Pratt.

Where and in what Cases Entry must be expressly found or not, and of the force
of the words prout lex postulat.
In Horewood and Holman's Case, 2 Bulst. 29. Lands are given to the use of a
Man and his Wife, the Remainder to the Heirs of the Body of the Husband; the
Husband makes a Feoffment in Fee with Warranty, and takes back an Estate to him
and his Wife for their Lives, the Remainder over to make a Remitter to the
Wife, there ought to be an Entry, To make a Remitter, there must be a new
Entry. Prout lex pestulat.
and no new Entry is found by the Special Verdict to be by the Husband, but
only prout lex postulat. The Court advised a new Trial, and to amend the
Special Verdict, and to find the Entry of the Baron and Feme.

The time of the Entry of the Plaintiff is sometimes material, as in Fort and
Berkley's Case. The time of the Entry of the Plaintiffs Lessor.
Per Cur. In that Case which way soever the Law had been taken, Judgment could
not have been given for the Defendant. There was a Lease made to Godolphin in
Reversion, under whom the Plaintiff claims. Chersey the Lessor of the Plaintiff
did Enter upon the Possession of Berkley the Defendant, but when he did Enter
does not appear; then the Case is, Berkley was in Possession. If the Lessor of
the Plaintiff entered before the Term began, he was a Disseisor as it was, Dier
89. Clifford's Case. But its said he was possessed prout lex postulat, Prout lex
postulat.
as so he was of the Reversion too, it does not appear but that he was a
Disseisor and so continued, Carters Rep. 159, 160.

If the Title appear to be in a Stranger, they must find an Ouster made to him
who had the Right. Where actual Ouster must be ^ound.
And therefore in Ejectione Firm, If the Jury find a Special Verdict, being
matter in Law upon a Lease for years, reserving Rent upon Condition, etc. but
no Title is found for the Plaintiff nor Defendant; but it is only found, that
the Lessor of the Plaintiff being a Stranger Enters into the Land and Leaseth
this to the Plaintiff, by which the Plaintiff was possessed prout lex postulat,
until the Defendant entered and ejected him; this is not a good Verdict, the
Title appearing to be a in Stranger, without any actual Ouster made to him who
had the Right, 2 Rolls Abr. 699. Bland and Inman.

In an Ejectione Firm, the Jury find a Special Verdict, and find Special
Matter in Law, whether J. S. had right to the Land, upon which the Court
adjudged, That he has right to the Land. But they find farther, Ouster Dissesin.
That J. D Entered into the Land upon J. S. and was thereof seized prout lex
postulat, and made the Lease to the Plaintiff, and the Lessee was by force of
this possessed, and it is not found that J. D. disseised J. S. and for that,
upon this Verdict shall not be intended that J. D. oustred J. S. and disseised
him, and then the Entry of J. D. and his Lease is void, and so an Action does
not lie against a Stranger, who had nothing in the Land, as was Hitchin and
Glover's Case.

In Ejectione Firm, by the Lessee of a College, if the Jury find a Special
Verdict in this manner, ( viz.) That the College let this to A. upon
Condition, and found a Special Matter in Law, whether the Condition be broken,
and that the College supposing the Condition broken by their Bailiff entered,
Entry by a College how to be found.
and let this to the Plaintiff, this is not a good Special Verdict, without
finding of a command given by the College to the Bailiff to Enter, to be by
Deed, for otherwise it is not good, 2 Rolls Abr. p. 700. Dumper and Simms.

A. was seized and demised to his Executors, the Lands in Question for the
performance of his Will, till the Executors levy 100 Marks, or until his Heirs
pay to them 200 Marks, and that the Executors after his Death entered and were
possessed prout lex postulat, Prout lex postulat, how far extend.
and being so possessed granted to the Plaintiff, who entered and was possessed till
the Ejectment. This is uncertain, because it is not found that the Heir had
paid the Money, Super totam materiam.
for they say super totam materiam, and to say prout lex postulat, is not an
affirmation of any certain Possession, Palmer 192. Langly and Pain.

Of the Juries finding by Parcels.
It is a Rule: Verdict that finds part of Issue, and nonothing for the residue
is insufficient.
A Verdict that finds part of the Issue, and nothing for the residue is
insufficient. As in Pemble and Sterne's Case, Raym. 165. The Demise is laid of
a Park Message 300 Acres of Land, and the Verdict finds only as to parcel, and
nothing of the residue for the Plaintiff or the Defendant; the Verdict is void;
so is the Rule, 1 Inst. p. 227. A Verdict that finds part of the Issue, and
finding nothing of the residue it is insufficient for the whole, because they
have not tried the whole Issue wherewith they are charged, Car. Jac. 113.
Ejectione Firm of a Lease of Messuages, 3000 -- Acres of Land, 3000 Acres of
Pasture in D. per nomina of Monkhal. and 5 Closes per nomina. On Not guilty the
Jury gave a Special Verdict, ( viz) quoad 4 Closes of Pasture containing by
Estimation, 2000 Acres of Pasture, that the Defendant was Not guilty, Quoad
resid.
quoad resid. they find the matter in Law; this Verdict is imperfect in all,
for when the Jury find that the Defendant was Not guilty of 4 Closes of Pasture
containing by Estimation, 2000 Acres of Pasture it is not certain, and it does
not appear of how much they acquit him, and then when they find quoad residuum
for the Special matter, it is uncertain what that residue is; a Venire fac' de
novo was awarded, A Verdict of more than declared for.
Woolmer and Caston's Case. But if the Verdict be of more than declared for, it
shall be void for the residue. As Ejectment for him who pleaded all of 14
Acres, and the Jury find Guilty of 20 Acres, 14 Acres, The Plaintiff shall have
Judgment for the and the Verdict shall be void for the residue, 2 Rolls Abr.
707. 719. Seabright's Case.

In Ejectment of a Manor, and so many Acres as includes the Manor; the Jury
find for the Plaintiff as to the Manor, praeter the Services; and as to the
Services Not guilty. And Judgment pro Quer. Here are 2 manifest Errors. 1. When
the Court is of a Manor, the Jury cannot find for the Plaintiff, for that which
is not a Manor; and there is none that brings Ejectment of a Manor, Ejectment
of a Manor, how to be brought.
but they also add the Acres that contain it, to the end, that if they prove it
not a Manor they may recover according to the Acres, but they must enter it so,
but not as here generally of both. 2. The Verdict being as much as the Count,
the Judgment against the Plaintiff cannot be in Misericordia, if it be supposed
good. The Court held them to be manifest Errors and assignable by the
Defendant, Hob. 108. Latch 61. Cr. Jac. 113. 1 Keb. 110. Hammond and Conisby.
But I conceive that is not Law, for in Hammond and Conisby's Case, Ejectione
Firm was of a Manor; upon Not guilty, there was a Verdict pro Quer. for the
Manor, and quoad the Services Not guilty. Error was assigned, because the
Verdict is not for the Plaintiff, for the Manor, because as to the Services it
is for the Defendant. Surpluse in a Verdict.
But per Cur. The last part of the Verdict shall be taken general for the
Plaintiff, Sid. 232. Ejectione Firm of a Message. On Not guilty, the Jury
find the Defendant guilty of 2 parts of the House: It was alleged in Arrest of
Judgment, That the Verdict has not found the Defendant Guilty according to the
Count, which is of a Message an entire thing. Manwood contra: Omne majus
continet in se minus; but if the Declaration had been of 2 parts of a Message,
and on Not guilty, the Jury had found him Guilty of the entire House, The
Plaintiff shall not have Judgment, Savill 27.

In Ejectione Firm of a Message, if it be found that a little part of the
House is Built by incroachment upon the Land of the Plaintiff, and not the
Residue; yet the Plaintiff shall recover for this parcel by the name of an
House.

It Is laid down positive in Ablett and Skinner's Case in Sid. The Verdict may
be of fewer parts than the Declaration.
p. 229. that the Verdict may be of fewer parts than in the Declaration: As on
Trial at Bar in Ejectment the Declaration was of a fourth part of a fifth part
in five parts to be divided, and the Title of the Plaintiff upon the Evidence
was but of a third part of a fourth part of a fifth part in five parts to be
divided, which is but a third part of what is demanded in the Declaration. It
was said the Plaintiff cannot have a Verdict, because the Verdict in such Case
ought to agree with the Declaration; but per Cur' the Verdict may be taken
according to Title; and so it was. But Qu. how the Habere fac' shall be
executed.

If the Verdict in Ejectment contain more than the Declaration, If the Verdict
contain more than the Declaration, the Plaintiff may release his Damages.
the Plaintiff may release the Damages. Q. if he may release part of the Land,
Sid. p. 412.

Ejectione Firm of the Manor of Dale; on Non Culp' pleaded, the Jury find,
quoad unum Messuagium parcel' As to a Manor.
Manerij praedict', guilty; quoad resid Not guilty. It is moved he cannot have
Judgment; the Action is brought of the Manor, and the Jury find him guilty of
one House only, so he cannot have his Judgment according to his demand. So
Delabar and Hudlestone's Case. Ejectment of a Rectory, and upon Non culp'
pleaded, the Defendant was found guilty of Tithes without the Glebe; and he
could not have Judgment, the Glebe being the Principal. So Ejectione Firm of a
Manor, and proves only the Rents, he shall not have Judgment. Ejectment was of
an House, the Special Verdict was, That the Plaintiff was seized in Fee; and if
there be several things laid in Ejectione Firm, If several things are laid in
Ejectione Firm, and the Jury find the Defendant guilty in one, the Plaintiff
shall have Judgment of that.
as House, Garden, etc. and the Jury find guilty of one only, the Plaintiff
shall have Judgment of this. In Delabar's Case it was not found that the Tithes
were parcel of the Rectory, and so it differs from this Case. In Ejectione
Firm of a Manor and ten Acres, it is no Plea that the ten Acres are parcel of
the Manor, aliter in Entry in the nature of an Assise. Adjornatur.

The Jury find the Defendant guilty of one Moiety, and for the other Moiety a
Special Verdict, this is no Error; for the Jury may conclude upon the Moiety,
Where the Jury may conclude upon a Moiety or not.
for it may be he entered into one Moiety, and not into the other; but if he
declares upon the whole, they cannot find him guilty of a Moiety, 3 Bulstr.
229. Milward and Watts. But if one declares in Ejectione Firm upon a Fence
made in certain Lands, and he has Title but for a Moiety, the Jury are not to
conclude upon the Moiety, for they are not to judge upon this, but the Court.

Where a dying seized or possessed, must be found.
A Man by his last Will and Testament devised all his Fee-simple Lands
whatsoever to his Brother, on Condition he suffer his Wife to enjoy all his
Free Lands in H. du^ing her Life, and the Jury found the Testator had only a
Portion of Tithes in H. but they did not find the Testator died seized of the
Tithes, which without doubt had been ill upon the Demurrer. And Rolls said, He
would see the Notes by which the Special Verdict was drawn up, if that could
help it. For they all agree the Verdict ought to have found the Dying seized,
Styles Rep. 279. Saunders and Rich.

In Ejectione Firm if the Jury find a Special Verdict, That J. S. was seized
of the Manor of D. in his Demesne as of Fee, of which Manor of Copyholder in
the place where, etc. does waste by the cutting down an Oak; and that after J.
S. dies, and the Lessor of the Plaintiff being his Cousin and Heir, enters into
the Manor, and into the Place where, etc. for the said Forfeiture, and was of
this seized in his Demesne, as of Fee, and concludes, si super totam materiam,
etc. this is not a good Verdict, because it is not found that J. S. died seized
of the Manor, and that this descended to the Lessor as his Cousin and Heir; for
it may be J. S. aliened the Land, and that the Father of the Lessor, or the
Lessor himself might repurchase it, and that he was also Cousin and Heir to J.
S. for although it be in a Verdict, yet it shall not be intended, that the Fee
continued in J. S. at his death, and that he died seized thereof without
finding of it, P. 1 Car. 1. Cornwallis and Hammond.

Of Uncertainty in Special Verdicts.
As to Persons. As to Acres and Parcels. As to the Place or Vill. As to time.


As to Persons.
One devises all his Lands to E. his Wife for Life, the Remainder to F. his
Daughter in Tail, the Remainder to the eldest Son of William his Brother in
Tail, Remainder over. E. enters, F. dies without Issue; they find Gertrude
Cousin and Heir to F. who levied a Fine, but they find not Gertrude was Heir to
the Devisor; Do not find Heir.
and it may be although F. was the Daughter, the Devisor might have a Son, or that
she was Heir to him by a second Wife, yet that Exception seemed not valid, Cr.
El. 642. Hemsley and Price. So in 3 Rep. Sir George Brown's Case, Anthony is
found Son but not Heir, and yet without his being Heir, the Plaintiff had no
Title: And yet in Cymbal and Sand's Case, Cro. Car. 391. Gimlet and Sands, the
Court seemed to be of Opinion, That though the Jury found that Humfrey had Issue
by Hebell his Wife, John, unicum filium suum, that not finding that he was Heir
(it was in case of his being Heir to a Warranty collateral) was not good; for
he might have elder Sons by another Venture, or there might be an Attainder, or
the Warranty might be discharged or released io his Lifetime, 2 Rolls Abr.
701. mesme Case.

The Jury found a Special Verdict on a Will, in which they found A. had Issue
two Sons B. and C. and do not find which of them was the elder, and which the
younger, which is material in the Case. This Verdict is not good; for though B.
is first named, yet it does not appear by this that he is the eldest Son, M. 20
Jac. B. R. Peryn and Pearse.

Uncertainty as to part of a House.
The Defendant pleads Not guilty; Part of an House.
the Jury find him not guilty for part, and guilty de tanto unius Messuagij in
occupatione, etc. quantum stat super Ripam. Per Cur' the Verdict is
insufficient for the Uncertainty; for though the Certainty may appear to the
Jury, yet that is not enough; the Court ought to give Judgment, and oportet
quod res deducatur in judicium. The Court must be informed of the Certainty,
and it ought to appear to them.
Had they found him guilty of a Room, it had been good. So if he had been found
guilty of a third part, for of them the Law takes notice. And an Ejectione
Firm was brought for the Gate House at Westminster, and the Jury found the
Defendant guilty for so much as is between such a Room and such a Room, and it
was adjudged good, Guilty of a Room is good.
Marsh. Rep. 47. Juxon and Andrews.

As to Certainty of Acres.
Ejectione Firm was brought of 400 Acres of Land; As to Acres.
and the Jury find the Defendant quoad all besides three Acres parcel
tenementorum praedictorum Not guilty; Quoad, etc.
and quoad the three Acres, they find special matter; and that G. A. the Lessor
let the aforesaid three Acres to the Plaintiff, and that he was possessed; and
that the Defendant ejected him out of the three Acres, Parcel.
parcel' tenementorum praedictorum, and they did not find the Ejectment of the
aforesaid three Acres, etc. and it may be the Ejectment was of other three
Acres; and for this Cause per totam Curiam held ill, Cr. El. 642. Hemsley and
Price.

Ejectment of 5 Acres, if the Jury find the Defendant guilty in 8 Perches de
terre parcel' tenementorum praedictorum, it is a void Verdict, because
uncertain, and no Execution can be made of Pieces, 2 Rolls Abr. 694. Pawlet and
Dr. Redman.

And this is the Difference between Trespass and Ejectment: The Plaintiff
declares of Trespass in one Acre in D. and abutts it East, West, North and
South. Upon Not guilty the Jury finds the Defendant guilty in dimidio Acrae
infra script' the Plaintiff shall have Judgment; and so if they had found but
one Foot of the Acre. And it suffices to be found in one Moiety of the Acre
bounded in this Action, where Damages are only to be recovered. But if it were
in Ejectment the Verdict had been ill; It must be certain in what part the
Plaintiff must have his Hab. fac. possess. aliter in Trespass.
for it is not certain in what part the Plaintiff shall have his Habere fac'
possessionem, Yelv. p. 114. Winckworth and Man.

In Ejectione Firm the Plaintiff declares of a Message, 3000 Acres of Land,
3000 Acres of Pasture in D. per nomina of the Manor of Monkall, and 5 Closes
per nomina, etc. The Jury give a Special Verdict, quoad four Closes of Pasture
containing by Estimation 2000 Acres of Pasture, that the Defendant was not
guilty; quoad residuum they find the Matter in Law. This Verdict is imperfect
in all; for when the Jury found the Defendant was not guilty of four Closes of
Pasture containing by Estimation 2000 Acres of Pasture, Quoad residuum must be
certain.
it is uncertain, and does not appear of how much they acquit him; and then
when they find quoad residuum for the special Matter, it is uncertain what that
Residue is; so there cannot be any Judgment given. And a Venire fac' de novo
was awarded, Cro. Jac' 114. Woolmer and Caston.

In Ejectione Firm de septem Messuagiit sive tenementis, De Messuagiis sive
Tenementis is ill, and the Verdict helps it not.
and Verdict pro Quer', it is ill for the Uncertainty, and the Verdict does not
help it. And Hales refused to let the Jury find for the Plaintiff for the
Messuages, and Non culp' for the Tenements. But per Twisden had it been de uno
Messuagio sive Tenemento vocat' The Black Swan, it had been good, because the
last part makes it certain, Sid. 195. 2 Keb. 80. Cro. El. 186.

On Special Verdict in Ejectment the Case was, As to Acres and Parishes.
the Declaration was of several Messuages in the several Parishes of St.
Michael, St. James, St. Peter and St. Paul, and that part of the Premises lie
in the Parish of St. Peter and St. Paul, and that there is no Parish called the
Parish of St. Peter, nor none called the Parish of St. Paul. Per Cur' the
Copulative ( Et) shall be referred to that which is real and has existence, ut
res magis valeat; not to make St. Peter's one Parish and St. Paul another, but
to make them both one Parish, and the Words, several Parishes, are supplied by
the Parishes before mentioned, as 6 Ed. 3. Praecipe of 10 Acres in A. B. and C.
there the Lands must lie in every one of the Vills; but if the Praecipe were de
Manerio and de december Acris in A. B. and C. there it would be well enough, though
the Manor lay elsewhere, provided that ten Acres lay within the Vills
aforesaid, for then the last words are satisfied by the ten Acres, Hardr. 1.
330. Ingleton and Wakeman.

Yet in Thomas and Kenn's Case, P. 38 El. B. R. it is said in Dyer ult. Edit. in
margin 34. b. Ejectione Firm upon Title of Land of Sir Hugh Portman; the
Count was of an hundred Acres in D. and S. and Non culp' pleaded, the Jury
found the Defendant ejected him of ten Acres only, and shows not them in
Certain, and adjudged a good Verdict, and the Plaintiff had Judgment.

It Is a Rule laid down, Where ever but one Acre (...) found certain, ^ne may
release ^ll the rest.
1 Rolls 784. Rhethorick and Chappel's Case, wherever an Acre is but found
certain, a man may release all the rest that is uncertain, and nothing is more
usual.

Of uncertainty in a Special Verdict, in reference to the Place or Vill.
Ejectione Firm of 30 Acres of Land in D. and S. The Defendant was found
Guilty of 10 Acres, and quoad residuum Not Guilty. Acres in two Vills, and the
Jury found the Defendant Guilty, and say not how many lie in one Vill, and how
many in another.
And it was moved in Arrest of Judgment, That it was uncertain in which of the
Vills those Lands lay; and therefore no Judgment can be given: Sed non Allocat.
and adjudged pro Quer. For the Sheriff shall take his Information from the
party, for what 10 Acres the Verdict was. So is Siderf. 75. If one Dcclares for
a 100 Acres of Land in two Vills, and the Jury find the Defendant Guilty, this
is good without saying how many Acres lie in the Vill, and how many in the
other: And the Sheriff ought to take notice of this at his Peril, in making of
Execution. And so in Dence, and Dence his Case: It shall be intended, that
every Acre of Land named in the Declaration lies in both Vills, for so much is
presumed by the Declaration, and the Venire from both Vills, Cro. Car. 467.
Portman and Morgan, Sid. p. 75. Yelv. 228. Dences's Case.

Trin. 43. El. Meredith and Brown. It was adjudged in B. R. that in Ejectione
Firm, supposing the Ejectment of 10 Acre, and the Jury find the Circumstances
but of 4 Acres, the Plaintiff shall recover these 4 Acres. But Dame
Baskervile's Case was in 39 Eliz. Assize was brought of a Park containing 60
Acres, and the Jury ^ound the Disseis^ but of 30 Acres, and adjudged against
the Plaintiff for all. But note, the Park was entire, Dyer 15. b.

As to time.
It was a great Case between Vernon and Gray. The Ejectment was supposed the
first of May; and the Jury found the Ejectment to be circa the first of May. It
was held not good, Godb. 125. cited in Yarran and Bradshaw's Case.

Of a Verdict in other Leases, or Date than is declared upon.
The Plaintiff Declares of a Lease by two Copyhold-Lords, Jury find on a Demise
generally.
Lessors of the Plaintiff for a Term certain; and the Jury find a Demise
generally, and do not find the Lease whereupon the Plaintiff Declares, and it
may be any other Lease which might not be determined at the time of the
Verdict, but is now since; and the Ejectment is only found out of this, Count
of a Lease for years in Possession, the Jury sound the Lease made on another
Day, its against the Plaintiff. Aliter, if it be made to commence at a Day to
come.
and not on the Lease declared on, 19 Car. 2. B. C. Lenthal and Thomas.

In Ejectment, if the Plaintiff Declares of a Lease for years made the first of
May, to commence at the first of St. Michael, then next ensuing (which is now
past) if the Jury find that the Lease was made the first of June, or at any
other Day before the Feast of S. Michael, This is found pro Quer. For the Day
of the making is not material, so that it was made to commence at a Day to
come. By Foster its the common practice, 1 Rolls Abr. 704.

But if in Ejectment the Plaintiff Declares of a Lease for years in Possession
such a Day, and the Jury find the Lease to be made at another Day; this shall
be found against the Plaintiff, because it is not the same Lease. So it is,

If a Man in an Ejectione Firm, Declare of a Lease made the 5th of May, 10
Jac. Habend. from the Annunciation before for three years. And the Jury found
the Lease to be made the 15 Day of May, 10 Jac. Habend. from the Annunciation
before (being the same Lady Day) for three years: This is found against the
Plaintiff, because this was a Lease in Possession at another Day ( scilicet 15
of May) than the Plaintiff had counted, although it had the same Commencement.
But in Musgraves's Case it was, The Lease in the Declaration was a Lease made
the 5 of May, 10 Jac. Habend. from the Feast of the Annunciation then last past
for 21 years extunc scilicet, from the Feast of the Annunciation next ensuing.
But the Lease found by the Jury, was a Lease made the said 5 of May, 10 Jac.
per Indent. bearing Date the said 5 Day of May, Anno 10 Jac. Habend. from the
Feast of the Annunciation beat Marie Virginis tunc ultimo preterito pro
termino 21 annorum prox sequen' dat' dicte Indenture. It was adjudged pro Quer.
and so affirmed in a Writ of Error. But I conceive this Case is best reported
by Allen. The Plaintiff declared, That J. S. the 5 of May, 10 Jac. demised a
House to him, Habend. from the Feast of the Annunciation last past, for 21
years extunc prox. sequend. and the Defendant the same 5 Day of May ejected
him. And upon Not Guilty the Jury found, that J. S. the said 5 of May by
Indenture bearing Date the 4 of May, demised the House to the Plaintiff Habend.
from the Feast of the Annunciation last past, for 21 years next ensuing the
Date hereof fully to be complete and ended. And upon the Verdict the Plaintiff
had Judgment, which was affirmed in Scaccario. The Term began from the Feast of
the Annunciation, in Computation of the 21 years, and on the 5 of May, in point
of Interest, Allen p. 77.

In Pope and Skinner's Case, The Plaintiff must make his Title truly.
The Plaintiff Declares of a Lease made to him the 30 Day of March, 11 Jac.
Habend. from the Feast of the Annunciation next before for a year. The
Defendant Traverseth the Lease modo and forma. The Jury find a Lease to the
Plaintiff on the 25 Day of March for one year, from thence next ensuing: This
is against the Plaintiff, for being in Ejectione Firm, he Demands and Recovers
the Term, and therefore must make his Title. Aliter, in Replevin, Hob. page 73.
Pope and Skinner.

Ejectment of a Lease made the 12 of December, Habend* a primo die. On Not
guilty, The Jury found a Lease made in haec verba, which was dated the 1 of
December, Hab. from henceforth, but delivered the 12 of December. It was
objected, That from the Day of the Date, and from henceforth are several
Commencements, for the one begins the Day it was Sealed, the other the Day
after. Habend. hence forth.
But per Cur. They are both one, being a computation of time from the time
past; and both shall be pleaded to begin from the Day of the Date, when the
Lease is afterward Sealed at another Day; and if the Lease be made the 1 of
December, Hab. henceforth, the Ejectment may be alleged the same Day. Aliter,
If it be a die datus. Pro Quer. Cr. Jac. 258. Lewellin versus Williams.

Verdict finds, The Averment of the Estate Tail to be found.
that the Lessor of the Plaintiff was seized in Tail of the Rectory, etc. and
does not show the beginning of the Estate Tail, which is the particular Estate.
Per Cur. It is an apparent fault, Cr. Eliz. 407. Baker and Searle.

In the said Case where the Party comes in by a Limitation of an Use, Where
when the party comes in by Limitation of Use* it must say, vigore stat.
the Verdict says, virtute cujus dimissionis, and it ought to have been and
virtute Statut. Per Cur. This is an apparent fault in Substance and Form.

The Issue in Ejectment was, if Julian the Wife of the Defendant was alive at
such a time; Diversity of names.
and the Jury found, that Jenimet the Wife of the Defendant was alive at such a
time. Per Cur. They shall not be adjudged one and the same Person, without
finding also by the Custom of the Country, that Women baptized by the name of
Julian, have beenalso called Jenimet, Moor 411. No. 560. Huntbach and Shepard.

Verdict as to Baron and Feme.
In Ejectione Firm against Baron and Feme. On Not guilty pleaded, and a Venire
fac' granted, the Jury found the Wife Note guilty, and found a Special Verdict
as to the Husband, Wife sound Not guilty, and Special Verdict as to the Husband.
which Special Verdict is afterward adjudged insufficient by the Court. A
Venire fac' de novo shall be awarded for both, as well for the Wife as the
Husband, and upon this new Writ the Wife may be found Guilty, because the
Record and Issue is entire; and for this their Verdict is insufficient in all
and void, 2 Rolls Abr. 722. Langly and Pain. Venire de novo.
So in Swan's Case, Styles 412. Ejectment against Baron and Feme, and the Feme
is found Ejector by the Verdict, and nothing is found concerning the Husband,
and a Venire fac' de novo was awarded, unless they will agree to amend the
Verdict according to the Notes,

Where, and in what Cafes Special Verdicts may be amended.
Where a Special Verdict is not entered according to the Notes, Record of a
Special Verdict amended.
the Record may be amended, and made agree with the Notes at any time, though it
be 3 or 4 Terms after it is entered, 4 Rep. 52. 8 Rep. 162. Cr. Car. 145.

And where a Verdict is certainly given at the Trial, and uncertainly returned
by the Clerk of the Assizes, Postea where amended.
etc. the postea may be amended, upon the Judges certifying the truth, how the
Verdict was given, Cr. Car. 338.

The Plaintiff was Nonsuited at the Assizes, Nonsuit ^o^ default of Warrant
to try the Cause not Recorded.
for default of the Warrant of the Justices to try the Cause, ( viz.) for not
confessing Lease Entry and Ouster, and prayed that the Nonsuit might not be
Recorded, which the Court granted, and an Alias Distringas, 1 Keb. 508. Pits
and Viner, Cro. Car. 203. Aquila Wicke's Case.

If the Plaintiff makes Title upon a Demise made by Tho. Bill and Agnes his
Wife, and the Parties are at Issue, and the Record of Nisi prius was entered by
the Clerk, that the said Tho. Bill, and Anne his Wife made the Demise, Record
of Nisi prius, variance from the Roll not amendable.
etc. so that the Record of Nisi prius differs from the Roll; this shall not be
amended, for if the Record should be amended, the Jury should be attaint, in as
much as they found a Lease made by Tho. Bill and Agnes his Wife; and
peradventure this Lease will not prove a Lease, by Tho. Bill and Anne his Wife,
1 Rolls Abr. 202. King and King.

CHAP. XIII.
Where the Defendant shall have Costs, and Damages. How the Plaintiff may aid
himself by Release of Damage. Executor not to pay Costs. Lessor of the
Plaintiff to pay Cost. Where Tenant in Possession liable to pay Costs or not.
Feme to pay Costs on Death of her Husband. Infant Lessor to pay Costs of the
Writ of Enquiry. The Entry. Writ of Error Lies upon the Judgment, before the
Writ of Enquiry, and why. Writ of Enquiry how abated.

The Jury are to find Costs and Damages in Debt, Trespass, Ejectment, etc,
IF the Plaintiff mistake his Declaration, Regular.
the Defendant shall have Costs. The Plaintiff may relinquish his Damages,
where part of the Action fails, and take Judgment for the other. Release of
Damages.
And so is the Rule, If part of the things Demanded in this Action are well
demanded, and part of the things demanded are not well demanded, and Verdict is
given for the Plaintiff for the whole, and entire Damages are given, The
Plaintiff may release all the Damages in that which is not demanded, and pray
Judgment for the Residue; and this shall aid Error if Judgment be given
accordingly. As in Ejectione Firm of a Message, Cottage and Tenement, if it
be found for the Plaintiff, and entire Damages given for the whole, because
Ejectione Firm does not lie of a Tenement, the Plaintiff may release all the
Damages, because it is entire, and have Judgment for all the Land saving the
Tenement; and this shall not be Erroneous. So in Ejectment of Land, and de
liberate Pischarie, for libera Pischaria, which is not good, the Plaintiff may
Release all the Damages, and have Judgment for the Land only, although he cannot
be said properly to Release Damages, as to the Pischary where none were, Godb.
page 354. No. 439. 1 Rolls Abr. 786. Clive and Vere. 1 Rolls Abr. 784, 786.
Retorick and Chapel.

Ejectment was for Entry into a Message sive tenementum, and 4 Acres of Land
to the same belonging. As to the Message sive tenementum, The Declaration is
uncertain, and if the Damages are Released, Warranty.
the Costs are gone also. It is uncertain to which the 4 Acres belong, i. e. to
the Message or Tenement. But per Cur. as to the 4 Acres its certain enough,
and the words (to the same belonging) are merely void, 3 Leon. p. 228. Wood and
Pain.

In Ejectment Judgment is against the Defendant who dies, Executors not to pay
Costs.
and his Executor brings a Writ of Error and is Nonsuited. He shall not pay
Costs; an Executor is not within the Statute for paying of Costs, Occasion
dilationis, Mod. Rep. 77.

In Ejectment against 2. A. B. they prayed to be made Defendants, and were so,
confessing Lease, Entry and Ouster, and at the Trial A. confessed so much as
was in his Possession for certain; but B. would not proceed with him, and the
Plaintiff was Nonsuit against both. He that tried it prayed Costs, which the
Court granted, but they must join in the Suit of Execution for Costs, 2 Keb.
219. Sir Cyril Wych's Case.

The Lessor of the Plaintiff in Ejectment shall be liable to Costs, Feme liable
to pay Costs on Baron Death.
the Lease being made by Baron and Feme; on his Death she is liable as well as
other Joyntenant Surviving, 1 Keb. 827. Morgan and Stapel's Case.

The Lessor of the Plaintiff by several Rules of Court on Demand, The Lessor of
the Plaintiff where to pay Costs.
ought to pay Costs upon the Insufficiency, or Skulking of the Plaintiff in
Ejectment, 1 Keb. 17.

The Lessor of the Plaintiff is liable to pay Costs (though he shall never be
forced to give Security for them) but the Lessor of a Tenant in Possession is
not liable to Costs, because though he may come in gratis and defend his Title,
Tenant in Possession liable to pay Costs by the Law.
yet the Tenant in Possession, is only liable to pay Costs by the Law. But only
by the Course of the Court, unless the Trial be by the Lessors means brought to
the Bar, and then he shall never have a second Trial at Bar, before he has
paid the Costs of the former Trial; but yet the Court for Non-payment of Costs,
will not hinder proceedings in the Country. Per Cur. 1 Keb. 106. Latham's Case.

Note, In Judgment against his own Ejector, no Cost to be paid by the Tenant in
Possession.
Upon a Judgment against his own Ejector in defalt of confessing Lease, Entry
and Ouster according to Rule of Court, without Special Rule no Costs shall be
paid, by H. The Tenant in Possession that made the defalt, etc. Contra, upon
Trial had against H. because the Plaintiff has the Benefit of the Suit, viz.
Judgment against his own Ejector, whereby he may recover the Possession, 1 Keb.
242.

Verdict was for the Defendant, Allegation by the Plaintiff to save his Cost,
not allowed.
and the Plaintiff to save his Costs, alleged, That the Venue was misawarded,
and that there was a Fault in the Declaration; but resolved per Cur' the
Defendant shall have his Costs, 2 Rolls Rep. 327: Pritchard and Reynell. Palmer
365. mesme Case,

The Plaintiff in Ejectment was nonsuited, The Plaintiff not to take advantage
of his own insufficient Declaration.
which was recorded, and the Defendant sued for Costs upon the Stat. 4. Jac. c.
3. The Plaintiff alleges insufficiency in his own Declaration to avoid Costs
upon the Words of the Stat. That in Ejectione Firm and every other Action
where the Plaintiff might recover Costs, etc. If it had been found for him,
that then upon Nonsuit, etc. in every such Action the Defendant shall have
Judgment to recover Costs against him; and the Plaintiff pretends in such
Action he cannot recover where the Declaration is not sufficient. But per Cur'
there is no reason the Plaintiff should take Advantage of his insufficient
Declaration, Palmer's Rep. 147. Dove and Knapp.

Debt was brought on the Stat. Costs on Stat. 8 Eliz. on Nonsuit, and the Stat.
mistaken.
of 8 Eliz. for Costs in an Ejectione Firm, the Plaintiff being nonsuited,
supposing the Statute to be made ad Parliamentum tentum 8 Eliz. whereas the
Parliament began Anno quinto, and by Prorogation was held in 8 Eliz. so it
ought to have been ad Sessionem Parliamenti tent' Anno octavo Eliz. and ruled
to be ill, Cro. Jac. 111. Ford and Hunter.

If no Continuance be entered, Costs for want of Continuances entered.
then a Discontinuance may be entered, and he may recover Costs in Ejectment, 2
Bulstr. 63.

Per Stat. When Nonsuit shall be for want of a Declaration.
13 Car. 2. c. 11. Nonsuit shall be for want of a Declaration before the end o^
the next Term after Appearance, and Judgment and Costs against the Plaintiff,
Stat^ 13 Car. 2. c. 11.

In all personal Actions, and in Ejection Firm for Lands, etc. depending by
Origin^^ Writ, There need not be 15 days between the Teste-day and Day of
Retorn.
after any Issue therein joined, an^ also after any Judgment had or obtained,
there shall not need to be Fifteen Days between the Teste-day and Day of Retorn
o^ any Writ of Venire fac', Habeas Corpus, Juratt' Distringas Jurat', Fiere
fac' or Cap' ad sat', and the Writ of Fifteen days between the Teste-day and
the day of Retorn of any such Writ, shall not be assigned for Error, Stat. 13
Car. 2. c. 11.

Infant Lessor in Ejectment shall pay Costs 3 Keb. Infant Lessor pays Costs.
347. Masten and King.

Upon a Verdict against all Evidence the Court will tax Costs, and will not
suspend it till a new Trial, 1 Keb. 294.

If the Defendant, whose Title is concerned in an Ejectione Firm, will not
defend his Title to the Lands in Question, and the Verdict do pass against the
Plaintiff, the Ejector may release the Damages, Pr. Reg. 100.

Note, This Rule, as to paying of Costs, if a Man had a Verdict in Ejectment,
The sole Remedy for Costs in the first Trial is by Attachment, unless the
second Trial be in the same Court after a Verdict.
and Costs taxed, and an Attachment for not paying them; and whereas he cannot
procure them of him who ought to pay them, he sues the same Party for the same
thing again in an other Court, and he shows this by Motion, and prays he may
not proceed till Costs paid; yet the Court will not grant it, but he ought to
resort to the Remedy of the Process of the Court where he recovered for these
Costs; and so it is if it was in the same Court for Costs for not going on to
Trial; but if it were for Costs after a Verdict in the same Court, there upon
Affidavit of this, it is good Cause to stay the second Trial for the same thing,
unless the Costs of the first be paid, Sid. p. 229. Austin and Hood.

Upon a Trial at Bar in Ejectment where two were made Defendants, Where Costs
are confessed on Lease, Entry and Ouster, etc. and that the other did not.
and had entered into the Common Rule; and at the Trial one appeared and
confessed Lease, Entry and Ouster, but the other did not; and after Evidence
given, the Plaintiff was Nonsuited, and Costs taxed for the Defendants. Per
Cur' both these Defendants are entitled to the Costs, and he that did not
appear, might release them to the Plaintiff. But the Court said, If there
should appear to be Covin between the Lessor of the Plaintiff and the
Defendant, who did appear to release the Costs, they would correct such
Practice when it should be made to appear, 2 Ventr. 2. W. and M. Fagge and
Roberts.

Berkley had Judgment in Ejectione Firm in C. B. and Execution of his Damages
and Costs. Foot brings Error, and the Judgment is affirmed; whereupon B. prays
his Costs for Delay and Charges, but could not have them, for no Costs were in
such Case at Common Law. And Stat. 3 H. 7. c. 10. gives them only where Error
is brought in delay of Execution, and here though he had not Execution of the
Term, yet he had it of his Cost, 1 Ventr. 124.

Adminstrator brought a Writ of Errorupon a Judgment given in Ejectment against
the Intestate. Per Cur' he shall pay no Costs, though the Judgment was affirmed,
and the Writ brought in Dilatione executionis, 1 Ventr.

Writ of Inquiry.
It was assigned for Error, That a Writ of Enquiry of Damages was awarded, and
no day given to any of the Parties to be there at the time of the Retorn; The
Entry.
for the Entry ought to be, Ideo dies datus partibus praedictis, or at least to
the Plaintiff, that so he might then pray his Judgment, sed non allocat', for
the Defendant is not to have day, and the Plaintiff is to attend at his Peril;
and so is the Course of the Common Pleas, aliter in the King's Bench, Cro. El.
p. 144. Matthew and Hassel.

E. in Ejectione Firm had Judgment by Default against the Defendant; whereupon
a Writ of Enquiry issues out to enquire of the Damages, and before the Retorn
thereof the Defendant brought a Writ of Error, the Question was, Whether the
Writ of Error were well brought, in regard the Course of the Common Pleas is
not to make up the Judgment, until the Writ of Enquiry be returned. Rolls said,
A Writ of Error may be brought before the Writ of Enquiry be returned in
Ejectione Firm, for in that Action the Judgment is complete at the Common Law
before it be returned; for the Judgment is but to gain Possession, and so it is
in a Writ of Dower. But in an Action of Trespass where Damages are only to be
recovered, there the Judgment is not perfect, till the Writ of Enquiry be
returned, nor can be made up, as in this Case it may. But in regard that here
is no complete Judgment, for there is no Capias, which ought to be in all
Actions Quare vi and armis, that the King may have his Fine, which else he
cannot have, if the Party do not proceed in his Writ of Enquiry, the Writ of
Error is brought too soon, and you may proceed to Execution in the Common
Pleas, for the complete Record is not here. Afterward in another Case Rolls
was of Opinion, That it was a perfect Judgment; and it is in your Power (said
he to the Defendant's Council) whether you will have a Writ of Enquiry or not;
and if the Judgment be affirmed here upon the Writ of Error brought, you may
have a Writ of Enquiry in B. R. the Council therefore moved for a Certiorari.
Rolls, take it, but it will do you no good, for the Judgment is well, Styles
Rep. Glide and Dudenu's Case. p. 122. Crook and Sanny. Styles 127. The Writ of
Error lies upon the Judgment before the Retorn of the Writ of Enquiry, and why.


This Point is settled now in both Courts. In Ejectione Firm if the Plaintiff
recover by Nihil dicit, in which Judgment is given, that the Plaintiff shall
recover his Term, and a Writ is awarded to enquire of Damages, a Writ of Error
lies upon this Judgment before the Retorn of the Writ of Enquiry of Damages,
and Judgment upon it, for the Judgment is perfect as to the Recovery of the
Term before by the first Judgment, and the Plaintiff may presently have
Execution for the Possession; and peradventure he never will have Judgment for
the Damages, and so the Defendant shall be ousted of his Possession sans
Remedy. So it is if a Man recover in Ejectione Firm by Confession, or non sum
informatus, or Demurrer, a Writ of Error lies before the Damages taxed by Writ
of Enquiry, 1 Rolls p. 750, 751. Newton and Terry, Taverner and Fawcet, Booth
and Errington. 5 Rep. Wymarth, and House and Layton. Latch. p. 212.

Council prayed Abatement of a Writ of Enquiry on 16 and 17 Car. Abatement by
Death after Judgment or pendant Error, but not after Affirmance.
2. c. 8. by Affidavit of Cesty que vie's Death after the Judgment two days;
and by the Act from the Judgment affirmed in Error, which was a Term after,
which the Court granted. But it were better the mean Profits were recoverable
in Ejectment by the same Verdict. Wild held this should be given in Evidence on
the Writ of Enquiry, but being no Bar but in mitigation, that is not
sufficient; and it was staid, Warren and Orpwood. M. 25 Car. 2. B. R. 3 Keb. p.
218.

CHAP. XIV.
Of Judgment in Ejectment and Execution. The Form of entering Judgment in this
Action. How the Entry is when part is for the Plaintiff, and part against him.
How against several Ejectors. The Form of the Entry in case of Death of the
Plaintiff or Defendant. After Verdict and before Judgment the Plaintiff dies.
Ejectment for the whole, and no Title but to a Moiety. For what Causes
Judgments in Ejectment are arrestable or erroneous. In what Cases Judgment
shall be amended. Of Judgment against ones own Ejector.

NO Judgment in Ejectment till Latitat filed, Note,
and Bail, 2 Keb. 743.

The Form of entering Judgments in this Action.
In Cr. Quod recuperet possessionem termini.
El. 144. Matthew and Hassel's Case. It was assigned for Error, That the
Judgment was, Quod recuperet possessionem termini praedict', where it should
be, Quod recuperet terminum; for as in a Real Action he is to recover Seisin,
so in a Personal he is to recover Possession, and the Writ is habere fac'
possessionem, 1 Leon. p. 175. mesme Case.

All the Course of Entries, How the Entry is when part is made pro Quer', and
part against.
when part is found for the Plaintiff, and part against him, is to enter only,
Quod Def. eat inde sine die quoad, etc. whereof he is acquitted. It was Tailor
and Woldboro's Case, Cr. El. 768. Error of a Judgment in Ejectment was brought,
because the Defendant was found Not guilty quoad a third part; and the Judgment
is entered thereupon, Quod Def. eat inde sine die and quer 'in misericordia,
etc. whereas it ought to have been, Quod le Plaintiff nil capiat per Billam for
that third part, sed non allocat^r causa qua supra, Cro. El. 768. and the Court
would have affirmed the Judgment, but because the Plaintiff had not appeared
that Term, they caused him to be nonsuited.

In 1 Rolls Rep. Quod Def. sit quietus.
51. Error was assigned because the Judgment in Ejectione Firm in Wales was
Quod Def. sit quietus, such Judgment being only given in a Writ of Right and
such Actions which are final; but this Action is not final, and the Judgment
should be Quod Def. eat inde sine die, Sir William Morris and Cadwallader's
Case.

In Ejectione Firm, Quod Def. remaneat indefens'.
if upon Non sum informatus pleaded, Judgment be given, Quod Def. remaneat
indefensus, without saying versus querent', yet its good, 1 Rolls Abr. 772.
Fiegot and Mallory.

Ejectment was against several Defendants, Against several Ejectors.
etc. they were fined severally, where the Ejectment was against them all
jointly; but because they were found several Ejectors of several Parcels, the
Judgment was good (scilicet) quilibet capiatur quoad his Parcel; and if it had
not been joint, it had not been been sufficient, Bendl. 83. Darcy and Mason.

The Plaintiff shall be in Misericordia but once. The Plaintiff shall be in
Misericordia but once.
As Ejectment with Force, three of the Defendants were found Guilty of the
House, and ten Acres of Land, and Not guilty for the Residue. The fourth
Defendant is found Not guilty generally. And Judgment was entered, That he
should recover his Term in the House and ten Acres of Land, and Costs against
the three Defendants, and that the said three Defendants capiantur, and that
they be acquitted quoad residuun, and that the Plaintiff quoad the three
Defandants pro falso clamore for so much as they were acquitted; and pro falso
clamore, against the fourth Defendant, sit in Misericordia. Its good enough,
and the course, that the Plaintiff in such Cases be in Misericordia but once,
which is specially entered, Crok. Car. 178. Dockrow's Case.

In Croke and Sam's Case, Styles 122. 346. The Judgments was, ideo considerat'
est quoth. recuperet, and there wants, and Def. capiatur, it is Erroneous.

Form of the Entry in Case of the Death of the Plaintiff or Defendant.
Note, That 3 Plaintiffs in Ejectment were, and on general Issue it was found
for the Plaintiffs. One of the Plaintiffs died during a Curi: advisare.
And 4 days after the Verdict given, was moved to stay Judgment, a Special
matter in Law, whereof the Justices were not resolved, and gave day over, and
in the mean time one of the Plaintiffs died. This shall not stay Judgment, for
the Postea came in 15 Pas. which was the 16 of April, at which Day the Court
ought to give Judgment presently. But Cur. advisare vult, and on the 19 of
April one of the Plaintiffs died, and the favor of the Court shall not
prejudice; for the Judgment shall have relation to the 16 day of April, at
which time he was alive, 1 Leon. 187. Isley's Case.

In Ejectment two Defendants were found Guilty, The Death of one Defendant
shall not abate the Writ.
and the other not. The one that is Not guilty dies, The Plaintiff shave
Judgment against the other: So it is, if he that is Dead had been Guilty,
because this Writ is but as a Trespass, where the Death of one Defendant shall
not abate the Writ, Moor 469. 673. Griffith and Lawrence's Case.

Ejectione Firm against Baron and Feme. Ejectione Baron and Feme, Baron dies.
And Verdict pro Quer. and after between the Verdict and day in Banco the Baron
dies, and therefore the Court in Lee and Rowley's Case, 1 Rolls Rep. 14.
advised the Plaintiff to relinquish this Action, and only to enter the Verdict
for Evidence; for if Judgment is given against the Defendant, and one is dead
at the time of the Judgment, then this will be Erroneous, per Dodderidge and
Mann Preignotary. But Coke said, The Plaintiff may make allegation that the
Husband is dead, and shall have Judgment against the Wife. And it has been
adjudged lately, Ejectment against Baron and Feme, which are but one person in
Law; yet, if the Husband dies, the Suit shall proceed against the Wife, Hardr.
61. But in Rigley and Lee's Case, Cr. Jac. 356. Ejectment against Baron and
Feme, after Verdict Baron dies before the day in Banco, because it is in the
nature of a Trespass, and the Feme is charged for her own fact. Per Cur. The
Action continues against the Wife, and Judgment shall be entered against
herself, because the Baron was dead.

Ejectment against diverse, Record where not to be amended.
all plead Not guilty; and diverse Continuances were between them all, where
revera, one of the Defendants was dead after Issue joined, and a Verdict was
after found pro Quer. and the Record was moved to be amended. Per Cur. we
cannot do it: After Verdict and before Judgment the Plaintiff may surmise, that
the Defendant was dead before the Verdict and Continuance was against him, One
Defendent dies after Issue joined.
as in full Life, Jones 410. Sir John Fitzherbert versus Leech. And

In Ejectment to try the Custom of Copyhold. Suggestion entered on the Roll, one
Defendant being dead after Nonsuit.
The Plaintiff was Nonsuit, and one of the Defendants being dead. Hales Chief
Justices, advised to Enter a Suggestion on the Roll that one was dead; else the
Judgment for the Defendants on the Nonsuit, will be Erroneous as to all, M. 23
Car. 2. B. R. Hawthorn and Bawdan.

Ejectment was brought against seven, Ejectment against seven, and one dies
hanging the Writ and Error brought.
one dies, hanging the Writ; and the Judgment was given against the six,
without speaking any thing of the seventh, where the Judgment ought to be
against them that were in Life, and a nil cap. as to him that was dead.
Otherwise, there is a variance between the Writ and Judgment: And a Writ of
Error was brought, but it was not well brought; for the seventh joined in the
Writ of Error, which was ad grave damnum of all the seven. But had it been
omitted ad grave damnum of him that was dead, it had been good, 2 Rolls Rep.
20. Bethell and Parry, Pal. 152. Mesme Case.

In Hide and Markham's Case it was Ruled, After Verdict and before Judgment the
Plaintiff dies and Judgment his given for him the same Term.
That if one bring Ejectione Firm in B. R. and there had a Verdict in a Trial
at Bar; and after, before Judgment he dies, and after the Judgment is given for
him the same Term; this is not Error, for that the Judgment shall relate to the
Verdict. But if the Verdict pass against the Plaintiff at the Nisi prius, and
after, before the Day in Bank he dies, and after Judgment is against him; this
is Error, for as much as Judgment is given against a dead Man, 1 Rolls Abr.
768. and Jurdan's Case, ibid.

The Plaintiff in Ejectment dies. 'The Plaintiff dies after Verdict and
Judgment was not staid and why.
Addison's Case, Mod. Rep. 252. Yet as that case was the Court would not stay
Judgment, for between the Lessor of the Plaintiff and the Defendant, there was
another Cause depending, and tried at the same Assizes when this Issue was
tried, and by Agreement between the Parties, the Verdict in that Cause was
drawn up, but agreed it should ensue the Determination of this Verdict, and the
Title go accordingly: Now the submission to this Rule was an implicit
Agreement, not to take advantage of such occurrences as the death of the
Plaintiff, whom we know no ways to be concerned in point of Interest and many
times but an imaginary person. ( Per Cur. We take no notice judicially, that
the Lessor of the Plaintiff is the Party interested, What notice the Court
takes of the Lessor of the Plaintiff.
and therefore we punish the Plaintiff, if he Release the Action, or Release
the Damages.) It was said too in behalf of the Judgment, That there was a Man
of the same name in the County with him that was made Plaintiff: And by the
Court that is sufficient, and the Court shall intend it to be him, were there
any one of the same name in rerum natura.

It is said in Cooper and Franklin's Case. Ejectment for the whole, and a Title
but to a Moiety, Judgment shall be for the whole.
If one brings Ejectione Firm for the whole, having Title but to a Moiety,
that i^ has been adjudged against Bracebridges's Case, in Plowd. He shall have
Judgment for a Moiety, 3 Bulstr. 185.

In what Cases, and for what Causes Judgments in Ejectment are Arrestable or
Erroneous.
In Savern and Smith's Case, Judgment for the whole where it ought to be for a
Moiety.
Judgment was de integris tenementis, where it ought to have been for a Moiety;
The Judgment was given for the whole, and entire Damages assessed by the Jury.
Its Error, Croke Car. 7.

The Declaration was, Quoth. per Indentur. dimisit decimas garbar. Rectorie de,
etc. una cum quodam horreo and gardino eidem Rectorie pertin. And the Judgment
on Demurrer on the Plea was, Ideo, etc. quoth. praed. Querens recuperet verse.
praefat Def. terminum suum praedict. adhuc ventur' de and in Rectoria horreo
and gardino praed. More Damages found than the Plaintiff counts.
cum pertin. and damna sua. And more Damages is found in the return of the
Inquisition, than the Plaintiff counts. And the entire Rectory was not Let, and
no Term supposed in it in the Declaration, but in the said three particulars,
and no express Judgment is given for the Tithes and Damages are assessed for
the expulsion of the entire Parsonage, of which there was no complaint. It
seems its Erroneous, Dyer 258. Plow. 19. 1 Bulstr. 49. 10 Rep. 117. 3 Cr. 544.

Ejectione Firm was brought against four, Against Guardian and Infant quoth.
capiantur.
whereof one was an Infant, and appeared by his Guardian, and Verdict was pro
Quer. and Judgment against them quod capiantur. But no such Judgment ought to
be against an Infant, and its Error, and Judgment was reversed, Cr. Jac. 274.
Holbrook and Doyle's Case.

C. Infant appeared be Attorney
One of the Defendants at the time of the Judgment, was within Age, and
appeared by Attorney, where it ought to have been by his Guardian, the Judgment
being upon Verdict. Per Cur. Its Error; and in regard Damages and Costs are
entire, the Judgment shall be reversed for both, by the Stat. 21 Jac. 13.
Judgment shall not be Arrested, for that the Plaintiff in any Ejectione Firm,
or in any personal Action being under Age did appear by Attorney, and the
Verdict did pass for him.

Judgment was reverst in Error of a Judgment in C. B. Not severing and entire
Damages.
in not severing for what part by number of Acres by Special Verdict, and
giving entire Damages to the Plaintiff, 2 Keb. 250. M^^kworth and Thomasin.

Ejectione Firm was against Baron and Feme: Versus Baron and Feme quod
capiantur, though the Baron be found Not guilty.
On Not guilty pleaded, the Feme was found guilty, and the Baron Not guilty;
and the Judgment was against Baron and Feme, quod capiantur. This was assigned
for Error, but the Plaintiff had Judgment, for so are all the Presidents: But
in the Writ it was vi and armis, Vi and armis left out in the Declaration.
and in the Declaration vi and armis was left out; and for this cause Judgment
was reversed, Cro. Car. 406. Mayo's Case.

In Ejectione Firm, Writ of Enquiry of Damages, without saying, Quod capiatur.
if Judgment be given upon Demur, or by Default, or on Non sum informat for the
Plaintiff to recover the Term, but it is awarded that there shall be a Writ of
Enquiry of Damages, without saying, Quod capiatur, this is erroneous; for it
may be, he will never enquire of the Damages, and make Retorn of it; and then
the Fine due upon the Capiatur will be lost, 1 Rolls Abr. 769.

Note, On Not guilty pleaded, Issue is joined, and a Special Verdict found, and
upon this Verdict Judgment given against the Plaintiff, and after the Plaintiff
brings a Writ of Error, Plaintiff brings a Writ of Error, and the Judgment is
reversed. What Judgment he shall have.
and in this the Judgment is reversed, the Plaintiff shall have Judgment to
recover his Term, his Declaration being good, and the Law being for him on the
Special Verdict: For the Court which reverseth the first Judgment, ought to
give the same Judgment which was given in the first Suit, 1 Rolls Abr. 774.
Omalcowr and Eyres.

Note also, If before Judgment the Years of the Lease expire, the Plaintiff had
Judgment to recover Damages; Before Judgment the Lease expires, the Plaintiff
shall have Judgment for Damages.
otherwise in Actions where Freehold is to be recovered, Savile 28.

In what Cases Judgments shall be amended.
The Jury find the Defendant guilty of Ten Acres, Twenty Acres entered for ten
Acres.
and the Judgment was entered of Twenty Acres, the Judgment was amended, Winch.
p. 8.

If on Non culp' pleaded, a Verdict is for the Plaintiff, and Costs and Damages
given; and upon this the Judgment is, Quod quer' recuperet the Damages and
Costs, and not quod recuperet terminum, Quod recuperet terminum left out.
as the use is; this is the Default of the Clerk, and so amendable, 1 Rolls
Abr. 206. Belsh and Pate.

The Clerk of the Entries of the Judgments had mistaken the Parcels, Variance
of Parcels.
the Jury having found several Ejectments in several Parcels, they find S. had
ejected him out of certain Parcels by a certain Name, Amendment.
and T. had ejected him out of other Parcels by a certain Name, and mistook
that S. had ejected him out of the Parcels that T. had ejected him, having the
Distringas for his Direction. But it was amended, for the Entry was, quod
recuperet versus S. unum Messuagium, etc. which was the Ejectment made by T.
and so vice versa; whereas the Court's Judgment was, quod Judicium intretur pro
Quer'.

In Ejectione Firm of one Message, two Cottages, and certain Lands, and the
Jury find the Defendant guilty of the Moiety of a Message and Lands, and Not
guilty of the two Cottages and of the other Moiety of the Message and Lands,
and Judgment is, quod Quer' recuperet Terminum suum praedict' de medietate
tenementorum praedictorum, and eat inde sine die for the residue; and this
Judgment, although it may be intended that Judgment is given for the Moiety of
the two Cottages, Default of the Clerk.
whereof he is found Not guilty, in as much as it is tenementorum praedictorum,
yet it shall be amended, it being only the Default of the Clerk, having the
Postea before him when he entered the Judgment, 1 Rolls Abr. 206. Sawyer and
Hoskins.

Judgment quod recuperet, and says not terminum, yet amended, 1 Keb. 155.

The Judgment was, Amendment for Misprision of the Clerk.
quod recuperet the Possession of a Message, Sixty Acres of Land, Fifty Acres
of Meadow, and Fifteen Acres of Pasture; whereas the Verdict was entered, That
he was found guilty of the Ejectment of a Message, Ten Acres of Meadow and
Thirteen Acres of Pasture, and for the residue, Not guilty; so as there is not
any Land in the Verdict, and a lesser Quantity of Meadow and Pasture than is in
the Judgment, per Curiam it is amendable, and is not like the Entry of a
Capiatur for a misericerdia, which is not amendable, that being an Error in
point of Law, and cannot be imputed to the Default of the Clerk: But here the
Verdict is the Guide to the Judgment; and when the Verdict is before the Clerk
to enter up the Judgment, it is but his Misprision, especially the Entry of the
Judgment in the Paper-book being right according to the Verdict, Cro. Jac. 632.
Mason and Stephenson.

EXECUTION.
In Ejectment against two, Two Defendants, one confesses, the other pleads Not
guilty.
one confesses, the other pleads Not guilty, and at the Trial the Plaintiff is
Nonsuited, he cannot take Execution against him that confesses, but if by Rule
of Court one be made Defendant for part and confess, the Plaintiff
notwithstanding the Nonsuit, may take Judgment against him that confesses for
his part; but if each Defendant take upon him the whole Title, the Plaintiff in
any case cannot have Execution; but one Defendant being Lessor of the House,
reserving a Chamber, who never had any notice of the Action, and therefore
Judgment entered of the whole House, is not void quoad the Chamber only, but
wholly. And Hide would have had the Attorney who entered Judgment, pay Costs,
but ordered Possession to be delivered to the Tenant on Agreement to relinquish
the Costs, 1 Keb. 786. Burgoigne and Thomas.

It was a Question much debated, If a Scire fac' quare Executionem habere non
debeat upon a Judgment in Ejectione Firm, may be brought by the Administrator
of the Lessee (the Plaintiff in Ejectment, Scire fac' upon Judgment in
Ejectment may be brought by the Administrator of the Lessee, or Lessor himself.
or by the Lessor himself) against the Free Tenants; and Per Cur' the Lessee or
his Administrator, as well as the Lessor himself shall have this Writ in such a
Case; this was on demurrer to the Scire fac': Yet the Lessee nor his
Administrator shall have it, but the Lessor himself, Sid. 317. Cole and Skinner.

Note, Recovery by the Husband in Ejectione of the Wife's Term.
Baron and Feme are ejected out of a Term in the Right of the Wife, and the
Husband recovers in Ejectione Firm brought by him in his own Name, this is an
alteration of the Term, and vests it in him only, 1 Inst. 46.

Note, After Judgment Court of Equity not to relieve the Mortgagor.
It was adjudged in Throgmorton and Sir Moyle Finch's Case, That after Judgment
for the Mortgagee in Ejectment, a Court of Equity cannot relieve the Mortgagor;
but he ought to have preferred his Bill before Judgment, 3 Bulstr. 118. The
Case was, He by whom the Money was sent to be paid for the Redemption of the
Land, was by the way robbed of the Money; but the Money was paid presently
after.

Note also, No Judgment upon Nihil dicit, but upon Motion in Court.
In Ejectione Firm, if a Rule is given to the Defendant to answer, and he does
not; and upon this another Rule is given to answer peremptorily, and he fails
to do it, no Judgment shall be entered against him on a Nihil dicit, but upon
Motion in Court.

It is said in Carter and Claypool's Case, 1 Rolls Abr. 887. If a Man recover
in Ejectione Firm against J. S. who after dies, he must sue Execution against
his Heir; for by Intendment J. S. his Ancestor the Ejector, was was a Disseisor.

Of Judgment against ones own Ejector.
Judgment against the casual Ejector, Council prayed that he might not plead to
the Declaration of Michaelmas Term on Lease of the Bishop of Worcester, made
this January Habend' from the 20th of October last, which is ill, per Cur', and
Judgment stayed; but this is a good Declaration of this Term by new Delivery,
Declaration is of that Term when the Tenant appears.
though of Course a Declaration is of that Term always when the Tenant appears,
which was but this Term, yet Judgment stayed, 3 Keb. 729. Hill. 18. Car. 2.
Finch and Pley.

The Action was of Easter Term, and the Demise and Title of the Plaintiff is
but two days before Trinity Term, A Trick to gain possession.
and there was a Rule for Judgment against the casual Ejector; per Cur' this is
but a Trick to gain Possession, as Sir Richard Mincham's Case was, who
delivered Ejectments in his Wife's Lifetime on Lease then when he had Title as
of subsequent Term when she was dead; and it is not fit to put the Tenant to a
Writ of Error: So the Rule was set aside, and ordered a new Declaration, 3 Keb.
343. Tr. 26 Car. 2. Stedman's Case.

Judgment against ones own Ejector cannot be entered, When Judgment against ones
own Ejector to be entered.
till the Postea returned and indorsed, that the Nonsuit was for want of
confessing Lease, Entry and Ouster, which the Secondaries agreed for a Rule, 1
Keb. 246. Sir Hugh Middleton's Case.

Council prayed Judgment against his own Ejector in an Action for Lands in the
County Palatine of Chester, Judgment against ones own Ejector for Lands in Com'
Chester.
which the Court granted; because when the Defendant has pleaded to Issue,
they may try it by Mittimus in the County Palatine, 2 Keb. 135. Reddish against
Smith.

CHAP. XV. Habere facias Possessionem. 1 Keb. 579.

How this Writ is to be executed. And when, and in what Cases a new Habere
facias Possessionem, shall be granted or not. How the Sheriff is to deliver
Possession. Habere facias Possessionem, after the year without Scire fac' and
why.

THis Writ is made out by the Clerk of the Judgments, By whom made out and when.
after Costs taxed and the Judgment signed.

In Ejectione Firm of 20 Acres of Land. The Defendant on Not guilty pleaded,
is found Guilty for 10 Acres, and Not guilty for the Residue. Now the Plaintiff
at his own peril, Plaintiff at his own Peril to be put in Possession of the
Acres sound.
upon his own showing which they are, shall be put in Possession, Savil p. 28.

And if a Man bring Ejectione Firm of 40 Acres of Land, and recovers 30, and
not the Residue. Upon the Writ of Execution the Sheriff may deliver to him any,
( viz.) Three or more of the Acres in the name of the whole, How the Sheriff
must deliver it.
without setting out the Land, recovered by Metes and Bounds; though the
Plaintiff had not recovered all the Acres, whereof he brought the Action, and
whereof he had supposed the Defendant Tenant, 1 Rolls Abr. 886.

Now, How the Sheriff is to esteem the Acres.
if a Writ of Execution go to the Sheriff, to put a Man in Possession of 20
Acres of Land; the Sheriff ought to give him 20 Acres in quantity, according to
the usage of the Country, and not according to the usage of the Statute. And if
a Man recovers diverse Messuages, the Sheriff upon the Writ of Execution (may
make Execution of one in the name of all, without going to every one in
particular, Where delivery of one Message in the name of all by the Sheriff is
sufficient or not.
but (if in such Case) the Messuages be in the Possession of several Men, he
ought to go to every House particularly, and of them to deliver Seisin, and the
delivery of Seisin of one, in the name of all is not sufficient, Floid and
Bethel.

When many Acres are in demand, and but part recovered, and the Habere fac'
Possessionem comes to the Sheriff to deliver Execution of the Land recovered,
Where the Sheriff is to give all the Acres in particular.
it does not suffice there to give one Acre in the name of the whole recovered;
but he ought to set forth all the Acres particularly, so that the Recover or
may have benefit of the Judgment in certainty, and the several profits without
interruption, Pal. Rep. 289. Molinex and Fulyam.

Sometime a Rule of Court is to give Possession.
If one recover Rent or Common, How the Sheriff is to give Possession of Rent
or Common.
a Writ Issues out to the Sheriff to put him in Possession, and the Sheriff
comes upon the Land, and delivers him Seisin of the Rent or Common by parol,
this is well done, 22 Ass. 84.

Hab. fac' Possession', Habere facias Possessionem, good without return.
if execute is good without return. But the Court may command the Sheriff to
return it, 1 Rolls Rep. 77.

Note, How Possession to be given of House, Land of Rent
The Sheriff in Cases where Land is recovered, is to put the party in
Possession and Seisin by a Twig, Clod, etc. of an House by the Key, etc. of
Rent by Corn or Grass growing on the Land, out of which the Rent Issues, 6 Rep.
52.

Error was of a Judgment in the King's Bench in Ireland, and Judgment for the
Defendant was reversed, and Judgment given for the Plaintiff, quod recuperet
terminum suum praed. Habere fac. Possessionem how awarded into Ireland.
It was moved how Habere fac' possessionem should be awarded. And it was
resolved, That there should be a Writ directed to the Chief Justice in Ireland
to Reverse that Judgment, commanding him to award Execution, Cr. Car. 511.
Mulcarry and Eyres.

In what Cases a new Habere fac' Possessionem shall be granted or not, and of
the Sheriffs demeanor therein.
Nota pro Regula. That after Habere fac' possessionem executed; be it by the
Sheriff or voluntary delivery of Possession, if the Party be turned out again
by the Defendants means, Where the Plaintiff shall have a new Habere facias
Possessionem.
he may have a new Habere fac' possessionem on motion in Court, and an
Attachment against him: But if after quiet Possession others enter, he must
have a new Action or Restitution; else by this means, by practice the Plaintiff
may turn out any of his after Lessees on Non-payment of Rent. Had actual
possession been by Agreement of the Parites, or by Delivery of the Sheriff, the
Party can never after have a Habere fac' possessionem: But if there be
agreement to deliver Possession in futuro, if it be denied a new Writ may be
had. But after the year there must be a new motion for it in Court: With this
agrees Pearson and Tavernor's Case, if one recovers in Ejectment, upon which
the Recoveror was put in Possession Per Habere fac' possession, and after the
Defendant ousts him again, if the Writ was never returned (because then it
appears nor, that the Plaintiff was ever out of Possession) a new Writ shall be
granted, 1 Keb. 779. Ratliff and Tate, 1 Keb. 785. Lovelace's Case, 1 Rolls
Rep. 353. Peirson and Tavernor's Case.

It is expressly resolved in Dame Molineux and Falgam's Case, Palmer p. 289.

If Haber e facias possessionem go to the Sheriff, When the Writ of Hab. fac'
Possessionem is returned and filed the Court may not award a new Habere fac'
Possessionem, and why.
and he returned Execution of the Writ, and the Writ is filed; there the Court
may not award a new Habere fac' possessionem, but before they may, because in
the first case it appears the Party had Execution. The Council prayed, That the
Defendant might file an Habere facere possessionem to the intent that no new
one may be taken out, or that, that was taken out should not be filed after the
return of it, which the Court refused; for the Party has election to return it
or not, and may renew it at pleasure, till an effectual Execution be had;
albeit the Party had Execution, yet if there were any sudden expulsion of him,
he shall not be Estopt, 2 Keb. 245. Underhil and Devereux.

Also, New Habere facias Possessionem.
if the Sheriff give Seisin but of part, he may have new Habere fac'
possessionem for the rest.

So in Stile's Case, 2 Browl. 216. Styles upon a Judgment in Ejectione Firm,
was put into Possession by the Sheriff, by Habere fac' possessionem, and after
the Defendants enters again, and the Writ was returned but not Filed. It is at
the election of the Sheriff, whether he will return it or not.
Per Cur. He may not have a new Writ of Execution, but is put to his new
Action, and the Filing of the Writ is not material, for it is in the Election
of the Sheriff, if he will return it, or not. But if Execution had not been
fully made, as in case of persons hiding themselves in the upper Lofts, and
after the Sheriff was gone, they outed those that were in Possession, in this
Case a new Writ of Execution was awarded. But by the Chief Justice, if the
Sheriff put a Man in Possession, and after the other which was put out enter
forthwith; in this Case the Court may award an Attachment against him for
contempt against the Court, and so an Attachment was awarded upon Affidavit in
Gallop's Case, 2 Brownl. 253. To this purpose is Upton and Well's Case, 1 Leon.
p. 145. Upon the Habere fac' Possessionem, the Shereiff returned that in the
Execution of the said Writ, he took the Plaintiff with him, Where the first
Writ is not fully executed the Court will grant a new (...).
and came to the House recovered, and removed thereou^ a Woman and two
Children, which were all the persons which upon diligent search he could find
in the said House, and delivered to the Plaintiff peaceable Possession to his
thinking, and afterward departed-and immediately after three other persons,
who were secretly lodged in the said House expulsed the Plaintiff again: Upon
notice of which he returned again to the said House, to put the Plaintiff in
free Possession, but the others did resist him, so as without peril of his
Life, and of them that were with him in Company, he could not do it. And upon
this return, the Court awarded a new Writ of Execution, for that the same was
no Execution of the first Writ, and also awarded an Attachment against the
Parties, 1 Leon. 145.

If the Sheriff delivers more Acres than are in the Writ, If the Sheriff
delivers more Acres than are in the Writ.
this makes not the Writ Erroneous, but Action on the Case lies against the
Sheriff for doing it; but if the Writ of Hab. fac. possessionem contains more
Acres of Land, than were in the Declaration, the Writ is Erroneous.

Upon Ejectione Firm, Where Habere fac. possession. shall be after the year
without Scire fac.
and Judgment Hab. fac. possessionem shall be after the year without a Scire
fac. as to the Damages; yet its not absolutely requisite, that there should be
any Scire fac. as to the Land; for if the party take Possession of other Land
than he ought, Trespass lies, 1 Sid. 351. Okey and Vicars. Scire fac' is given
in personal Action, per Stat. W. 2. where the remedy was after the year to
commence a new Action on the same Judgment; which cannot be in this Case as to
Land, though it may be as to Damages; on Judgment for Damages, Costs or Debt,
there must be a Scire fac', for here is a person certain charged; not so in
Hab. fac. possessionem, 2 Keb. 307. Mesme Case; but the Hab. fac. Possessionem,
shall not be granted an year after the Judgment without a motion in Court. Not
to be granted after the year, without a motion in Court.
And if it be once executed, though the parties are turned out presently by a
trick, yet they may not have new Hab. fac. possessionem without motion of the
Court, Siderf. page 224.

Note, It was a Question in one Hills's Case, upon the Statute of Maintenance:
A Man was out of Possession, and recovered in Ejectione Firm, and was put in
Possession by Habere fac. possessionem, Whether he might sell presently, and
adjudged he might, God. b. 450.

Upon the Hab. fac. possessionem, the Sheriff may break open the House to
deliver Possession, 5 Rep. 91.

Return de Hab' fac' Possessionem cum Fieri fac.
Virtute istius brevis mihi direct' 24 die Maij anno infra scripto Habere feci
infra nominat' H. H. Possessionem Termini sui infra scripti de Tenementis infra
script' cum pertin ac etiam Fieri feci de Terris and Catallis infra nominat' W.
W. 20 s. parcel damnor infra script and denarios illos haber coram Justiciarijs
infra script ad diem and Locum infra content ad reddend' prefac H. prout
interius mihi precipitur.

Of Misdemeanors in Possession.
In Ejectment Declarations were delivered, and on Verdict Evidence was found
for the Plaintiff against some, and Judgment against the Casual Ejector for
others, in the whole 47 Houses. Upon color of Hab. fac. possessionem, the
Sheriff turns out of Possession these 47 Tenants, and 80 other Tenants also
without any Process or Plea against them, for the Execution of which Writ the
Sheriff took of the Plaintiff 200 l. for Fees. 1. The Court would not grant
any. Writ to supersede this Execution against the 80, for if so then it ought
to be Quia erronice, and there was not any Error in the proceedings against
them, because there was no proceedings against them, but they may bring
Trespass against the Sheriff, Sheriffs Fee.
and the Sheriff shall be indicted for Extortion; for they cannot take such
Fees in case of real Estate as personal, 2 Sid. 155.

There is a remarkable Case in Siderf. 254. the King against Far. Far being a
Solicitor, had obtained a Judgment against the Casual Ejector, upon which he
Sues Hab. fac. possessionem, and the Sheriffs Bay liffs enter the House with
him, and break the Door where the Goods were, and take the Woman to whom the
House and Goods belonged, and required of her Special Bayl, and for want of it
brought her to Newgate; then Far took the Goods which were of great value. And
upon Trial at the Old-Bayly it appeared, That Far did this with intent to take
away the Goods, and had no color of Title to the House for his Client. He was
found Guilty of Felony, and was hanged, not being able to Read though he were a
Solicitor.

The Court was moved for an Attachment against J. upon an Affidavit, that he
had ejected one out of Possion that was put in by Hab. fac. possessionem, and
that in a very Riotous manner, and had imprisoned the Party so put out of
Possession. The Council on the other side answered, That the party came into
the Land by virtue of an Eigne Judgment, and an Extent upon it. Rolls, here is
Title against Title, therefore take your Course in Law, for we make no Rule in
it, Styles p. 318. Fortune and Johnson's Case.

Verdict for the Plaintiff was found in Ejectment. But upon Agreement made
between the Plaintiff and Defendant, The Defendant was to hold the Land
recovered, for the remainder of his Term to come, and according to this
Agreement he held it for two years; but afterward before his Term expired, the
Plaintiff takes out an Hab. fac. possessionem and executes it. It was moved,
That the Defendant might have a Rule for Restitution. Per Cur. it cannot be:
Take your Action on the Case against the Plaintiff, for not performing his
Agreement, Styles Rep. 408. Wood and Markham.

CHAP. XV.
Of Action for the mean Profit's. In whose Name. What Evidence shall be given
in this Action or not.

THe Action for the mean Profits on the Judgment in the Ejectment, In whose
name.
shall be in the name of the Lessee during his Term. And note, What Evidence
shall be given in this Action.
In this Action no Evidence shall be given, as to the Right, which must be, if
the Action should be in the Lessors name, and therefore he can have no such
remedy, 1 Keb. 731. Sadler and Tailor.

A Trial at Bar was prayed in Action for mean Profits. But the Court denied it,
because how good a Title soever the Defendant has, he cannot give in Evidence
any other matter than what was before Ruled. But by Twisden the Title being
admitted, other matter may be given in Evidence, as a Release or Fine by the
Plaintiff: And the same Law is in Action by the Lessor, in the former Action as
by the Lessee, and against the Undertenant, or any that claim under the former
Defendants Title, especially the contest being for profits during the time of
the former Action hanging.

So it is said in Harris and Wills's Case. If Recovery be in Ejectione Firm,
and after Trespass is brought for the mean profits before the Lease, nothing
shall be given in Evidence, but the value of the Profits and not the Title. For
if it should be so, then long Trials would be infinite. Also, if it be between
the same Parties, the Record is an Estoppel; so the Court held it should be, if
it were against Undertenants. But the Court granted a Trial at Bar, in
assurance they would not insist upon the Points formerly adjudged, but admit
it, and insist upon new Title, Siderf. p. 239. Collingwood's Case.

In 1 Will. and Mary, The Court was moved to set aside a Verdict, recovered in
an Action for the mean profits after Recovery in Ejectment, showing that the
Defendant in the Ejectment had brought another Ejectment since, and recovered;
so that the first Recovery was disaffirmed, and therefore there ought to have
been no Recovery for the mean profits, but the motion was denied, per tot. Cur.
2 Ventris Reports.

Trespass lies by Recoveror in Erroneous Judgment for a mean Trespass; because
the Plaintiff in Writ of Error recovers all mean profits, and the Law by
fiction of Relation, will not make a wrongdoer dispunishable, 13 Rep. 22. But
contra, where Act of Parliament restores.

In Trespass with continuando to recover mean profits, an Entry and Possession
of the Land before the Trespass must be proved; and also, another Entry after
the Trespass. Lessor is the principal Person looked upon in the Law to Sue for
the mean profits, 2 Keb. 794.

A Termor being Outlawed for Felony, granted his Term and Interest to the
Plaintiff, who is put out by J. S. and after the Outlawry is reversed; and the
Plaintiff brought Trespass for the profits taken between the Outlawry Reversed
and the Assignment; adjudged, that the Action did lie; for though during that
time that the Queen had the Interest, and the Assignee had Right, yet by the
reversal it is as if no Outlawry had been, and there is no Record of it, Cr.
Eliz. 270. Ognells's Case. It was held by Justice Vernon, where a Man would
recover the mean profits in Trespass, he must prove Entry into every parcel,
and not into one part in the name of all. An Action of Trespass came to Trial
before T. for recovering the mean profits, and the Trespass was laid the 11 of
May with a continuation, and the first Entry was before the 17 Day; And an
Ejectment had been brought of this Land the same Assizes, and because a second
Entry is required to recover the mean profits, the which if it shall be, will
happen after that time which he has acknowledged himself out of Possession, by
his Action of Ejectment, and such Entry will abate the Action; it was directed
to find Damages for the first entry only.

It is a Rule in Law: By the Re-entry of the Disseisee, he is remitted to his
first Possession, and is as if he had never been out of Possession; and then
all who Occupied in the mean time, by what Title soever they come in, shall
Answer to him for their time, as if a Disseisor had been Disseised by another:
The first Disseisee Reenters, he shall in Trespass punish the last Disseisor;
otherwise, after his Re-entry he should have no remedy for his mean profits.

Note, In Trespass for mean profits Special Bail is always given, 1 Keb. 100.

Writ of Enquiry for mean profits abates by Death after Judgment, Writ of
Enquiry for mean profits how abates.
and before or pendent Error, but after affirmed is in mitigation, Warren and
Orpwood, 3 Keb. 205.

Where one Declares on a Fictitious Lease to A. In whose name.
for three years, and within the same Term Declares of another Fictitious Lease
to B. of the same Lands; the last is not, good for Trespass for the mean
profits must be brought in the first Lessees name, ut dicitur.

Its a note in Siderf. p. 210. If one Recover and had Judgment in Ejectione
Firm, according to the usual practice, by confessing Lease, Entry and Ouster,
etc. it was a doubt by the Court, if upon such Confession, Lessee may have
Trespass for the mean profits, from the time of the Entry confessed; for it
seems it is an Estoppel, between the Parties to say, That he did not enter.
Tamen Quaere, because this Confession is taken to Special purpose only, Siderf.
p. 210.

If a Writ of Error in Ejectment abates by the Act of God, a second Writ shall
be a Supersedeas. Aliter, where it abates by the Act of the Party, 1 Vent. 353.

Judgment in Ejectment. The Defendant (Plaintiff) brings a Writ of Error. The
Plaintiff who is Defendant in the Writ of Error, brings a Scire fac. Quare
Executionem non. To the intent the Defendant, Plaintiff in Error might assign
Errors. To which the Plaintiff in Error pleads, That the Defendant ought not to
have Execution, because he was in Possession already, by virtue of Hab. fac.
possessionem. Per Cur. Its a trick for delay, The Scire fac. being only to the
intent, that the Defendant may assign Errors, and there can be no such Plea to
it in stay or delay of Execution, 1 Keb. 613. Winchcomb's Case.

CHAP. XVII.
Writ of Error.
Where it lies. Of what Error the Court shall take Conisance without Diminution
or Certificate. Variance between the Writ and Declaration. Variance between the
Record and the Writ of Error. One Defendant dies after Issue and before
Verdict. Nonage in Issue on Error where to be tried. Amendment of the Judgment
before Certiorari unaided. Release of Errors from one of the Plaintiffs in the
Writ of Error, bars only him that released it, and why. Outlawry in one of the
Plaintiff pleaded in Error. Of Release of Errors by casual Ejector.

ERror lies in B. Where it lies.
R. upon a Judgment in Ejectment before the Justices in Wales, per Stat. 27 H.
8. Error in Real Actions shall be reversed in B. R. and in personal Actions by
Bill before the President and Council of the Marches; Ejectment before Justices
in Wales.
and because Ejectment was a mixed Action, there was some doubt, but it was
resolved, ut supra, Moor p. 248. no 391.

Writ of Error lies in the Exchequer-Chamber upon a Judgment in a Scire fac' in
Ejectione, Sid. Crook Car. 286.

Lessor or Lessee may have a Writ of Error on Judgment in Ejectione, Sid. 317.

In a Writ of Error upon a Judgment in Banco in Ejectione Firm, Of what Error
the Court shall not take Conisance sans Certificate.
is certified a brief Entry of the Writ according to the Course there, and then
the Declaration at large, and by the Recital of the Writ which mentions that
the Action is brought de Rectoria de D. viginti Acris terrae and duodecim Acris
prati cum pertinentiis in D. And the Declaration is of a Lease by Indenture of
the said Rectory and Tenements cum pertinentiis (excepta terra pro mensa
Vicarij ibidem cum omnibus talibus easiamentis quales Vicarius adtunc habuit
cum omnibus talibus decimis, etc.) And upon Not guilty a Verdict and Judgment
was for the Plaintiff, and assigned now for Error, That Judgment was given pro
Querente; whereas it ought to to be for the Defendant. And after in nullo est
erratum pleaded, it was moved for Error, That it appears by the Record
certified, that the Writ is general of a Rectory, and the Declaration is of a
Rectory with certain Exceptions. Variance between the Writ and Declaration.
In this Case the Court ought to reverse the Judgment for this Cause, in as
much as this is not assigned for Error, nor the Writ it self certified; so that
the Court may not take notice that the Writ is as the Entry of it is certified;
and this Exception is but a Variance between the Writ and the Declaration, and
perhaps this Exception in the Declaration was but ex abundantia, Declaration
with an Exception and pleading in such Case.]
and is not parcel of the Rectory, and then he ought not to have demanded the
Rectory with an Exception. And it seems it had not been a good Plea for the
Defendant in the first Action, to say that it appears by the Declaration that
there is an Exception, etc. without Averment in Fact, that it is parcel of the
Rectory, Pas. 11 Car. B. R. Gregory and Shepard on a Lease made by the Dean and
Chapter of Peterborough.

Error upon a Recovery in Ejectment out of the Court of Durham. The Error
assigned was the Infancy of the Plaintiff in the Ejectment, who appeared by
Attorney where he ought to have appeared by his Guardian; and upon Issue joined
on the Infancy, it was found for the Plaintiff in the Writ of Error. But this
Writ of Error was not sufficient to the Court to proceed to the Reversal.
Variance between the Record and the Writ of Error.
1. Because the Writ of Error is directed to the Bishop of Durham and others by
Name to remove a Record of Ejectment between such and such, which was coram the
said Bishop and seven others by Name, and the Record removed, seems to be a
Record of Ejectment before the Bishop and eight others, so it is not the same
Record specified in the Writ; for a Record before eight, and a Record before
seven cannot be intended the same Record. 2. This Writ of Error is directed to
the Bishop of Durham and six others by Name, and the Retorn of the Writ ( viz.)
Respons' of the Commissioners is by the Bishop and five others only, without
making mention of the sixth Commissioner, Yelv. p. 211. Ode and Moreton. 2
Rolls Abr. 604.

In Ejectment Verdict was given pro Quer' quoad ill' parcel' Messuagij
praedict' jacen' proxim' ad Messuag' modo F. N. continen' ex Boreal' part,
etc. and quoad resid' pro Def. and the Judgment was, quod Quer' recuperet
terminum suum praedict' de C. in praedict' parcel' praedicti Messuagij jacen'
proxim' ad praedict' Messuag' ut praefertur in occupatione praedicta F. N. and
continen'; whether this Variance between the Verdict and Judgment be Error.
Adjournat' Qu. if it be not a Jeosayl deins Art. Stat. 16, 17 Car' 2. c. 8.
Raym. p. 398. Norris and Bayfeild.

Ejectione Firm against two, Death of one Defendant dying after Issue pleaded,
and before Verdict.
if after Issue joined, and Venire fac' awarded, one of the Defendants dies;
and after a Verdict is given at the Nisi prius for the Plaintiff, and after
before Judgment the Plaintiff ^^rmiseth the Death of the one, ut supra, and
prays Judgment against the other, and Judgment given accordingly without any
Answer to it by the Plaintiff, if it be not true that he is dead, as was
surmised, this may be assigned for Error; for in as much as the Plaintiff had
made this Surmise, it being a matter of Fact, and the Plaintiff might not have
any Answer to it (the use not being to enter ^up this, that, the Plaintiff does
not deny it) the Plaintiff had no other Remedy but to assign this for Error.
But this is reported otherwise, p. 767. 1 Rolls Abr. 756. Tiffin and Lenton.

If A. bring Ejectione Firm against B. and C. and after Issue joined B. dies,
and after upon the Hab. Corpora, which mentions the Issue to be between A. of
the one part, and the said B. and C. a Verdict is given against B. and C. that
they are guilty, and Damages against them; but a Surmise is made of this before
Judgment, and so Judgment given only against C. this is not erroneous, although
the Verdict was against both, in as much as the Judgment was only against him
who was in life, 1 Rolls Abr. 767. Tiffin and Lenton.

If A. Nonage in Issue upon Error, where to be tried.
recover against B. in Ejectione Firm in D. upon which B. brought a Writ of
Error in B. R. at Westminster and discontinues it, and after there brought a
new Writ of Error, quod coram vobis residet, and assigns for Error, That the
said A. at the time of the Trial of the first Action was commorans and within
Age, at Westminster in Middlesex, and that he sued in the said Action by
Attorney; and upon the Nonage the Parties are at Issue; this shall be tried in
Westminster, and not in D. where the Land lies, because the Ejectione Firm is
not any real Action; and in as much as it is specially alleged that he was
within Age and commorans at Westminster when the Writ of Error was brought, 2
Rolls Abr. p. 604. Orde and Moreton.

Error of a Judgment in Ireland in Ejectment was assigned, Deins Age.
that the Plaintiff then Defendant was per Attornat', and within Age, Judgment
was reversed notwithstanding 17 Car. 2. c. 8. vide 3 Keb. 384. D. of Albermarl
and Keneday.

In Ejectment one of the Defendants pleaded Not guilty, and Verdict for the
Plaintiff against both, and Judgment accordant. Error was brought, because in
the Venire Constantinus Callard was returned, and so named in the Distringas;
(...) by Release.
but in the Panel annexed thereto Constantius Callard was returned and sworn,
and so was returned by that name on the back of the Postea; this was held
manifest Error; for they be distinct Names of Baptism, and cannot be amended;
but Curia advisare from Hillary Term till Pasche; in the mean time the
Defendant in the Writ of Error obtained a Release of all Errors from one of the
Plaintiffs in the Writ of Error, and the first day of Term Pasch. pleaded it in
Bar as a Plea puis darrein Continuance; and thereupon a Demurer was entered in
the Names of both the Plaintiffs in the Writ of Error; Release from one of the
Plaintiffs in Error, shall bar only him that released it, and why.
for in nullo est erratum being pleaded before, there could not now be any
Summons and Severance. Per Curiam this Release shall bar him only that released
it, and not the other Plaintiff (though the Action was in the personalty:) For
the Plea being by way of Action, to discharge themselves of Damages which were
recovered against them, and to be restored to the possession which was lost by
the first Judgment; and they being joined in the first Action by the Act of the
Plaintiff, and their own voluntary Act, it is not reason that the Act of one
shall charge or prejudice the other. But otherwise if they had been Plaintiffs
in the Record by their own Act, Cro. Jac. 116. Blewit and Snedstow.

Verdict was pro Quer' for 10 Messuages, 15 Acres of Land, 15 Acres of Meadow
and 20 Acres of Pasture, and as to the Residue Non Culp. And the Judgment was,
That the Plaintiff should recover the Messuages and the greater Quantity of
Acres which were in the Verdict. Upon which the Plaintiff brought a Writ of
Error, and assigned Errors, and had a Scire fac. and before the Defendant in
the Writ of Error joined in nullo est erratum, it was moved in Common Bench for
amendment of the Judgment. It was objected. 1. That the time after the
Assignment of the Error was past for the amendment. Amendment of the Judgment
before a Certiorari awarded in Error.
Per Cur. The time is not past, so long as a Diminution may be alleged, or a
Certiorari awarded, it may be amended. 2. The Judgment is the Act of the Court,
and therefore may not be amended. Per Cur. It is the default of the Clerk, who
did not enter the Judgment according to the Verdict, Jones Rep. p. 9.

Ejectione Firm by two against one Defendant. And on Not guilty, Verdict for
the Plaintiff. The Error assigned was, because Constantinus Callard was
returned, and so named in the Distringas, but in the Panel annexed thereto by
the Sheriff, Constantius Callard was Returned and Sworn, Release of Errors from
one of the Plaintiffs in the Writ of Error pleaded, shall bar only him that
Released it, and why.
and so was returned by that name on the back of the Postea. Its manifest
Error; for they be distinct names of Baptism, and not amendable. But Curia
advisare. In the mean time the Defendant in the Writ of Error obtained a
Release of all Errors from one of the Plaintiffs in the Writ of Error.
Ejectment against the Release of one shall not bar the other of a Writ of
Error, because this is to recover nothing, but to have restitution of that
which he lost by the Judgment.
And the first day of Easter Term pleaded it in Bar as a Plea puis darraine
Continuance; and thereon a Demur entered in the name of both the Plaintiffs in
the Writ of Error. For in nullo est erratum being pleaded before, there could
not be any Summons and Severance. Per Cur. This Release shall bar only him that
Released it, for the Plea being by way of Action to discharge themselves of
Damages, which were recovered against them, and to be restored to the
Possession which was lost by the first Judgment; and they being joined in the
first Action, by the Act of the Plaintiff, and not by their own voluntary Act,
it is not Reason, that the Act of one should charge or prejudice the other, for
then by such practice any one might be charged, and should have no remedy to
discharge himself. And the Judgment was reversed, quoad him that did not
Release, and that he should be restored to all what he lost, and quoad the
other who released, that he should be barred in his Writ of Error, Cro. Jac.
116. Bluit and Snedstow, 2 Rolls Ab. 411. Mesme Case.

So the Defendant in the Writ of Error Pleads Outlawry in one of the
Plaintiffs. Outlawry in one of the Plaintiffs pleaded in Error.
Per Cur. Its no Bar, because this is an Action not to recover any thing, but
to restore them to what they had lost, and to discharge them of Damages and
Fines; and they are forced to join, because one of the Plaintiffs was a
Defendant in the former Action, Cro. Jac. 616. Bythell and Harrts.

Error without Bail is a Supersedeas in Ejectment, Error without Bail, a
supersedeas. 13 Car. 2. c. 2.
notwithstanding the Act of 13 Car. 2. c. 2. being not within the general word
Trespass, 1 Keb. 308. Lufton's Case.

And unless all the Defendants in Ejectment do give Recognizance, its no
Supersedeas, for as to the Land its entire, 3 Keb. 138. Cole and Levingstone.
Baron and Feme Lessors. its no Error to allege the the death of the Wife
before ^udgment.


Baron seized in the Right of the Feme, makes an Ejectment Lease, and the
Lessee brings an Action upon it, and has a Verdict and Judgment; its not Error
to allege the death of the Wife before Judgment, by which the interest of the
Husband, and Lease by him made to the Plaintiff determines, because neither the
Wife nor the Husband are Parties to the Action, and this determins upon the
Title to the Land; for the Plaintiff may say, That the Husband was seized in
his own right, 1 Rolls Abr. 768. Wilks and Jordan.

Error was brought to Reverse a Judgment in Ejectione Firm, The Plaintiff in
Ejectment dead before Judgment.
and Error in Fact assigned, ( viz.) That the Plaintiff in the Ejectment was
dead before Judgment: To which he that was Attorney for the Plaintiff pleaded,
That he was alive at such a place, and upon this Issue joined, and found that
he was dead. Per Cur. The Issue is well joined, and the Judgment shall be
reversed for this Error without Scirc fac. against the Executors, for until the
Issue tried none can deny, but that the appearance was good. But the surer way
had been for the Attorney to have pleaded quod venit pro magistro suo D. and
not quoth. D. venit per Attornat. Siderf. p. 93. Dove and Darcen.

If a Man recover in Ejectione Firm, The Plaintiff dies between Verdict and
Judgment, the Judgment is voidable by Error.
and after his Executor Sues Execution by Scire fac' against the Recoveree; the
Recoveree may not avoid the Judgment, nor stay Execution by saying, That the
Plaintiff died between the Verdict and Judgment, or such like. But he is put to
his Writ of Error, for the Judgment is only voidable, 1 Rolls Abr. 742. Hide
and Markham.

But in 1 Rolls Abr. 768. If a Man brings Ejectione Firm in B. R. and there he
has a Verdict on Trial at the Bar, and after, and before Judgment he dies, The
Plaintiff dies after Trial Judgment may be given.
and after Judgment is given against him the same Term. This is not Error,
because the Judgment relates to the Verdict, Hide and Mark's Case.

Lessor of the Plaintiff in Ejectment, Lessor of the Plaintiffmay may have
(...) Writ of Error.
may have a Writ of Error upon a Judgment in Ejectione Firm, Siderf. 317.
Cole's Case.

Release of Error, vid. supra.
The Issue was that H. who was casual Ejector, and gave Release of Errors, was
not the same Person. Being tried, The Court would not suffer the Defendant to
Assign Error, but conceived he was barred now, 1 Keb. 755. Keys and Bredon.

The Defendant obtains a Release of his casual Ejector, Issue that he that made
the Release was not the same person.
and pleads it to a Writ of Error, of a Judgment by defalt, of Ejectment in
Ireland; although the Issue was, that he that made the Release was not the same
Person as was casual Ejector. Yet per Cur. It ought to be set aside, and the
Error Assigned, 1 Keb. 705. vid. 7.

Release by Casual Ejector is a fraud.
The Court conceived a Release of Errors, Release by Casual Ejector, a fraud.
obtained of the Casual Ejector by the Lessor being but Fictitious is void. And
the Court made a Rule, That no such Release be accepted without Leave of the
Court, 1 Keb. 740. Keys and Bredon.

The Case was, As it is Reported in Raymond, 93, Keys and Bredon. The
Plaintiff obtains a Judgment against his own Ejector, in a Case where an Infant
was in Possession; and the Party concerned in the Lands, Release by Casual
Ejector, a fraud.
brings a Writ of Error in the name of the feigned Defendant. The Plaintiff in
the Writ Pleads the Release of the Defendant. Per Cur. Such Release shall not
be allowed. And the Court will not permit the Party to proceed to try the
Issue, if the Release be good or not, because it is to Bar the Right of a third
person.

On Ejectment after Judgment against Casual Ejector, for not confessing Lease,
Entry and Ouster; the Defendant in the Ejector's name brought a Writ of Error,
Ejector disavows the Suit.
and now the Ejector was brought to the Clerk of the Errors, and disavowed the
Suit, and thereupon it was prayed by Council, that a non Pros. may be entered,
as is the usual Course in such Case, 2 Keb. 579. M. 21. Car. 2. Watts and Loyd.

In the Lord Byron and Sir William Juxon's Case, Council prayed leave to
discontinue a Writ of Error brought in the Ejector's name, of Judgment in the
County Palatine of Lancaster against him by default, showing a Release of
Errors by the Casual Ejector: But the Court denied it, but left them to Non -
suit the Plaintiff in Error, 2 Keb. 853.

A Release of Error by the Causual Ejector, no Discontinuance in Error, 2 Keb.
853.

Ejectment was brought against eight Defendants in B. C. Error was brought,
grounded upon the Judgment, and the Writ was ad grave damnum ipsorum, and the
Judgment was only against three, and other five were acquitted, The Error was
assigned in the Nonage of the three. Per Cur. The Writ of Error was good, though
it might be also ad damnum of those convicted. But being only in the nature of
a Commission, whereby the King Commands the Errors to be examined; this matter
is not material, Hob. 70. Yelv. 209. By Twisden, The constant practice is for
all to join, and per tot. Cur. Judgment ought to be reversed against all. Error
of a Judgment in Ejectione Firm, and in the Record a space was left to insert
the Costs which had not been taxed, if such an imperfect Record be certified;
yet it might be amended by Rule of Court there, and then if it be removed by
Error, the Court there must amend it. For it is the constant practice, That if
a Record be removed into the King's Bench, out of the Court of Common Pleas by
Writ of Error, and afterward amended by Rule of Court in the Common Pleas, The
Court of King's Bench must amend it accordingly, vid. Hard. p. 905. 1 Ventr:
165. Bell and Richards.

Ejectment was brought in C. B. in Ireland, and declares against Commyn de
Castrovilla and Terris de Kilborough, in such a County. The Plaintiff had
Verdict and Judgment. Commyn brought a Writ of Error in B. R. in Ireland, Error
in Irel.
and Assigns for Error, the want of an Oiginal. The Plaintiff rejoyns, that
such a Day an Original Writ was delivered to such a one, and concludes to the
Country. And the Judgment was reversed there for want of an Original, on which
the Plaintiff brought a Writ of Error for reversal in B. R. in England. And the
Judgment given in B. R. in Ireland was reversed here, for the matter was
discontinued. Because the Defendant in Ireland concludes al pais, where in
truth the matter of his Plea should be tried by the Record, and the Plaintiff
in Error does not Reply, or Demurr upon the Plea of the Defendant, and so all
is discontinued. Also, there was another apparent Error in the Declaration,
viz. the Action brought de castro villa and terris in Kilborough, without
expressing the number and certainty of Acres, and upon such general demand no
Habere fac' Possessionem can be awarded and executed, Yelv. 117. St. John verse.
Commyn.

THE TABLE.
A.
WHat shall be a good Plea in Abatement, 110 After Imparlance, no Pleading in
Abatement, and why. 111 Where a Man Pleads in Abatement, he ought to give the
Plaintiff a better Writ, ibid. Where the Plaintiff by his Demand confesses the
Writ abateable. 112 Actions real changed in Ejectments, and why. 2 Acres
according to the Statute Measure. Accord and Satisfaction, a good Plea in
Ejectment. 122 Declaration in Ejectment by Administrators. 78, 79 Amendment of
Original Writs in Ejectment. 27 Where, and in what Cases Special Verdicts shall
be amended. Record of Nisi prius variant from the Roll not amendable. 217
Affidavit in Ejectment to move for Judgment against the Casual Ejector. Where
an Answer in Chancery shall be good Evidence at a Trial, 161 Judgment against
the Casual Ejector for want of Appearance, 29 Appropriation Evidence, 168 How
Ejectment lies in Ancient Demesne, 10 Ancient Demesne pleaded in Ejectment, 116
Whether it may be pleaded after Imparlance, 116, 117, 118 Plea of Ancient
Demesne allowed the same Term, and how 118 Aid Prier, where it shall be granted
in this Action, and where not, 122
B.
The Bail Lets Lands to B. Judgment is against the Principal, and extent on the
Lands Leased. B. brings Ejectment, 21 Common Bail entered after the Attorney
was dead, 31 When Common Bail to be Filed, ibid. Ejectment brought by a Vendee
of the Commissioners of Bankrupt, 23 Declaration upon a Lease by Commissioners
of Bankrupts, 78 Ejectment by Baron and Feme, 36, 75 Ejectment against Baron
and Feme, Baron dies since the Nisi prius, and before the day in Bank, the
Action continued against the Wife, In Ejectment the Wife found Not guilty, and
Special Verdict as to the Husband, 216 Ejectment against Baron and Feme.
Verdict pro Quer. Between the Verdict and day in Bank Baron dies, Q. if Error.
But its good to enter the Verdict for Evidence, 230 Judgment against Baron and
Feme is quod capiantur, though the Baron is only found Guilty, 235 Bill of
Exception on the Probate of a Will, 158 Where Copy of a Bill in Chancery shall
be Read in Evidence or not, 159, 160
C.
Challenge, what is principal or not, 229 That the Lessor of the Plaintiff is
Cousin, to the high Sheriff is a principal Challenge in our feigned Ejectments,
131 Challenge for default of Hundredors at a Trial at Bar, 132 Color not
sufficient in Ejectione Firm, and why. How Tenant in Common of a Moiety may
maintain Ejectione Firm, 20 Ejectment by Tenants in Common, 74 Conizance of
Pleas, how to be demanded, allowed and pleaded, 113 How Copyholder, or his
Lessee shall maintain Ejectment, 15, 16 Declaration by a Copyholder in
Ejectment, 16 Ejectione Firm, by a Copyholder before admittance, 17
Copyholder, Mortgagee must be admitted before he can bring his Action, ibid.
The Lord upon the seizure of a Copyhold may bring Ejectment, till the Heir come
to be admitted, Copyholder in reversion after an Estate Tail, no Witness, 147
One Copartner cannot be Evidence for another in Ejectment, ibid. Ejectment by
Coparceners, 74 Where Copies of Deeds shall be Evidence or not, 157 Where
Copies of Court Rolls may be given in Evidence, 158 Ejectment by a Corporation
how to be brought, 36, 77 The Defendant not to plead till Costs assessed in a
former Action was paid, and security for new Costs, 126 The Plaintiff may
relinquish his Damages where part of the Action fails, and take Judgment for
the other, 218. But the Costs gone, Executor not to pay Costs, 219 Feme liable
to pay Costs on the Husbands death, 220 Lessor of the Plaintiff, where to pay
Costs, ibid. Tenant in Possession liable to pay Costs by the Law, ibid. In
Judgment against his own Ejector no Costs to be paid by the Tenant in
Possession, ibid. Costs for want of Continuance, 222 Infant-Lessor pays Costs,
ibid. The sole Remedy for Costs in the first Trial, is by Attachment, unless
the second Trial is in the same Court after Verdict, ibid. In what Court new
Ejectment to be brought, 11 Of Ejectment in inferior Courts, 38 Cinque Ports,
112
D.
The Plaintiff may relinquish his Damages where part of the Action fails, and
take Judgment of the other, 218 Diversity where Damages are only recovered, and
where the Term, 5 He that desires to be made Defendant in Ejectment, must give
a Note of what is in his Possession, 44 He that is made Defendant in Ejectment,
is not to be charged in Actions by the by, 45 Rule to make the Owner Defendant,
105 The Inconvenience of the new Course of Leaving Declarations in Ejectment,
40 Of Declarations in Ejectment, 47, 48, 49, etc. The Certainty and Quality of
the Lands ought to be described in Ejectment, 54 The Plaintiff must declare on
one Title only, 61 Surplusage in the Count not vicious, ibid. If the Entry and
Ejectment be supposed in the Declaration to be before the Commencement of the
Lease, the Declaration is void. 62, 64 It must be alleged in what Vill the
Tenements are, 62 Ejectment of the fourth part of an House in four parts to be
divided, and declares de Tenementis praedictis, 73 How to declare upon a Lease
of Tenant for Life, and him in Remainder, 76 Where in a Declaration a Life must
be averred, and where it need not, 80 A new Declaration delivered on the
Essoyn-day, 81 The Declaration delivered after the Essoyn-day, and the
Consequence, 82 Where Copies of the Declarations need not be paid for, 83
Declaration need not be of more Acres than he was ejected, 97 Of the Omission
of vi and armis, 98 The Omission of Extra tenet, ibid. Demanding of a part of
Lands, without showing into how many parts divided, 99 Declaration in Ejectment
quod cum good, not so in Trespass. ibid. Forms of Declarations in B. R. 101 B.
C. 102 Scaccario, 103
Copy of a Declaration with the Endorsement, ibid. What is to be done after a
Declaration delivered, 104 What is good Service of the Declaration, 107 How and
wherein a Special Verdict shall make a Declaration good, 187 Decree or decretal
Order, where allowed to be Evidence, 164
DEED.
Difference between pleading a Deed, and giving it in evidence, 154 Of finding
Deeds in haec verba in Special Verdicts, 178 Who to show the Original Deed in
evidence, 155 Where a Deed may be proved by Testimony without showing it, 156
In Ejectment against two, one pleads to Issue, and the other demurs, the Issue
isfirst to be tried, and why, 8 Where, and in what Cases Depositions in
Chancery shall be read at a Trial or not, 162 Where primer Possession makes a
Disseisin, 185 Doomsday-Book good evidence, 155
E. EJECTMENT.
The Nature of Ejectione Firm, 1 The reason of the Change of Real Actions into
Ejectments, 2 Ejectment and Trespass for Battery both in one Writ, 8 Difference
between Ejectione Firm and Quare ejecit infra terminum, 9 In what Court
Ejectment lies, 10 Where to be brought into the Exchequer, ibid. In what Court
a new Ejectment may be brought, 11 How Ejectment to be brought of Lands in
Middlesex or London, ibid. Who shall have Ejectione Firm, 13 In what Cases the
Action lies, or not, 13, 14, 15 Against whom Ejectione Firm lies, 33 Who was
counted an Ejector formerly, ib. The new Practice in Ejectments, 34 The old way
of Sealing Ejectments, and where, and in what Cases still to be used, 35 Of the
Ejectment Lease, 46 Of what things Ejectione Firm may be brought, and of what
not, 47 Ejectment against Tenant by elegit in case of holding over Ely
Jurisdiction pleaded, 114 Elisors, 130 Elegit must be showed in evidence, 154
Entry taken away by Lapse of Time for not entering, 21 Entry to deliver
Declarations, not good to avoid a Fine, 62 Entry before the Nisi prius to be
pleaded at the Assizes, 113 Difference between Entry after Verdict and Death,
ibid. What Entry shall be intended, and need not be proved, 169 Estoppels how
found by a Jury, 178
Evidence, vide Witnesses.
What shall be good Evidence in Ejectment 151, 152. 153, 154 If Record be
pleaded, it must be sub pede sigilli. 151 Copy of a Record may be showed in
Evidence to a Jury, ibid. Exemplificat' of a record in Wales no good Evidence
in B. R. and why, 152 Scyrograph of a Fine given in Evidence, 153 But in Fine
and Nonclaim the Fine must be showed with Proclamations under Seal, ibid. Copy
of a Recovery given in Evidence, ibid. Inspeximus, how far it is Evidence,
ibid. Transcript of a Record, or Inrolment of a Deed may be given in Evidence,
and how, 154 Evidence as to Matters of Fait. 157 Who to show the Original Deed
in Evidence, 155 Where a Deed shall be proved by Testimony, without showing it,
156 A Deed cancelled by Practice, may be showed in Evidence, ibid. Copies where
Deeds are burnt, good Evidence, ibid. Copy out of a Leiger-book, no Evidence
152 Copy of a Counterpart allowed to be Evidence, ibid. Tho Seals be broken
off, yet a Deed may be given in Evidence, ibid. Where Copies of Court-Rolls may
be given in Evidence, ibid. A Will under which a Title of Land is made, must be
showed it self, 158 Where Bills, Answers, Depositions shall be good Evidence,
159 Where Copy of a Bill shall be read in Evidence, 159, 160 Where an Answer in
Chancery shall be good Evidence or not. Where, and in what Cases Depositions
shall be read at a Trial, or not, 162 Exemplification of Depositions, if
Evidence, ibid. Decree or Decretal Order where allowed to be Evidence, 164
Pedigree, where allowed to be Evidence or not; what Matter may or must be
pleaded, and what Matter may or must be given in Evidence, 165 Condition to
defeat a Freehold found by Jury. ibid. What Evidence the Jury shall have with
them after Evidence given, 166 What shall be good Evidence to make a Title, 167
Evidence as to an Appropriation, 168 Where constant enjoyment is good
Evidence, ibid. What is good Evidence to prove Lands parcel of a Priory or
not, 170 What Evidence shall be said to maintain the Issue, ibid. Estoppels
found by Jury, and how, 165 A Man ousts the Executors of his Lessee ^r years,
what Remedy,
EXECUTION.
Execution in Ejectment, 230 How Execution shall be where there are two
Defendants, one confesses, and the other is found Not guilty, Execution on
Recovery by Baron in Ejectment of the Wife's Term, 239 If a Man recover in
Ejectment against J. S. who after dies, he must sue Execution against his Heir;
for by intendment J. S. his Ancestor was a Disseisor, ibid. Extent of a Rectory
on Elegit, 169 Remedy against undue Extent on Elegit by Ejectment, 19
Exemplification of a Verdict, 175
ERROR.
Of what Error the Court shall take Conisance without Certificate, 257 Variance
between the Writ and Declaration, ibid. Variance between the Record and the
Writ of Error, 258 Nonage in Issue upon Error where to be tried, ibid.
Amendment of the Judgment before a Certiorari awarded in Error, 262 Release of
Errors from one of the Plaintiffs in the Writ of Error, shall only bar him that
released it, and why, ib. Outlawry of one of the Defendants pleaded in Error,
263 Error without Bail a Supersedeas, ibid. Release by casual Ejector, a Fraud,
265, 266 Error in Ireland, 268
G.
Difference between a Guardian and Prochein Amy, 30
H.
Habere fac' possessionem how to be executed, 242 How the Sheriff is to esteem
the Acres, 243 Where Delivery of one Message by the Sheriff in the name of
all, is good or not, ibid. How the Sheriff is to give Possession of a Rent or
Common, ibid. Hab. fac. possessionem is good without Retorn, 244 How awarded
into Ireland, ibid. In what Cases and when a new Hab. fac. possessionem may be
awarded, 244, 245 Not to be granted after a Year without Motion, 248 Of
Misdemeanor in giving Possession, 249
I.
Inspeximus how an Evidence or not in Ejectment, 153
INTENDMENT.
Reversion shall be intended to continue, 190 Where a Lease shall be intended
to be in being, 191 Where a Dying seized shall be intended, 192 Incertainty in
Special Verdict. Vid. Verdict. Writ of Inquiry in Ejectment and the Entry, 224
Stranger may enter notwithstanding Judgment in Intrusion, ^7 Judgment in
Intrusion what, ibid. Ejectment by Joyntenant, 75 Of Issue in Ejectment, 139
JUDGMENT.
Judgment against ones own Ejector when to be entered, 240 No Judgment against
the casual Ejector but by Motion, 104 No Judgment upon Nihil dicit, but upon
Motion, 239 In what Cases, and for what Causes Judgments in Ejectment are
erroneous, 233 Judgment was reverst for not severing by number of Acres, and
yet entire Damages, 234 Plaintiff brings a Writ of Error, and Judgment is
reversed, what Judgment he shall have, 235 In what Cases Judgments shall be
amended, 236 After Judgment the Court of Equity would not relieve in case of a
Mortgage, 239 Writ of Error lies upon the Judgment by Nihil dicit before the
Retorn of the Writ of Inquiry, and why. Chap. Judgment. The Form of entering
Judgments in Ejectment, 227 How the Entry is when part is pro Quer', and part
against him, ibid. Judgment against several Ejectors, 228 The Plaintiff shall
be in Misericordia but once 229 One of the Plaintiffs died during a Curia
advisare vult, it shall not stay the Judgment, 230 Suggestion to be entered on
the Roll, one Defendant being dead after Nonsuit, 231 After Verdict, and before
Judgment the Plaintiff dies, and Judgment given for him the same Term, 232 Of
pleading to the Jurisdiction, 113
JURY.
Another Person sworn on the Jury who was not returned, no Error lies, because
an Estoppel, 136 What Evidence the Jury shall have with em after Evidence
given, 166 Jury find the Interest of the Land came to the Lessor, but show not
how, 193
K.
Lessee of the King may bring Ejectione Firm though the King be not put out of
the Freehold, 20
L.
Of the Ejectment Lease, 46 The Defendant not to confess Lease Entry and Ouster
for any more than is in his Possession, 39 In what Cases the Court will give
leave to return the General Confession of Lease Entry and Ouster, 40 Of the
Defendants refusal to confess Lease, Entry and Ouster, and the consequence 40,
41 Where the Confession of Lease, Entry and Ouster shall supply an actual Entry
or not, 42, 43 The Term in the Ejectment Lease enlarged, 46 After Default in
Ejctment, the Defendant may confess Lease, Entry and Ouster, Lease to Try a
Title no Maintenance, 47 Ejectment brought on a Lease made the ^ame Term, ibid.
Commencement of Leases, 68, 69, 70 Where the Lease shall be intended to be
delivered on the Day of the Demise, and not of the Date, 71 Lease not warranted
by the Declaration, 83 Why the new Rule of confessing Lease Entry and Ouster
was introduced, 115 Lease recited in the Release, was admitted to be proved by
Witnesses to the Release, without showing the Lease it self, 156 What notice
the Court takes of the Lessor of the Plaintiff, 233 Jury find Virtute literarum
patentium, and find not the Letters Patents under Seal, 19^
M.
Ejectment of a Manor, how to be brought, 52, 201 Manor in Reputation, 196 The
Defendant in Ejectment, not to give in Evidence a former Mortgage made by
himself, 169
O.
Person Outlawed may bring Ejectione Firm, 21
P. PEDIGREE.
Where allowed to be Evidence or not, 164 Pernomen, where it is material, 71,
96 Pleadings in Ejectment, 109
PLADINGS.
Of Pleading in Abatement, 110 Of Pleading to the Jurisdiction, 113 Conusance
of Pleas, how to be demand^d, allowed, pleaded, ibid. Where Conizance of Plea
not allowed in Ejectment, 115 Pleading Ancient Demesne, 106 Conclusion of Plea,
118 Plea puis Darraine Continuance, 119 Bar, or Recovery in one Ejectione
Firm, ^ow far a Bar in another, 126, 127 Two Defendants, one confesses, and
the ^ther Pleads in Bar, he cannot leave the one and proceed against the other
126
POSSESSION.
A good Title in Trespass, but not in E^^ctment, and why, 6 In what Cases the
Party before Entry ^ath Possession, and a Fine and Non-claim all Bar his Right,
14 Possession in the Lessor of the Plaintiff ^^st appear to be within 20 years,
15 Long Possession good Evidence, 170 Et postea, how expounded, 73 Procedendo
denied, because Bail was put B. R. 12 What is Evidence to prove Land, parcel a
Priory or not, ibid. Priority of Possession, where and how a ^od Title or not,
179 Prout lex postulat, How expounded in Special Verdicts, 181, 197 Where
primer Possession makes a Disseisin, 185 In Ejectment prior Possession, a good
Title against the King's Presentation, not so in a Quare Impedit, ibid.
Mean Profits.
Action for the Mean profits, and wha^ Evidence shall be given in this Action
251 Whether Lessee may have Action for the Mean profits from the confession of
Lease^ Entry and Ouster, 254
Q.
The nature of a Quare Ejecit infra Terminum, and the difference between it and
Ejectione Firm, 9
R. RECOVERY.
Recovery and Execution pleaded in former Action, 12 In Ancient Recoveries the
Court will no^ put one to prove Seisin in a Praecipe, 15 What Evidence will
serve to prove a Recovery, ibid. What thing a Parson in the Ejectment (...) a
Rectory may prove, 16^
RENT.
Upon Entry of the Grantee of a Rent and Retainer till satisfaction of the
Arrears, he may upon such Interest quousque maintain an Ejectment, 23
RELEASE.
Where the Plaintiff in Ejectment may aid himself by Release of part, 50
Release pleaded on a Special Verdict, and day given for Argument, 120
S.
Deprivation for Simony disables from bringing Ejectment, 18 Stat. 13 Car. 2.
c. 11. expounded 28. Stat. 21 Jac. and 13 Car. 2. c. Bail, Stat. 16 and 17 Car.
2. cap. 8. Of Amendment, 84 Stat. W. 2. c. 27 -- 139 Stat. 8 Eliz. of Costs,
221 Stat. 3 H. 7. 10. Of Costs, 224
T. TRES PASS.
Difference between Trespass and Ejectione Firm, 5 Conusance of Trespass
includes not Ejectments, 7 Possession a good Title in Trespass not in ectment,
and why, 6 Color in Trespass, 7
TRIAL.
Ejectment to be tried, where it is supposed the Lease to be made, 12 Tenant at
Will may make a Lease for years, to try Title, and so may a Copyholder, 23 How
Trials below in Ejectment are to be brought, 39 Stat. 27 H. 8. the Marches, 141
Consent to alter Trial entered upon the Roll, 142 Consent to a Trial in a
Foreign County, ibid. Where issue in Ejectment shall be tried in other County,
than where the Land lies, 144, 145, 146 Of Trial by Mittimus in a County
Palatine, 146 Where the Issue in Tail is liable to execution on a Statute of
Scire facias returned, and he comes not in and pleads, he shall not bring his
Ejectment, 21 Of Ejectment being brought by Cesty que Trust, 23 How a Trustee
may be a Witness in Ejectment, 146
V.
Variance of the Evidence from the Declaration, what are material Variances, or
not, 170 Variance as Times, 172 Acres, 173 Vills, ibid.

VENIRE.
Of the Venire in Ejectment, 132, 133, 134 Where a Vill and a Parish shall be
intended all one, 155 Where it shall come de Corpore comitatus, 136 The Wife
found Not guilty, and a Special Verdict as to the Husband which was
insufficient, Venire fac' de novo, was awarded, and why, 138
VERDICT.
In what Cases no Verdict shall be entered, 140 Of exemplification of a
Verdict, 175 Of a General Verdict, 177 Of Special Verdict, ibid. Of finding
Deeds in haec Verba, 178 Seven or eight Rules of Special Verdicts, 178, 179,
etc. The Special conclusion of a Special Verdict, shall aid the Imperfections
of it, 186 Diversities between a General Conclusion and a Special Conclusion,
187 How a Special Verdict may make a Declaration good, ibid. The Judges not
bound by the Conclusion of the Jury, except in Special Cases, 188 Verdict to be
taken according to intent, vid. Intendment, A General Conclusion depends upon
all Points of the Verdict, 189 Where the dying seized shall be intended, 192
Jury find the Interest of the Land, but show not how, 193 All Circumstances
necessary shall be intended, ibid. Difference between the Limitation and
Condition of an Estate, as to the finding by Jury. 194 Finding the substance of
the Issue as sufficient Verdict by presumption, 197 Where, and in what Cases
Entry must be expressly found or not, and of the force of the words prout lex
postulat. 197 Where actual Ouster must be found, 198 Entry by a College how to
be found, 199 Super totam materiam, the effect of it, 200 Of the Juries finding
by parcel, ibid. Jury finds part of the Issue, and nothing for the Residue,
ibid. Of Surplusage in a Special Verdict, 202 If the Verdict contain more than
in the Declaration, the Plaintiff may Release the Damages, 203 Where the Jury
may conclude upon a Moiety or not, 184 Where a dying Seized or Possessed must be
found, 204 If Incertainties in Special Verdicts, 206 As to Persons, Acres,
ibid. Place, Time,
Quoad residuum, the operation of those words in a Special Verdict, 208, 209 Of
Verdicts in other Lease or Place than declared, 212 It must be certain in what
part the Plaintiff must have his Habere facias Possessionem, aliter in
Trespass, 209 Where, and in what Cases Special Verdicts may be amended, Virtute
cujus, he entered and says not when 46 Virtute cujus and ijsdem die and anno he
entered, 66, 67 Virtute cujus and pretextu cujus, the difference, 72 Omission of
Vi and Armis in the Declaration, 98 Where the Party comes in by Limitation of
use, he must say vigore statuti, 215
W.
Action in nature of Ejectment brought in the Court Marches of Wales,
Prohibition granted, 12 How Collateral Warrants may be given in Evidence, 165
WITNESSES.
Who shall be good Witnesses in Ejectment, 147 How a Trustee may be a Witness
or not, 146 Interest in Equity disables a Man to be a Witness, 147 In what
Cases Parishouses may be Witnesses, ibid. One Coparcener cannot be Evidence for
another in Ejectment, ibid. Copyholder in Reversion after an Estate Tail
Witness, ibid. Trespassor of the Land no Witness, ibid. Tenant at Will may be a
Witness to prove Livery, 149 Witnesses Sell part of the Land before Trial, 148
Father a Witness for the Son, 149 In what Cases Attorney, Solicitor or
Council, or not to give Evidence against his Client, 150 Vide Evidence.
WILL.
Will under which a Title of Land is made must be showed it self, 158 What
Evidence may or can be given against the Probate of a Will, ibid. Bill of
Exceptions on the Probate of a Will, ibid. Ejectment by Original Writ, 25, 27
WRIT.
Amendment of Original Writs in Ejectment, 20 Writ not to proceed Rege
inconsult. where it lies, 12^
FINIS.

