Something by way of REJOINDER TO Richard Smith HIS REPLY Wherein I have
Cleared my self and others from the Lies and Slanders which he (as his usual
manner is) has cast upon us.

Written by Alexander Lawrence.

The Backslider in Heart shall be filled with his own Ways; and a Good Man
shall be satisfied from himself.

A Wise Man fears, and departs from Evil; but the Fool rages, and is
confident, Prove. 14.14, 16..

Printed in the Year 1678.

RIchard Smith calls his Paper, printed in the year 1678. A brief Reply to
Alexander Lawrence 's Pamphlet, entitled, An Answer to Richard Smith; but how
little there is of that in it, is easily discerned by any reasonable person
that may read my Answer and his Reply; but instead thereof many Reflections and
Slanders by him cast upon us, as in their time and place will appear: my Answer
was chiefly for the clearing of us the People of God called Quakers, more
particularly we in this County of Cheshire, from the Wrong, In justice and
False Accusation by him charged upon u^ in the management of the Difference
depending between him and Danie^ Maddock, which accordingly I did, and not one
word, that I know of, in his Reply does gainsay what I wrote in my Answer
touching that matter, which was the Ground of the D^fference, or at least he
pretended it so, between him and us; so that (...) may reasonably be concluded,
the Man, as touching that matter, was satisfied by my Answer, or other ways
was not a^le (...) gainsay what was written therein, and proved by several
Witnesses; though he is minded to call my Answer, page 11. of his Reply, A
piece of the greatest Hypocrisy and Deceit imaginable but it had been Man-like
in him to have showed wherein, if (...) could; but I conceive, sober
considerate persons will be more wise than to take it to be so because Richard
Smith says it, especially being his Tongue is his own, and he can say what he
pleases, that will make for himself, as in its time and place will appear.

Richard Smith, page 3. I no less, says he, call and refer to rational,
impartial, sober-minded men to judge the Cause; by all which, says he, one
would think the man was serious and in good earnest.

Answ. Quakers, who are able to judge of those things, I leave to their
Consideration and Judgment; yet this does not at all cut the Throat of my
Cause, as Richard Smith in the same page says it does: for the first thing I
leave to the sober Reader, page 6. is, Whether it had not been as fit for R.
Smith to have come to some of us, to have showed his Book, tituled, Light
unchangeable, before he had published it, as I did mine to him, as to do what
he did, mentioned in my Answer p. 6. The second thing I appeal to any
reasonable man in, to judge of, is page 10. Whether we received a False
Accusation against Rich. Smith when he was not present, as he falsely charge
us we did. The third thing, page 11. I appeal to such in, is to judge, by what
is therein truly laid down, whether we had wronged Richard Smith according to
what he made a noise of. The fourth thing i^ ^n page 13. of my Answer, That no
rationable man can in reason judge, that I should charge Richard Smith to deny
that they never were, seeing the Scriptures are so full that they were in their
time and season, viz. Water Baptism and Breaking of Bread, these are the
things, though Richard Smith in page 3. of his Reply mentions Points of
Religion, I leave to rational impartial-minded men to judge of, as any man that
reads my Answer may find in the pages mentioned, of which things, and deeper
than these doubtless, many are able to judge, which are not called Quakers,
unto whose serious Consideration and Judgment I again leave them that may read
both Richard Smith's and my Answer.

The next thing that Richard Smith tells the Reader of, is, That a Paper of
George Fox 's was brought to him, in which George Fox says, many Friends came
to him concerning Marriages, to know what they should do in that Case; so that
it may now (says R. Smith) be seasonably asked, What is become of the Light of
Christ, so cried up for the only sufficient Teacher, to teach all things
requisite for men to know?

Answ. Rich Smith, page 4. unchristian-like says it does) than it proved the
Light defective, or that they durst not trust to it in the primitive time, when
Paul and Barnabas, and certain others of them, Acts 15.2. should go up to
Jerusalem to the Apostles and Elders there, to know what they must do as
touching Circumcision; might it not as well at that time have been said, What
is become of the sufficiency of the Light (Paul that great Apostle of the
Gentiles was sent to turn people to, Acts 20.18?) Does not sending to the
Apostles an^ Elders at Jerusalem, to know what you must do in this case, prove
either the Light is defective, or you dare not trust to it? nay, this does not
follow, but shows that some are come to a more full Age in the Truth, and so
to a more clear and deep sense and Knowledge of the Mind and Will of God, and
of things relating to his Kingdom than others, and such the God of Heaven in
his infinite Wi^dom and Goodness is pleased to make use of, as Instruments in
his hand, for the Benefit and Comfort of such who are more weak, and some but
as Babes in Christ, which the Apostles and Elders in their day did not reject,
but wrote to them what they should do, which when they had received, they
rejoiced for the Consolation, verse. 31. as many faithful Ones do now for what
God has been pleased to do by George Fox and many other Elders and Fathers, as
Instruments in his Hand for the Well-being and Government of his Church, for
which we bless the Name of our God, who gave some Apostles, some Prophets, and
some Evangelists, and some Pastors and Teachers, for the perfecting of the
Saints, for the Work of the Ministry, for the edifying of the Body of Christ,
till we all come in the Unity of the Faith, and of the Knowledge of the Son of
God, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the fullness of
Christ, Ephesians 4.11, 12, 13. R. Smith might as well have said, as many do, What
need you to preach, pray, build up, exhort, advise, counsel, admonish, reprove,
and such like holy Duties? (is not the Light sufficient? what is become of the
sufficiency thereof, so much cried up by you as Cavil against Friends for some
coming to George Fox to know what they must do as in the case of Marriages, for
their so doing does not prove the Light defective, or that such durst not trust
to it: this is not what Richard Smith has formerly said and done; so let him
and others consider who it is that is altered, for we are the same we were
twenty Years and more ago, who abide faithful both in Principle, Doctrine and
Practice, and nothing denied or gone from that we at first held, though some
things are added for the benefit in the Government of the Church of Christ, as
it was in the Primitive Time, as I proffered to Richard Smith's Face in his
House to prove, if he would deny it, which he did not; and he would have been
ashamed once within seven Years last past (and as many before that as to make
them twenty) to have spoken or written after this manner: but it is no more nor
otherwise then the old Spirit of the R^^ter coming forth in a new appearance,
which has assumed many shapes in our Day, to withstand the Simplicity that is
in the Truth, and for Liberty to it self which the God of Truth has and will
blast and bring to naught.

The next thing Richard Smith speaks o^, A great Meeting in this County of
Cheshire, where Womens-Meetings were p^op^^^^ by William Gandy and Thomas
Briggs, two of George Fox's p^^selites, as he calls them, to speak so slightily
of such that he has formerly had an esteem and respect for (and they are the
same they were) will make him never the better thought o^ ^y (...) or People:
he says, that I and most of the Meeting gainsaid th^^. As he there lays it
down, the thing is not true, as I can br^^g several to witness, for neither I
nor others did oppose them simply as touching Womens-Meetings, but as judging
there was no need for them to concern themselves in our County about some
things, as looking after the Poor, etc. which s^m^ of the Women out of their
Christian-Charity were willing to Communicate unto, and have a hand in the
disposal of, which I and some others in a high mind t^ought needless; and it is
not our selves we stand to justify, but the Truth, and the Simplicity therein,
and whosoever goes from it, goes into Error; and the Spirit of Truth, that
cannot Err, and men that believe in, and are guided by it, therein Err not, but
by it are led into all Truth: an^ for R. S. to say what is said as touching
Mirriam, Deborah, ^n^ Paul's pastoral charge to Titus, Paul, speaking to the
Women that resorted to the place where Prayer was wont to be ma^e and what has
bin said to the Scriptures is nothing to the matter, and i^ not a sufficient
Argument to prove it so, for R S. p. 5* 6. mentioning what G. Fox, W. Penn, R.
Bartlet and G. Wh^t^^^^d, say, they are able to answer for themselves, and W.
Penn did give him an answer thereunto in Writing, which might have satisfied
him.

In the next place I shall clear my self from the Lies and Forgerie, he in page
13. charge me with, and to be guilty of: R.S. says, It is a common saying, a
Liar uses to have a ready wit and quick memory (I have heard it said, he had
need of it) both which, says R. S. Alexander Lawrence wanted when he writ his
Book.

Answ. Richard Smith would in sense such who may come to read his Reply to the
contrary.

Richard Smith says, page 8. of his Reply, That I say, page 11. of my Answer,
that I knew not he had spoke against Womens-Meetings till after such a time,
yet in page 15. I give my self the Lie, in confessing, and saying within a
Parenthesis, though it may be some of us have been of the same mind with thee.

Answ. London, which thou chiefly objected against, though that was done above
nine Months before this I mention, yet nothing that I know of said against it
till after this time, which was the time we had to do between Thomas Davantport
and him, as in page 10, 11. of my Answer is mentioned at large, these words
[since that at London] Richard Smith leaves forth, which wholly alters the
case, for that which I mention, page 15. was at that great Meeting he mention,
page 4. of his Reply, where he says, I and most gain-sayed them, to wit,
William Gandy and Thomas Briggs, which was before that at London, for he says
in the same page 4. of his Reply, not long after that Alex. Lawrence and some
others went to that great Meeting at London, 1675. and there set their hands to
a Paper, etc. Therefore Richard Smith leaving forth the time, by me mentioned,
which was so plain before his Eyes, whereby to alter the sense of my words, is
no less then wilful Wickedness in him, and upon his own Head I return the Lie:
The second Lie R. Smith charge me with, and a piece of Forgery, I am guilty
of, as he says, is in the same page 8. that I should say that in my page 11.
which he did not say in his Light Unchangeable, page 7. nor in any page of his
Book; my words, page 11. of my Answer are these, Line sixteen and so on; and
there upon we advised and desired him, to wit, Thomas Davantport to come to
Meetings, which accordingly he did, and this thing was it, as thou call it,
pinch't thee the most of any thing done by us, page 7. the word pinch is that
which I had relation to in this matter, says Richard Smith, page 8. There is
neither in that page, viz. 7. nor any other in my Book any such Express^on of
mine, let any that has his Book entitled, Light Unchangeable, read p. 7. line
19. and on, and there they may find these words, As by the sequel will appear,
having beyond all Bounds of Civility been so pincht with Wrongs and Delays
from such, etc. Here he says, beyond all Bounds of Civility so pinch't, which
is the word I insisted upon, or intend in mine: therefore let any sober Person
judge who is the Liar and Forger, Richard Smith, or Alexander Lawrence.

The third Lie and piece of Forgery he charge me with, is in the same page,
that I charge him no less then three times in my Book, in adding to my Answers.

Answ. Christian-like, yea, and Un-Man-like abused me, in taking part of my
words, and separating them which are joined together in my Answer, page 5. line
14, 15. these are my words, also adding or diminishing to all or most of my
Answers to thy Queries.

The second place he mentions is page 13. these are my words, In the next place
I come to speak of my Answers to thy Queries and therein to prove unto thee and
others what I said before, viz. that thou have IN ALL or Most of them either
ADDED or DIMINISHED: Now let any impartial man judge whether it be fair in R.
Smith only to say, I said he Added, when I say he either ADDED or DIMINISHED,
and I did prove he Diminished in most of them, which he would put off himself
IN SAYING ITS NOT Equiv^c^t^ng and Forging, and to say of him page 13. quoting
Margin 26. of his, that is my Answer, which says he, he did not say: he says in
Margin 26. Book entitled, Light unchangeable, In Answer to the first Query,
which Answer was mine and no man's else, therefore it must either be my Answer
or no man's, yet he says, he did not say is was mine.

What pitiful shifts are these to hide Deceit, but they are too short any
rationable man may see them. The third place he cites is page 18. of my Answer,
my words are these: So have I showed wherein thou have either Added or
Diminished from all or most of my Answers, for what end is known to thy self:
Therefore let any sober person judge whether R. Smith has not dealt Un-
Christian-like, yea, Un-Man-like in saying, I say he has Added, when in all
the three places by him cited, I say, he has added or diminished, which in my
Answer to his, as before, I did clearly prove.

Another piece of Forgery he charge me with is in the same with that which he
in his Margin calls, the second Lie about the word pinch; therefore my Answer
thereunto may serve, only I may say, the man did not only want good memory and
quick wit, but also good Eyesight, or otherwise he would not have written so
many Lies and Slanders in one page, viz. 8. and one twice over, or else he
wanted Matter to fill it up; but however, his Tongue is his own, and he can say
what will fit his own turn.

He tells people of an Edict, as he calls it, and as though thereby we would
Violate the Bonds of Relations, so as to teach Wife to deny Husband, Children
Parents, Servants Masters, etc.

Because we therein deny him, he being gone out of the Fear and Wisdom of God,
which does not in the least imply such a thing, though he would draw such a
conclusion from it, thereby to render us contemptible in sober Peoples minds,
which is a further manifestation of his Mind and Intent toward us, but it had
been fitter for him to have been silent herein, except he had kept the Bonds of
Relations at Home, better then he has done.

R. S. says, page 11. of his Reply, That he takes Religion to be a close
walking with God in those holy Duties the Gospel enjoins.

Answ.

Had there not been a necessity for the clearing of the Truth from his Lies and
Slanders, I should rather chose to have been silent, knowing the bad use that
many will make of such things, saving, They are at difference among themselves,
and the like, but Truth is but one, and they that are in it, and keep to it,
are in Unity therein.

THE END.

