TWO Funeral Sermons OF THE Use and Happiness OF HUMANE BODIES.

Preached on 1 CORINTHIANS. vi. 13. Now the Body is not for Fornication, but for
the Lord, and the Lord for the Body.

WITH A brief Account of the Life and Death of Mr. G. Lorimer, Merchant; upon
the occasion of whose Death the second Sermon was Preached.

By Edward Lawrence, M. A. Minister of the Gospel.

London, Printed by J. R. for T. Parkhurst, at the Bible and Three Crowns in
Cheapside, 1690.

TO THE READER.
Reader,
THou have many Discourses of the Souls of Men: And here I offer thee one Plain
and Short Discourse of Man's Body, yet also with respect to the Soul: It will
cost thee but a very little Time to read it, and but a very little Money to buy
it; If it may be of any use to preserve thee from wasting thy Time at the Door
of Eternity, and from losing thy Soul in a vain Religion, and to save thee from
a stinging Death, and tormenting Eternity, I have my end.

Febr. 17th. 1689/90. Thy Servant for Jesus sake, Edward Lawrence.

THE BODY FOR THE LORD.
1 COR. 6.13. -- Now the Body is not for fornication, but for the Lord, and the
Lord for the Body.


IT is ordinary for Nations and Cities, Families, and Persons, to be in a
special manner inclined to some particular sins. The Cretians were branded for
a Lying People, Tit. 1.12. The Cretians are always Liars: And the Jews also to
whom St. James writes, seem by his Epistle, to be much addicted to the Sins of
the Tongue; and this is exemplified in the Corinthians, which were much given
to Fornication; and therefore we read that in Corinth there was a Temple
erected for this Sin! One reason of the prevalency of this Sin amongst them,
was an Opinion of the Gentiles which prevailed in Corinth, that Fornication was
no sin, but a thing indifferent. Hereupon the Apostle in this Chapter pleads
against this Sin; the argument he uses against it is, That this sin is against
the right use of the Body of Man. Now says he, The Body is not for
Fornication, etc.

The words show us the true and proper use of Man's Body; And this is expressed

(1.) Negatively the Body is not for Fornication.

(2.) Affirmatively: But for the Lord: And this is amplified by another
proposition, which shows why the Body is, and ought to be for the Lord, viz.
The Lord is for the Body: By the Lord is here meant the Lord Jesus Christ; as
appears by his being mentioned with God the Father, ver. 14. and has both
raised up the Lord. The words chiefly teach us Two Doctrines.

I. The Body of Man is for the Lord Jesus Christ.

II. The Lord Jesus Christ is for the Body of Man.

I. The Body of Man is for the Lord Jesus Christ. Method,

1. What is meant by the Body of Man?

2. What is it for the Body of Man to be for the Lord.

3. The reasons of the Doctrine.

4. Use. By the Body of Man is meant, that visible and essential part of Man
which is distinct from the Soul and Spirit, this is that part of Man, which was
at first formed out of the dust of the ground. Genesis 2.7. and at death, returns
to the Earth, when the Spirit returns to God that gave it. Eccles. 12.7. This
is visible may be seen and felt; and therefore Christ demonstrates his Body by
this, Luke 24.39. Behold my hands and my feet, handle and see, for a Spirit
has not Flesh and Bones, as ye see me have.

3. This is distinct from the Soul, as appears, verse the last of this Chapter,
Glorify God in your Body and in your Spirit, viz. In your Body and Soul. Now
this Body is for the Lord which implies Four things.

1. The Body with all the Members of it in particular are for the Lord. The
Eyes, Ears, Tongus, Hands, Feet, are for the Lord. They have all work to do for
the Lord Christ. And its a great piece of Skill to understand what is the main
use we are to make of our Senses, and of the Members, and Limbs of our Bodies.
What is the chief work these are to be employed in, they are to be used for the
Lord, they are to work for the Lord Christ.

2. The Life, Health, Strength and Activity of all these is for the Lord, Romans
14.8. Whether we live, we live unto the Lord: If we have better Health and
Strength than others, it is that in the use thereof we may do more for the Lord
than others.

3. All things that are for the use and service of the Body, are to be used for
the Lord, that with them you should serve him. What Christ appointed his
Disciples to say in a special case concerning the Ass, and the Colt, Mat. 21.3.
The Lord bath need of them, is true in ordinary cases. The Lord has need, or
use for them, your Money, Cattle, Corn, Goods, and Apparel; that with them you
should serve him, your Meat and Drink, Preferments, and Estates, Houses, and
Lands are for the good of your Bodies; but you must eat and drink to the Lord,
1 Cor. 10.31. You must honor the Lord with your substance, Prove. 3.9. When you
buy or sell, or build, be able to say, I get this Money for the Lord, I trade
in this Shop for the Lord, I build these Houses for the Lord. The Lord Jesus
shall have all at his service, and for his Glory. The Heavens, Earth, Seas,
etc. must praise the Lord by your Mouths.

4. All the time of Bodily Service. The time wherein we are in the Body is for
the Lord. Ps. 148.12, 13. Both young Men and Maidens, old Men and children, let
them praise the name of the Lord. A young Boy or Girl has work to do for the
Lord. You should make all your Works, and Recreations serviceable to the Lord.
There is no time, but you may find something to do for God.

2. What is it for the Body to be for the Lord? Account in seven particulars.

(1.) It is for the Lord chiefly: This does not exclude our Natural, much less
our Spiritual Self: Neither does it exclude our Families, Relations, or the
Public, the Body is for all these in their places, but chiefly for the Lord,
and for all these things in, and to the Lord. The Body is for Food and Raiment,
for to get Money and Wealth, etc. in their places, but the Body with all these
must be for the Lord, as the last end. You may take all the good God has put
in any Creature, for your use and service, but you must honor and serve God in
the use of it. And its most certain that any Creature is best to you, and you
have most of the Comfort and sweetness of it, when you do honor, and serve God
with it: You will eat and drink with as true gladness of Heart as any Man
alive, when you eat to the Lord, and drink to the Lord; and you may get, and
keep riches with as much diligence, and care as others; and you will take as
much pleasure in your Houses and Lands, and Silver, and Gold, as any when you
look on your estates as the Lords and improve them for him, and are ready to
forsake them for him.

(2) That our Bodies are not our own; we are not the chief and absolute Lords
and Masters of our selves, ver. 19. of this Chapter: Ye are not your own: Romans
14.7. None of us lives to himself: They were ignorant Atheists that said,
Psalm. 12.4 -- Our Lips are our own. We cannot according to our own Wills and
Pleasures dispose of so much as a glance of our Eyes, or a word of our Tongues.

(3.) Our Bodies are not for Sin. The Body is not for Fornication, says the
Text. Thy Body was not made for Whoremongers, and Harlots, thy Tongue was not
made for Oaths, Lies, and evil Speaking. Thy Eyes are not for wanton looks, to
be gazing on Spectacles of Uncleanness. God did not make the Body to dishonor
himself. The Apostle tells us, Romans 8.12. We are Debtors, we owe our selves,
but not to the Flesh; we owe Sin and the Devil no service, we are not to go a
step in their Work; God-did not so curiously frame that Head, and those Limbs
of thine for the Devil, and Sin, Romans 8.12. Let not sin reign in your mortal
Bodies. The meanest Finger or Toe in thy Body is too good to be an Instrument
of Sin.

(4.) The Body is not for the World; so as to be employed for it as its Chief
Master, or its chief end, Mammon was not made for your Master, but your
Servant: The World is for you, and not you for the World. The body of man was
made for a higher business, than only or chiefly, to gather and heap up the
Riches of the World; and therefore when the Body is employed about the World,
we must see we are for God therein, this is the true goodness of the World,
that it is good to make a Man more useful for God, and more serviceable to him.
For a Man to be busied about Silver and Gold, and about Houses and Lands, and
Goods and Cattels, except he can thereby do some service for God, it is not
worth the Labor of a Man, Prove. 14.24. The Crown of a wise Man is his Riches:
Riches are a Man's Crown and Glory; when Men are so wise as to use them for God,
otherwise they are their snares, curse, and shame.

(5.) The Body is for the Lord, so as to be an Instrument of Obedience to the
Lord. Its to be employed in the Lords work in that which he sets it about, Romans
6.10. Yield your Members Servants to Righteousness, unto Holiness. Our Bodies
are at the Command of God, and should be always doing the Will of God.
Whatever we do, we should be able to say, We are doing the Lords Work, and with
our Savior we are about our Fathers business.

(6.) The Body is for the Lord, i. e. for the Honor and Glory of the Lord. So
verse the last of this Chapter, Glorify God in your Bodies and Spirits: Phil.
1.20. That Christ may be glorified in my Body. We should give that account of
all our actions, as David did of his dancing before the Ark: 2 Samuel 6.21. It
was before the Lord: And it should be said of us, as Romans 4.6. He that eats,
eats to the Lord: Every Member of our Bodies may be useful in its place to
bring Glory to God: And we often see, how very much God is glorified by one
Holy and Sanctified Body, Oh what a blessed place London would be, if all the
Bodies which you see in the Houses, Shops, and Streets were employed for the
Glory of God.

(7.) Our Bodies are for the Lord, so as to be at the Lords disposal. He may
choose which way he will serve himself of our Bodies: He sets us the bounds for
the Habitations of our Bodies, Acts 17.26. that we may fill our places with the
Name and Glory of God. He appoints us our Work and Callings, Mark 13.24. To
every Man his Work: A Minister has his Work, a Tradesman his Work, a Master
his Work, a Servant his Work, and whatsoever a Man's Calling, Work and Way is,
he should work for God therein, and labor to have Communion with God therein;
1 Cor. 7.24. Brethren, Let every Man wherein he is called therein abide with
God; He measures out to us our outward Estates, and Conditions. Some are to be
rich for God, and others to be poor for God; to some he gives Healthful,
Strong, Comely Bodies; to others Sick, Diseased, Lame, Blind Bodies; and
however he disposes of them, they have their Way, and Work for the Lord. And
we often see to the shame of others, how the Blind, Lame, and Deformed will
find Work to do for God, and that in many Families a Blind or Lame Child
becomes a Member and Spouse of Christ, when perhaps their Brothers, and
Sisters, that have their Sight, and Limbs, and are comely, and do greatly
dishonor God, and make their handsome Bodies instruments of Sin, and Firebrands
of Hell.

Two Reasons of the Doctrine.

I. Because the Body is the Lords. II. The Body has much work to do for the
Lord.
I. The Body is the Lords: He is the chief Lord and Owner of your Bodies, as
well as of your Souls. See verse the last of this Chapter, Glorify God in your
Bodies, and Spirits, which are Gods. So in the Text, The Lord for the Body.
This seems to be the reason of the Text: Or as some turn the Phrase, The Lord
is the God of the Body. God is the Lord of the Body, by a five fold right, all
which show the Body is for the Lord.

1. He is the Maker of the Body, as he made all other things, so also did he
make the Bodies of Men, for himself. Therefore says David, Psalm. 139.14. I
will praise thee, for I was fearfully and wonderfully made: He has made the
Bodies of Men capable of doing him more Service, and bringing him more Glory
than any other Bodies are capable of. He has given Man a Tongue to call on
God, and to fill the World with the praises of God.

2. Our Bodies are the Lords by purchase. He has bought them with a great
price; verse the last of this Chapter, Ye are bought with a price. Observe,
Your Bodies are bought with a price, therefore they are Gods to glorify him.
God has bought, and paid for every good word thou can speak, for the use of
every Finger or Toe in thy Body: He has bought all these for his Service, 1
Pet. 1.17, 18. God did not purchase us at so dear a rate, to leave us to live
the Lives of Slaves to the Devil, the World, and Sin, but that we might live
the Lives of the Sons and Heirs of God, and of Christ.

3. By Union with the Lord Jesus Christ, he is the Owner of his whole self, and
every Member of his is for himself: With this reason the Apostle proves, that
our Bodies are for the Lord; ver. 15. Know ye not that your Bodies are the
Members of Christ, and thence he infers, Shall I take the Member of Christ,
etc. We should do nothing with our Bodies, but what is fit to be done by a
part of Jesus Christ. Shall I swear, or lie with the Tongue that is a part of
Christ. Shall I make any part of Christ drunk or unclean, or worldly, no
certainly, our Bodies being Parts and Members of Christ, should be moved at the
Will and Pleasure, and for the Honor of our Head in Heaven.

4. By Dedication, Our Bodies are dedicated to the Honor and Service of God,
ver. 19. What know you not that your Bodies are the Temples of the Holy Ghost,
which is in you, and is of God. And therefore, says he, Ye are not your own,
ye are for the Lord, whose Temples you are. These Temples should be kept Holy
and Pure, and for the Use and Service of God. You may easily conceive what a
horrid thing it would have been to have seen a Company of People Whoring, and
Drunk, and Swearing, and Fighting in the Temple of God. What make the Temple of
God a Bawdyhouse? No, The Temple of God is to be a House of Prayer, a place
Devoted to the Service of God; so it is a very horrid thing that our Bodies
which are the Temples of God, should be filled with all manner of Sin. Eyes
full of Adultery, Mouths full of Lies and Oaths; and the whole Temple of God
filled with all manner of Sin. Beloved we know the Glory of God was seen in the
Temple; his Glory did shine in the Temple, and indeed we may see the Glory of
God in the very Looks, Countenances, and Languages, and Behavior of the very
Bodies of Holy Men, which speak their Bodies to be the Temples of God.

5. By Covenant This is one great use of Baptism, and the Lords Supper, that
we do therein bind our selves, our Souls and Bodies to be for the Lord. So that
it may be said of us, as in Deuteronomy. 26.17, 18. Thou have avouched the Lord this
day to be thy God. Or, As some read it, Thou have made the Lord say this day
that he will be a God to thee. verse 18. The Lord has made thee say this day,
That you will be a peculiar People unto him: And every time we stand before God
to worship him in the use of any Ordinance: We do profess our Bodies to be the
Lords, and for him.

II. Reas. Because there is much work for the body to do for the Lord. The
Commands of God bind the body to Obedience, as well as the Soul. Jesus Christ
lived here in the body, and left us an Example of bodily service, and
sufferings. Our profession of Religion must be by the body, Romans 10.10. With
the heart man believes, and with the mouth confession is made to Salvation. We
must by the use of our bodies confess Christ before Men, that he may confess us
before his Father in Heaven, Matthew. 10.32. We must with our bodies worship God
in all the Ordinances of Worship. We must pray with our bodies as well as our
Souls. We cannot hear or read the Word but in the use of our bodies. The
Sacraments are bodily Signs, that by them we may with our bodies as well as our
Souls Worship God. We cannot eat or drink in the Lords Supper without the Body.
Water in Baptism is to wash the Body: Our Bodies are to be employed in our
particular Callings for the Lord. The Graces of Gods Spirit come into the Soul
by the Body, Romans 10.17. Faith comes by hearing: And all the Graces are
exercised by the Body. I believed, therefore have I spoken. The Soul sets the
Body on work, Ps. 45.1. My Heart is inditing a good matter, etc. and my Tongue
is the Pen of a ready Writer, Matthew. 12, 34, 35. Out of the abundance of the
heart the mouth speaks. A good man out of the good treasure of his heart
brings forth good things.

USES. I. Of Dehortation. II. Of Exhortation.


I. For the First: Of Debortation. In respect, 1. Of the Bodies of others. 2.
Of our own Bodies.


(1.) If the Bodies of Men are for the Lord, do not debauch or corrupt any
Persons by enticing them to bodily Sins: Do not draw them to Whoredom and
Drunkenness: They have a better Master to serve, and better work to do; they
may be honoring and serving God whilst they are serving thy Lusts. Their
Bodies may be better employed, than by Drinking and Whoring with thee; entice
no body to any thing, but what their bodies were made and purchased for: Draw
them to nothing but what is fit for a Spouse and Member of Christ to do.

(2.) Do no wrong to the bodies of any Persons, by unjust beating them, or
hurting them. How dare thou disable any person for the service of God. You
Masters, be not cruel to your Apprentices, their bodies are for the Lord: You
would not starve or overwork or abuse a dear Horse that cost many Pieces. Look
on thy Apprentice, he is a dear Child, do not abuse that body which was bought
with the blood of God; prize it and cherish it for the Owners sake.

(3.) Do not cheat any of their bodily Wealth, by Theft, by Overreaching them
in buying or selling; by withholding the just Debts which thou owe. They and
their Estates are for the Lord, and the Lord will concern himself to take
vengeance on thee, 1 Thessalonians. 4.6. It may be sad to many to think that they have
consumed that on their Lusts, for which many Parents and their Children would
be blessing God for* And here I may warn Husbands and Wives, and Parents, that
they consume not the bodily Wealth which is for the good of their Yokefellows
and Children. Oh what a cruel Husband or Wife art thou who have consumed that
on thy lusts which would have maintained thy Yokefellow: And how can Parents
endure their Children should cry. We might have been better Scholars, or might
have had better Trades or Portions, had it not been for our Fathers and Mothers
Lusts.

II. Dehortation. In respect of your own Bodies. Do not abuse your own Bodies
by Sin. This sets all the Members of the Body against the Lord, which should be
for the Lord: Let not your bodies be used as Instruments to execute or bring
forth the sins of your hearts; Remember the Apostle, Romans 6.12. Let not sin
reign in your mortal Bodies. More particularly keep your Bodies clean from
these four sorts of Sins.

(1.) All manner of Whoredom and Uncleanness. Mark the Text, The Body is not
for Fornication, but for the Lord, see ver. 18. How the Apostle pleads against
this Sin as being more against the Body than other Sins: Flee Fornication,
says he: The reason follows: Every sin that a man does is without the Body,
but he that commits Fornication sins against his own Body, i. e. Although
the Body be the Organ or Instrument to execute other sins, yet the matter which
by sin is abused, lies more without the body. The Drunkard hurts this body, but
he abuses Wine, and Drink which is without the body; but in Whoredom the body
is the Instrument of sin, and that which is abused by sin: But these things are
spoken comparatively; the words show what a wrong Whoredom is to a man's body:
See ver. 15. how the Apostle pleads against it as a most loathsome thing to take
a part and member of Christ, and make it a member of an Harlot, to join any
part of Christ to a Harlot. This is a sin rots the Name, rots the Body, by this
the flesh and the body are consumed, Prove. 5.11. and brings body and Soul to
Hell, ver. 9, 10. of this Chap. Fornicators and Adulterers shall not inherit
the Kingdom of God: It Is matter of grief and astonishment that this sin should
be practiced with such horrid Impudence by a people that profess their bodies
to be Members of Christ, and in a Land where the Bible is read that tells them,
Whoremongers and Adulterers God will judge, Heb. 13.4. And that people will not
believe how little a way it is between the defiled Bed, and the Fire of Hell.

(2.) Drunkenness, to which may be added gluttony: These things set the body in
a readiness to do any thing for the Devil and Sin, but render it unfit for the
service of the Lord. A Drunkard in his drink may swear, blaspheme, and Whore,
and Murder. But can a Man pray when he is drunk, hear Sermons, or receive
Sacraments, or have Communion with God in any thing when he is drunk? When a
Man is drunk, he is not fit Company for a Man, how then can he at that time be
fit for Communion with God? Pray therefore that nothing may enter into thy
Mouth which may defile thy Soul, disease thy Body, unfit thee for the service
of God, or waste the Creatures on thy craving and consuming Lusts.

(3.) Sins of the Eyes. A great deal of Sin or Grace is seen in the Looks or
Countenances of People: There are proud Looks, wanton Looks, envious Looks and
angry Looks; but when the Soul and Body is serving the Lord, it puts another
Face and Countenance on Men. It makes them look with a holy, humble, chaste,
loving, and cheerful countenance

Lastly, Sins of the Tongue, Jam. 3.6. How would it tame our Tongues, if we
considered our Tongues are for the Lord: And what a great deal of Honor one
wholesome Tongue brings to the Lord; and we should not speak a word, but it
should be some way or other for the Lord.

Use 2. Of Exhortation, which refers.

1. To others.

2. To our selves.

For the First, Is the Body for the Lord: Thence infer three Duties to others.

(1.) Put a true value on the very bodies of all Men. Look on them as for the
Lord, and prize them accordingly, 1 Pet. 2.17. Honor all Men: Wherever you see
the body of a Man, Woman, or Child, be they never so poor, or weak, or
deformed, yet consider these bodies were made for the Lord, bought for the
Lord, and may be Members of the Lord, and therefore love and esteem the bodies
of Men for the Lord's sake.

(2.) Do all the good you can, not only to the Souls, but to the Bodies of Men:
This is the great duty of the Sixth Commandment, which binds you to your power
to endeavor to preserve the Life, Health, Liberty and Cheerfulness of Men:
Therefore do them good on this reason, because their bodies are for the Lord;
and you may fit them, and make them more capable of serving and praising him.

(3) Lament to see the horrid abuse which most make of their bodies. When you
see how most use their own bodies, can you think they use them for the Lord.
What are Men Swearing, and Cursing, Whoring, and Drunk for the Lord; are they
Lying, Cheating, and oppressing for the Lord? You may see Streets full of Sin,
Shops full of Sin, Houses full of Sin; most people eating and drinking, talking
and working for the Devil, the Flesh, and the World; but very few doing any
thing for the Lord.

2. To our selves. Frame your Lives according to the belief of this Truth. That
your bodies are for the Lord. I shall press this with a few Motives, and
conclude with Directions.

Mot. 1. Consider the great account you are to give to God for your own Body,
Romans 14.12. Every one of us must give an account of himself to God: God will
question us what we have done with our selves, What use we have made of our
own Souls and bodies, 2 Cor. 5.10. We must all appear before the Judgment Seat
of Christ, that every one may receive or carry away the things done in his
Body, according to that he has done, whether it be good or evil. Observe,
When we appear before Christ at the day of Judgment, every one shall carry
away his weight. Sinners shall carry away their Oaths and Lies, etc. viz. the
Wrath due for them. Saints shall carry away a weight of Glory I charge you
Christians as you will answer it to the Judge before the door, when in that
flesh and body you must stand before him, when he will call you to account for
your Lives, Health, Ease, for your Speech, Sight, Hearing, and for the Members
and Limbs of your bodies, for your Meat, Drink, Sleep, Estates; that you then
be able to say, I have used this body for the Lord: remembering that of the
Apostle, 1 Cor. 3.17. If any Man defile the Temple of God, (meaning his own
Soul and Body) him will God destroy.

2. Consider God accepts and will reward all that with your bodies you do for
the Lord? Not so much as a good word spoken sincerely for God, nor a loving
look upon a Child of God, nor a Cup of cold Water given to a Disciple of
Christ, shall lose its reward.

3. It Is but a little while, that your bodies will be fit to do any thing for
the Lord. I would have those who have yet Youth, and Health, and Strength to
study the 12. of Ecclesiastes, where young Men are required to serve the Lord,
ver. 1. Remember thy Creator, and the way the Holy Ghost uses to move them
hereunto, is this, he sets before them an old man with an hoary head, dim eyes,
shaking hands, Feeble Limbs, with his Teeth rotted away, Faltring Speech, and
bowed Back, such things as these are set out by those Metaphorical Expressions,
ver. 3, 4, 5, 6. and they serve to teach the Young and Healthful, that whenever
they see an Old, Lame, Withered Man or Woman, sitting in the House, or creeping
about the Streets: They should consider that they should do all the service
they can for God, now because they will do so little, when they are in the
condition of such aged Persons.

4. Consider, if your Bodies are employed for the Lord now, it will yield you
sweet comfort, when you can serve God no longer, or at least do him but little
service, Ps. 71.17, 18. God will never forsake an Old Servant, or a Sick
Servant.

Lastly, When sickness and death comes, thou can have no comfort, if thou
have not employed thy Body for the Lord. It will be fad parting with the Body
and Soul, when thou must leave a cursed Body to the Earth, and go with a Damned
Soul to Hell, and more sad will be their meeting at the Resurrection to
Condemnation.

7. Directions.

1. See that the whole Manbe-Sanctified, and made holy, 1 Thessalonians. 5.23. The very
God of Peace sanctify you wholly, Heb. 10.22. Our Bodies washed with pure
water, i. e. by the powerful Operation of the Spirit, which cleanses the heart
from sin, as Water washes the Body from Filth. When the Soul is made Holy,
there will be a Holy Tongue, Holy Hands, etc. all will be Holy.

2. Present your bodies to the Lord, Romans 12.1. I beseech you Brethren by the
Mercies of God, that you present your Bodies a living Sacrifice, Holy,
acceptable to God, which is your reasonable service. The word (...), rendered,
present; is an allusion to the Sacrifices which were set before God at the
Altar as ready to be offered to him; so we must set not only our Souls, but our
Bodies before the Lord as his due. Say, This Tongue, and these Eyes and Hands
are for the Lord. Pray him to take them, and use them for himself.

3. In all places you are in with your bodies, consider what Work is to be done
for the Lord, you can be no where but you may find work for the Lord, Prove.
27.8. As a Bird that wandreth from his Nest, so is a man that wandreth from his
place: And this I think is the intent of that Scripture, Eccles. 11.3. In the
place where the Tree falls (or happens to be) there it shall be, for the
benefit and advantage of them to whom it falls. The Context seems to justify
this sense, teaching us that every Man ought to labor to be a blessing in his
place.

4. Whatever you do for your Bodies, do it as for the Lord: Take care of your
bodies: Do not wilfully bring Diseases on your bodies: Preserve your bodies for
the Owners sake: When you are feeding and clothing your Bodies, see that you
do it for the Lord: Do not eat and drink, so as to make you unfit for the Lord,
to put your bodies out of frame for the Lord.

5. All that you do with your bodies, do it to the Lord, and for the Lord:
Observe Romans 14.6. He that regards a day, regards it to the Lord; he that
eats, eats to the Lord. When you are employed in your Callings, if your
Working, Buying, and Selling, were only to get Money, and to have great
Estates: This were not worth the Care, and Thoughts, Words, and Time of a Man;
but see that you and yours are for the Lord. So when you are cheerful, be ruled
by these Principles, in your Laughing, Jesting, and Mirth: Have no Mirth, but
what you can bless God for, and have no Mirth but what you can part with, 2
Cor. 7.30. And they that rejoice, as though they rejoiced not.

6. Keep a Guard on your Bodies, and on all the parts of them. Job made a
Covenant with his Eyes, Chap. 31.1. Feed not your Lusts with wanton Objects.
Bridle your Tongues: Psalm. 39.1. Keep your whole Bodies in subjection to the
Will of God.

Lastly, Give up thy Body to the Lords disposal. Submit to the Lord in bodily
Sickness, Poverty, Imprisonment; be ready to suffer any thing for the Lord, and
so leave thy Body to sleep in Jesus when the Lord calls for it.

THE LORD FOR THE BODY.
1 COR. 6.13. -- And the Lord for the Body.


Doct. 2. THE Lord Jesus Christ is for the Body of Man.

I shall give account of the Doctrine under these Heads.

I. What are we to understand by the Lord Jesus his being for the Body.

II. What does Jesus Christ do for the Body of Man.

III. Why is Jesus Christ for the Body.

USE.

I. By Jesus Christ his being for the Body, we are to understand that the Lord
Jesus Christ does set himself to bless the Body of Man, so as to make it
unspeakably happy, and blessed for ever. See Jesus Christ in all his Glory, and
then look upon that poor Worm and dust of thy Body, and know that all the
fullness of the Godhead, and all the fullness of the Manhood is in Jesus Christ
for the good of that poor Body; See Col. 2.9, 10. In him dwells all the Godhead
Bodily, and you are complete in him who is the Head of all Principalities and
Powers. Observe, All the fullness of the Godhead dwells in the Humane Nature of
Christ; that we may be (...), filled in him, and both in Body and Soul
completely happy and blessed in him. There are three things employed in the Lord
Jesus his being for the Body.

1. That he is a Savior of the Body of Man. The whole Work of Salvation is for
the Body.

2. That he has the Infinite Love and Kindness of a Savior for the Body of
Man, Tit. 3.4. After that the kindness and love of God our Savior toward man
appeared: Observe these words, (...): The words show that the goodness it self,
or as I may say, the good Nature in the Lord Jesus inclines him to love Man. So
that its easy and Natural to him to be kind and loving, and to have
unspeakable love and kindness for Man, for every part of Man, both of Body and
Soul.

3. That all the Attributes of the Godhead are working in the Lord Jesus Christ
as a Savior to fulfill his love, and good will to the Body of Man. See the
Infinite Power, Wisdom, Justice, and Faithfulness of the Godhead in Christ. He
has infinite Love and good Will for the Body; Infinite Wisdom to contrive the
Happiness of the Body; Infinite Power to execute the Counsels and good Pleasure
of his Wisdom, and Love for the Body of Man. See Phil. 3.20, 21. We look for
the Savior the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall change our vile body, that it may
be fashioned like unto his glorious Body, according to the working, whereby he
is able to subdue all things to himself. These words show that the Almighty
Power of Christ, whereby he is able to do what he will, is working in him to
make the Body of Man glorious.

II. What does the Lord Jesus do for the Body of Man? Answer in two particulars.

1. He blesses the Body with Temporal things.

2. He makes the Body of Man glorious and blessed for ever.

1. He blesses the Body with Temporal things, Deuteronomy. 30.20. He is thy Life and
the Length of thy days. He gives and prolongs our Lives, Prove. 8.18. Riches
and Honor are with me.

(1) He has made many gracious promises for the Body. 1 Timothy 4.8. Having
premise of this Life that now is, Mat. 6.33. All these things shall be added
unto you* Deuteronomy. 28.3, 4, 5, 6. Blessed shall thou be in the City, etc. He has
settled all things present upon us, so far as it is for our good; 1 Cor. 3.22.
Things present are yours. We have the Word of God for the good of our Bodies in
this Life; and certainly the poorest Saint who has a right to the promises of
God for things present, is better provided for and in less danger of Famine,
then the greatest carnal person in the World; for the Ungodly have Riches, for
the Body Silver, Gold, Houses and Lands for the Body, but a Godly Man has the
Lord of all the World for the Body.

(2.) His Infinite Care and Providence is exercised to fulfill his promises for
the Body, Mat. 6.32. Your Heavenly Father knows you have need of these
things, i. e. he knows so as to supply our need of these things: And for this
David tells, Psalm. 37.16. A little that a Righteous Man has, is better than
the Riches of many Wicked; because, says he, The Arms of the Wicked shall be
broken, but the Lord upholdeth the Righteous. The Righteous have the Lord with
their little, when the Wicked have often much, but the Lord is not with them,
but against them. So that this Lord who made the World for the good of Man's
body, does exercise his glorious Providence for the bodies of his People.

2. The Lord Jesus makes the bodies of his People blessed and glorious for
ever; and this appears.

(1.) By considering what he does for their bodies in this Life, in order to
their Eternal Happiness.

(2.) By considering what he does for their bodies when dead.

(3.) At the day of Judgment.

Lastly, For ever.

For the First, Observe Three things which the Lord does in this Life for the
Salvation of the bodies of his people.

1. He unites their Bodies to himself, ver. 15. Know you not that your Bodies
are the Members of Christ. What could he have done more for that poor dust of
thine, than to make it a blessed part of himself; to make it a part of his own
Mystical Body; so that what is done to the very Bodies of his People, is done
to himself, Mat. 25.35. I was Hungry, and Sick, and Naked, and Imprisoned: Lord
say they, when saw we thee so and so,: Yes says he, these little ones are a
part of me, I and they are all one, and what you did to them you did to me. Oh
how should we be affected with the Lords being thus for the body, so as to make
it a part of himself. Come and I will show you the Bride, the Lambs Wife; Rev.
21.9. How or where shall we see that sight: Why, wherever you see a true
Believer, you see the Body of the true Bride and Spouse of Jesus Christ.

2. He puts a Presence and Glory on the very Bodies of his people, Eccles. 8.1.
A Man's Wisdom makes his Face to shine: The Image of God shines in the very
face of a Godly Man: We read, Revel. 7.3. That the Servants of God must be
sealed in their Foreheads; which some think is an allusion to Slaves, who have
their Foreheads marked with the Names of their Masters, to whom they did
belong. So there may be read in the very Faces, and Countenances, and Foreheads
of Gods people, the Name of Christ, to whom they belong; for although Grace is
Internal, yet the Fruits thereof appear in the outward Man: And so Revel. 22 4.
The Name of the Lamb shall be on their Foreheads: If that be spoken of Heaven,
its in some measure true here; and its most certain that an upright, holy
Saint, carries such a presence with him, that it daunts oftentimes the Wicked,
and the very sight of them puts Gods Children in mind of their Father and
Savior.

3. He honors them by fitting their bodies for his Service, and using them
therein: And indeed it is a great Honor to serve so great and good a Master,
which made Paul so often Glory in that Title, The Servant of Jesus Christ. Now
when a Man is Sanctified, and made a new Creature, his whole Soul and Body are
thereby set for God; for his Honor and Service: We are said, Ephesians. 2.10. to
be Created in Christ Jesus to good works, to be made fit for good Works. It Is
said of a Godly Man, 2 Timothy 2.21. He shall be a Vessel of Honor, sanctified,
and meet for the Masters use, and prepared unto every good work. Thus you see,
that by the Grace and Life of Christ, a Man is fit for any service or
suffering, which Duty leads him to; and hereby the Saints of God may live as a
Company of Incarnate Angels in the World.

II. Consider what Christ does for the Body when Dead.

1. Their blessed Corpse are continued in their Union with Christ. Death breaks
no Union made by Grace; and therefore they are said to sleep in Jesus, 1 Thessalonians.
4.4. And are called the dead in Christ, ver. 16. Where you think of, or look
into the Churchyards: What a great Mystery it is, that so great a part of the
Bride and Spouse of Christ should lie amongst those ghastly Skuls, and rotten
Dust, and that there should be more of his Members, and a greater part of his
Body dead in the Earth, than are serving him here in the World.

2. He owns their dead Bodies for his. They are Christ's own. 1 Cor. 15.23. --
Afterward they that are Christ's at his coming. Observe the Bodies of Believers
from the hour of Death, till the coming of Christ, are Christ's all the while;
when they are Children of their Earthly Parents no more, Husbands and Wives no
more, yet Christ's still.

3. He loves them as his own, and as united to him: He loves their very rotten
Corpse as part of himself, as part of his own Spouse and Members; he knows them
all in the Earth; he can distinguish between the cursed Corpse of Unbelievers
that lie in the Graves under the Curses of the Law, and who are bound over to
suffer Everlasting Fire; and the blessed bodies of his Saints who lie in their
Graves, in a right to Heaven and Salvation: When our dearest Relations die, we
cry with Abraham, Bury my dead out of my sight: Bury my dead Husband, or dead
Wife, or dead Child out of my sight, and they are all to us as dead Men out of
mind; as its said, Psalm. 31.12. Yet they are always in the sight and view of
Jesus Christ; and when they have rotted in the Earth, or been swallowed up in
the Seas; or burnt in the Fire many Hundred years, yet these blessed bodies are
precious, and lovely in the Eyes of Christ. Jesus Christ is always looking on
the dust of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, of David, Paul and Peter, and all the
Saints which are dead with great Love and Delight.

III. Consider what Christ will do for the Bodies of his people at the day of
Judgment: In five particulars.

1. He will raise up their bodies to Glory; and herein he is said to be for the
body, ver. 14. Following the Text: God has both raised up the Lord, and will
also raise us by his Power: As sure as Christ is risen, so sure shall all
Believers be raised to Life and Glory, by the same Power that raised Jesus
Christ, Romans 8.11. But if the Spirit of him who raised Christ be in you, he
that raised up Christ from the dead shall also quicken your Mortal Bodies by
his Spirit that dwells in you. Then will he indeed show himself for thy Body,
when that Body which was at death sown in Corruption, shall be raised in
Incorruption, and which was sown in dishonor, shall be raised in Glory: Then
shall thy Body and Soul which were so loath to part at Death, and did part with
such sad gaspings and groans, meet again in Joy and Glory, and be for ever
united never to die and part more; 1 Cor. 15.42, 43, 44. And all this done in
the twinkling of an Eye. ver. 52. in a moment, and all be raised together.

2. Thy Body shall be fashioned like the glorious Body of Jesus Christ, Phil.
3. last. from whence we look for a Savior who shall change our vile Body.
Believer look upon that poor dying dust of thy body; see it as it will be
shortly amongst the Worms of the Earth; and then believe, that the Lord is so
for thy Body, as to exercise his Almighty Power, in fashioning that Body like
the glorious Body of Christ at the Right hand of God.

3. Thou must in thy Body come with Christ, and attend him coming to Judgment,
1 Thessalonians. 4.14. Them that sleep in Jesus, will God bring with him. He will bring
the Holy Patriarchs, and Prophets, and Apostles, and all the Saints with him.
Col. 3.4. When Christ who is our life shall appear, then, etc. you that were so
despised and scorned here, shall appear in Glory, in the open view of the World.

4. They shall be solemnly owned and acknowledged of Christ before his Father,
and the Holy Angels, Matthew. 10.32. Luke 12.8. The Lord Jesus himself will in
Effect say, This is my dear Spouse and Bride; these are they that loved me, and
served me, and suffered for me, and were never ashamed of me. Yonder Tongues
have spoken many good words for me, and yonder hands have reached out many a
kindness to me.

Lastly, They shall with their Bodies sit with Christ to Judge the World, 1
Cor. 6.2, 3. The World of Ungodly Men, and all the wicked Angels, and Devils in
Hell, must stand before the Saints to be judged by them: Indeed Jesus Christ is
the Chief and Supreme Judge, but all his Saints shall sit with him in Glory, as
his Members, with all their Bodies, like his glorious Body: So that they shall
then be like him, 1 John 3.2. And they shall prove and applaud the just
Judgment of Christ; though they see Jesus Christ judging their Parents to Hell;
yet they shall see his Justice so glorious and excellent, and their own Glory
will be so great, that they will be so far above the trouble for the Damnation
of the nearest Relation, that they will applaud, and exalt the Righteous
Judgment of Christ therein. I tell you Christians, the poorest and meanest
Saints of God, whom you often see clothed in Rags, who are accounted the Sink
and Jakes of the World, shall shortly appear in such Majesty and Glory, that
the highest, and proudest Ungodly Monarchs in the World will be ashamed and
tormented to look them in the face.

Lastly, Consider what he does for their Bodies for ever. In three particulars:

(1.) He makes their Bodies to be Immortal and Incorruptible, 1 Cor. 15.43. Thy
Body must last as long as thy Soul, or as the Angels in Heaven, or as the Body
of Christ: Here the most healthful are but a Vapor, which appear but a while,
and then vanish away, Jam. 4.14. What Is become of all the bodies of the Men in
the Ages before us, which were once in the Streets, Shops, Houses, and
Congregations, as you see the Bodies of Men now? What Is become of the bodies of
your Parents, Grandfathers, and Grandmothers, they are all vanished away; but
the other World is a World, without Sickness, Death, or Graves; your very
Bodies must live for ever.

(2.) They shall live in the Society of Blessed Angels. As the Devils are
Haters, so the Holy Angels are Lovers of Mankind: They love the Bodies of
Saints, and are undoubtedly Instruments of much good to them here; and they
shall be in the blessed Company of these Spirits for ever; See Zech. 3.7.

3. They shall with their glorified bodies, live in the Everlasting view and
sight of the glorious body of Christ, and of the glorified bodies of one
another, John 17.24. Thou shall see the Body of Christ as the Body of thy
Husband, Head, and Savior; thou shall see the body of Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob, Paul, and Peter, and be able to say, This is the Body of Paul, Peter,
and John. This is the body of Bradford, and Philpot, etc. Your Bodies shall be
cloahted without Silks, or Sattins; fed without Meat and Drink; Rich without
Silver and Gold; and your Bodies and Souls in nearer Communion with God, then
they would be here, though in the most desirable frame, you could hear a Paul
in the Pulpit every day.

Reason, Why is the Lord Jesus for the Body.

1. God the Father has given our Bodies as well as our Souls to Christ, to be
made happy by him. John 6.39. It Is the body that was given to Christ to be
raised up at the last day, and not a Finger or Toe shall be lost, if the having
of it will make it thy happiness.

2. Christ is fitted to be a Savior of the Body, as well as the Soul, Heb.
10.5. Jesus Christ has the Body, as well as the soul of man, which inclines
him so love Men's Bodies, and his Mystical Body is to be made of the Bodies of
his People, as well as their Souls; who as the Apostle says, are Members of
his Body, Flesh, and of his Bones, Ephesians. 5.30.

3. He carries on the whole Work of Salvation, with respect to our Bodies; He
dyed for our bodies, rose again for our Bodies, that they might rise with him,
and he intercedes in Heaven, for our Bodies, and at the day of Judgment will
raise up, and glorisie our Bodies; for he is the Savior of the whole Man, Body
as well as Soul.

USE 1. Of Information. Of three things.

1. This informs us what an unspeakable privilege it is to be a Child of God,
to have the Lord of all the World, for our Bodies as well as for our Souls. We
would think our selves happy, if the Princes, and Nobles, and great ones of the
World were for us, if we had their Love, and Favor; so that they would improve
their Power, and Interest for our good, but this has not always been the Lot
of Gods People; but the Lord is for us: Infinite Wisdom and Power, and Goodness
for us; for Believers are a part of Christ, a Self of Christ, and certainly he
will improve all for the good, and Glory of his whole Self.

2. It informs us of the dreadful condition of wicked men what a sad state are
they in both as to their Bodies, and Souls. I am now speaking of the Body, thou
have got good Meat and Clothes for the Body, good Houses and Lands for thy
Body, but is the Lord for the Body? No, this great Lord is against thy Body.
Infinite Power, and Wisdom, and Justice will be all set on work to torment thy
Body. Thou can not endure an aching Tooth, a broken bone, a fit of the Stone,
or Gout: The pains of a Traveling Woman: Oh little do thou think what thy
Body is to endure for ever. Go and dress thy self, make thy self fine, set out
thy self to the best, look in the glass, see if every hair or pin stand right,
but remember what that head and face, and arms, and Limbs must suffer, when
they burn in Hell. Oh Sinners, pity your Souls and Bodies, and never rest till
thou have got the Lord for thy Body. I tell thee, thy body has more need of
Christ, than of Meat and Drink.

3. It informs us what are the greatest and best things for the body, you may
know this by considering what the Lord does for the body; For certainly Christ
and his Spouse live best, and fare best, and are always most happy: And if it
were best to be Lords and Ladies, Nobles and Princes, do you think Christ would
not make his Members and Spouse such? Can any be so foolish as to think that
Christ does more for Turks and Pagans, than he does for himself, and for his
own Body; and therefore we must conclude that the best things are amongst Gods
Children to be Holy and Happy, to live a life of Godliness and Obedience to
God, in order to Glory, this must needs be the best, for this is that which the
Lord who is for the Body, does in Infinite Wisdom and Love choose for, and give
to his people; we must believe that the best and worst things are reserved. The
Wicked for the most part have the Gold and Silver, Honors and Pleasures of the
World, Oh but consider what is reserved for them, is reserved the blackness of
darkness for ever, Jude 13. Gods people are often poor, afflicted, and
persecuted in this World: But there is an Inheritance Incorruptable that fades
not away, reserved in the Heavens for them, 2 Pet. 1.4. Its a sweet comfort to
think that those things which are best at present, are most durable: If
spiritual things were to last no longer than the Vanities of the World, yet for
the present, they are better than the Riches, Honors, and Pleasures of the
World; if we had but a day in Gods Courts, its better than a Thousand
elsewhere, Ps. 84. but they are not only incomparably best at present, but they
are Everlasting.

USE 2. Of Comfort to the Godly: In three Particulars.

1. This secures to us the Providence and Care of God in outword things for the
Body. The Lord is so for the Body, that we may be assured the body shall not
want any thing that is good for us in order to our Eternal Happiness. Indeed
its fit we should leave it to God, who has more Wisdom to know what is good
for us, and more love to give what is good for us, than we have; to choose to do
us good in his own way. He knows best how to use his own care, to exercise his
own Providence, and to show his own Love, its enough for us to know that the
Lord, with the Infinite Wisdom, Power, and Love of the Godhead is for us, so as
to be the Cause of our Eternal Happiness; but seeing we may believe that this
will be the effect, and that the cause is sufficient to work it, we may well
leave it to God to take his own way to make us blessed; Observe our Savior;
Luke 13.32. Fear not little Flock, etc. Christ is there pleading against our
inordinate care about the Body; and says he, Fear not, for it is your Fathers
good Pleasure to give you the Kingdom of Heaven, and therefore shall not want
what is good for you in your way thither.

2. Comfort against all the Enemies of your Bodies, we have more for the Body
than can be against it: For the Lord is for the Body, and if God be for us, who
can be against us, Romans 8.21. And on this account, fear not them that can kill
the Body: For if the Lord be for the Body, fear not all that Wicked Men can do
to the Body, let them spoil us, impoverish us, imprison, kill us, yet they do
but fulfill the Counsels of the Lord for the Body: For as long as the Lord is
for the Body, things that are seemingly against the Body, are indeed for the
body, for the Lord rules all, and turns it to the Welfare of the Body.

3. Comfort against Death: If the Lord is for the Body, then Death is for the
Body too: It comes from the Lord as a blessing on the Body, to fulfill his good
Will and Counsel concerning it; and therefore welcome Death, the Body cannot be
happy in this World: This World of Meat and Drink, and Money, etc. Cannot so
much as make the body of Man happy; the Body must die, or at least be changed
before it can be happy. And therefore take a full view of Death, of the Grave,
of Worms, of Rottenness, See Job 19.25, 26, 27. I know that my Redeemer lives,
etc. Believe this, that the Lord is for the Body, and then say, Death take my
Body, Grave cover my Body, Worms eat my Body, yet the Lord will be still for
the Body, and he will raise it up; I shall see him, and stand before him at the
last day, and be like him, and appear with him in Glory.

Last use of Exhortation to three Duties.

1. Bless the Lord for what he does for the body: Its the Lord that gives you
Life, Health, Liberty and Estates; and therefore observe and take notice of the
Lord in all your Mercies to the body. You which are Tradesmen, if a Customer
come into the Shop, its the Lord which sends him for thy good, and deal with
him as coming from the Lord. See your Tables filled with the Lord, especially
if you were ever enabled to do him any bodily service.

2. Pray to the Lord for the body; there is care and love in the Lord for the
body, but it must be drawn out by Prayer: As there is Milk in the Mothers
breast, for the child, but the child must suck and draw it out of the breasts
into his own body; so we must by Faith and Prayer, suck and draw out Mercies
from the Lord both for Soul and Body.

3. Live as those who look for the Lord Jesus, to show himself for the body; to
make the body completely blessed and happy, Romans 8.28. We groan within our
selves, etc. Observe, We groan within our selves, viz. in the most inward parts
of Hearts and Souls, waiting for the Adoption, viz. the full possession of the
Inheritance which by Adoption belongs to us, viz. the Redemption of our Bodies.
We look and wait that our bodies be freed from Sin and Death, and made
perfectly glorious with Christ, let us live as those who look for such things.

(1.) As ever you expect to be like Christ at the Day of Judgment, Labor to be
like him now, 1 John 3.2, 3.

(2.) Labor to be such as Christ may own you, and accept you at the day of
Judgment, 2 Pet. 3.13, 14. 2 Cor. 5.9. Do nothing but what you are willing
Christ should come in the Clouds, and find you doing, do nothing but what
Christ will accept of, and reward you for, when you must see him with those
Eyes, and in your Flesh stand before him.

The LIFE of Mr. Gilbert Lorimer, Late MERCHANT of LONDON.
MR. Gilbert Lorimer, late Merchant of London was accomplished with Learning
and Parts: He was Master of the Latin Tongue, and understood several other
Languages.

He was most inclined to study Divinity, but by reason of his Bodily weakness,
and because he could not comply with the terms of Conformity, (though he much
valued all sober, good Conformists.) He applied himself to Merchandise, wherein
he was skilful, diligent, and just and faithful: When he was about Thirteen or
Fourteen years old, it pleased God to turn his Heart to himself; he told a Holy
and Judicious Person nearly Related to him, the Time when, and Place where
Infinite Grace began that blessed Work: wherein something was so signal that
made such an abiding Impression upon him, as to say with David, Psalm. 119.93. I
will never forget thy Precepts, for with them thou have quickened me. It pleased
God to exercise him with diverse Afflictions, especially Bodily Distempers,
which for four or five years before he died, were often accompanied with
stinging Pains; but in all God had his Heart and Love, and he possessed his
Soul in Patience: This is evident by several Letters which he writ to his Holy,
Learned, and Judicious Brother, Mr. William Lorimer, Minister of the Gospel,
part of which I thought sit to Communicate.

In Feb 23.168^, After his Recovery from a dangerous Sickness, he writ to him
thus, What shall I render to the Lord for all his benefits, who heals my
Diseases, and crowns me with loving kindness, and tender Mercies. O that I
may no more live to my self, but to God my most Gracious and Almighty
Deliverer; for this I desire your Prayers, and to return thanks to God through
Jesus Christ on my behalf.

On June 7. 1687. He wrote to him of the Death of their Dear Mother: Some of
his Words therein are these: O that through the hope of our being also with the
Lord, we may purify our selves as he is pure, that we may despise whatsoever
in this World would take us off from the Love of Christ. Blessed Jesus, draw
our Hearts to thy self in Heaven, where thou sit at the Right Hand of the
Father, that Death may be the Messenger to open the Prison Doors, that we may
flee away, and be at rest with Christ the beloved of our Souls, Amen.

In September following, his former Distemper, returned with greater force: But
when by means of two able Physicians he had some ease, he wrote to his Brother
aforesaid, on September, 12. 1687, wherein among many other of the like Nature,
are these words, Lord support and comfort me under my Bodily Pains, and grant
that I may wholly resign my self to the will of my Heavenly Father. I desire
your Prayers, although I am chastised sorely: Yet the Lord will not give me
over unto Death, not to a Temporal Death, so long as the continuance of Life
may be for his Glory and my good; however I steadfastly trust in the Infinite
Mercy of God, through the perfect Obedience, Sacrifice, and Intercession of my
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, that the second Death shall never have power
over me.

On Sept. 24. 1687. He writ to his Brother in Answer to one of his to him,
wherein he says, I have received your very comfortable and Christian Letter,
the only fault in it is, that it runs in expressions more suitable to those who
are in some high degree of Christian perfection, than to me a vile sinner; I am
nothing, but Christ is all in all in me, and for me, adding his pain was much
abated, for which (said he) Magnify the Lord with me, and let us exalt his
Name together; Salvation and Glory be ascribed to the God of Salvation, pray
rather for a sanctified use of my Afflictions, than for deliverance from them;
and O that the consideration of the shortness of them, may keep me from being
weary of the chastening of the Lord, or fainting when I am rebuked of him.

In a Letter of October. 15. 1687. He gave notice to his Brother of another
Relapse into Sickness, wherein he says, I desire to bless God for the good of
my Soul through the Afflictions of my Body, pray that I may improve my
Afflictions unto Victory over Sin, and increase in all Grace.

On November 22. 1687. He wrote how ill he was, saying with David, Day and
night thy hand is heavy upon me: It is the Lord, let him do with me what
seems him good: I am his by right of Creation, and therefore at the disposal
of his Sovereign Will, and I am also his by right of Redemption and Purchase in
the Blood of Christ, and therefore he will save me, if not with a Temporal, yet
with an Everlasting Salvation, in hopes whereof I desire to possess my Soul in
Patience.

His last Letter to his Brother was on July 14. 1688. wherein after he had
given him account of his present Distemper he says, Lord help me, that I may
be more and more fitted for Communion with God here, and for the full enjoyment
of him for ever; of which I am an Expectant through the alone Merits, and
Mediation of Jesus Christ my ever blessed Lord and Savior.

About a Month before he dyed, his Worthy Brother heard him often say as he
lay awake in the Night on his Bed, Come Lord Jesus, Amen, Even so come Lord
Jesus.

I was with him about half an hour before he dyed; he continued to the last
both the same Man in the use of his Reason, and the same Christian in the
Exercise of Grace; I desire his surviving Relations will never forget his
Counsel and Example which they heard and saw.

This Israelite indeed passed into the World without Sin, on October. 26. 1688.

I was ever tender of what I said on such occasions as this, making Conscience
of these 2 things.

I. To give no Person that Character in my Words, which they have not in my
Heart.

II. To speak nothing of any one when they are dead, which I did not think, or
speak of them whilst they were alive; but I had personal knowledge of him for
many years, and therefore have given this true Relation.

Edward Lawrence.

FINIS.

