THE SPEECH OF THE President de la Tour, Envoy Extraordinary from his ROYAL
HIGHNESS the Duke of SAVOY, To His MAJESTY, At his First Public Audience,
November. 2. 1690.
Published by Authority.

SIR,
HIS Royal Highness my Master does by me Congratulate Your Sacred Majesty's
Glorious Accession to the Crown; It was due to Your Birth; deserved by Your
Virtue, and is Gloriously maintained by Your Valor: Providence had designed it
for Your Sacred Head, for the Accomplishment of its Eternal Decrees, which
after a long Patience, do always tend to raise up chosen Souls to repress
Violence, and protect Justice. The Wonderful Beginnings of Your Reign, are most
certain Presages of the Blessings which Heaven prepares for the Uprightness of
Your Intentions; which have no other Scope than to restore this flourishing
Kingdom to its Greatness and break the Chains which Europe groans under, This
Magnanimous Design, worthy of the Hero of our Age, filled his R. H. at first
with inexpressible Joy; but he was constrained to conceal it in the secret of
his Heart: and if at last he has been free to own it, he is obliged to the
very Name of Your Majesty for it, since that alone has made him conceive some
hopes of Liberty, after so many years of Servitude.

My Words, nor the Treaty which I have Signed at the Hague with Your Majesty's
Minister, do Express but weakly the Passion which my Master has to unite
himself by the most inviolable Ties to Your Service. The Honor, SIR, which he
has to belong to You by his Birth, has tied the first Knots of this Union; the
infinite Respect which he has for Your Sacred Person, has, as it were, knitted
them faster, and the generous Protection which You are pleased to Grant him,
will without doubt, make them Indissoluble. These are the sincere Sentiments of
His Royal Highness, to which I dare not add, any thing of mine; for how ardent
so ever my Zeal may be, and how profound the Veneration which I bear to Your
Glorious Achievements; I think, I cannot better Express, either than by a
Silence full of Admiration.

Edinburgh, Reprinted by the Heir of Andrew Anderson Printer to Their
Majesty's, 1690.


