THE SPEECH Of his Grace, the Duke of LAUDERDALE, His Majesty's
HIGH-COMMISSIONER For the Kingdom of SCOTLAND, To the PARLIAMENT there, The
Twelfth of November, 1673.

By His Majesty's Special Command.



In the SAVOY, Printed by Thomas Newcomb, 1673.

THE SPEECH Of His GRACE, The DUKE of LAVDERDALE, His Majesty's High
COMMISSIONER for His Kingdom of SCOTLAND, at the Opening of the Session of
PARLIAMENT, November the 12th 1673.
My Lords and Gentlemen,
THe last time I had the Honor to serve the King in this place, I did by His
Majesty's Command acquaint you with the Grounds and Motives of His Engaging in
this so unavoidable a War against the States General of the United Provinces,
for securing His Kingdoms against them, who would have made us long ere now
have felt, what was then only foreseen, if by Gods good Providence, and the
Kings Wisdom, this War had not been made. I did at that time recommend to you
to consider His Honor, His Interest, and your own Security (which are
certainly most inseparable) and to lay down such Real and Effectual Ways, that
the Forces of this Kingdom might be supplied, to serve His Majesty upon
occasion, to be a Terror to His Enemies, and a Security to this His Kingdom.
You then did most cheerfully raise such a Sum, as might probably provide
against any Foreign Invasion, or Intestine Commotion the Enemy could raise
here: For which, His Majesty does again return you His Hearty Thanks. He has
not diverted any of it from the Ends for which it was granted; And so great
were His Naval Preparations, together with His Land Forces this last Summer,
that He had great reason to have expected a Just and Honorable Peace: But such
has been the insolent stubbornness of His Enemies, that He is disappointed of
that hope.

Therefore He did command me to keep this Session of Parliament at this day, to
which was many months ago Adjourned; and as He acquainted you with the Motives
of the War, so to let you know how He has used all means possible for ending
it. The Swedes (who are the Mediators) proposed a Treaty: His Majesty accepted
it, and offered Dunkirk as the most convenient Place for all that were
concerned in the War, to Treat in; But the Enemy refused it, though His Majesty
had treated with them at their own Town of Breda during the last War. The
Mediators proposed a Cessation of Arms, before any Engagement last Summer; His
Majesty agreed to it: But the Enemy insolently refused it also; And the King
accepted of the City of Cologn, proposed by the Enemy for the place of Treaty.
Thither he sent His Plenipotentiaries with reasonable Proposals, and those He
did so moderate, that the Mediators declared; they were not reasonably to be
refused: Yet the Enemy have been so very averse to Peace, that they would never
declare what would satisfy them, nor so much as Answer any Proposal made by
the Mediators for the King or His Allies: Nay, such was their insolence, that
they gave in Papers, stuffed with such unhandsome Language, that the Mediators
were ashamed, and refused to show them. Therefore the King is forced to
continue the War, for His own Honor, the maintenance of His Just Rights, and
the Protection of all His Subjects; wherein He doubts not of the hearty
concurrence of this and of all His Kingdoms.

Another main reason of keeping this Session of Parliament, is, to join with
you, in taking such effectual course, for curbing and punishing insolent
Field-Conventicles, and other Seditious practices, as that the good Laws you
have made, may receive due Obedience, and that Peace and Order may be preserved
in this Kingdom. The Ways and Means for this good End He leaves to your Wisdom,
not doubting of the same Care and Affection to His Service in this, which he
has found all along from you. And whereas the malicious Tongues of the
Disaffected may still bespatter His Majesty and His Government with base
Slanders, and false Suggestions, I am again particularly commanded to renew to
you the fullest Assurance of His Majesty's most constant continuance, in His
firm and unalterable Resolutions, to maintain the true Reformed Protestant
Religion, and the Government of this Church by Archbishops and Bishops, against
Popery and Separation. And I am fully Authorized to all such further Acts, as
you shall think convenient, for the quieting the minds of peaceable People; for
preventing the increase of Popery or Schism, and by all good means securing the
true Reformed Religion, and the Peace of this Church.

I am likewise fully Empowered to give His Maj^sties Royal Assent to such good
Laws as you shall offer, for Increasing of Trade, the Improving of
Manufactures, or any way promoving the good of this Kingdom: So that I doubt
not, by Gods Blessing, and your Wisdom, of as happy an End of this, as I have
seen in former Sessions of Parliament.

FINIS.

