Remarques ON THE HUMORS AND Conversations OF THE TOWN.

Written in a Letter to St. T. L.

LONDON, Printed for Allen Banks, at the sign of St. Peter at the West end of
St. Paul's. 1673.

TO THE READER.
THou have often, without doubt Reader, heard of a sort of despised Animals,
called Country-Gentlemen: if thou frequentest the Playhouse, thou have there
seen us brought in with a highcrown'd Hat, a Sword put through the wast-band of
our Breeches, and a pair of antic tops; where we tamely stand, whilst the
learned man of Humors practices upon us with his sleights, and intrigues. And
if thou usest the company of the Wits, thou know that we furnish them with
their most pleasant entertainment. Nay, if the Poet out of an excess of his
bounty, is inclined to refresh the company with an extraordinary treat of
Humors we are the men with whom he composes the Regalio; where he swells and
looks big, to see the success of his victorious Stratagems. We should be glad
that our Masters the Poets can make any use of us considering our unpolisht and
rough capacities; but in the mean time they must take it kindly from us if we
advise some of them also, to look well to their own glory, and to appear less
ridiculous themselves, lest they should become the scorn of their own vassals.
They cannot take it ill from us, if we desire a little to pry into those
admirable things for which they are so much admired; the humor of our climate
Abandons that Eastern State, of demanding adoration to powers wrapped up in
Clouds. We have taken the boldness to approach the Heroes, and to examine their
Genius; which in many of them, we find not only the most wild and extravagant,
but the most idle and trifling that ever bestrid an Age. And certainly either
Historians have been much to blame, in recommending to us a pompous name of
Virtue, Glory, and Renown, acquired by our Ancestors, making that appear noble
and useful to mankind, which was dull and rude, or else their Children have
nothing in them worthy of their Fathers: In things so different and unlike,
either they, or we must strangely have miscarried; and this we must say in
favor of those that lived before us, that what they did was gravely and
silently, but the acquists of this Age, are made with a strange affectation and
noise; our smallest performances creating in us more pride, than their mighty
achievements did in them, and swelling us to a contempt of all those who are
not at leisure to appear as ridiculous as our selves. The following paper
cannot be accused of doing injustice to any, since all are obliged to give the
liberty they take: and as for the rest, since it does not reflect on particular
men, the Author might with reason expect that good nature from them, which they
extend to comical entertainments; all are content to be taken to pieces in a
Playhouse; and to be exhibited for divertisement on the Stage; which are much
unkinder reflections than are made in this paper. Besides, since we have to do
with nothing but blemishes and errors, the Laws of writing allow those to be
insisted on, for the admonishing of others. What could be done less than to
reckon up the ordinary follies of the Town life, to a person who we desired
should value the innocence and manliness of a Country one. We have too great a
kindness for our Relations, to desire that they should that way aspire to be
Heroes; but that they should rather reserve themselves for fairer occasions of
acquiring glory. Our rural affairs, and innocence, afford us that employment,
that we are not at leisure to mind the Towns treatment of us; and if we might
in the Country but be free from the communication of their Vices, we should
easily resign them all our pretenses to their renown and pleasures: it is not an
envy of their Grandures, transports us to make remarks on their way of living,
nor their Drolleries on us, that excite us to revenge, they are an unequal
match for us to encounter; one stab of a Sonnet, would be mortal to the little
sense we have acquired; and we only remonstrate to others, and not presume to
find errors in such labored Editions of their great capacities. And we
besides, know the vanity of affronting the Darlings of Fame; and we rather sit
down with a submission to the capricio of her fancy, than endeavor to reclaim
her feminine humor: we would prevent her from aggrandizing any of our friends
with favors worse than infamy; and we wish so well to her Heroes, that they
may triumph alone in their excess of felicity: yet if there should come a time
that she might discard them, we desire not to step into their fortune; and only
wish that they who next share in her esteem, may be the Authors of more
benefits, and good Offices to mankind, than her present Minions have been: but
if she continues in the same humor, we cannot but pity those who come after
us, that will through the mists of so much vanity, see less clearly the glory
and renown of former Ages; and feel at a greater distance, a less force from
that emulation.

I do not speak this, as if the Town were not abundantly furnished with persons
of both sexes, that are excellent in their Generations both for understanding,
good Government, and Virtue; but still these fair endowments are rather
blessings to themselves than examples to others, for they live private and to
their own Consciences, whereas vice and vanity walk barefaced; and the Mode
and humor of the times (how corrupted soever) passes for the standard of Wit
and good Company.

IT was, Sir, both with trouble and surprise, that I received from my Lady,
your resolutions of going to spend some years in London; and that, not only
through the compassion I have, for the affliction you will thereby bring to so
affectionate and tender a Mother; but also a real pity, to see you expose
qualities of so much innocence and virtue, to the revenous and devouring Vices
of the Town. I know by a long experience in that place that the life of a young
Gentleman led there, is for the greater part vicious, sottish, and profane,
and not only degenerated below the precepts of ancient gallantry and
generosity; but beneath that prudence, so briety, and discretion, which ought
to be found in all who pretend to manhood England, that first took its Vices
from the bordering Nations, has now outdone them; and by its over-apeing
humor, exceeded the pattern of its crimes; Whilst France formerly esteemed the
most fantastic Country of the Universe, has of late rescued it self from some
of its follies, and bequeathed to us those Vices of which it is now grown
ashamed; and we are become the more trifling and effeminate Nation of the two,
and the place you go to visit, is the intoxicated and giddy head of all these
Vanities. The education you have hitherto had amongst your friends, has been
agreeable to the ancient Precepts of nobleness, generosity, and virtue, but
when you come to the Town, you must be told that these things are set
formalities, and out of Mode, and not suitable to that careless and undesigning
way of living now in use; careless and undesigning with a witness! Which owes
its Epithites to the neglect of all virtue, and the blind impetuosity of
humor: their way of living is now removed out of the Road hedged in by the
prudence and justice of our Ancestors; and acknowledges no course inglorious
and irregular: the admired wit to which they pretend, and in which they so much
triumph, is of so hot a mettle, that it has leaped the Fence of Ages, and takes
its wild carrear over all the Enclosures of the Universe; and it is now on so
fierce a speed, that where it will stop, even Astrology cancannot assure us.
Our Ancestors deserved the fame of a better management, who considered equally,
their own satisfaction, and the good of the world, and in that practiced a
moderation, which freed humane affairs from those inconveniences and surfeits
they suffer from their Children. To be serious and to be wise, was a reputation
great enough to them, and they coveted not the triumphs reaped from the heights
of frenzy and madness: the Town was then a place of better education, and its
conversation was manly, accomplished and innocent; and a Gallant then visiting
the Country, came furnished with something more excellent than a bundle of
Sonnets, bringing with him, from the fountain of the refinedst conversation, a
richer sense than was sung at the corner of every street: yet this is the
advantage they communicate to us now, affording us only the knowledge of those
trifling things, which we esteem our felicity to be without; whilst yet they
are pleased to value themselves highly on such a sufficiency, and to despise us
for being defective in those accomplishments; and yet these Gentlemen thirst
after the fame of Heroes, and extraordinary men. The real advantages then which
you propose to your self, Sir, are nothing important in that sort of life,
whilst the inconveniences will be very considerable: it is necessary you
should think on what you abandon in quitting the Country, which yet are
advantageous things, if you will put your self to the trouble of reflecting on
them.

You have just reason to believe, and you have the vogue of the world, to
concur with you in such an opinion; that all the accomplishments of Womankind,
are to be found in your excellent Mother; her great wit, her prudence, her port
and manner of living, rendering her self, and her house most considerable. And
though there is usually that awe imprinted on us by the severities of
education, as makes us desire to spend our youth far from our Parents, out of a
love of childish liberty and frollicks; yet my Ladies carriage to you, has
still been attended with that sweetness, and prudence, as perfectly to overcome
an unpleasant obsequiousness in you: it is true her discretion would not permit
her to indulge you in any vicious liberties, like those fond and imprudent
Mothers, who think they cannot show their love enough to an only Son, unless
they comply with all their extravagancies; and consider them always as
Children that must have their wills, so loosing betimes that authority, and
respect, which the ill-educated Boy has never after grace enough to
acknowledge: and then, like some sort of Lovers, they please themselves in
their own kindness; and in supporting the neglects of their children, with a
patience truly a reproach to their dignity and duty: my Lady has loved your
accomplishments in Virtue, and excellent qualities too well, to permit you an
extravagant liberty; but yet she did these things, with a sweetness and an air,
that demonstrated at the same time the pleasures of her conduct. She considered
that you were her only Son, but yet she did not from such a reflection, become
presently of the opinion, that she could not appear fond enough of you, nor
with too much freedom let you know the pleasure she took in you; but with
greater wisdom and generosity, she thought it her duty, to endeavor to make
appear in you, the virtue and the hopes of many Sons; well knowing, that a wild
Liberty (usually the effect of a declared fondness) would have been the
reproach of your family and of her conduct: and that it would have been worse
to have you live with so much infamy, (what ever the Age may discourse to the
contrary) than to bury you with the universal compassion and grief, paid to the
death of a hopeful Gentleman. Moreover she considered, tha^ a Mother is a
stranger assumed into a Family; and tha^ she is on that score to discharge the
trust she stands obliged in to that Race; she is not to gratify her particular
fondness, but to govern her self by the glory and the interest of a name: so
that any just severity in a Mother, is no^ to be looked upon as her peculiar
resentments, but he respect to that Duty she stand obliged to perform. I remind
you of all this, Sir, because you are now arrived to an Age of consideration,
and to invite you to reflect on the grand obligations you have to my Lady, for
her manner of educating you; in which you will see a little ingratitude, in
being opposite to her desires of keeping you with her; let the Humourists of
this Age talk what they please, of the height of Spirit, and the gallantry of
despising the Regiment of a Mother; they must show us a greater advantage they
make of that liberty, than lying perpetually in Play Houses, Taverns, and
Whore-houses, before we can agree to their extravagant sentiments: neither is
it my Ladies fondness of keeping you with her, so much as her fear of having
you debaucht, which now perplexes her; she would willingly spare you for any
glorious or advantageous adventures; if it were for the service of your Prince,
or the defense of your Country, she would blush to withhold you from pursuing
such noble enterprises, and she had rather loose you to the world, than to your
Virtue, and the true glory of your Ancestors: but she fears the Vices of the
Town, more than the Arms of an Enemy; and the slavery of those Humors, worse
than the Fetters of a Conqueror. She would rejoice to see you stick fresh
Laurels in the Garlands of your Ancestors, and she would freely abandon you to
those fields where you might gather them; but what Bays you are like to
purchase in Town, or what perfections you are like to learn there, which may be
truly enobling to a Gentleman, cannot possibly be made appear to her. But, Sir,
if you believe that all this stands on a childish punctilio of gratitude, and a
fondness of your Parent, that would make you ridiculous to the Heroes of this
Age; you will find other things capable of detaining you in the Country.

It is agreed by all, that, though conversation is a great felicity, and solace
to Humane nature, yet that a life partly of that, and partly of leisure and
retiredness, is most suitable to the affairs and interests of men. I speak not
this (though I very well might) upon the account of what we owe to Religion;
and we have found many of the greatest Monarchs, and the Administrators of
Regal affairs, when they came to die, to complain of the hurry and the bustle
of those occurrences, that kept them from considering any thing of a life, to
which all the interests of this appear but a shadow, and nothing, I say, I
shall not so much present you with this, as those real advantages that occur to
the accomplishment of men, by a due leisure and serenity: I know that
Philosophy, is so far out of credit in this Age, that if I should present you
with any thing out of that old profession, you would so far comply with the
present Humor, as to despise me for a Pedant: but I hope that a just reason,
is not at the same time obliged to suffer by the Janty nonsense of the Town.

As our thoughts are the first images of our actions, so after they have lived
in that condition, and been perfected by them, the fading beings, fall back
again to the root from whence they grew; where like our separated minds, they
live in pleasure, or in pain; the delight, or torment of reflections, being the
Manes of past actions. And without doubt, many of the greatest performances of
the world, were as much directed to the pleasures of remembrance, as they were
to the pleasures of action. We find in the Empire of Rome, how many prodigious
difficulties, dangers, and toils were overcome by their Captains, only for the
Fame and Glory of Triumph; it cannot be imagined, that the lustres of a day,
could become a sufficient motive to such painful actions; but there must be a
great deal ascribed to the contentment of considering it before it arrived, and
the prospect of those pleasant reflections, that might be made when it was
past; which were without doubt, as considerable, as were found in the
acclamations of Rome, and the chariot of Triumphs: and the retirements of many
famous men, from the noise of those affairs, in which they had lived, might be
in some, for the pleasures of reflecting on what was past: and though the
degrees of such felicities, are enjoyed only by those, who have had the same
proportion of generous enterprises, yet the young, and unexperienced, are not
wholly destitute of such a pleasure; the reviews of their own virtuous actions,
may give them content; since all things of this nature, are measured by the
Capacity, and the extent of the knowledge; and he is happy in a little, that
has not the Idaeas of greater to converse with. Besides, there is the great
delight, of seeing former Ages in the glasses of History: a prospect that also
instructs at the same time that it pleases: there we may behold the beginning,
flourishing and fading of Kingdoms; the rise, and fall of illustrious
Personages; the transactions, occurrences, and intrigues of all Nations and
affairs, appearing in the Oratory, and Remarques of some men, with a greater
pleasure than the prospect of such things could possible have given us. Action
is but rude and imperfect in respect of the beauty, and life it receives from
the accounts and imbellishments of History; and we may easily see more of a
past Age, in the memoires are transmitted of it, than we can of the present by
having an interest in some of its actions: he that stands on high, takes a more
perfect account of an agreeable show, than he that makes one of the Train: nay,
I will venture to say further, that though there wants the action, and the
life, yet there is in this, the pleasures of the best conversation; which is
divertisement, and instruction: what can more please us, than to understand,
how some men, from an obscure beginning, have reached all the heights of glory
and renown: and how others again, born with the greatest pretenses, have
through variety of fortunes, descended down to the lowest conditions of men: to
read the diverse adventures of courage, beauty, and wit, and through how many
scenes of various actions, they have conducted their Pretenders. To observe how
many obstacles have been overcome by a persevering ambition; and yet at the
same time, how the shock of a slight accident, has overthrown the industry of
many years. To perceive the success of an intrigue, walking with a Masque in
inquisitive Courts; which yet the dexterity and art of the Conductor, conveys
unknown through all the Examiners. He that observes diligently, will find a
great delight, in perceiving how some vast Empire, has at first, (like budding
flowers) sprung out of the Earth; when being continually blessed with the
Sunshine of success, and watered with fresh and vigorous Counsels, it has
spread it self in so vast a Dominion, as to shade all the neighboring
Kingdoms; when at the same time, some petty Cabal, (like little worms at the
root) bring a languishment and fading over all its glories. Neither do these
studies instruct at a less rate than they delight; they enable us to give a
judicious opinion of present transactions; they fill the mind with the most
excellent and generous Idaeas; and they become moreover the true admonishers of
the frailty of all. Those, Sir, who celebrate perpetual action, and reproach
study, with drowsiness and idle sloth, ought themselves to be exercised in
very advantageous business, since he that does nothing to the purpose, either
of his own virtue, or the advantages of mankind, is guilty of a greater
idleness than the imperial fly-catcher could be reproached with. It is study
that is the best Principle of conversation; without which, it cannot be
furnished with a just capacity to please; it is strange to observe, how these
great men of action, talk with a confidence equal to their Ignorance; who
understand nothing but what is uttered in the company they keep; where their
faithful memories, preserve all new and gentile words, but their dark Souls
penetrate nothing into the worth of the harangue; which makes them perpetually
hunt for company, because they know not what to do when they are alone; except
it be to practice a new Dance, or a modish Bow; all the business this Person
has with former Ages, is to damn their old fashions, whilst he extravagantly
celebrates the easiness of the new garniture: he that pretends to understand
any thing beyond it, (in the opinion of most of them) is an affected Pedant,
and of a rough and unpolisht conversation. I write not this, Sir, as if I loved
a noise of learning, and labored discourses; but it is necessary a Gentleman
should understand something above the Breeches.

If we pass from this point, Sir, to the divertisements of the Country; you
will find them innocent and manly, and much for the preservation of your
health, and the vigor of your mind; when you delight in the fierceness of a
Horse, and pursue the Deer, you are busied in a nobler course, than if you were
hunting a little Wench. You have besides variety of other sports, along the
beautiful foot-cloaths of Nature: and when you are wearied with them, you will
spend more sweetly the moments of repose; though you went to bed, without the
triumphs of having worsted the Watch in your return from a Tavern, or of having
at the head of a couple of Foot-boys, bravely attacqu'd a Troop of
Glasswindows, that stood imbatteled as you past to your lodgings; or of having
beat up the Quarters of some Bawd, who commanded a Squadron of Wenches. You
will sleep well enough without the memory of such exploits, and never miss
their Idaeas to form you glorious dreams: instead of them, you may have the
satisfaction not to have lost a good quantity of Guinies to a common Rook; nor
to have played away a Lordship in an hour. In short, Sir, here you have the best
air, the most manly divertisements, the most innocent (and yet not foolish)
company, which much contribute to your health, and the festivitie of your
Senses.

There is one thing too, of which it will be necessary to mind you, and that is
what you owe to Posterity, and the continuance of your Family; as you are an
only Son, my Lady presses you to Marry; she has proposed to you a Lady,
illustrious for her fortune, beauty, and youth; and in whose conversation,
(besides the advantageous effects) you may meet with more agreeable
divertisements, than in the caresses of those whom you make love to with money:
had not custom made it gallantry in a Gentleman, it would have appeared
ridiculous, to spend a considerable part of a good Estate, upon her who perhaps
Jilts you in a month or two; and bestows those favors on another for
inclination, which she forces her self to allow to you for her interest: this
is found in considerable Mistresses of the Town, though the vanity and self
flattery of some men is so great, as to make them believe there is that power
in their worth and caresses as to conquer the sovereignty of fancy; and is it
not then, Sir, more agreeable to a manly temper, (if there were no virtue in
the action) to possess in an innocent Consort, that sincerity, which is never
to be found in a Mistress? Those who undervalue those contentments, should at
the same time show their neglect of them in the whole Sex of Woman kind; but to
hear the most effeminate and lascivious Age of the world, mock at the virtuous
felicitys of Love, is a thing worthy of scorn and contempt. Moreover, your
resolutions are to marry, to continue your Family, and is it not better to do
it now, whilst you are uncorrupted, than to present to your Lady (of a sweet
and blooming youth) a body harassed with vicious Loves, and perhaps, infected
with innumerable distempers: this will not only be an odious ingratitude to
her, but a grand miscarriage to Posterity; who may through some Generations,
feel the smart of your Vices.

In fine, Sir, the just care of your Estate, ought to have some place in your
resolutions. A young Gentleman, whose prudent Father has left him a round sum
of ready money, thinks he is obliged, by that sort of tenure belongs to such an
Estate, to throw most of it away extravagantly; as if Nature had established
that necessary variety, that the Parent who lays up, must have a Son to spend
it: methinks it is so pleasant a sight, to see a young Gentleman return home to
his Country, after some years spent in the Town, with one third of his Estate
cut off, or impounded by the Scrivener; and all the purchase he has made, with
so fair a portion of Fortune, is but a couple of Songs, or'a French Dance; a
confiden^ affectation to Swear without fear or wit, or to despise those who
cannot name so many considerable Whores in the Town as himself. We have Sir,
often been run down with these blustering Hectors, who think, that the modish
nonsense which they bring from London, should be more valued than the civility
and agreeableness of rural conversation. But we shall find enough of this sort
of Gallantry, in examining the pleasures and entertainments of the Town.

Well then, Sir, if you neglect these considerations, we will see what there is
in that Town so much to be doted on; when you come first thither, you will find
your self in a little distress; because though you may possibly understand as
much of true sense, and good breeding as most of them, yet you will be at a
loss, because the fashion there consists not in any thing that is real, but in
odd terms, and fantastic Ideas; in a round of words, and strange punctilio's
of action: certain it is, that all things we do, are shaped by those Ideas and
Images that have the ascendant of our minds; and all our good as well as ill
actions are agreeable to such Ideas; so that you must diligently compare those
with which you are now furnished, with them that govern the Gallants of the
Town. You have hitherto believed, that your liberality and munificence, your
sincerity to your Friend, the civility and sweetness of the address, with your
moderation and justice, were most excellent qualities in a Gentleman; you have
accordingly lived to them, and have in their practice obtained an universal
love and esteem; but with your pardon, Sir, you must believe other things to be
more excellent, or at least strangely regulate these, or pass for nothing
considerable with those Magnifico's If when you come into company, you are not
able to give a piercing judgment of some admirable passage in the Prologue of
the last Play; if you cannot discourse on the intrigues of famous Wenches, and
deliver your own amorous achievements in the bluntest lascivious terms; ^f you
cannot mock at Virtue and prudence with a mean of scorn and contempt, you will
not be able to keep company with those Heroes. It is true, there are some
Juntoes of Gallants, that will admit you of their society; if you can but
Discourse tolerable of good Wine, of dressing and the Mode of your
habiliments; if you can deliver a pretty good judgment of a new Tune, or a
French Dance; if you will be a companion with them at a Play, and at the other
divertisements of their lives, which are Women and Wine; if you are able to do
those things, you are accomplished enough for them, and they require not of a
Novitiate so great a capacity, and such mighty undertakings as the grander
societies; for they penetrate into nothing more desperate than the outside; nor
covet a higherfame, than of (as they call it) honest and good natured
Gentlemen. But you must not live so peaceably in the society of the other, they
are men that are ruled by the Idaeas of great and generous actions: it is true,
Eloquence is part of their business, but yet it is inferior to their Love of
Arms. It is confessed that they are men of wit enough, and it is not to be
denied but that there is great generosity in them; for they pretend to value
persons for their worth, and hate a fop, though he spreads himself in a great
many Titles, or stands mounted on half a score Manors; they are courteous and
obliging to their inferiors, desiring no ceremonies to be paid to their
acquirements, and grandeur, showing as little to those who expect it; they are
always in humor, and in short, if they were not so fatally corrupted, they
are perfectly practiced in all the arts of the most obliging conversations.
Thus far they have drawn Virtue right, and hitherto they have merited the glory
of extraordinary men; but yet, though they have given society so delicate a
shape, they have yet put to it a Face truly ugly and horrid: nay there are
found among these men, the most fatal Ruiners of so many excellent qualities
which the world laments the loss of; neither have they been satisfied with
their own liberties, but a strange ambition transports them, to give Laws to
the Universe, and to overturn the old Regiment society: I find celebrated in a
late Printed Discourse, the sufficiency of an excellent Poet, to instruct
Mankind in the most important points they ought to believe, whilst at the same
time, the Author mocks at the dullness of a heavy and Phlegmatic Gown-man, as
being incapable of such a task; but though people may make such things the
subject of their Discourse, yet I did not imagine any necessity of telling it
to the world; because to make good such pretenses, they must excel the
endeavors of many Ages, and practice an industry that agrees not with their
pleasures. I must confess I was a little surprised at this passage, not only as
it showed a strange neglect of all others but the Poets; but also, as it was an
atttempt of great vanity to lessen the respect is paid to distinguished
Professions. We will allow them to be adored by their own Society, but they
cannot so easily overcome the sentiments of mankind: it is yet a pretty
self-flattery that we find amongst some men, who believe that the affairs of
the Universe are so trifling and so much at leisure, as to stop themselves to
take a concernment in their affectations: He replied handsomely and smartly, on
the great but affected Orator of Rome, who demanded of him, (meeting him in his
return home) what was the vogue of Rome concerning him, and his management of
affairs; to whom he answered, where have thou been all this while, O Tully?
Intimating by that feigned ignorance, that Rome was a place so continually
crowded with glorious occurrences, that the worth and the sufficiency of one
man, was but like an undistinguished drop, in that bright Abiss of noble
actions; so whilst the world finds the benefit of its present regiment, it is
not at leisure to listen to what is offered it to the contrary, though with the
greatest Eloquence, and art. But, Sir, I know not how to dismiss this Subject
with these short Remarques; and I must entertain you a little longer upon it.
The Age has already allowed them the Title of excellent, and they might have
spared it in their own writings: had any but one of themselves, practiced that
odd sort of civility, of showing their Readers the way to the appartments of
their worth and merit, they had immediately been conveyed to the Stage, and
there severely lasht in Comedy. But all things are handsome in those we admire;
besides it is found, that such a sort of assurance, has a peculiar pleasing
address, whilst Modesty sits behind all the caresses of this Age. They would
raise Poesy, (especially Dramaticque) to that perfection, as to be capable of
Governing all the generous, noble, and accomplished thoughts of mankind: what
they may do for the time to come, I am not able to say; but what they have
already performed, comes short of the justice of such pretenses. How much their
art, reckoning them Dramaticques, (for under that character they love to be
esteemed) has been rather an inconvenience, than an advantage to the world, any
of their heavy Corrivals may make it appear. And since they are become the
Idolaters of the Heathen Virtue, we may see how incapable they are of the
conduct of Nations, only professing Virtue. Let them tell us, if they please,
what Ages of Roman bravery were inspired from the Stage; or at what memorable
times, their glorious Eagles took their flights by the rules of a Drama: such
easy representations were then, (as Farces are now in France) for the Rout and
Plebeans, whose ignorance made them incapable of spending more advantagiously
their vacations from the wars. But the noble Youth were continually perfecting
in fields, or in the other affairs of the Commonwealth, the characters of
manly glory; in which they acquired and exercised a Virtue, too boistrous and
robust for the Poetic Pen to manage; and if any of them built magnificent
Theaters, it was only to beget an admiration of their greatness amongst those,
who were incapable of understanding the advantages and dignity of their Virtue.
And we remember moreover, that a great Captain was forced to shut up the
Theaters of his Confederates, to oblige them to defend their Patrimonies, which
yet they did like men who had learned War from the Stage: and such things by
the witnesses of all records, had never an Universal love and esteem, but in
effeminate and trifling Ages. But to look nearer into their pretenses; the
great thing in which they triumph, is an Heroic Play; which yet is imperfect
in that Virtue of which they boast: they have made the three grand characters
of a Hero, to be Love, Honor, and Friendship; but to what fantastic heights
they have raised these is apparent in their Poems. They have made Love to be
the hot passion of an hour; tried by Chymaerical and odd experiments;
unpracticable to the World, and rather an Idaea fit to misguide the leisure and
the sentiments of Youth, than capable of giving any just assistance to the
occasions of Life: he that pretends to instruct, is not to celebrate the things
that happen, but the things that ought to be. Their Honor consists in an
obstinacy to combat necessity and time; in maintaining the feiry ground of
Fame; to vanquish Reason and generosity in the contempt of life; gathering the
spreading glory of a Hero into a single punctilio. This is their Honor, as
much Chymaerical as their Love. Neither is their Friendship less idle, whilst
it consists in resigning an adored Mistress in becoming the confident o^
amors; or a Knight Erran^ pursuing the capricio of an other; a scruing up the
courage of a friend to those fantastic heights, where we can dare to perish
with him. I cannot imagine what the world has to do with such Idaeas, only
proper for that Elysium, so much the Idol of their Poetry. Moreover, there is
to be observed the confusion and defects in their Precepts: Poetic Love
(according to the rules of their own Art) can happen to no Hero but once in his
life, and for all the rest of his years he remains untaught; the Poet
interposes critically whilst he has an Amor in his head, but he abandons him
unworthily, when he should perfect the characters of highest glory: he teaches
him to strut and bluster, and to speak half a dozen Verses when he dies, but he
guides him not at all in the Labyrinths of difficult affairs. He tells him what
is true Honor, on the fantastic point he stands; but he cunningly omits to
guide his mind on the bright traverses of a public good: he is busy about
youth, whilst the Regions of Manhood and of Age are left without a path, or any
track of Virtue and Renown: when the Gallant is weary of living like a Beast,
when he has finished the Love and the Atheism of his youth, the Poet has left a
dark space before him, without the light of any precept or instruction. But all
their Heroes must die when they are young, or live ingloriously when they have
finished their youthful Intrigues. Besides, were their Heroic Virtue perfect,
it could concern but a few persons in a Nation, whilst all the lesser Scholars
must remain untaught: what is left for them but the idle intrigues of Farce and
Comedy; filled with impertinences, and the most loathsome Vices; and if they
pretend to instruct by this, it must be by the rules of contrary: Certainly
never any that undertook so important a conduct, discharged it with less
generosity and fidelity. And in fine, if we may judge of the cause by the
effect, we shall find that manner of censure very disadvantagious to their art;
where are the Heroes they have fashioned by their Precepts? What proofs do we
receive of that Virtue with which they have inspired them? I wish we had no
reason to complain of the contrary, and that the Grossness of their Dramaticque
Vices were not a burden heavy to the world; instead of teaching them to burn
like Heroes, they have made them love like beasts; and all the industry of the
Stage, has helped them to nothing more refined in that passion, than what is
common to the Goat, and the Bull. Ye mighty Directors of our Virtue! do ye not
blush to see the dullness of your Scholars? and lament to find so much
perverseness, in times when there flourish such able ^oets? You throw away ^our
glorious Precepts, whilst ^ou talk of Heroickness, to ^n impertinent and
grovelling Generation. Or is it, Sir, con^^ary to their inclinations that ^hey
write Heroic Poems; whilst a Poetic fury carries them to celebrate those
Idaeas. which they repent of, and ^ecant in a loose Comedy: and without doubt
they as well understand the capacity of the Age, as their own ^umour in such
actions: if ^hey did not, they would never talk so unprofitably to them as they
do; for wha^ benefit are they like to receiv^ from such trifling instructions,
as correct writing with out the preposition at the en^ of a Verse, or the
niceties o^ Grammar, as if a Hero were to speak with that exactness as if he
stood in fear of a Firula. Moreover, what is it o^ moment to the instruction o^
this Age, whether Achilles drew his whinyard at Agamemnon* or whether Rinaldo
endangered with his, the home-spu^ Breeches of Godfry of Boloigne; what does
this signify to the practical Virtue of Gentlemen? Those who take upon them to
form the Genius of an Age, are to consider what is useful, and like to occur,
and they ought to decline Idaeas, that fly too high for practice and
experience; such ^airy perfections, like Romances, may fill the head with
chymaeras; but they can ^ill be the Directors of action, which is the beauty
and the life of Precepts. Besides, all prudent managers of publicque
sentiments, are to consider, that in such Draughts they must exhibit to after
times, what they will admire and imitate, or what they will explode and scorn;
for he is too short sighted, who only accommodates his Precepts, to the easy
and the vicious humor of an Age, and forms not that, which must endure the
shock of an impartial and severe Posterity: and I believe some of our Poets
imagine that the inconveniences of their present instructions, will be so
sensibly prejudicial to the next Age, as to make them abhor the fatal intrigues
of this; who will besides, have reason to mock at those slieght draughts of
Virtue, and those airy thin perfections, which will be exceeded by the least
reality: if they say that this is not required from a Poet whose part is to
please; we answer; That it is from a Philosopher, and from those who pretend to
direct whole Generations. And since they have raised their ambition to the
universal Monarchy of wit, it becomes them to invent a Regiment, suitable to
that character; and not expect with a few Poems to command all the Regions of
Learning. Or is it not so much their desire to rule, as to destroy? Is it their
ambition, (like his that burnt the Temple of Diana) to be known the Authors of
the ruin of those excellent principles which so many Ages have honored and
revered; and to proscribe all Virtue, Sobriety, and ancient honor; as if a man
were to build his reputation on the quicksands of vicious and inglorious
practices; esteeming it a weakness worthy of reproach, to be moderatly wicked,
or to boggle at an impiety, whose degrees are hardly to be matched in Hell ^
Some there are who by such prodigious accomplishments, having gotten great and
admired names, become the Patrons, and Darlings of the Youth, who willingly
sacrifice their early Virtue, their Interests, and the repose of their Family,
to their mighty reputations; and think it enough to make them wear the Title of
wits for ever, if they but be admitted to drink, and swear, with their glorious
Masters. But I now grow weary, Sir, of taking a farther account of such
actions, which yet they have not more failed in, than in the principles of the
best prudence. And those who debauch and effeminate Nations, may be pleasing,
but they can never be wise and generous Directors: they argue strangly who
affirm, that it is necessary for some times to be laid to sleep, free from the
thoughts of Virtue and glory, thereby to bury faction and sedition; since
nothing can be more the security and renown of just and excellent Princes, than
the manliness and gallantry of their Subjects. Moreover, it is a double
indiscretion, to soften and charm our Youth with luxuries and pleasures, so
near the best grounded Ambition of Europe; degenerating the ancient Virtue of
the English, whilst others are brightning and illustrating of theirs: thus to
misguide so considerable a part of the Universe, only for the Fame of having
the conduct, is what an excellent Poet has no reason to glory in; whom we must
allow to excel in his way, though with no justice to claim to his Art, the
directing of Ages. Neither can I imagine, what should transport them to assume
so painful a Dominion over all the Provinces of Learning; it is not agreeable to
the delicacy of their living, to be troubled with the affairs of so vast an
Empire: they had better leave it to that Administration under which it then
appropriate it as the task of that vivacity and fancy, which like the Gallicque
briskness is quickly tired. But I have kept you too long, Sir, in this
consideration; I will lead you to the conversation which is sometimes found
amongst those persons, whose pretenses are so haughty: and who live in great
neglect of their own Idaeas; contradicting in their lives, what they magnify
and extol in their Poetry: I will not say it of that Person whom we just now
mentioned; but we can too truly affirm it of many of that Art.

The first great subject of their entertainments is Atheism; which is not now
owned with a blush, but on the contrary, esteemed a piece of gallantry, and an
effect of that extraordinary wit in which we pretend to excel our Ancestors:
the great principle of these sentiments, is matter of strange opinion about the
Creation of the World; some following Aristotle, others Epicurus. Those who
imagine that the world did never begin, have took the belief from the imperious
Stagerite, rather out of an unknowing admiration of his name, than any just
reason that has accompanied the assertion: for to what reason can it pretend;
or how is it likely, that the World was Eternal, when the memory of all things
are but of Yesterday! (for to Eternity, the small portion of time Recorded,
merits no larger a name) how has it come to pass, that so many thousands of
Ages should leave no Records behind them, nor no Monuments of all they did, nor
all they had designed to do: the most ancient accounts that are produced,
except by the Jews, are the Thaeban War: and the great Funerals of Troy,
(actions of times easily computed:) and which if they are not fabulous, they
appear at least ridiculous in the Records of the Poets. But how is it likely,
that Eternity should be the Parent of nothing more ancient, nor more
considerable in that vast flux of Ages, many great Empires must have rose,
flourisht, and declined; many useful and excellent Arts must have been
invented, and practiced; and many just, as well as bloody Laws, must have been
established and executed. Some man or other, in so many births, must have been
so considerable for his Virtue, and his grand Actions, as to leave at least his
name, and some dark stories of his deeds, from one Age to another. Some Tyrant
for barbarous and inhumane cruelties, must have been so odious and so much
detested, as to have left a hateful memory and name to after times: but the
good, and the bad, have been equally forgotten; and neither ambition,
greatness, valor, riches, nor beauty, had then the advantages they have since
acquired, of perpetuating the memory of their owners: this great silence of all
things, but what stand so ^ear the present Ages, is a most convincing proof of
the Worlds Creation, and of its Creation not very long ago. The other opinion,
though it is most embraced by this Generation, yet it is so ridi^ulous, that a
man of reason should be ashamed to own it. which affirms, that several Troops
and Parties of Atoms, (raised first by an unknown Commission) after they had
ranged the field of an infinite space, did at last under the conduct of chance
alone, (for they allow no greater a cause to have commanded in the morning of
the Universe.) rendezvous in a most glorious and beautiful World; that so many
pieces of such admirable workmanship, so many businesses, and so many offices,
of the beginning, maintenance, and preservation of all the kinds of life, had
no other cause but an undesigning impetuous chance: yet this opinion, as
ridiculous as it is, is become the principle of their grandest debauchments; on
which they Discourse with so much liberty, and bluntness, as is the
astonishment of serious persons. But they equally hate that modesty in
Learning, which they do in Love; and they strive to have their Souls equally
debaucht as their Bodies; hazarding the one in all opinions, as the other with
all exploits. A Virtuous person how ever ought to be careful of the innocence
of his mind; lest there may, nay there will, come a time, when he must want
those tranquillities: which is moreover, no slight admonition for our wits,
especially since some of them (like Caligula) are Atheists only in fair weather.

Their next great entertainment is Marriage, which they treat most
ingloriously, affirming it to be the clogg of generous minds; and the greatest
impediment to the ambition of Heroes: they believe mankind has suffered in
nothing more, than in the restraints and captivities of Wedlock; and that no
freedom ought to be more dear to his nature, than wild and rambling Lusts.
They think the World took ill advice, when it abridged it self of so sweet a
pleasure, by yielding to an Institution, that so much dulls and baffles the
Spirits; and though they are themselves the issue of these Beds, yet they
cannot believe but their constitution had been much more sprightly and
generous, if they had been born by a Mistress; and that their inclinations had
been more elevated and high to great undertakings: they believe that without
doubt, the Crescents of the Ottomans, had before now been filled up with blood,
and slaughters, if there had been such a generation born into these parts of
the World; and that their arms had succeeded as fortunatly as those of the
Macedon. What ever was the belief of their Fathers, they resolve to give the
World the proofs of a better judgment, and a braver Soul; which makes them
scoff at Wedlock, priding themselves in their own freedom; and with a scornful
pity, despising the Captives of that state: they esteem no man ridiculous in
the Town, but the votary of Matrimony; and he that happens to be so of their
own Fraternity, if he does not sigh under that yoke, if he does not curse the
folly of his nature, that betrayed him to so grand a slavery, they discard him
as unfit for their conversations: and indeed they have found persons ridiculous
enough to do as they would have them; to whom they represent, that the
slighting of the pleasures of Marriage, is a greatness of Soul, that scorns to
be imposed on; but that the pursuing variety of amors, is the peculiar gusto
of a great wit: for that is a principle from which they must not recede, that
all their extravagancies, are not only the pleasing of their Humors, but
inseparable proofs of extraordinary capacities: they must believe that it was
an effect of their Fineness and Dexterity, to bring wenching into so great an
esteem, and that nothing less than their Industry and Arts, could have laid
Matrimony under so much reproach, as the present Age does find it, this is
their business, in their converses, the Play House, and all their
entertainments; where if they have occasion to represent to the Gallants a
Comical fop, they make him one who is wheadled into Matrimony. Vain and
triffling Politicians! whom the World has so much reason to thank for the
advantages you procure it, what shall it do with your sentiments? except
unravel the richest imbroideries of ancient generosity and prudence; and make
all its affairs as ridiculous as your practices; do you desire it should be so
halfwited, as for your allurements to betray the charge of so many Ages? But
yet, Sir, the progress they have already made is very deplorable; the contempt
of Wedlock in the Town grows very common; and we have reason to accuse the
great managers of that Humor: they would do well to satisfy us, either what
nobleness, what gratitude, or wisdom they can ascribe to their practices; they
are very rude and disobliging to a considerable part of the Universe; and offer
mankind a great affront. They are strangely respectful to their Fathers, who
lived in an Age better qualified; and who conveyed them hither in the circles
of that despised Wedlock: had they not stood on the foundations of blood, and
fortune, but been forced to have rose by their industry and merit, the World
had possibly looked upon them with contempt, in a low Sphere. And then how do
they discharge the character of wise managers? Without doubt, Marriage is the
foundation to times occurrences, and the principle of excellent affairs; and if
this fountain should be fatally corrupt, it would injure considerably, all the
advantages that flow from it: for if any Generation should come into the World
promiscuously, all things would be unsorted and mixed, and the claims of enobled
Virtue, Blood, and possessions must be made unsuccefsfully; all things must
begin again, or yield to such a disorder and confusion, as would soon involve
the most flourishing Nations in ruin and distractions: thus what the prudence
and the industry of many Ages, had formed into a peaceful, and a happy
Regiment, thereby rendering the succession of Familie^ tranquil and secure,
would be broken and disordered, and the Parent can leave to hi^ children only
the adventure of an uncertain condition and that Family that wa^ Rich, Potent,
and esteemed mixing its blood inconsideratly, loses insensibly those
advantages; and he that would raise Monuments of excellen^ things, must not
only begin anew, but leave them unfinished when he dies; for i^ he has club'd
to the uncertain issue of a Harlot, yet they can pretend no right in the
grandeurs of their disputed Fathers; and no glory, reputation, and virtue would
be perfect, whilst it has only the assistances of one Age, and those
discouraged by the consideration of their decay: thus in the Ottoman Empire,
whilst the greatest Minister has conveyed nothing to his children, through all
their successions, there remain no Monuments of ancient virtue, greatness, or
power, whilst the children are not permitted ^o inherit any of the acquists of
their Fathers: and he that is took up to the highest places of Honor, and
command, considers not that he is to bear himself suitable to the Fame, and
Virtue of his Ancestors; nor that he is to leave the same dignities and
reputation to his children, but he lives unjustly, carelessly, and voluptuously,
and is only intent on his present satisfaction: and the same it would be in
various enjoyments, and the neglects of Marriage; from which appears the
imprudence of those who pretend to instruct this Age: and we have reason to
believe, that either some extraordinary event must interpose to vindicate such
excellent affairs, or else they are still to decline, till they mingle ruins
with the Universe: those, Sir, who think these Remarks trifling, consider not
the strange progress of Vices; for though it is chiefly amongst persons
somewhat above the vulgar, that Marriage is ingloriously treated, yet those
distempers will descend from the noble parts, as fast as the capacities of
instruments can convey them down: as we see it has been already in prodigious
Swearing, and other crimes. And were not wisdom and nobleness strangers to this
Age; those who pretend to the fairest endowments of the mind, would never
practice the greatest follies of it: I cannot imagine what they would do with
that wild liberty they endeavor to introduce; it is a strong sort of leveling
they wish to see in the World; and there needs a great eloquence to make appear
the benefits it would receive from it: hitherto we have dreaded it as a Torrent
that would quite overflow the fairest enclosures of humane nature; and we
cannot perceive their own ability to stem that Tempest: but they care only for
the present; and think not themselves at all obliged to look after the
interests of the world. All that can be said to these men, is, that if their
forefathers had been of their Temper, they might now have been Barbers, or
Grooms, or left to the Parish, who pretend to fairer Titles.

The next great subject of their Discourses, is the dishonours of Women; those
whom they have not overcome with their addresses, they will be sure to conquer
with their tongues; and hardly leave an honest Woman in the Town: they are so
charitable to think, there never was any such, but those who lived solitarily,
and were never attacqu'd by a powerful Courtship; and they particularly
attribute want of these successes to the undexterous Assaulter; but they know
not how to believe, that where any so redoubted as themselves, laid siege to a
Woman, that she was ever able to withstand the force of their caresses: This is
a thing that makes up a great part of their devertisement, to recount their
particular victories; which perhaps to oblige posterity, they are so kind as to
record them in some lascivious Songs: and indeed to give them what they call
their due; they obtain too many conquests of this nature; as it is not to be
expected otherwise, from an assiduity and an industry great as theirs. But yet,
with their favor, it favors but little of good breeding, or good nature, (for
higher considerations are nonsense to them) to reap the effects of another
easiness or kindness, and then to spread it in every company; whilst none but
those persons who are strangly vicious, can delight in that society, where
nothing but the dishonours and scandals of Women are constantly repeated; which
besides the subject, is done in a language so innocent, modest, and ingenious,
that it is strange such great wits, should delight in so barren conceptions:
they pretend to admire the soaring, and refinedness of the fancy, but I know
never a Plowman, but might deliver himself with as much variety of imagination,
as they do upon these subjects: and were it not for that strange pleasure, they
find in exceeding the prescriptions of virtue, and modesty, and in scorning the
limits are set to the extravagancies of men, they would blush themselves at
such a sort of ingenuity: I do believe, that never in any Age, was there such a
violent and universal thirst after the Fame of being wits, and yet no Age has
possible discharged it self, with less real applause in those pretenses; wit,
though it be properly the vivacity, and the agreeableness of the fancy, yet
there ought to belong something more to that high quality, than a little flash
and quibble, which yet is all that this Age has bid for that mighty Fame: and
it is not to be questioned, but that the next generation, will be at a loss to
find out that wit of which their Fathers so much boasted: we affect the
beautiful trimming of foraign words; the youth, and pleasantness of the fancy,
but the subject is contemptible on which this dress is bestowed; which with
time wearing sullyed and out of Mode, nothing will appear so ridiculous as that
unvalued subject; of which we may say, as the Poet did once of the Woman; that
it is the least part of it self. Besides, when they are witty, they are always
beholding to Monsieur; in which they equally discredit themselves, and their
Nation: to place wit in a Mode of words, is little commendation to the fancy of
him that wears it; a sufficient quantity of these words are used every day by a
blockhead, whilst yet they penetrate into the nature of nothing, but like
Arrows shot into the Air, fall idly back upon the Earth: and then their Nation
is little beholding to them, whilst they undervalue its ancient, and unaffected
language: I cannot but think, that our Ancestors understood themselves as well
as we do, and spoke as much to the content and pleasure of those they
entertained; who yet larded not their Discourses with ends of French; they were
careful of the true glory of English men, to justify the Dominion of their
Language, equal to the Dominion of their Seas: methinks our Nation blushes, and
appears out of countenance to see it self neglected; whilst the leight Gallia
receivs all the Courtships of its ungrateful youth, and it has reason enough
for a just indignation; whilst it is done with the perverting of a better
Genius; and a rendering that fantastic which was before serious and manly. As
every thing which is natural is the most handsome, so it is free from the
follies of affectation; and as much as we have studied to Ape the French, we
have yet only reached that perfection as to be ridiculous: besides, they look
upon us as a Nation to whom they give the Laws of Mode; and presently ravish
with transports from them, the smallest trifles they are pleased to
countenance: this is a great pride to them, whilst they see themselves to
preside over our Genius, and to guide it into all the fashions which their
rambling fancies take. The Spaniard (though affected enough in this way) yet in
this understands his reputation; whilst having disputed with them for the
universal Monarchy, scorns to truckle under the Laws of their Mode; and
sullenly keeps to a fashion of some hundreds of years, rather than to appear
inclined to the lightness of his neighbors. But it were better to let them
command our dresses, than our Language; because these are to be altered by
time, whilst the other should be left pure and unblemisht to posterity; from
whom we betray the glory of our Fathers. This ought to be the principle
concernment of the wits; because as they guide the inclinations of the youth,
so they are capable of delivering themselves sweetly and pleasantly, in the
native beauties of our Language; and can render their conceptions lovely,
without the paint and imbellishments of France: it is they must rescue our
captived Language from the fetters of that Tongue: which would be more generous
in them, and procure them a greater Fame, than to make their boast (as I know
some of them do) that he cannot write well in our Language, who understands not
the French. It is no wonder to hear a Fop, pride himself in store of French
words; because his memory is all the fountain of his sense; but it is not so
with the Poets, who pretend to the most elevated and most refined notions. I
speak not this, Sir, out of a disrespect to that Language; highly necessary to
all that frequent Courts; and that have to do in the important affairs of the
world: but yet, where that and our own Language dwell together in the same
capacity, like the currents of the Savas, and Danubius, they should never mix
in all their conversations.

But, Sir, I have kept you long enough in these considerations. You may now
justly expect something to divert you. Let us then compare some of the ordinary
Town Adventures, and Exploits with the sentiments before mentioned; and indeed,
it is their actions that will be most capable of transporting you to a glorious
emulation; for though the sweetness and the beauty of Discourse, is a thing
very enamouring, yet action is the darling of youth, and of a sprightly
disposition: Rome found its old men business for their Eloquence, in rescuing
distressed Clients, and in appeasing the disorders of the people; but the youth
were continually busied in the Wars, and generous achievements; and indeed all
Nations, have esteemed wit, of a second venture to Arms: now, Sir, if you have
this ambition about you, you shall not fail of meeting in the Town with strange
satisfactions. There are men, who begin not the day till noon; the morning
affording the sweetest sleeps, and the pillow being the best place to take
Counsel on, for the adventures of the evening: that of the Playhouse is the
first Stage, where they can support the repetition of an old Play, if they can
but make Love to a new Beauty: they come not hither to learn wit, for they
preside over the Language of the Stage: but they come like true Knights Errant,
in search of adventures; and their Humors are so much allied to the Romance,
that they can do nothing without the Distressed Lady; where if any thing
heightens their appetite, and pleases their fancy, by the little sleights of a
Masque, or some pretty stratagem, they become eager of the Quarry, and apply
themselves to all the arts of that Game: but their principal business in this
House, is to meet their Friends, and to join themselves in a Squadron for some
gallant exploit: which perhaps is first at a House of pleasure, and then the
French House; where having repeated their former gallantries, and heightened
their courage, with eloquence and Wine, they are fit to gather fresh Bays for
the Garland of their triumphs; and to add a new luster to their former actions.
In these brave Humors, has many a Watchman been forced to measure his length
upon the ground; the poor Constable been put beside the gravity of his
Interogatories; -- Many a timorous Female has been forced to fill the air with
shrieks, and complainings: whilst during this close engagement, the thundering
Cannon of their Oaths, have with horror filled the neighborhood: and when
they have obtained such victories as these, lest they should not find an
Historian capable of Recording to the life, their noble performances, they are
committed to the Pages of a Sonnet: whilst our Gallants, like the Roman,
conquer and write at the same rate; and indeed to such a courage, such an
eloquence is necessary; lest the life and vigor of their actions should
languish in the dullness of ordinary Styles. It is, Sir, to such dreadful
things as these you must be bred, if you covet such company; they casheir all
that are faint hearted, or unfit for the Wars, or that have not a body capable
to endure the Discipline, and toils of their Camp: to be a great wit, is but an
imperfect qualification, for they associate with none for speculative
pleasures: and esteem him ignoble, who dares not act at the rate he can
dictate: which has been found in the fortune of some modern wits, who have been
neglected, because unfit for exploits: so that if you would join your self to
the conversation of these Gallants, you must well examine your sufficiency and
courage for the highest achievement. There is moreover, another task belongs
to him that accompanies with them; and will pass for a wit in the Town, that
is, you must write a Play: which is a kind of fantastical necessity imposed by
fashion on a Gentleman, who is obliged to hazard his abilities, on such
niceties of Fame, and Humor: the case is not the same with him as with a
mercenary Poet, who ventures for his gain, and not like a Hero, whom the desire
of glory alures to write: the first can support a miscarriage, not only through
necessity, but also by the advantages of getting money: but the other,
according to the chymaerical rules of their honor, ought to dispatch himself
with his own unfortunate Pen, which has so ill served the interests of his
glory, and blush to survive so shameful an overthrow: he that performs any
thing of this nature, ventures at the first rank of wits; and to gain the
highest steps, where this Age has mounted its ambition: but he that is
unsuccessful in the attempt, falls down with the greater precipitancy amongst
ordinary men; and not only loses his hopes, but his former standing, in the
division of wits. Which has been found in some of the endeavors of our times;
where those that have past for the greatest wits, venturing on the Stage have
discharged themselves so ill in their pretenses, that the world will by no
means allow them what they formerly possessed; and are moreover grown
suspicious, that amongst those they name for the greatest wits, there is that
same barrenness and dullness, with which they reproach inferior men; he that
has got the reputation of a wit, ought to maintain it by suspicion, and not
expose too much of that quality to pitiful censures; since he that writes, puts
himself on the ordinary trial of his Country; but he that utters only in
Juncto's and Cabals, stands alone to the trial of his Equals. Who are not to
judge by the general Laws of wit, but by the principles of their own honor,
that is their allowed Humor. So that both your wit and your Person, Sir, must
run equal hazards in your joining with these men. There are some it is true,
not only of a more peaceable temper, but also less ambitious of wit: but there
is nothing amongst them, that will be high enough for the emulation of a
Country Gentleman: their business is, to make long addresses to a Mistress, or
to sit till midnight at a Tavern: where they talk judiciously of some new piece
of wit that goes about the Town; or the fortune of the Poets: to value
themselves by their ability to dress well; and their quick intelligence of a
new Mode: they will entertain you with long winded and ridiculous stories of
their amorous successes; they will find fault with the sitting of your Periwig,
or the way you have in manageing your Clothes: and though to follow the fashion
of conversation, they will speak with Encomiums on the wits, yet they damn all
sense and understanding, where the man is not adored, but in that case they are
forced to truckle under the Laws of Fame. And now, Sir, if you should pass from
this Gentleman who pretends to do nothing; and seek for a friendship amongst
men of affairs; you would yet miss of what you sought; there being nothing
amongst them agreeable to an indifferent person. If you go to the Inns of
Court; where you will hear the distresses of Clients; with the murmurs of those
who continually solicit a capricious, or a sullen Justice: amongst men who are
busied with these concernments, the Idaea of conversation is commonly very
Pedantick, and unpollisht; and in Truth, not worthy of a Gentleman; where men
study not so much, things noble and generous, but the arts of paliating wrong,
of defeating and deferring right. With what pleasure could you seek the
friendship of a mighty Clark, who having a head crowded with Records and
Statutes, sits drowsily brooding over unjust causes, with the wretched
satisfaction of tiring out, by pedantick stratagems, the Votaries of justice;
endeavoring to draw Clouds on Sunbeams, and to hang those mists on truth,
that it shall wander in the clearest evidences: forcing his conscience, tamely
to truckle under the love of money, and of Fame. Certainly this man can have
nothing in him agreeable to the principle of Nobleness, found in a Gentleman:
neither if you should stand off from his endearments, would his indifferent
conversation afford you any contentment; whilst he might entertain you with a
long story of his industry in causes; with honorable Encomiums of the wise
speeches of his Judges; a blind admiration of those who have wit enough to get
a great deal of money; with the factions of the Bar; and the rise of famous
Pleaders; and such unprofitable Harangues which signify nothing to an
indifferent Person, who is not interested in that manner of Life. If, Sir, you
address your self to the younger men of those Societies, you will find many of
them to have only just so much of the gallant humor as serves to make them
singular, if not ridiculous; whilst they are the idle Imitators of those things
they cannot come up to: if you have a mind to divert your self, you may behold
in them, just matter for such an entertainment; whilst you shall see them
manage the affected strut, and their half-moded garniture: hear them speak in
the phrases of a Play, (that modish sort of canting) and becoming the Insurers
of their own glorious adventures: they damn all things but the extreme niceties
of humor; and even scorn the Learning of their own Society, whilst they extol
the magnanimities of a Bravo: they pride themselves in their amors to a
Sempstress; and in swearing like those who keep company with the wits: nay you
must take their oaths for their wit; for they believe their profuseness that
way, a sufficient proof of their being furnished with that quality: but with
all this noise they know little of that address, of which they are the fond
Idolaters. This is to be understood, only of the vain, the imperfect, and the
half-witted part of them. For these societies are, otherwise, the Nurseries of
men of great abilities, and Virtues.

I believe I have said enough, Sir, to divert you from seeking a friendship
amongst those men. In these distresses, I presume you will not apply your self
to the Merchant, whose business is Profit, and Interest; without any design
upon the Improvement of arms, letters, or conversation.

I cannot imagine, Sir, that you will seek lower for a society. But yet I have
omitted one sort of men, where you will be confident of being relieved, and
they are the new Philosophers: here indeed it were the highest injustice to say
you should be deceived; whilst they have given out themselves to have done so
much for the advancement of Knowledge; and seem to have obtained a victory over
it, with the same celerity as Caesar did, who only saw and overcame. It is
under their conduct that learning has made such famous acquists, whilst they
have led it victorious through the glorious Regions of the Sky; through the
shady Empire of the Main; carrying its Arms so far on the Continent, as to
strike its Ensigns to the Center of the Earth; giving it so absolute and so
entire a victory, that it may now, like the ambitious Youth, lament the
scarcity of Worlds. This, Sir, is the sum of their pretenses, and what they
proclaim; but you will be a little surprised, when you shall find them so long
grovelling in mechanics: and pinioning with those meaner arts, the mind, which
so many Ages had used to happy flights: causing such a noise about the infirm
foundation laid by our Ancestors, as to make the magnificent structure
hazardous of being abandoned by those eminent wits that have lodged in it. With
these Gentlemen I am assured you will not desire to spend your time; and with
any of the former we desire you should not. You must in these distresses turn
Gallant, and join your self to the company of Women; to spend whole afternoons
in kissing their hands, in admiring their dresses, and pretending to receive
mortal wounds from their beauty: but yet, over and above that this were an idle
life, you would be discarded if you used it; for we are not now adays for
Lectures of Platonicks; since many of our Women are grown as hardy as the men,
and love a taste of the thing you wot of, to relish their Conversations: they
deride the formality of hearing long Discourses of their beauty, of the
achievements of their Sex, or any of their adventures that are not arch and
courageous: so that, Sir, you will be more ridiculous in these attempts, than
unsuccessful in the other. If you should last of all, abandon particular
societies, and chop in with all in common: the Park, the Playhouse, the
Eating-house, and the Coffeehouse: you will hear an unintelligible buzzing, and
a noise of what you understand not: some snatches of occurrences, whose beauty
you are not able to perceive without the knowledge of the whole: if passing by
the benches of the Pit, you should hear a young Gallant swear, that he had
appointed the assignation at eight of the clock; you could not tell whether it
was an intrigue with a Countess, or with a Citizens wife: if you should take a
walk, and discover a course betwixt a Hero and a Lady in a Mask; except you
were acquainted with her voice, and her fashion, you could give your self no
account of the hunted beauty: these things, Sir, would perplex that curiosity
they could not satisfy: and besides, nothing at all instruct you in the
glorious adventures of the Town: and then for that great Mart of lies and
nonsense the Coffee-house: if you could furnish your self with so much
patience, as to sit here half an hour; you might hear one Gentleman say to
another; I am surprised, Sir, at the News you told me last night; I did not
believe that Nation was capable of so much fineness and dexterity, now if you
were not there at the precise time of uttering this intelligence, on the
foregoing evening, you could not understand of whom it was spoken: except you
civilly ask the question, which is an affront to, and below the gravity of that
place: and besides unless you know your self to be of a remorseless, and bloody
disposition; you will be extremely moved by compassion, at those Tragic
Histories you will there find uttred: the Sacking of Towns, ^e cutting in
pieces of gal^^nt Troops; the approach^^g Catastrophies of Nations; ^e
misfortunes of eminent ^tatesmen; the fantastic ^risis, under which puissant
Monarchies groan, etc. Will ^here be so continually thun^er'd in your ears,
that you will often be obliged to a con^ernment for those Persons, who really
stand in need of ^o such compassion. Besides, there will be this inconvenience
in general remarks; that you must expect to be jeered with a witness, if you
presume to peep into the myst^ries of a Humor, of which you are not the
Crafts-maste^ the Professors of every Intrigue, taking a great prid^ to
despise a pretending Novit^ate: and I have known a little Hector, more to glory
in the sleights he is capable of usin^ in picking up a Wench, an^ in the
variety of his knowledge, than a great Captai^ ever did, in the stratagems an^
policies of War: the desir^ of glory and singularity i^ now as violent as ever,
though its satisfaction is placed in such trifling and idle acquirements
neither should you meet with so much contempt, if you ^^me to learn the most
glori^us Mysteries of War, or rule ^^om its greatest Masters; as ^ou shall if
you apply your ^^lf to a Gallant to know the ^odes of the Town: who ^ears
himself more upon such ^ sufficiency than the others ^ould upon theirs: so that
it ^ill by no means be agreeable ^^ the height of your spirit, to ^retend but
in part to the Hu^ours of a Hero; because ^ou will be strangely ruffled if ^ou
are found ignorant in the ^^cest points. I can think for ^he present, of
nothing else that is important in the occurrences of the Town. A^ now, Sir,
what is it that yo^ see in this manner of life capable of pleasing you? or tha^
should cause you to prefer i^ before the innocence, manl^ness, and pleasures of
you^ Country one. Do you livingloriously, because you g^ to Bed at ten a clock,
and cannot up the Sun to usher you t^ your Lodgings? Is it more pleasant to lie
in little Rooms more incommodious than the Lodge of your Porter, tha^ to be
well attended, and to command in the Palace o^ your Ancestors? Is there ^
necessity that you should esteem that day as lost, in which you have not
signalized your valor on the Applewomen, the Constable, or the frail
Glass-windows? Giving by such actions a luster to the night in which you do
them, that should make it capable of ^rivalling the brightness of the morning.
I see no necessity, Sir, of humouring such an ambition: Or are you not educated
like a Gentleman, except you have half a score times been under the hands of
the Surgeon, for the Consumption it is surely a very fantastical Genius that
governs this Age, to place the glory of a Hero in such odd sort of sufferings ^
are you obliged by the rules o^ the new Honor, to swear for prodigiously, as
if you were made Master of the Artillery to the Devil, or else you cannot be
reckoned a man of good utterance and sense; We can here, Sir, esteem you well
enough without such loud streams of Rhetoric; and sufficiently value your
generosity, though you oblige not your lavish soul to spend all its virtue in a
moment. You may, Sir, (according to our opinion) try your strength better in
the manly exercises of the Country, than in the Debaucheries of the Town! and
find less repugnance in making Love to a Lady, whose Virtue equals her Beauty,
than in lavishly presenting of Wenches, who will spend your bounty as freely on
a Groom, or a Footboy: your mind will certainly be more tranquil, and more
capable of generous thoughts, that has the Idaeas of justice and innocence to
caress it, than when it is heated with the exploits of the Town; those minds
who have always before them the Images of such low and common things, can
never generate actions truly noble or worthy of Heroes; since it is impossible
for the soul to produce any thing above its Idaeas And in short, Sir, what
satisfaction do you imagine my Lady will take in the knowledge of these things:
will she not have just reason for her grief and displeasures, when she sees how
ill you improve the care of her education, and what a disagreeing structure you
raise on such a foundation; she will see with infinite grief the disappointment
of her hopes, whilst she must leave behind her only the name, without any of
the Virtues that were illustrious in your Family: as she will reflect with
trouble on those happy Mothers, who all along had a charge in your Race; and
who died with the contentment of a prosperous conduct; when at the same time
though her prudence and her diligence have equalled theirs, yet her charge has
alone miscarried: she has been a fruitful Mother, and set you in the cluster of
Heroes, but she must see you growing dim and sullied in the circle of so bright
a Race; and she will believe that the glory of your house is set, since a name
adds nothing to a Family, without virtuous endowments. And in fine, Sir, we
that have hitherto been honored with your friendship, shall not know after
what manner to receive you, when you return from the Town: we know you will
sufficiently despise not only our capacities but our courage; whilst we can
neither talk, nor act at your admirable rate: nor I believe will you ever be
able to inspire us with your gallantry of mind: we can very peaceably go to Bed
by a Candle, and not desire to swim to our repose through Blood or Wine: we are
guilty of that good breeding as to think it rude to lie long after the Sun;
neither have we those prodigious adventures to dream of, as could ^ndear the
Pillow to us beyond the hour of twelve. Well, Sir, we must take our leave of
you when you go, and never expect to see that accomplished innocent young
Gentleman again in our Country; but one that will become the terror of the
Piggs, and the Pullen; and that will level such an Artillery of Oaths against
us, as must oblige us to stand off with our caresses. Thus, Sir, like Justice,
you must be a stranger in your Country: or return again to the bosom of your
Heroes; where after you have cut off another fair branch of your Estate, you
will have added enough to the triumphs of wit, and humor: and though with less
glory, yet more discretion, return like a Consul privately home: where you will
have time to reflect, like an unfortunate aspirer, on all the precipitancies of
a wild ambition; and on the fantastic Paths are trod to the glory of this Age:
yet you will then find that all your exercise of Eloquence, and Arms, to which
you had been bred in the Town, will not bestow upon you a sufficiency to serve
your Country, with reputation and success; or to preside over the fortune of
bickering Nations: but though your Age will not feel the weight of your
Laurels; yet it may the smart of your debauchments; and the extravagancies of
an hour, may accompany your sense to the remotest moments of your life: and
that reason to which time will restore its just Dominion, will not only with
indignation see the miscarriage of its affairs, under the conduct of a wild
Humor; but also, like a just Prince, behold with pity the ruin of its
interests, and the fatal wastes of its inheritance, under the regiment of that
Tyrant; when it must live a solitary and a drooping Monarch, lamenting the
captivity of its noblest Princes, carried away in the incursions of youthful
lusts; and grieve to have arrived too late to rescue the fairest subjects of
its power; when the pleasures of what it possesses, will not be able to divert
the trouble of losing what it ought to have enjoyed. After all, Sir, you will
add to those numerous instances, that show to the world the alone power of
experience: whilst all the remonstrances of others; and the admonitions of our
best friends can never prevail so effectually upon us as our own trial of
things: and that he which will be truly wise, must be so at his own cost, and
not expect it at the expenses of others. Yet from that Experience, you will not
receive instruction with that friendliness and sweetness, with which now your
Relations make you their Remonstrances: that Lords it, and imposes, sitting
upon our minds like sullen Counselors in declining States: presenting us not
with the Picture; but the Original of unpleasant things. Experience is the last
Instructor of mankind; having in it that Authority and Eloquence, of which
examples and precepts are destitute: whether or no, it is reserved as a
punishment of untractable dispositions, to know with a blush and regret, what
they would not receive with an even and a tranquil temper: or whether it is the
surest way to conquer an inglorious affection to Vices: certain it is, it has
triumphed in very great instances of its power; and reclaimed those that were
impenitrable to sweeter arts: and there has not past an Age, in which it has
not done something extraordinary and eminent. But yet it was the desire of your
Relations, that you might have escaped its Discipline, and that not only
because it would show more generosity to be otherwise admonished; but also,
because that is known to be sometimes very severe; and to have that fatality in
its precedure as to ruin the subject it instructs: allowing but some few
moments of being wise. We heartily wish that you may be spared from those
severities; and since you will be left to the Documents of experience, that it
may deal favorably with you, and kindly show you in a little, what the greater
amounts to, is the passionate wish of all that know you: and particularly of,

Sir, Your most affectionate Friend, and humble Servant.


