CONCERNING MARRIAGE. A LETTER Sent to G. F.

And with it, a Copy of an Answer to a Friends Letter CONCERNING MARRIAGE.

And some Queries, and his Reply to the Answer and Queries, and an Additional
to G.F's. Reply, containing 13 Queries concerning Marriage; Also the manner how
the parties intending Marriage are to go together.

Published by Benjamin Lawrence by the consent and advice of Friends.

Printed in the Year 1663.

Faults escaped.
QUery 3. lin. 18, 19. should be 27.28. Querie 5. lin. 21. should be lines 29,
30. latter end of the 7. querie, next the words, Gods counsel and Gods time,
before the word note is left out these words, others not answering Gods
stirrings, yet think to deal sure, sure enough of trouble and sorrow, a curse
and not a blessing. page 10. lin. 4. staid for stirred; about the middle of the
10. page so in times is set for sometimes; after Querie 13. strike out a, and
leave year after.

Concerning Marriage,
A Letter sent to G. F.
LOving friend, something in answer to a friends Letter who desired counsel
concerning marriage, has occasioned several Queries. To the Answer and Queries
if there be some Reply, it may do well.

Thomas Lawrence.

The Copy of an Answer to a friends Letter concerning Marriage.
FRiend, That marriage is Gods Ordinance, which is joined in, and by the Lord.
The honorable marriage is when the bed is undefiled, transgression finished,
freedom from sin witnessed, victory over the world known, and the enmity kept
under, an absolute divorce from all that the first nature has been wedded to,
and committed uncleanness with, in the time of ignorance. When Lovers are moved
and guided by the Light in coolness and moderation, waiting in Gods counsel,
then the honorable marriage may be known in the Light, and all children of
Light will have unity with it. When one man and one woman, out of
transgression, are joined together in and by the Lord, let no man put them
asunder. Forbidding to marry is the doctrine of Devils.

But for any that cannot witness transgression finished, nor scarcely know what
it is, who live in sin, and say God has joined them in marriage, is it not a
lie against God and his Ordinance? God instituted marriage before sin was, and
does it when sin is done away, and is the same for ever, who joyneth nothing
but that which is pure; all that is hasty and hankering after fleshly motions,
is not Gods moving: some have been observed not to have grown in truth, but
deadness, and losing the condition, have followed after marriage: nothing
defiled is to be owned, much less to be endeavored after.

Thomas Lawrence.

Some Queries occasioned by the foregoing Answer.
1 WHether Joining together in marriage by such as cannot witness freedom from
all sin, be Gods Ordinance, or of the world?

2. Whether the marriage bed be undefiled whilst any kind of sin remains?

3. What is the difference between such as can witness freedom from all sin,
and do keep the enmity under, and marry; and others that do not only live in
sin, but have enmity against them that hold there is a freedom from sin?

4. Whether children of Parents that are both or either of them free from
transgression, are conceived and born in sin, or are they clean and holy?

5. Whether deadness and losing the condition have not followed some minding
marriage?

G.F. his Reply to the Answer and Queries sent to T.L. by a friend, and is as
follows.
Hester. And

G.F.

An Additional to G. F. his Reply.
FRiend, I received from thee by the Carrier, G. F. his reply to the Answer and
Letter of Queries, which appeared at first to whom it particularly concerned,
as a parable; and to the thing in question, but little answer. G.F. being told
so, said, he did usually answer to the ground of a thing rather then the words.
But this reply being weighed, is found so full (though short) that it may
serve for a standard rule to answer all Queries that ever need be made
concerning marriage. Take an example from the Queries sent to G.F. and some
more, being referred to his lines, as follows.

T. L.

Querie. Whether joining together in marriage by such as cannot witness freedom
from all sin, be Gods ordinance, or of the World? Answ. Gods joining is a state
out of the fall again, by the power of God and his image, lines 1.2.3. Such as
are redeemed out of the fall into the image of God, and marry, is Gods
ordinance; and such as are in the War, who cannot as yet witness freedom from
all sin, yet if they do believe there is such a freedom, and do endeavor to
attain it, who can witness a growth, and do abide faithful, and marry, this may
be Gods ordinance also. In the time of ignorance God winked; but now such as do
not only deny freedom from sin after they have been admonished to the truth,
but contend against it, affirming that none can be free from sin on this side
the grave, and not only live in sin, but profess they must do so: if such
marry, their marriage is of the World, in the fall, out of the power of God and
his image, not as God joins; and though they may be faithful one to another,
yet they are not faithful to God, out of the doctrine of Scripture, are in the
defiled bed, their children unclean.

2 Querie. Whether the marriage bed be undefiled whilst any kind of sin
remains? Answ. He that believes, has passed from death to life, and so from
the sin, and overcomes the sin, Turn to G.F. Letter, page 2. lines 23.24. To
know marriage as it was in the beginning before man fell, is a state before
defilement was, lin. 27.28. and such as live in sin, and say they never look to
be otherwise in this life, are not they in the defilement? is not all sin
defilement? is not their bed defiled, and all that they do? to the unclean all
things are unclean, though they may be faithful each to other concerning bodily
act. Here the honorable marriage of Gods joining, out of transgression, goes
over the head of the Worlds marriages of man's joining in the sin, though they
boast and mock at the simplicity of truth, and them that live in it.

3 Querie. What is the difference between such as can witness freedom from sin,
and do keep the enmity under, and marry; and others that do not only live in
sin, but are in enmity against them that hold there is freedom from sin? Answ.
The first are of Gods joining, both in the image of God, out of the fall again,
lin. 1.2. overcome the sin, and marry as others do not; as passive, as it was
in the beginning, before defilement was, lin. 18.19. others join in their own
wills and affections, out of the power of God and his image, not as God joins,
but as man joins, have trouble in the flesh, cares, differing, children
unclean, and many sad effects which are incident to all marriages in the fall.

4 Querie. Whether children of Parents, who are both or either of them out of
transgression, are conceived and born in sin, or are they clean and holy? Answ.
There is a state where the believing wife sanctifies the unbelieving husband,
and the believing husband sanctifies the unbelieving wife; else were your
children unholy, but now they are clean, which is through the sanctification,
which is through the belief; he that believer, has passed from death to life,
and so from the sin, and overcomes the sin: lin: from the 17. to the 27. Is it
a small thing to consider? or did Parents seriously weigh what their children
do inherit from them in the seed, it might be a motive to throughout
sanctification to all tenderhearted Parents, for their childrens sake.
Zachariah and Elizabeth both were just before God, and John was filled with the
Holy Ghost from his Mothers womb; God created one man and one woman out of
transgression, Mal. 2. that he might have a godly seed to replenish the earth
and subdue it.

5 Querie. Whether deadness and losing the condition be not the more incident
to some minding marriage? Answ. All deadness and losing the condition, comes in
going from the power of God, lin. 21.

6 Querie. Whether children may not marry without consent of Parents? and
whether Parents may not give or deny their consent to their children in
marriage? Answ. In the beginning God made them male and female; whom he joins
together, let no man put asunder, lin. 10.11. no not natural Parents, but give
their consent; then answered Laban and Bethuel and said, This thing is
proceeded of the Lord, we cannot say unto thee evil nor good. Also spiritual
Parents give their consent. Paul gave his consent to the Apostles, Bishops,
Ministers, any, if need so require, let them marry, But such marriages as man
joins, not as God joins, Parents may deny their consent; Paul denied his
consent, saying, Be not unequally yoked with Infidels, Isaac and Rebecca denied
their consent, and Isaac said unto Jacob; Take not a wife of the daughters of
Canaan, and Jacob obeyed his father and his mother, Genesis 28.7. Obey them that
have the oversight of you, and submit your selves, for they watch for your
souls; be obedient to such as have given themselves to minister to the Saints,
and to all that help with them, and labor. All Friends that intend marriage,
take counsel of the ministers of truth, not conclude marriage first, and
acquaint them with it after, but be obedient to Parents, that your days may be
long in the land, and the earth may be repelnished with an holy seed that may
rule in righteousness; who are obedient to their spiritual Parents, cannot
disobey their natural father and mother, who are not to force their children to
marry against their consent; the Parents and kindred called Rebecca, and said,
Will thou go with this man? and she said, I will go.

7 Querie. Whether any may know Gods will absolute and infallible concerning
their marriage, as whether such a person be appointed of God to be a a fit
help, forasmuch as some have been so persuaded, yet failed? Answ. To know
marriage as God joins, is to know it as it was before man fell, lin. 1. a
certain knowledge, this is bone of my bone, and flesh of my flesh. Adam knew
Gods appointment, Abraham knew Gods appointment, and said, God will send his
Angel, and thou shall take a wife for my son from thence. Laban and Bethuel
knew Gods appointment, and said, This thing is proceeded of the Lord, for this
cause (Gods will manifest, Gods appointment, Gods ordinance) shall a man leave
father and mother and cleave to his wife. Some marry in their own wills, and
say it is Gods will; Can any be obedient to Gods will and not know it, or not
know it certain? this the Worlds Preachers and Professors cry, none is
infallible say they; what then do they preach for? to make people doubt? or
what shall any hear such for, that cannot tell certain? Who abides in the
light, are in the unity, joined to the Lord, are one spirit, one in desire,
delight and sweetness, one will; what man wills, God wills; if ye abide in me,
and my words abide in you, says Christ, ask what you will and it shall be done
unto you; delight thy self in the Lord, and thou shall have the desire of thine
heart, not in thy own, but in Gods time. The Jews after they did come out of
Egypt, did go together; there might be something stirring of God at first, lin.
4.12. the state of the Gentiles and the Christians, there might be something
stirring from the Lord, as particularly Hester, lin. 13. Jews, Gentiles,
Christians; Gods stirrings have been in all generations, and all Gods stirrings
are absolute and infallible, and that of God in every one, which Answers, is
infallible; and when any one is restored out of the fall, his assurance may be
infallible also; though not so clear at first; it is a growing condition, but
in long trial; a false faith from imagination, or a true Faith not continued
in, may fail: This Query and Answer may charge such who blame others for not
answering God's witness in them according to their persuasion, when as the
persuasion was from imagination only; or if they had stirrings of God, have not
continued in the truth, and waited for God's counsel and Gods time; Note.
this one thing is to be noted especially, although this doctrine of absolute
and infallible assurance, is here occasionally applied to marriage; it is also
true in all other things, prophesies, promises and revelations, things
spiritual and temporal, and all conditions, prosperity and affliction: Abraham
had faith for a seed, David for a Kingdom, Jehosaphat for Victory, the
Centution for his sick servant, the poor woman for cure of her issue, and many
the like in Scripture; and have been of excellent use to many of God's
servants, when he has called them forth to sufferings and trials of any kind,
though they might not have so clear and distinct knowledge of it, what it was
at the present: Surely (said Jacob) the Lord was in this place, and I was not
aware.

Qu. 8. How may one come to know this infallible assurance in himself, and not
be deceived?

Ans. How may one come to know infallibly the Sun shines, but by his own
light? The state of the Christians and the Gentiles, there might be something
stirring from the Lord, as particularly Hester, lin. 13. and this is the most
infallible and deepest ground of knowledge, the stirrings of God, the light in
every conscience, in which while any abide, they may be certain; If ye abide in
me, says Christ, Joh. 15. read it: But if any love to shut their eyes against
what they know, by affected ignorance, through indulgence to several lusts,
such may say they have seen the sun shine, and others tell them so, but they
may be deceived, He that believes, has his witness in himself: The Jews after
they came out of Egypt, did go together, and hardness of heart got up l. 7.
there might be something stirring of God at first, lin. 13. the time of
discerning God's stirring to marriage clearly, is after the coming out of
Egypt, out of darkness into light, and they have put away the sin, if any be
persuaded in their minds, that such a person is appointed of God to be a fit
help; then signify so much to the party, who at present may feel no such
thing, nor it may be, not in a long time after, yet take it off and lay it
there; if after denials there be yet stirrings of God, wait in that of God
which stirs, believe and submit; a great mystery! let go, yet hold fast;
submission and assurance may stand together, nay without submission assurance
cannot stand; Abraham submitted and offered up his only Son, yet he was fully
assured that he who had promised, was also able to do it.

Note, Although this doctrine concerning assurance of faith since the Apostacy
have been denied by Preachers and Professors, in the time of the beast and
false Prophet, yet it will stand over all their heads a truth according to
Scripture. Witness the examples of Abraham, David, the Centurion, and many
more, who all received according to their faith; the Lord may try and exercise
his servants whom and when he pleases; and when he gives such a faith, he
gives exercise. Gods promises are ever true, but oftentimes of long date.

9 Querie. Whether freedom from all sin, and infallible assurance of Gods will
be of absolute necessity to every particular that joins in marriage? Answ. He
that believes, has passed from death to life, and so from the sin, and
overcomes the sin, lin. 23. 24. to have infallible assurance there is freedom
from all sin, to hunger and thirst, and press after it, to witness a growth, to
be sincere in heart, and faithful to God in measure, is of absolute necessity
to marriage in the Lord. Who comes short of this, are like Cain; he went out
from the presence of the Lord and knew his wife; Secondly, For the parties to
have infallible assurance they are in Gods covenant, do believe and are
qualified as aforesaid, to see in the light the thing is well-pleasing to God,
and to have unity with friends in the truth is of absolute necessity to Gods
joining in every particular, but to have assurance that such a person is
appointed of God to be a fit help, is not of absolute necessity to every
particular, but to such only to whom God reveals the thing.

Note. Let none wrest truth to their own and others hurt; It has not been said
that every true believer has such a particular faith of assurance in every
particular thing; nor are they condemned for not having such assurance; but if
any have the gift of faith, and faint in the way, he is condemned for his
unbelief, Matthew. 14.31. O thou of little faith, why did thou doubt? But if
any being stirred of the Lord, do desire such a blessing as Abraham did an
Heir, What will thou give me, seeing I go childless? or desire a deliverance,
as Jehosaphat did, O God, we know not what to do, but our eyes are toward
thee? Or to desire longer life, as Hezekiah did; or that Christ's power might
be manifest, as Peter did; God that stirred up such a prayer, and has given
such a faith in his Word that is in the heart, being continued in, will most
certasnly perform the thing.

Obj. Abraham had an Angel to tell him Sarah his Wife should have a son; so
have we Christ Jesus the Angel of the Covenant, he sends forth Ministering
spirits for the good of the heirs of salvation; it were well mankind did better
know the guard, assistance, communion and fellowship of good Angels.

Jehosaphat had a Prophet to tell him of the deliverance; so have we a prophet
of our brethren, that God has raised according to his promise by Moses the
servant of the Lord; and whosoever will not hear that prophet in such a case,
he shall be cut off from that enjoyment.

Hezekiah had a promise that fifteen years should be added to his life; so have
we a promise, yea the same promise, if the same spirit of the Lord open and
apply it, even for longer life: God made a promise to Joshua, I will not leave
thee nor forsake thee; the Authot to the Hebrews applies it to all believers,
Heb 13.5. and all promises in Scripture are made good to every believer as God
in wisdom gives them out of his treary: If a man have the Bible in his house,
nay if he had all the promises in Scripture drawn up into a Catalogue, if he
have not the same spirit that gave them forth, to open and apply them, or any
particular of them, he is never the better for them all.

Peter had Christ present with him, and Christ spoke to him to come on the
water; so have we Christ present with us; the Word is nigh thee, in thy mouth
and in thy heart, and God has spoken to us by his Son, and sent the spirit of
his Son into our hearts, and teaches us to pray as we ought.

House and Land are the Inheritance of a Father, said Solomon, but a prudent
Wife comes of the Lord: If any be staid of the Lord to desire his gift, and
believe God's answer that he shall have a prudent Wife, then he may have such
assurance also it may be of the person, that Abraham's servant had; even she
that said, Drink, and I will give thy Camels drink; and of the time as
Jehosaphat and Elisha had, to morrow, 2 Chronicles. 20. to morrow, this time, 2
Kings 7. and also of the means, an Angel, as Tobias had, Tob. from the 5. to
the 13. chap. and as Abraham had for his servant; God will send his Angel, and
thou shall take a Wife for my son from thence: And we are come to Mount Sion,
to the company of innumerable Angels: The Angels are pure, chaste, modest
spirits, and friendly, without deceit, who have joy in heaven when a sinner
converteth; and the Kingdom of Heaven is within you: Whosoever has a lustful,
lascivious, false mind, the good Angel will not stay with such: The Angel of
the Lord encampeth about them that fear him; sometimes contracted into one; the
Angel of the Covenant, Peter's Angel: An Angel slew one hundred and fourscore
thousand of the army of Senacherib; and so in times enlarged to be more, two
Angels, three Angels, seven Angels, twelve Legions of Angels, innumerable
Angels, who have the testimony of Jesus, are Ministering Spirits, whether in a
visible form, as to Abraham and Tobias, or invisible, as to Abraham's servant,
and Christ, and in him to the heirs of salvation; the honorable marriage, out
of transgression, has God, Angels, and all good men to encourage it.

Qu 10. Seeing there may be denials, lets, and intermissions before the
finishing of Marriage, and when it is finished, to know certainly it was of
God's stirring, and of God's joining, may be a continual comfort; then how may
one retain this certain knowledge, and not lose his condition?

Ans. Losing the condition comes in going from the power of God, lin. 30. To
hold this condition, keep innocent, a conscience void of offense to God and
man: When doubts arise, temptations come, and the many things cumber, heed
nothing but God, and what is of God; know nothing, do nothing, be nothing but
what thou be in God; God all, self nothing: Enoch walked with God, and he
was not; and when ye are clean through the Word which Christ has spoken, keep
the watch against relapses, lest they prove harder to cure then the first
sickness: If there be failings, doubts will arise, and trouble, and questioning
of several kinds; as, Whether there be such a Faith? or whether such things
whereof one has been certainly persuaded, was of God? which might be truly so,
the stirrings of God not being diligently taken heed to, nor stayed in, but the
mind drawn out into the many things; hardness got up, then follows a divorce
from all that communion and enjoyment.

Note. This particular infallible assurance of faith, concerns all other things
as well as marriage, as to have assurance of pardon of sin, freedom from all
sin, perseverance in the truth, deliverance out of trouble, and that the
Kingdom, Dominion and greatness of the Kingdom under the whole Heaven, shall be
given to the people of the Most High, freedom from wants, streights, poverty,
sickness, and from the noisome pestilence.

Qu. 11. Whether one that has attained to such assurance of faith, may not
lose it? Ans. The Jews did go into hardness of heart afterward; there might be
something stir of God at first, l. 6. 10, 11. the people of Israel believed the
Lord and his servant Moses; but afterward they hearkened not, whose carkases
fell in the Wilderness; yet their faith at first was not from imagination nor
fiction, I said that thy house, and the house of thy Father should walk before
me for ever; but now it shall not be so, said the Lord to Eli; for they that
honor me, I will honor. Disobedience and unbelief may lose eternal life, or any
other blessing.

Qu. 12. Whether such as are of the true Religion, may marry with others that
have been trained up in a false Religion? Ans. The state of the Christians and
Gentiles, there may be something stirring from the Lord, as particularly
Hester, lin. 8, 9. who was made Queen to a Heathen King, Hest. 2.17. and was a
means to deliver her people and her Kindred from the bloody conspiracy of
Haman: Jacob married Labans Daughters, Leah and Rachel, and Rachel had stolen
her father Laban's Idols, Genesis 31.32. which Laban called his gods, v. 30.
Mahlon the son of Elimelech, of Bethlem Judah, married Ruth a Moabite, and
after him Boaz, Ruth 4.10. and Solomon married Pharoahs daughter an Egyptian;
but she was persuaded to forget her Country and Fathers house; and so did Ruth
and Laban's daughters, and came into the Land of Israel; and the people that
were in the Gates, and the Elders said to Boaz, The Lord make thy wife as
Rachel and Leah, which twain did build the House of Israel: But what is all
this to them who in the deceit, not stirred of God, for lust, lucre, and
self ends, marry the daughters of men not converted to the true Faith? The
example of Hester may afford two considerations, 1. That Friends of God know
his secrets sometimes by extraordinary Revelations. 2. That such examples are
no presidents for the people of the World to follow, no more then to go naked,
to take a wife of Whoredoms, or offer up a sons life, because Abraham and some
of the Prophets did so.

Qu. 13. What may such do as are in the doubting, who say in themselves,
Whether had I best marry, or abide? Whether had I best marry such a person, or
not? Ans. The state of the Christians and the Gentiles; there may something
stir from the Lord, as particularly Hester, l. 13. who having something stir
from the Lord for good ends, as followed, she was persuaded to receive the love
of King Ahasuerus a Heathen, who loved Hester above all the women, and she
found grace and favor in his sight, more then all the Virgins, so that he set
the Crown of the Kingdom upon her head, and made her Queen instead of Vasthi,
and she had the counsel and consent of Mordecai, who took her for his own
Daughter, Hest. 2. and so she became a deliverer and Nursing-Mother in Israel,
while captive in Babylon. So if any be persuaded infallibly of Gods stirring,
and Gods joining, all doubts are resolved. All friends, every particular, until
til they be persuaded of Gods will certain and infallible concerning their
marriage, were better forbear, and wait on God, in his Light to receive his
counsel; how else do Friends differ from the World? the Light is the place of
waiting for Gods stirring and manifestation; Gods stirring is the time for
faith to act in what the light does manifest, whether to be kept secret or
declared. Hester showed it not to her people nor her kindred, for Mordecai had
charged her she should not tell it; have thou faith, have it with thy self
before God. Paul had revelations not lawful to utter, and things to utter that
some could not bear; but when a word came to the Prophets from the Lord, they
did declare infallibly, This says the Lord; and in the New Testament as the
spirit gave them utterance, and no otherways. But Preachers and Professors
since Antichrists rise and reign, say Revelation is ceased, and none now can
know and speak infallibly as the Prophets and Primitive Saints did; but learned
men declare truths, according to Scripture; which is not true neither; for all
the learned men in the World with all their Libraries and learning, cannot know
one line of Scripture but by revelation of the same spirit that gave it forth;
and all that I have put this question to, confess the same.

Note, Now this Querie is ended, let none question a year after, whether
particular absolute infallible assurance be; but whether Do I live in it, and
am I diligent to attain and keep it to my comfort? These Queries and Answers
are to expel the confusion that may arise in many, why some have assurance of
faith in particulars, and not others, and not finding it ordinary, by
experience, have denied infallible assurance wholly; and that all who have had
stirrings to seek God and wait for his Counsel, might be certain, and to stop
the hasty proceedings of some not rightly qualified, who though they profess
truth, yet endeavor to marry as the World do; also to denote unto others who
are tender, their lawful liberty to marry in the Lord.

Admonition.
1. To the unmarried, that they shut out all motions to marriage that are not
of God.

2. To the married, that they be helps to put away all sin, and witness the bed
undefiled.

3. To them that would have married, and have had many offers, but failed, to
consider whether they have not been ignorant or negligent of Gods stirrings,
and have followed carnal desires, and self ends, the usual provocations to the
Worlds marriages; but to some that God will show his loving kindness and
favor, there are two ends of such long delays in mercy, 1 To break down and
utterly destroy the body of sin and death, from whence carnal lusts and
self ends arise. 2. To qualify them to receive his blessing, to be married in
the Lord, to know Gods call, Gods stirrings, and Gods will concerning marriage,
by an absolute and infallible knowledge and assurance, and so come out of the
defilement, and come to enjoy the honorable marriage. But the Worlds marriages
can never be happy, though they have their carnal desires and self ends, in
riches, honors, and pleasures, etc. Cain Cham and Esau had riches, honors, and
pleasures, Nations, Cities, Dukedoms, and Music, Tubal-Cain the first inventer
of Organs; but Cain was a Vagabond out from the presence of the Lord; Cham
accursed; and Esau lost the blessing, and all of them and their seed enemies to
Gods people to this day, though they may abound in worldly wealth, pomp, and
pleasures.

If any object in man's wisdom concerning this writing; first witness in life
what is here declared in words, and try if that may not answer all objections.

The manner how parties intending marriage are to go together.
Concerning the manner, see G.F. in his book concerning marriage, whereof here
are some particulars inserted;

First, After the thing is known between the parties themselves, before any
thing is concluded, let it be declared unto friends, who are able in the wisdom
and power of God to see and feel into it, if they see the thing in the light
and power of God, to stand: Then 2. Declare it in the meeting, or meetings, to
which the parties do belong, toward the end of the meeting by the parties
themselves, or some friend or friends, as they are moved, both parties being
present. 3 If any have to object against it, then the matter be laid before
friends the next general meeting, appointed to consider of things relating to
friends, to see into it and end it. 4 About twelve friends met together, they
may declare their testimony how the Lord has joined them; there was a marriage
in Canaan, and Christ and his Disciples were called to it, not married in a
corner by one called a Minister, for money. 5 A Certificate by friends may be
then given of the day, month and year, that it may be recorded. Rebecca's
friends blessed her, so the people and Elders blessed Ruth, and so may friends
do by words or silence, as moved of the Lord. 6 As any is moved, they may
declare it to the Magistrate, or in the midst of the Market, to such parties
outward dwelling if moved, (or they may not.) 7 The things that cannot be owned
by all friends, and have unity within the power and spirit of God, may not be
recorded. Who comes together as it was in the beginning, comes over the Jews,
Gentiles, and Apostate Christians, the honorable marriage, and the bed that is
undefiled.

T. L.

THE END.

