A BRIEF and TRUE NARRATIVE Of some Remarkable Passages Relating to sundry
Persons Afflicted by VVitchcraft, AT SALEM VILLAGE: Which happened from the
Nineteenth of March, to the Fifth of April, 1692.

Collected by Deodat Lawson.

Boston, Printed for Benjamin Harris and are to be Sold at his Shop,
over against the Old-Meeting-House. 1692.

The Bookseller to the Reader.
THe Ensuing Narrative being, a Collection of some Remarkables, in an Affair
now upon the Stage, made by a Credible Eyewitness, is now offered unto the
Reader, only as a Taste, of more that may follow in Gods Time. If the Prayers of
Good People may obtain this Favor of God, That the Misterious Assaults from
Hell now made upon so many of our Friends may be thoroughly Detected and
Defeated, we suppose the Curious will be Entertained with as rare an History as
perhaps an Age has had; whereof this Narrative is but a Forerunner.

Benjamin Harris.

ON the Nineteenth day of March last I went to Salem Village, and lodged at
Nathaniel Ingersols near to the Minister Mr. P s. house, and presently after, I
came into my Lodging Capt. Walcuts Daughter Mary came to Lievt. Ingersols and
spoke to me, but, suddenly after as she stood by the door, was bitten, so that
she cried out of her Wrist and looking on it with a Candle, we saw apparently
the marks of Teeth both upper and lower set, on each side of her wrist.

In the beginning of the Evening, I went to give Mr. P. a visit When I was
there, his Kins-woman, Abigail Williams, (about 12 years of age,) had a
grievous fit; she was at first hurryed with Violence to and fro in the room;
(though Mrs. Ingersol, endeavored to hold her,) sometimes making as if she
would fly, stretching up her arms as high as she could, and crying Whish,
Whish, Whish! several times; Presently after she said there was Goodw N. and
said, Do you not see her? Why there she stands! And she said Goodw N. offered
her THE BOOK, but she was resolved she would not take it, saying Often, I wont,
I wont, I wont, take it, I do not know what Book it is: I am sure it is none of
Gods Book, it is the Devils Book, for ought I know. After that, she run to the
Fire, and begun to throw Fire Brands, about the house; and run against the
Back, as if she would run up Chimney, and, as they said, she had attempted to
go into the Fire in other Fits.

On Lords Day, the Twentieth of March, there were sundry of the afflicted
Persons at Meeting, as, Mrs. Pope, and Goodwife Bibber Abigail Williams, Mary
Walcut, Mary Jews, and Docter Grigg's Maid. There was also at Meeting,
Goodwise C. (who was afterward Examined on suspicion of being a Witch:) They
had several Sore Fits, in the time of Public Worship, which did something
interrupt me in my First Prayer; being so unusual. After Psalm was Sung,
Abigail Williams said to me, Now stand up, and Name your Text! And after it was
read, she said, It is a long Text. In the beginning of Sermon, Mrs. Pope, a
Woman afflicted said to me, Now there is enough of that. And in the Afternoon,
Abigail Williams, upon my referring to my Doctrine said to me, I know no
Doctrine you had, If you did name one, I have forgot it.

In Sermon time when Goodw C was present in the Meetinghouse Ab. W. called out,
Look where Goodw. C sits on the Beam suckling her Yellow bird betwixt her
fingers! Anne. Putman another Girl afficted said there was a Yellow-bird sat
on my hat as it hung on the Pin in the Pu^pit! but those that were by,
restrained her from ^^^aking (...) about it.

On Monday the 21st. of March, The Magistrates ^f Salem ^ppointed to come to
Examination of Goodw C. And about twelve of the Clock, they went into the
Meeting House, which was Thronged with Spectators: Mr. Noyes began with a very
(...) and pathetic l Prayer; and Goodwife C. being called to answer to what was
Alleged against her, she desired to go to Prayer, which was much wondered at,
in the presence of so many hundred people: The Magistrates told her, they would
not admit it; they came not there to hear her Pray, but to Examine her, in what
was Alleged against her. The Worshipful Mr. Hathorne, asked her, Why she
Afflicted those Children! she said, she did not Afflict them. He asked her, who
did then? she said, I do not know; How should I know? The Number of the
Afflicted Persons were about that time Ten, viz. Four Married Women, Mrs Pope,
Mrs. Putman, Goodw. Bibber, and an Ancient Woman, named Goodall, three Maids,
Mary Walcut, Mercy Jews, at Thomas Putman's, and a Maid at Dr. Griggs's, there
were three Girls from 9 to 12 Years of Age, each of them, or thereabouts, viz.
Elizabeth Parris, Abigail Williams and Ann Putman; these were most of them at
G. C's Examination, and did vehemently accuse her in the Assembly of afflicting
them, by Biting, Pinching, Strangling, etc. And that they did in their Fit, see
her Likeness coming to them, and bringing a Book to them, she said, she had no
Book; they affirmed, she had a Yellow-Bird, that used to suck betwixt her
Fingers, and being asked about it, if she had any Familiar Spirit, that
attended her, she said, She had no Familiarity with any such thing. She was a
Gospel Woman: which Title she called her self by; and the Afflicted Persons
told her, ah! She was, A Gospel Witch. Ann Putman did there affirm, that one
day when Lieutenant Fuller was at Prayer at her Fathers House, she saw the
shape of Goodw. C. and she thought Goodw. N. Praying at the same time to the
Devil, she was not sure it was Goodw. N. she thought it was; but very sure she
saw the Shape of G. C. The said C. said, they were poor, distracted, Children,
and no heed to be given to what they said. Mr. Hathorne and Mr. Noyes replied,
it was the judgment of all that were present, they were Bewitched, and only she
the Accused Person said, they were Distracted. It was observed several times,
that if she did but bite her Under lip in time of Examination the persons
afflicted were bitten on their arms and wrists and produced the Marks before
the Magijestrates, Ministers and others. And being watched for that, if she did
but Pinch her Fingers, or Graspe one Hand, hard in another, they were Pinched
and produced the Marks before the Magistrates, and Spectators. After that, it
was observed, that if she did but lean her Breast, against the Seat, in the
Meeting House, (being the Bar at which she stood,) they were afflicted.
Particularly Mrs. Pope complained of grievous torment in her Bowels as if they
were torn out. She vehemently accused said C. as the instrument, and first
threw her Muff at her; but that flying not home, she got off her Shoe, and hit
Goodwife C. on the head with it. After these postures were watched, if said C.
did but stir her feet, they were afflicted in their Feet, and stamped
fearfully. The afflicted persons asked her why she did not go to to the company
of Witches which were before the Meeting house mustering? Did she not hear the
Drum beat. They aceused her of having Familiarity with the Devil, in the time
of Examination, in the shape of a Black man whispering in her ear; they
affirmed, that her Yellow-Bird, sucked betwixt her Fingers in the Assembly; and
order being given to see if there were any sign, the Girl that saw it, said, it
was too late now; she had removed a Pin, and put it on her head; which was
found there sticking upright.

They told her, she had Covenanted with the Devil for ten years, six of them
were gone, and four more to come. She was required by the Magistrates to answer
that Question in the Catechism, How many persons, be there in the Godhead? she
answered it but oddly, yet was there no great thing to be gathered from it; she
denied all that was charged upon her, and said, They could not prove a Witch;
she was that Afternoon Committed to Salem-Prison; and after she was in Custody,
she did not so appear to them, and afflict them as before.

On Wednesday the 23 of March, I went to Thomas Putmans, on purpose to see his
Wife: I found her lying on the Bed, having had a sore fit a little before she
spoke to me, and said, she was glad to see me; her Husband and she, both
desired me to pray with her, while she was sensible; which I did, though the
Apparition said, I should not go to Prayer. At the first beginning she
attended; but after a little time, was taken with a sit: yet continued silent,
and seemed to be Asleep: when Prayer was done, her Husband going to her, found
her in a Fit; he took her off the Bed, to set her on his Knees, but at first
she was so stiff, she could not be bended; but she afterward set down; but
quickly began to strive violently with her Arms and Legs; she then began to
Complain of, and as it were to Converse personally with, Goodw. N. saying,
Goodw. N. Be gone! Be gone! Be gone! are you not ashamed, a Woman of your
Profession, to afflict a poor Creature so? what hurt did I ever do you in my
life! you have but two years to live, and then the Devil will torment your
Soul, for this your Name is blotted out of Gods Book, and it shall never be put
in Gods Book again, be gone for shame, are you not afraid of that which is
coming upon you? I Know, I know, what will make you afraid; the wrath of an
Angry God, I am sure that will make you afraid; be gone, do not t^urment me, I
know what you would have (we judged she meant, her Soul) but it is out of your
reach; it is Clothed with the white Robes of Christ's Righteousness. After this,
she seemed to dispute with the Apparition about a par ticular Text of
Scripture. The Apparition seemed to deny it; (the Woman's eyes being fast closed
all this time) she said, She was sure there was such a Text; and she would tell
it; and then the Shape would be gone, for said she, I am sure you cannot shand
before that Text! then she was sorely Afflicted; her mouth drawn on one side,
and her body strained for about a minute, and then said, I will tell, I will
tell; it is, it is, it is! three or four times, and then was afflicted to
hinder her from telling, at last she broke forth and said, It is the third
Chapter of the Revelations. I did something scruple the reading it, and did let
my scruple appear, lest Satan should make any, Superstitious lie to improve the
Word of the Eternal God. However, though not versed in these things, I judged I
might do it this once for an Experiment. I began to read, and before I had near
read through the first verse, she opened her eyes, and was well; this fit
continued near half an hour. Her Husband and the Spectators told me, she had
often been so relieved by reading Texts that she named, something pertinent to
her Case; as Isa 40. 1. Isa 49. 1. Isa. 50. 1. and several others.

On Thursday the Twenty fourth of march, (being in course the Lecture Day, at
the Village,) Goodwife N. was brought before the Magistrates Mr Hathorne and Mr
Corwin, about Ten of Clock, in the Fore Noon, to be Examined in the Meeting
House, the Reverend Mr. Hale, begun with Prayer, and the Warrant being read,
she was required to give answer, Why she aflicted those persons? she pleaded
her own innocence with earnestness. Thomas Putman's Wife, Abigail Williams and
Thomas Putmans daughter accuscd her that she appeared to them, and afflicted
them in their fitts: but some of the other said, that they had seen her, but
knew not that ever she had hurt them; amongst which was Mary Walcut, who was
presently after she had so declared bitten, and cried out of her in the
meeting house; producing the Marks of teeth on her wrist. It was so disposed,
that I had not leisure to attend the whole time of Examination but both
Magistrates, and Ministers, told me, that the things alleged, by the
afflicted, and defenses made by her, were much after the same manner, as the
former was. And her motions, did produce like effects as to, Biteing, Pinching,
Bruising Tormenting, at their Breasts, by her Leaning, and when, bended Back,
were as if their Backs was broken. The afflicted persons said, the Black Man,
whispered to her in the Assembly, and therefore she could not hear what the
Magistrates said unto her. They said also that she did then ride by the
Meeting House, behind the Black Man. Thomas Putman's wife, had a grievous Fit,
in the time of Examination, to the very great Impairing of her strength, and
wasting of her spirits, insomuch as she could hardly, move hand, or foot, when
she was carried out. Others also were there grievously afflicted, so that there
was once such an hideous scrietch and noise, (which I heard as I walked, at a
little distance from the Meeting house,) as did amaze me, and some that were
within, told me the whole assembly was struck with consternation, and they were
afraid, that those that sat next to them, were under the influence of
Witcheraft. This woman also was that day committed to Salem Prison. The
Magistrates and Ministers also did inform me, that they apprehended a child of
Sarah G and Examined it, being between 4 and 5 years of Age And as to matter of
Fact, they did Unanimously affirm, that when this Child, did but cast its eye
upon the afflicted persons, they were tormented, and they held her Heed, and
yet so many as her eye could fix upon were afflicted. Which they did several
times make careful observation of: the afflicted complained, they had often
been Bitten by this child, and produced the marks of a small set of teeth,
accordingly, this was also committed to Salem Prison, the child looked hail,
and well as other Children. I saw it at Lievt. Ingersols After the commitment
of Goodw. N. Tho: Putmans wife was much better, and had no violent fits at all
from that 24th of March, to the 5th of April. Some others also said they had
not seen her so frequently appear to them, to hurt them.

On the 25th of March, (as Capt. Stephen Sewal, of Salem, did afterward inform
me) Eliza. Paris, had sore Fits, at his house, which much troubled himself, and
his wife, so as he told me they were almost discouraged. She related, that the
great Black Man came to her, and told her, if she would be ruled by him, she
should have, whatsoever she desired, and go to a Golden City. She relating this
to Mrs. Sewall, she told the child, is was the Devil, and he was a Liar from
the Beginning, and bid her tell him so, if he came again: which she did
accordingly, at the next coming to her, in her fits.

On the 26th of March, Mr. Hathorne, Mr. Corwin, and Mr. Higison, were at the
Prison-Keepers House, to Examine the Child, and it told them there, it had a
little Snake that used to Suck on the lowest Joint of it Forefinger; and when
they inquired where, pointing to other places, it told them, not there, but
there, pointing on the Lowest point of the Forefinger; where they Observed, a
deep Red Spot, about the Bigness of a Flea-bite, they asked who gave it that
Snake? whether the great Black man, it said no, its Mother gave it.

The 31. of March there was a Public Fast kept at Salem on account of these
Afflicted Persons. And Abigal Williams said, that the Witches had a Sacrament
that day at an house in the Village, and that they had Red Bread and Red Drink.
The first of April, Mercy Lewis, Thomas Putman's Maid, in her fit, said, they
did eat Red Bread like Man's Flesh, and would have had her eat some: but she
would not; but turned away her head, and Spit at them, and said. I will not
Eat, I will not Drink, it is Blood etc. She said, That is not the Bread of Lif^
that is not the Water of Life; Christ gives the Bread of Life, I will have none
of it! This first of April also Marcy Lewis aforesaid saw in her fit a White
man and was with him in a Glorious Place, which had no Candles nor Sun, yet was
full of Light and Brightness; where was a great Multitude in White glittering
Robes, and they Sung the Song in the fifth of Reverlation the Ninth verse, and
the 110 Psalm, and the 149 Psalm; and said with her self, How long shall I stay
here! let me be along with you: She was loath to leave this place, and grieved
that she could tarry no longer. This Whiteman has appeared several times to
some of them, and given them notice how long it should be before they had
another Fit, which was sometimes a day, or day and half, or more or less: it
has fallen out accordingly.

The third of April, the Lord's Day, being Sacrament-day, at the Village, Goodw
C. upon Mr. Parris's naming his Text, John 6, 70. One of them is a Devil, the
said Goodw. C. went immediately out of the Meeting House, and flung the door
after her violently, to the amazement of the Congregation: She was afterward
seen by some in their Fits, who said, O Goodw. C. I did not think to see you
here! (and being at their Red bread and drink) said to her, Is this a time to
receive the Sacrament, you ran-away on the Lord's Day, and scorned to receive it
in the Meeting House, and, Is this a time to receive it? I wonder at you! This
is the sum of what I either saw my self, or did receive Information from
persons of undoubted Reputation and Credit.

Remarks of things more than ordinary about the Afflicted Persons.

1. They are in their Fits tempted to be Witches, are showed the List of the
Names of others, and are tortured, because they will not yield to Subscribe, or
meddle with, or touch the BOOK, and are promised to have present Relief if they
would do it.

2. They did in the Assembly mutually Cure each other, even with a Touch of
their Hand, when Strangled, and otherwise Tortured; and would endeavor to get
to their Afflicted, to Relieve them.

3. They did also foretell when another Fit was a-coming, and would say, Look
to her! she will have a Fit presently, which fell out accordingly, as many can
bear witness, that heard and saw it.

4. That at the same time, when the Accused Person was present, the Afflicted
Persons saw her Likeness in other places of the Meeting House, suckling her
Familiar, sometimes in one place and posture, and sometimes in another.

5. That their Motions in their Fits are Preternatural, both as to the manner,
which is so strange as a well person could not Screw their Body into; and as to
the violence also it is preternatural being much beyond the Ordinary force of
the same person when they are in their right mind.

6 The eyes of some of them in their fits are exceeding fast closed, and if you
ask a question they can give no answer, and I do belive they cannot hear at
that time, yet do they plainly converse with the Appearances, as if they did
discourse with real persons.

7 They are utterly pressed against any persons Praying, with them, and told by
the appearanees, they shall not go to Prayer, so Tho. Putmans wife was told, I
should not Pray; but she said, I should: and after I had done, reasoned with
the Appearance, Did not I say he should go to Prayer!

8 The forementioned Mary W. being a little better at ease, the Afflicted
persons said, she had signed the book; and that was the reason she was better.
Told me by Edward Putman.

Remarks concerning the Accused

1 For introduction to the discovery of those that afflicted them, It is
reported Mr. Parris's Indian Man, and Woman, made a Cake of Rye Meal, and the
Childrens water, baked it in the Ashes, and gave it to a Dog, since which
they have discovered, and seen particular persons hurting of them.

2 In Time of Examination, they seemed little affected, though all the
Spectators were much grieved to see it.

3. Natural Actions in them produced Preternatural actions in the Afflicted, so
that they are their own Image without any Poppits of Wax or otherwise.

4. That they are accused to have a Company about 23 or 24 and they did Muster
in Arms, as it seemed to the Afflicted Persons.

5. Since they were confined, the Persons have not been so much Afflicted with
their appearing to them, Biteing or Pinching of them etc.

6. They are reported by the Afflicted Persons to keep days of Fast and days
of Thansgiving, and Sacraments; Satan endeavor to Transform himself to an
Angel of Light, and to make his Kingdom and Administrations to resemble those
of our Lord Jesus Christ.

7. Satan Rages Principally amongst the Visible Subjects of Christ's Kingdom
and makes use (at least in appearance) of some of them to Afflict others; that
Christ's Kingdom may be divided against it self, and so be weakened.

8. Several things used in England at Trial of Witches; to the Number of 14 or
15 which are wont to pass instead of, or in Concurrence with Witnesses, at
least 6 or 7 of them are found in these accused: see Keebles Statutes.

9. Some of the most solid Afflicted Persons do affirm the same things
concerning seeing the accused out of their Fitts as well as in them.

10. The Witches had a Fast, and told one of the Afflicted Girls, she must not
Eat, because it was Fast Day, she said, she would: they told her they would
Choke her then; which when she did eat, was endeavored.

FINIS.

