Parents Groans OVER THEIR Wicked Children. SEVERAL SERMONS On PROVE. XVII. 25.
Published for the Benefit of all, but especially of good Parents and their
Children.

By EDWARD LAWRENCE, M. A. sometimes Minister of the Gospel at Baschurch, in
the County of Salop.

1 Samuel 2.25. -- Notwithstanding they hearkened not unto the voice of their
Father, because the Lord would slay them.

LONDON: Printed for Thomas Parkhurst, at the Bible and Three Crowns in
Cheapside, near Mercers-Chappel: and Joseph Collier at the Bible, under the
Gate, on London Bridge. 1681.

To my beloved Children, Deborah, Samuel, Edward, John, Thomas, Elizabeth,
Mary, Benjamin, Nathanael; and to all the Children of Christian Parents.
My dear Children!
I Am sensible of my unworthiness, and unfitness to be seen in Print; it is now
above Twenty years since, by the power and goodness of God, I was unexpectedly
rescued from the jaws of death, which was the reason I then published that
little book, called, Christ's Power over bodily Diseases: and I had never been
the Author of a book of this Title, had not two of you, but especially one made
me the Father of fools.

I shall here say no more particularly to you two, but that sound repentance,
and the fruits thereof, in a settled reformation of life, will yet be your
glory, and my joy; but if ye hate to be reformed, (which God forbid) I shall
mourn till I dye for the loss of Children, but ye will be tormented for ever
for the loss of God.

Children! I have not of the things of this world to leave you. I do
acknowledge the wisdom of God in not judging me sit to be entrusted with these
things; but it is enough for us if we can call God our own, though we cannot
call the riches of the world our own; some of you do with comfort remember how
we have often worshipped God together in singing with delight those words,
Psalm. 37.16, 17, 18, 19, 20. A little that a righteous man has, is better than
the riches of many wicked, etc.

I here leave you this Letter of the counsel and advice of your aged, and
loving, and faithful Father, who sees death looking him and you in the face,
and beholds the Judge before the door: this will speak to you, when death has
silenced me; and it speaks the same things which God, and Christ, and your own
Consciences speak to you; and it speaks to you (as it were) in the hearing of
the world.

1. Put a true value on your own Beings, for ye cannot love God and Christ, if
ye do not love your selves; ye are of that kind of creatures who are made much
higher than all other visible creatures, and but a little lower than the
Angels; ye are capable to know, and choose, and love, and delight in God, and to
speak of him, and to entertain your selves continually with him; ye are of
those creatures in whose happiness God glorifies all his perfections; he made
this world for man; he commanded his only-begotten Son to sacrifice himself for
man, and sent him to be born, and to live, and dye, and to rise again, and to
intercede in heaven for man; he has revealed all the Truths of the Christian
Religion for the good of man; and therefore ye should think it greater madness
to sell your precious souls and bodies to the Devil, and your lusts, for the
short and dirty pleasures of sin, than to sell a purse of gold, or a cabinet
full of jewels for a bag of chaff or cherry-stones; and should account it below
you to give your selves to any but to God.

2. Know that as your Beings are great, so your happiness or misery will be
very great; Riches or poverty, sickness or health, this present life, or the
death that deprives you of it, are things too little to make you blessed or
miserable; all the curses of God, or the blessings of the Gospel will be upon
you presently; and ye can neither live like men, nor like Christians, till ye
know what it is to be saved or damned, and what it is to lose or enjoy God.

3. That ye may escape the wrath, and obtain the glory set before you, let it
be your chief end and interest to know, and honor, and enjoy God; use the
creatures as his witnesses, to testify and declare the being and glory of God
to you; for God has not only made and appointed them to fill your hearts with
food and gladness, but also that in the use of them ye may feel, and find, and
fill your souls with God; but especially behold the glory of God, as he is
presented to you in the glass of the Scriptures, that he may have that name in
your hearts, which he has in his word.

Present him to your souls as God over all blessed for ever, that ye may
conclude that he who is so infinitely good, as to be his own happiness, is
sufficient to make you happy: And that this God may be your eternal life and
happiness, ye must know and behold his glory in the face of Jesus Christ, who
is the Image of the invisible God, the brightness of his glory, and the express
image of his person; and therefore behold his glory as the Father of such a
Son, and as the Lord of such a servant, for Jesus Christ is the Lords Christ,
Luke 2.26. Christ is Gods, 1 Cor. 3.23. and executes his office of a Mediator
in obedience to the will, and to the glory of God the Father, whose glory ye
may behold in his calling him to such a high office, in his accomplishing him
for the execution thereof, in prospering him, and making him successful in his
whole work, in giving him such a blessed seed, in making him victorious over
all his enemies, and in rewarding him for his great service and obedience; so
that according to the intent of the Scriptures forenamed, ye must labor to get
such a sight of the glory of God shining upon you in the face of Jesus Christ,
as will make an impression of his image in your souls.

And therefore loathe and abhor sin, which is against the glory of God, and
which is the only evil that can make you lose such a glorious God.

And for this reason be convinced of the vanity of this world, which is but a
poor thing when the glory of God shines on your souls; for ye will be most
blessed in him when this world shall be dissolved and passed away.

And let this make Jesus Christ glorious and acceptable to you, whose office
and work it is to redeem you from all sin and misery, and to make you blessed
for ever in the likeness and enjoyment of this glorious God.

And let this also cause you to endeavor to fill all persons with the great
Name of God and Christ, that ye may gain them all the hearts, and love, and
service ye can; and therefore in all company let God and Christ have your good
word.

4. Know that to love and delight in God is the best employment for the days of
your youth; God is much concerned for young persons; the Proverbs of Solomon
are written, to give to the young man knowledge and discretion, Prove. 1.4. and
one great use of the word of God is to teach young men to cleanse their way,
Psalm. 119.9. Young men, and maidens, and children, are called upon to praise
the Name of the Lord, Psalm. 148.12, 13. We find many mourning with holy
Augustine, that they loved God so late, but none complaining that they loved
him too soon; as young as you are, in heaven and hell, it is better be a young
child of God, than a young child of the Devil: young Saints are the glory of
God, the fullness and accomplishment of Christ, the joy of Angels, the security
and support of Religion, the crown of their Parents, and the blessing of their
Generation.

5. Fill your time with the fruits of the Spirit; see that your hearts be
filled with grace, and then your days will be filled with fruit; be always
receiving Christ, and resigning your selves to him; feel your hearts
continually laying hold on eternal life, and live as if ye were always running
to heaven; spend every day, so that ye may lie down in peace at night, that the
Lord's Day may be pleasant, death gainful, and eternity glorious.

6. Improve Gods Ordinances of worship; feel your vow of Baptism always fresh
and strong upon you; feel the difference betwixt the Lord's Day and other days;
see that the word Preached be mixed with faith, ingrafted in your hearts; that
it kill your sins, and reform your lives; pray continually, and in that duty
see that ye be with the spirits of children with your Father in Heaven; let all
your affairs pass through praying-hearts; and reckon all your own which ye
sincerely pray for; Sing Psalms, as those that make God your song and joy; and
as if ye were sensible that ye are in the gates of heaven, ready to enter
therein, to join with that world of blessed Angels and Saints in admiring and
praising God. When ye come to the Lord's Supper, see all that is presented to
you, receive all that is offered, and do all that is commanded you.

7. Be saithful to the Truth, and then ye need not be afraid of your selves, or
of any other: this is your greatest safety, and ye may then feel the ground
firm under you, and may say with David, Psalm. 26.12. My foot stands in an
even place; and if ye are called to suffer, choose it rather than sin; and
seeing men cannot kill your souls, let not the fear of them make you destroy
them your selves.

8. Decline evil company; do not go with them to Hell, who will not go with you
to Heaven; but if ye are called into such company, feel your selves with God,
whilst ye are with them, and carry it as those that are sensible that there is
a God in the place; exercise those graces which are contrary to, and do cendemn
their sins; be humble with the proud, meek with the angry, loving with the
malicious, that they may be reproved by your graces, and that ye may not be
defiled by their sins.

9. Labor to be a blessing to all persons; let men see that in you, for which
they may have cause to love and praise God; bear all wrongs, but do none; do
what in you lies to make all persons holy and joyful, but make none sinful,
angry, or sad; forgive all, but let none have need to forgive you; exercise
their love, but do not by your sins exercise their patience; give all cause to
bless God for you, but give not cause to any to wish they had never known you.

10. Dread debts; do not unnecessarily bring your selves under the bondage of
debtors; look upon it as more just and honorable to beg, than to borrow, if ye
are not likely to pay, except in that case ye plainly acquaint the lender with
your condition, that he may know what adventure he makes; and when ye are able,
pay seasonably, fully, and thankfully: I would have none to lend to any
children of mine, without first advising with me, except they be in a hopeful
way of trade: and my advice to such of you is, that you be afraid of being too
much trusted; for it is often seen, that they who go to the length of their
credit, are injurious to others, and prove bankrupts themselves.

11. Abhor Lying: This is a sin which is an abomination to the Lord, whom ye
should always please; it is contrary to the Divine Nature, which is in every one
that is born of God, Ephesians. 4.24. It Is an abuse of your tongues which should be
your glory; for the use of your tongues is to express your minds; but in a lie
your minds and thoughts do contradict your words; it is a wrong to others whom
ye would have believe you, when ye do not believe your selves; it makes you
unfit for humane society; for who will converse with those whom they cannot
believe; ye hereby rot your names, for a liar is one of the worst characters of
the devil of hell; ye destroy your bodies and souls for ever, for all liars
shall have their part in the lake of fire and brimstone, which is the second
death.

12. Do not dare to steal; take nothing from any person, but what ye can say ye
received it from the hand of God, and can praise him for it; and can
comfortably beg his blessing upon it; kill those lusts which ye would feed with
the fruit of other men's labors; consider, that when ye are tempted to this sin
of theft, ye are tempted to bring a curse on your estates and persons, to
thrust a dagger into your Fathers heart, and to hasten your selves to an
untimely and shameful death, and a tormenting eternity.

13. Deride and jeer no persons; let your jests be harmless, and make not your
selves the fools of your company; but whilst ye are cheerful as men and women,
lose not the savor of Christians.

14. Haunt not Taverns or Alehouses, etc. Go not into such places, but when
God calls you; stay no longer than he will stay with you; and do nothing there,
but what ye shall have cause to bless God for when ye come away.

15. Be thankful to them who have showed mercy and kindness to me and you; pray
for them; inquire how it is with their posterity; and as ye are capable, do
them good: remember Prove. 27.10. Thy own friend, and thy fathers friend forsake
not.

16. Forgive all that have done me wrong, and pray to God not to visit it on
them, or their posterity; ye know I have had hard measure from some, and I know
that I have stood before God to speak good for them, and to turn away his wrath
from them.

17. As for you that are or may be hereafter set up for your selves in a way of
trade: my counsel to you is this: See that your persons be upright with God,
that ye may have a Scripture-right to the promises of the life that now is, and
of that which is to come, which is to be preferred before the best estate in the
world. Pray to God for his blessing, and see every customer as sent from him,
and love them as your selves; let all that deal with you have cause to say,
that they deal with the members of Jesus Christ.

18. And for you that are or may be Apprentices, my counsel and command to you
is this: Let those Scriptures dwell in your hearts which teach you your duty,
and encourage you therein, as Ephesians. 5.5, 6, 7, 8. Col. 3.22, 23, 24, 25. Tit.
2.9, 10. 1 Pet. 2.18, 19, 20, 21. Commit them to memory, and bless God that he
condescends to be a teacher of servants; be content with your present
condition, which may be the easiest time of your whole age; be not apt to find
fault, for that will make you uneasy to your selves, and to the family; let
all your words, and looks, and actions, be such as do witness that ye do in
your hearts honor your Masters and Mistresses, and Christ in them; bear
correction patiently, though ye be wronged; the sufferings of Christ are set
before you as your pattern herein. Pray daily for your Masters, and their
families, for ye ought to improve all your interest in God for their good; pray
to God to fit you for your calling, that he who teaches the husbandman to plow
and sow, Isa. 28.26. may teach you herein.

To conclude, Love one another according to all the Obligations that are upon
you, but never put it in the power of any one to undo the other.

Kill all lustings after the honors, or riches, or pleasures of the world:
Remember I have told you, that as love fulfils all the Law of God, so lust
fulfils the law of the Devil. I will say no more, choose him for your Father
that cannot dye: And as Mr. Bolton said to his children, so say I to you, Do
not dare to meet me at the day of judgment in an unregenerate state.

June 6. 1681. Your loving and faithful Father, EDWARD LAWRENCE

To all Christian Parents.
IT is not only for the sake of my self and children, but also for the sake of
you and yours that I have published this little book; but especially out of
respect to the glory of God, that we may leave a seed to bless him in this
world, when we are glorifying him in the better world; it will cost you but a
little money to buy it, and but a little time for you and your children to read
it; if those of you who are able, do give to every one of your children one of
these books, and do likewise bestow some of them upon the children of the poor,
this will be no advantage to me; and when ye come to give your account, will be
no loss to you: I am a lover of children, and have often lifted up my heart in
prayer to God for them, where I have seen them. I wish this may be a blessing
to you and them; pray that we may leave that Religion which came originally
from the Father of Jesus Christ, and is revealed to us in the Scriptures, to
our posterity, and that they may have hearts to live according to the rules and
principles of it, more than we have done. Farewell.

June 6. 1681. Your Servant for Jesus sake, EDW. LAWRENCE.

ERRATA.
Page 35. line 19. instead of cinque, read sink.

Page 82. line 21. read afflictions.

Parents Groans over their wicked Children.
Prove. XVII. 25. A foolish son is a grief to his father, and bitterness to her
that bare him.


IT is one great argument of the vanity of this world, that we may be spoiled
of all that is dear to us under the Sun by the sins of other men.

A common and sad instance of this is, That the Comforts of godly Parents here
are very much at the will and pleasure of their own Children: For had a good
man all other delights that the creatures can yield, and did wash his steps in
butter, and dip his foot in oil: Nay suppose he had all the pleasures of
Godliness that are ordinarily attained in this life, yet he will be a man of
sorrow, if a wicked Child make him the Father of a fool.

This doleful case is presented to us in this Text, which I have chosen for the
subject of this discourse, that I may duly affect my own and others hearts with
this great calamity.

In the Text two things are clearly set before us.

1. A case taken for granted; and that is, That godly Parents have often
foolish Children.

2. The misery of that case is expressed; that is, That such Children are a
grief to their Fathers, and bitterness to the Mothers that bare them.

The Explication of the Text.

A foolish son, that is, a wicked and ungodly son, or daughter; for it is usual
in this book of the Proverbs, that both sexes are intended, when but one is
expressed: Wicked Children think themselves wise, wiser than their Parents, or
Masters, or Ministers; for vain man would be wise, though he be like a wild
Asses colt, Job 11.12. But all the Devils children are fools; for he that will
obey and imitate the Devil, who is a murderer of all his own children, and will
not obey and imitate Christ who is the Redeemer and Savior of all his
Children, I may say of him in the words of a wise Woman, A fool is his name,
and folly is with him.

Is a grief to his Father. By Father and Mother in the Text, I understand a
godly Father and Mother, who are most affected with this case. Is a grief: some
render the word anger, or indignation, and both grief and anger are intended;
for a foolish son makes his good Father both angry and sad.

And bitterness to her that bare him; that is, to his good Mother, called her
that bare him, to aggravate the Mothers misery, and the Child's sin: It cannot
but torment the good Mother to think that she did with so much sickness, and
pain, and sorrow bear and bring forth one that proves a child of the Devil, and
is like to be a firebrand of Hell; and it is a great aggravation of the child's
sins, to imbitter the life of her that was a means of life to him; and to
hasten that womb to the worms, which with such pangs and throws brought him
into the world.

The Text will be further opened in the following discourse, which I shall
reduce to these three Heads.

First, That it is ordinary for godly Parents to have wicked and ungodly
Children.

Secondly, That this is a very great calamity to these godly Parents.

Thirdly, Use.

1. It is ordinary for godly Parents to have wicked and ungodly Children: this
is implied in the Text: And I may say of this what Solomon speaks of another
case, Eccles. 6.1. It is an evil which I have seen under the Sun, and it is
common among men.

In the handling of this, I shall

1. Give some Characters of godly Parents.

2. Some Characters of ungodly Children.

3. I shall give you several instances for the confirmation of it.

1. I shall only give you two main Characters of godly Parents.

First, They are conscienciously careful for their preservation.

Secondly, For the Eternal happiness and salvation of their Children.

1. They are conscienciously careful for the preservation of the natural lives
of their Children, as trees support and feed the branches that grow out of
themselves: And as it is natural to the brutes to defend and keep their own
young, so nature it self teaches and inclines Parents to defend, and
preserve, and provide for the fruit of their own bodies: and for this end to
supply them with food, raiment, and physic, and to fit them for callings, and
seasonably to provide for them meet yokefellows, and every way to take care,
that they neither perish or be made miserable: but godly Parents, in whom
natural affections are sanctified and improved by Grace, do all these out of a
principle of Godliness, as persons who have to do with God herein: they do it
in a sense of their dependence on God, and pray for daily bread to feed their
Children, and are thankful when they feel it come warm from their Father in
Heaven; they do it in obedience and faithfulness to God; and with a design,
that their Children may live to be born of God, and to be a blessing to this
world, and be blessed in the other world: As for those unnatural monsters, who
feed their lusts with that which should maintain their Children; they are so
far from being Godly Parents, that they are worse than Infidels, in not
providing for their Families; and are like the Devil, who (as I said, is a
Murderer of his own Children.

2. They are conscienciously careful for the Eternal happiness and salvation of
their Children; for their natural affections being now sanctified, do work in
them for the spiritual good and happiness of their Children. Prove. 4.3, 4, 5. I
was my fathers son, tender and only beloved in the sight of my mother. Solomon
was his fathers and mothers darling, their love did run out exceedingly upon
this son; and he tells us which way their love and kindness was expressed: he
taught me also, and said unto me, Get wisdom, get understanding: He tells us
also how the affections of his good mother did work, Prove. 31.2, 3. What my
son? and what the son of my womb? and what the son of my vows? The son of her
womb, was the son of her vows, whom she had devoted to God; those Parents who
have known both states, the state of Wrath, and the state of Grace, and have
experimentally felt what it is to pass from death to life, and from the kingdom
of Satan, into the kingdom of God, cannot but desire that the same change be
wrought upon their children. And as they who love themselves with a holy love,
do take God for their eternal life and happiness, and Christ for their
Redeemer, to redeem them from all evil, and to bring them to this happiness;
and the Spirit for their Sanctifier, to fit them for this happiness: So they
that love their children with this holy Love, will desire and endeavor that
they be partakers with them of the same happiness.

2. I proceed to give you three Characters of ungodly Children.

1. They are such Children as will not be subject to the authority of their
Parents: The reverence of Children to their Parents is so incorporated into the
whole body of Religion, that all Religion is in vain without it: this fully
appears, Levit. 19.3. Ye shall fear every man his mother, and his father, and
keep my sabbaths, I am the Lord your God. Observe, this duty is here joined
with keeping the Lords Sabbaths, wherein Religion did always very much consist:
but it is often seen, that disobedient children are great prophaners of the
Lord's Day; they are always bad, but usually worst on that day; and some of them
may remember, that their first breaking out into scandalous sins, was on the
Lord's Day. We are here further taught, That this duty of Reverence to Parents,
is joined with all Religion to God; for, says God in effect, it is in vain for
any to pretend to call me their Lord and their God, if they do not fear their
Parents; and theresore wicked children are numbered among the most flagitious
and worst sinners. Ezekiel. 22.7. In thee have they set light by father and
mother; they villified and despised them, and made nothing of them: such break
all the bonds of Religion; and many hasten through a shameful and untimely
death, into a dreadful and tormenting eternity, whose wickedness first began in
scorning and despising their Parents.

2. They are such children as will not obey the Commands of their Parents: The
godly Commands of Parents, are the means which God has appointed, and does
often bless to make the children godly, Genesis 18.19. I know, Abraham, that he
will command his children, and his household after him, and they shall keep the
way of the Lord to do justice and judgment: and God commands all children to
obey all the holy and lawful commands of their parents, Ephesians. 6.1. Children
obey your parents in the Lord, for this is right: It Is the parents right that
their children should obey them; and it is Gods right that they should obey them
in the Lord: and this, says the Apostle, Col. 3.21. is well-pleasing to the
Lord: so that those children do neither fear provoking God, nor care to please
him, who will not obey their parents; and so are children of their parents
sorrow, and of Gods wrath.

3. They are such children as are unthankful to their parents; the Apostle
tells us, 1 Timothy 5.4. That it is good and acceptable before God for children to
requite their parents: and they have great things for which they should labor
to requite their godly parents, viz. for all their care, and cost, and pains to
keep them alive, and for all their diligence and faithfulness in endeavoring
to make them blessed; and all the requital which the poor parents desire, is,
that their children would but love and obey God, and not damn themselves; but
these ungodly children are so far from requiting them, that like so many Dogs
and Lions, they tear in pieces the hearts and bowels of their tender parents.

3. I now come to confirm this, That it is ordinary for godly parents to have
ungodly children: and for this end. I shall first give you some instances
recorded in Scripture. 2dly, I shall instance in several cases wherein this is
verified.

1. I shall only give you four instances recorded in Scripture for the
confirmation hereof.

1. Instance is in Adam and Eve; these were both godly parents; and therefore
in that first Evangelical promise, Genesis 3.15. we have notice of the two great
parties in the world; the one was the Woman, and her seed; and the other the
Serpent, and his seed, and of the enmity betwixt them; and though there is only
mention made of the woman, yet the man is also included; so that by the woman
and her seed, we are to understand Adam and Eve, and Christ and his Church; and
by the Serpent, and his seed, are meant the Devils, and all the devils
children; and forasmuch as we find Adam and Eve of the same party with Christ
and his Church, and in enmity with the Devil and his seed, we conclude them to
be godly persons, and godly parents: Moreover we find Genes. 4. that they
brought up their children in that Religion, and to worship God in the use of
those Ordinances which he had then instituted as a means of their salvation:
these two were the first fruits of Christ; the first persons that ever entered
into the Covenant of Grace; and Christ might say to them, as Jacob said to
Reuben, Genesis 49.3. Ye are my firstborn, my might, and the beginning of my
strength. At first the whole Church of God was only in these two persons, and
yet these are the parents of that cursed and bloody Cain. And I shall observe
three things in this history that render this case very doleful.

1. That Eve was so exceeding glad for the birth of Cain: some are of opinion,
that she thought she had brought forth the promised Messiah; and that made her
break out with joy, saying, Genesis 4.1. I have gotten a man from the Lord: and
yet this is he of whom the Apostle speaks, 1 John 3.12. He was of that wicked
one, meaning the devil: This is a common case, that parents are exceedingly
glad for the birth of a child, and call their friends and neighbors to rejoice
with them; and yet that sweet and pleasant babe proves the greatest torment to
their parents, which ever they met with in their whole age.

2. Consider his crime, he barbarously murdered his own brother, Genesis 4.8. Cain
rose up against Abel his brother, and slew him: He considered not how this
would grieve the heart of his good Father and Mother, nor that he was the elder
brother, and therefore ought to have nourished the life of the younger, and to
have been a pattern of holiness and love to him; neither did he consider that
he hated and murdered not only a brother, but also a holy child of God, and for
that which he ought to have honored and loved him; because his brothers works
were righteous: and he considered not how his brothers blood would cry to God
for vengeance against him; no bonds, or arguments, or reasons will prevail with
ungodly children.

3. Consider the dreadful judgment of God, both upon himself and his posterity:
Gods judgment on his soul was so dreadful, that he desperately cries out, Genesis
4.13. Mine ini quity is greater than that it may be forgiven: he was cast out
of the favor of God, excommunicated from the Church, and all his posterity
were excluded from communion therewith: they are called the sons and daughters
of men, in opposition to the Sons of God, and at last all perished in the
deluge of waters; and yet, I say, this bloody and cursed monster was the son,
the eldest son of the two first godly parents that ever were in the world.

2d Instance is in Noah; the first instance was in the first godly man in the
old world, as the ages before the flood are called, 2 Pet. 2.5. This instance
is in the best man in the new World after the flood: this Noah has a great
character in the Scriptures, Genesis 6.8, 9. Noah found grace in the eyes of the
Lord. Noah was a just man, and perfect in his generations. When all the earth
was debauched and corrupt, Genesis 6.11, 12. yet then was Noah just and upright,
and walked with God, it is he that is called in 2 Pet. 2.5. A preacher of
righteousness: It is he that was so much in the favor of God, that he and his
family were singled out to be preserved in the Ark, when all the world besides
were drowned and perished in the waters: yet this holy Noah was the Father of
that wicked Ham, whom all the waters of Noah (as the Scripture calls that
deluge) were not effectual to eure of his wickedness; but he went a wicked man
into the Ark, and came wicked out; insomuch that his own holy Father was
inspired by a prophetical spirit, to curse both his son and posterity, and the
crime mentioned, Genesis 9.22, 25. was his irreverence and disrespect to his
father.

3d Instance is in Isaac, that holy Patriarch, who so greatly feared God, that
his son Jacob gives God that honorable name, Genesis 31.42. The fear of Isaac,
meaning the God whom Isaac feared; yet he and that good mother Rebekkah were
the parents of a wicked Esau, whom God is said to hate, Romans 9.13. I know we
read Genesis 25.28. that Isaac loved Esau: but we see that children may be greatly
beloved of their parents, and yet abhorred and cursed of God.

4th Instance is in David, called a man after Gods own heart, whom God raised
up to be king of Israel: he was a Penman, of a considerable part of the holy
Scriptures; such an eminent type of Christ, that Christ himself is often called
David in Scripture; yet he was the tender father of that wicked Absalom, who
bloodily murdered his brother Amnon, and miserably and shamefully dyed in
Treason and Rebellion against his Royal Father, whose bitter lamentation is yet
in our ears, 2 Samuel 18.33. O my son Absalom, my son, my son Absalom! would God
I had died for thee; O Absalom my son, my son!

2dly, I shall further instance in four Cases, wherein this is often verified.

1. Those Children who are most beloved of their parents, do often prove the
most wicked Children. Absalom was David's darling; insomuch, that although he
set his whole kingdom in a flame, and constrained his father to fly for his
life; yet when David sent out his Army to suppress that rebellion, he gives
this charge to his Commanders, in the audience of the Soldiers, 2 Samuel 18.5.
Deal gently for my sake with the young man, even with Absalom.

And it often happens, that the Children who have most of their Parents love
and delight, and whose looks and talk they are most taken with, and whom they
are most apt to boast of, and are most unwilling to part with, and in whom they
promise themselves most content and pleasure, do often prove the greatest
scourge and torment to their parents; for it is not the love of the godly
parents, but the love of God that makes children holy and happy.

2. This is often the sad case of some holy Ministers of the Word: I know it is
a Popish and peevish humor in some to say, that Ministers children never do
well; indeed every thing of Ministers is most exposed to the observation of
people, and therefore the wickedness of their children is most observed and
talked of; but the holy, learned, and every-way prosperous and blessed seed of
diverse godly Ministers, is sufficient to confute and shame the ignorance of
people herein; and yet it is true that many godly Ministers in all ages have
groaned under this sad calamity: Eli was a holy Priest of God, but his two sons
were Devils incarnate, monsters of men, scandalous, sacrilegious and adulterous
sons of Belial, as appears 1 Samuel 2. And this is no rare thing, that the
Prayers, Studies, Sermons, Examples of many good Ministers are often made
successful to bring others to Heaven, when they can by no means restrain their
own children from running to Hell, and their own children make them do the work
of their Ministry with grief, when often the children of drunkards, worldlings,
and whoremongers will be their crown and glory in the day of the Lord Jesus.

3. This is often true, when both parents are godly; indeed when either father
or mother is wicked, no marvel if the children be hardened in their sins by
their examples: but it is usually seen, that when children have both the
instruction of the father, and also the law of the mother; and when they cry to
all the Ministers and Christians about them, to help them by their prayers and
counsels to save their children; yet all prevail not, but the holy father and
mother can scarce keep one another hearts from being broken by their stubborn
and disobedient children.

4. The children of godly parents often prove wicked, when God does sanctify,
and bless, and save the children of ungodly parents; we see sometimes trees of
righteousness, growing in the families of the wicked, when briars and thorns
grow up in the families of the righteous: We read Matthew. 1. that Ahaz, a very
wicked king, begat holy Hezekiah, and good Hezekiah begat Manasseh, who was an
Idolater of the highest rate; a Witch, and such a bloody murderer, that the
Chronicle of his reign tells us, 2 Kings 21.16. He shed innocent blood very
much, till he had filled Jerusalem from one end to the other (though afterward
he is set forth to be the greatest pattern of the grace of God in the Old
Testament, as Paul is in the New Testament): It is no new sight to see children
of the best Saints in the way to Hell, and children of Atheists and Persecutors
in the way to Heaven; Nay, though some parents do persecute their own children
for loving and fearing God, yet they cannot debauch them; when all endeavors
of godly parents will not prevail to make their children hate sin, and love
God: and this is one of the saddest instances of that great mystery of
Providence, mentioned Eccles. 8.14. There he just men, to whom it happens
according to the work of the wicked: again, there be wicked men, to whom it
happens according to the work of the righteous.

2. Head. It is a very great calamity to godly parents to have wicked and
ungodly children; A foolish son (says the text) is a grief to his father, and
bitterness to her that bare him: To the same purpose is that, Prove. 17.21. He
that begets a fool, does it to his sorrow, and the father of a fool has no
joy; a foolish son damps all his joy: and Prove. 19.13. A foolish son is the
calamity of his father.

I shall set forth the greatness of this trouble by these Eight particulars:

1. By the matter of these parents grief.

2. By the passions that this calamity does move and affect.

3. By comparing this with other afflictions, and showing how this exceeds them.

4. By showing that this makes these parents do all their work with grief and
sorrow.

5. By showing that this embitters all their other comforts.

6. By the sad concommitants of it.

7. By the several aggravations of it.

8. By instancing in some cases wherein this calamity is more grievous.

First, The matter of these parents grief is very sad, as appears in these
seven things:

1. That their children are so defiled and debauched with sin, which is so
loathsome to these holy parents; it vexed the righteous soul of Lot to see and
hear the filthy conversation of the beastly Sodomites; how grievous then must
it be to these godly parents, to see and hear the filthiness of their own dear
children; it is a grievous thing to a man that loves God, and Godliness, and
Souls, to see a drunkard staggering in the streets, or to hear any man
blaspheming and reproaching his Maker and Redeemer; but none can tell but those
that feel it, what a sad spectacle it is to sober and godly parents to see
their own children drunk; or how it torments them to hear their own children
lying, and blaspheming God and his Saints.

2. That their children are the children of the Devil, and under the power of
Satan, and ridden by him, and carried captive by him at his will; it was a
lamentable case of that good Mother, who came to Christ, saying, Matthew. 15.22.
Have mercy upon me, O Lord, thou son of David, my daughter is grievously vexed
with a devil: yet this was not her daughters sin, but only her great
affliction: but how doleful is it to these parents, who have renounced the
devil themselves, and live in continual warfare with him, to see the hearts,
and mouths, and lives of the children, whom they have devoted to God, filled
and possessed with the devil, whose children they are, and whose lusts they
will do; if the devil tempt the parents, their own graces will resist and
overcome his temptations; but they cannot secure their children from being
overcome, and from falling into the condemnation of the devil; but with sad
hearts do see the Lion of Hell running away with the lambs of their flock, and
cannot recover them.

3. That their children are under the wrath and curse of God; it did sadly
affect the father of that lunatic son, mentioned Matthew. 17.15. to see his son
fall often into the fire, and often into the water: How would he screech at such a
sight, and cry, Ah my dear child will be burnt, my child will be drowned! but
much more terrible is it to these parents, who know the terrors of the Lord, to
know that their children have cut off the entail of the Covenant of Grace, and
are every moment ready to fall into the hands of the living God! when such
parents are, with faith, reading the curses of Gods Law, how does it cut them
to the heart to think, that they are then reading their childrens doom.

4. That their children are under those black characters, which are given in
Scripture to ungodly men; for the faith of these parents makes all persons have
that name in their hearts, which they have in the Word: And as God is no
respecter of persons, so Faith, so far as it prevails, respects not the
persons of any, no not of a man's own children; but because they are more under
their notice and observation than others, and because they are more concerned
for them, therefore the deeper impressions do these characters make on their
hearts; so that this is the misery of these parents, that whilst they look on
persons through the glass of the Scriptures, and see many to be the jewels, and
treasure, and children, and heirs of God, and the glorious bride and spouse of
Christ; they must and do judge their own wicked children to be a generation of
vipers, and serpents, and dogs, and swine, and lions, and bears, and wolves, as
God calls them in his Word.

5. That the anger and displeasure of God appears so much against these good
parents herein; indeed the sense of their own folly must make them justify God
in this sharp correction, and cause them to say with Solomon, Prove. 26.3. As it
is meet that there be a whip for the horse, and a bridle for the ass; so is
it, that there be a rod for the fools back: But this is very grievous, that God
should correct them with a scourge made of their own bowels, and should chasten
a blessed father with a cursed child; his holy anger must be acknowledged
herein; for when the child despises his father, God himself does justly spit
in the fathers face.

6. The shame and disgrace which comes to them hereby, Prove. 19.26. He that
wastes his father, and chaseth away his mother, is a son that causes shame:
Every one will be ready to reflect upon their parents, and to say, Surely these
children were never taught to serve God, who do so sacrifice themselves to the
service of the devil.

7. Both parents are deeply affected for the trouble and misery that comes
hereby to one another; their love to, and sympathy with one another, makes the
burden of both more uneasy: The good father is not only troubled with a wicked
child, but also for the bitterness and sorrow of his wife; and the good mother
is not only troubled with the wicked child, but also for the grief of her
husband; the mothers heart bleeds to see the tears, and to hear the groans of
the afflicted father, and cries out, Oh, what a child have I brought forth,
that so much deprives me of the comfort of a loving husband, and is like to
break his heart, and to make me a desolate and disconsolate widow: The father
mourns to see the tears, and the sad countenance, and to hear the groans of the
distressed mother; and is ready to cry out, Woe is me, that the child of my
bowels is destroying the wife of my bosom; and yet these hard-hearted children
are not affected herewith; but let the parents sigh, they will sing; let the
parents weep and mourn, they will rant and roar; and care no more to break
their parents hearts, than to break a Tobaccopipe; and will not abate a lie, or
oath, or cup, to save the lives of their tender parents.

Secondly, The greatness of this calamity appears by the passions in the
parents, which are moved and affected hereby. I shall only instance in three
passions, Fear, Anger, and Sorrow.

1. Fear: This is a troublesome passion, and godly parents are never out of
fear of their wicked children; they are afraid that every one that knocks at
the door, and that every post, and every friend that comes to visit them,
brings them some sad tidings of their disobedient children. I shall amplify
this, by instancing in three great Evils, which such parents are greatly
perplexed with the fear of.

1. They are afraid lest their children are in the practice of some great sins:
this was Jobs fear, when his children were feasting together, Job 1.5. Job
said, It may be my sons have sinned and cursed God in their hearts: their
children are seldom out of their sight, but the good parents are in fear of
this; they know their children are always exposed to the devils temptations,
and to the snares of the world, and to the allurements of evil company; and
that their corrupt hearts are set to comply with all; and that they have
provoked God to give them up to their own lusts; and therefore they are in
continual fear, lest these poor children are lying, or swearing, or cursing, or
whoring, or drunk, and defiling, and debauching, and destroying themselves and
others.

2. They are in fear lest some heavy judgment of God will befall them in this
life: And thus David, when his son Absalom was in the head of a high rebellion
against his father, and the battle was to be fought with the Rebels, was
fearful lest his son should then perish in his sins: these parents know that
their poor children are out of Gods way, and as birds wandering from the nest,
Prove. 27.8. are exposed to all manner of danger; they know what the word
threatens against them, and what fearful instances there are of the vengeance
of God upon disobedient children; and therefore they are in fear, lest their
sins should bring them to some untimely, and shameful death.

3. They are in fear of their eternal damnation; they are sensible that their
children are children of wrath, and do live in those sins for which the wrath
of God comes on the children of disobedience; and these parents believe what
Hell is; for as faith in the promises is the substance of things hoped for; so
faith, as it believes the threatenings, is the substance of things feared; and
therefore they cannot but tremble to think, that their dear lambs, whom they so
tenderly nourished and cherished, are in danger every moment to be cast into
the fire that is prepared for devils.

2. Anger is another passion that is moved in godly parents, with the
wickedness of their children: and this is troublesome; for a man is never out
of trouble whilst he is in anger; and the more the wills of these parents are
bent to have their children godly, the more are they displeased, and provoked
to anger by their sins: they are angry to see them provoke that God whom they
themselves are so careful to please; and to see them destroying their precious
souls, which they are laboring to save; and to see them waste those estates on
their filthy lusts, which they have got by their care, and labor, and prayers:
they cannot but think of them with anger, and speak of them with anger, and
look at them with anger: and thus their children which should be their delight
and pleasure, are a continual cross and vexation to them.

3. Sorrow: They are deeply affected with grief and sorrow for the wickedness
of their children; the parents graces cause them to mourn for their childrens
sins; their saving-knowledge makes their hearts bleed to see their children
scorn and despise that glory which they see in God and Christ; and whilst they
by faith are feeding on Christ, it grieves them to see their children feeding
themselves with the dirty pleasures of sin; their love to God makes them groan,
that their children love sin the worst evil, and hate God the chiefest good.

Thirdly, I proceed to show the greatness of this calamity, by comparing it
with other troubles, and showing how this exceeds them. I shall instance in
four other Troubles.

1. This is a greater calamity than to be without Children; so that if God had
said of those Parents, as he said of him, Jer. 22.30. Write ye this man, and
this woman childless, the punishment had not been so great, as to be afflicted
with wicked children: such parents may say with our Savior in another case,
Luke 23.29. Blessed are the barren, and the wombs that never bare, and the paps
which never gave suck. As it is better to have no herbs in your gardens, than to
have only stinking-weeds that cumber the ground; and better to have no beasts
in your ground, than a company of foxes and wolves; so it is better to have no
children, than to have only such who are the continual shame, and plague, and
torment of their parents.

2. It Is a greater misery than to have diseased, or deformed children: This
indeed is a sore affliction, to be the parents of sick, or blind, or lame, or
monstrous children, because such children are naturally disabled to do that
service to God, and their generation, and their parents, which otherwise they
might do: but this is not so grievous as to have wicked children; for they that
are most diseased and uncomely, are often called to be the blessed and glorious
children and heirs of God, and the amiable and beautiful bride and spouse of
Christ, when all wicked children are the filthy and loathsome children of the
devil.

3. This is more grievous than the death of children. I know it is matter of
deep sorrow when parents may say with the tender Patriarch, Genesis 42.36. Joseph
is not, and Simeon is not: My son is dead, and is not; and my dear daughter is
dead, and is not; but this sorrow is not lasting, the impression of it usually
does, and should wear off; but wicked children are constant troubles to their
parents, and cause them to say with the Psalmist, Psalm. 31.10. My days are
spent with grief, and my years with sighing.

4. This calamity is greater than persecution from wicked men, though that be
also very grievous; insomuch that Paul, a man of a great spirit, was so
affected herewith, that he solemnly beseeches the Roman Christians, Romans
15.30. For the Lord Jesus sake, and for the love of the Spirit, that they would
strive together with him in prayer to God for him, to deliver him from
persecutingmen; it is a sad case to be smitten and wounded in our names by
lying and slanderous tongues: David, and Christ in him, tells us, Psalm. 69.20.
That reproach has broken his heart: It is sad for the jewels of God to be
accounted and used as the sink and jakes of the world, and to have our estates
wasted and spoiled, and to be exposed to beggary and want, and to be dragged
from our healthful and pleasant habitations and families, and to be cast among
rogues and thieves into nasty and loathsome prisons, and to have our innocent
and precious blood shed by barbarous men: but all this is not so grievous as to
be tormented by wicked children; for in that case we are distressed by the sins
of our enemies; and if so, as David speaks, Psalm. 55.12. We could have born it:
But in this case we are afflicted by the sins of our own children, and may say
with David, when he was reviled by Shimei, 2 Samuel 16.11. Behold my son which
came forth of my bowels, seeks my life: how much more may this Benjamite? It
is a far greater torment to have the children of our own bowels tear and break
our hearts, than to be destroyed by merciless enemies.

Fourthly, The greatness of this calamity is seen, in that it causes these
good parents to do all their work with sorrow. I shall instance in three sorts
of Works which they do in the bitterness of their Souls: 1. Natural. 2. Civil.
3. Religious Works. He that has a wicked child on his heart, does all these
with a sad heart.

1. Natural Works: these they do with sorrow: They are fed with the bread of
tears, and drink their tears in great measure, as the Psalmist speaks in
another case, Psalm. 80.5. And as it is said, in the prayer of the afflicted,
Psalm. 102.9. They eat ashes like bread, and mingle their drink with weeping.

2. They do their Civil Works with grief: this makes them labor with sorrow in
their particular callings; it was Solomon's trouble to think that a fool should
have the rule of his labor wherein he labored, and showed himself wise under
the Sun, Eccles. 2.18, 19, 20. And this sad case is often observed, that the
same estates which were the fruit of the wise and good parents prayers, and
diligence, are consumed upon the childrens lusts; and that the good creatures
which were a blessing to the parents, and wherewith they did honor God, and
feed Christ in his members, do prove a curse to their children, and weapons in
their hands wherewith they sight against God and his people.

3. This also causes them to do their Religious Works in grief and sorrow. I
shall only instance in two particulars.

1. This makes them instruct these poor ungodly children with sorrow: It is a
doleful case when men can have their dogs to come at their whistle, and their
horses to yield to the bridle, and their oxen to submit to the yoke; but their
unruly children will not be subject to the holy government of their parents;
they can readily learn filthy words, and wicked actions from their ungodly
School-fellows, or Fellow-apprentices, or debauched companions; but they will
not hear the instruction of their father, nor obey the law of their mother.

2. This causes them to pray for such children with sorrow; for according as
is the spiritual state of the children, so are their holy parents affected in
prayer to God for them; when they can in prayer call upon God as the Father of
their children, and can present their children to God as such, who are born of
God, and adopted of him, and can beg mercy for them who are the vessels of
mercy, then they do, as the Apostle for the Philippians, Chap. 1.4. In every
prayer make request for them with joy: but when children are manifestly wicked,
and their good parents must in prayer to God call them what they are, and must
say, Lord, my poor children are children of the devil, children of
disobedience, children of thy wrath, lying, swearing, covetous, drunken,
unclean, stubborn children; Oh pity, pardon, save, convert them; they pray for
them, but they pray in the sorrow and anguish of their souls.

Fifthly, I come to show how wicked children embitter all the comforts of their
good parents; so that as Solomon tells us, Prove. 17.21. A father of a fool has
no joy. I shall exemplify this in four particulars.

1. The good parents cannot be so comfortable and delightful to one another as
they would be, when both are in bitterness for their wicked children; the
husband cannot be such a comfort to his wife, when he is almost in continual
anger and sorrow for his wicked child; nor the wife such a delight to her
husband, when her heart is bleeding for her ungodly child; for if they have no
joy in themselves, as was said before, they cannot be so much the joy and
delight of one another: but when they lie down, this makes them water their bed
with tears, and they awake with sorrow, with a wicked child on their hearts.

2. They cannot take so much comfort as they would in the other children that
are godly; not that they love them less, but rather more; but their joy in them
is much interrupted hereby. Suppose among many children there be but one
ungodly child, that one is a disturbance and annoyance to the whole family;
that one sinner (as Solomon speaks in a more general case) destroys much good;
it grieves them to think, that whereas that one child was in the same Covenant,
and had the same dedication to God by Baptism, and the same affection and
education from the parents with all the other children; yet the rest are
vessels of mercy, but this seems to be a vessel of wrath.

3. They cannot take so much comfort in the victory over their own sins, when
they see the same corruptions which are abhorred, and mortified, and forsaken
by the parents, breaking out, and reigning in the children.

4. This interrupts their joy in God and Jesus Christ; when such parents must
with the same faith believe Gods wrath to their children, as they believe his
love to themselves; and when they look upon God as their Father, they must look
upon him as an enemy to their Children; and when they say, We hope Heaven is
our portion and place, it must grieve them that their children will not go with
them thither.

Sixthly, The greatness of this affliction appears further by the concommitants
of it. I shall only instance in three things that usually accompany it, which
make it more grievous.

1. Such children do often impoverish their parents; Solomon tells us, that a
wicked child wastes his father, and chaseth away his mother; such children
care not if they starve their poor parents, so that they can feed their own
lusts; and it is often seen, that a plentiful estate is consumed by riotous
children.

2. Such children do often debauch and corrupt the other children, and make
their brethren in nature, to be their brethren in iniquity: and often their
brothers and sisters are easier enticed to sin by a wicked brother, than drawn
to God by a godly father: and if any of the other children be godly, these
wicked ones do hate, and revile, and persecute them like wicked Cain, who slew
his brother because his works were righteous.

3. They bring reproach upon that good Religion which their good parents
profess and practice: and thus Eli's sons made men abhor the offerings of the
Lord; and with some the holy lives of the parents cannot wipe off the reproach
which is cast on Religion by the wickedness of their children.

Seventhly, The greatness of this affliction appears by these eight
Aggravations of it.

1. It aggravates their grief to remember what pleasure and delight these
children were to them in their childhood; it torments them now to see their
sweet and pleasant smiles, turned into scornful and disdainful looks at their
parents, and their pretty broken words turned into oaths and lies, and other
rotten speeches; and to think that these who once were so forward to clasp
about their necks, and to kiss them, and to run at their commands, do now lift
up the heel against them.

2. It aggravates their sorrow to see themselves so miserably disappointed in
their former hopes of these children; Hope deferred (says Solomon) makes the
heart sick: but to be crossed and disappointed in hopes of so great mercy, does
even break the heart. When these parents remember how pleasant it was to them
to hear these children lisp out their Catechisms, and to hear their good words
of God and Christ; it cannot but be very grievous to them, that the same
children which they did with Hannah lend to the Lord, should sell themselves to
the devil.

3. It aggravates their sorrow, that their children are so void of love to
their parents, and to see that the company of liars, and drunkards, and
whoremongers, and thieves, is more delightful to them than the company of their
parents.

4. It aggravates their sorrow to look upon the holy children of others; when
they may say, Yonder are children that make a glad father and mother, when the
children of our bodies, and counsels, and prayers, and vows, and tears, live as
if their father was an Amorite, and their mother an Hittite.

5. Aggravation is, in case the parents have but one child, and that proves
foolish and disobedient: and of this there be many instances; the Scripture, to
set forth the saddest kind of mourning, compares it to the mourning for an only
son, Jer. 6.26. Make thee mourning as for an only son, most bitter lamentation.
Zech. 12.10. They shall mourn as one that mourns for an only son. I know
these Scriptures speak of parents mourning for the death of an only son; but
it is not so sad to follow an only son to the grave, as to see an only child
live to the dishonor of God, to be a curse to his generation, and to be
continually destroying his precious soul; it is a very bitter case, when as much
love, and kindness, and care, and cost, and pains, and prayers, and fastings,
are bestowed upon one child, as other parents bestow upon many children; and
notwithstanding all this, one child should prove such a monster of wickedness,
as if the sins of many ungodly children met in him.

6. Aggravation. When Gods holy Ministers are the Fathers of fools, which (I
have told you) often happens: and this is a most dreadful case for such who
have the keys of the kingdom of heaven, and yet must bind over their own
children to the wrath of God: such know the terrors of the Lord, and the
torments of Hell more than others; and therefore must be more affected to
believe, that this at present is the portion of their own children.

7. Aggravation. When such children whom their parents designed to serve God in
the Ministry of the Gospel, do prove ungodly: this is matter of great
lamentation, for the parents to intend them for the highest office in the
Church, and give them education for that end, that these children should make
themselves as salt without savor, which is good for nothing, but to be cast
out, and trodden under foot of men.

8. Aggravation. When children are a grief to their parents in their old age,
and do as it were throw dirt upon their hoary heads, which is their crown of
glory; it is the command of God, Prove. 23.22. Despise not thy mother when she is
old: Solomon tells us, Eccles. 12. That the days of old age are evil days;
their very age is a troublesome and incurable disease; now the grasshopper,
every light thing is a burden to them, and therefore it must be more
troublesome to them to be then tormented with wicked children, when the strong
men (as Divines think) Solomon calls the legs, do bow themselves, and their
children who should be a staff and support to them, do break their hearts, and
cause their grey-hairs to go with sorrow to the grave.

I now come to make application of this discourse.

Use 1. Let such parents praise and honor God, whom God has blessed with
wise, and holy, and obedient children; whether by those words in Psalm. 144.12.
David means children accomplished with natural or spiritual endowments, or
both, I shall not determine; but to apply them to the case in hand, I say it is
the great mercy of God to you, that when so many children are as noisome weeds,
your sons should be as hopeful plants grown up in their youth; and when so many
make themselves ugly, and deformed with sin, your daughters should be as
corner-stones (in which is seen the beauty of the building, and the art and
skill of the workman) polished after the similitude of a palace. Do not hence
conclude, that you are better parents than others, or have had more care in the
education of your children than others, but ascribe all to the free grace of
God, who will have mercy upon whom he will have mercy.

2. Let none presume to censure godly parents for their wicked children; To him
that is afflicted, says Job, pity should be showed him from his friend. Have
they not trouble enough already, but will you add to their affliction? They
have not hereby forfeited the good thoughts and esteem which you should have of
them; and if you judge them for this, ye must judge as wise and holy Saints of
God as ever were in the world; though God herein does sharply correct them, yet
he will not allow you to sit in judgment, and to pass sentence upon them: I say
to you, as Job to his friends, Hold your peace, let them alone; and leave them
to stand or fall to their own Master.

3. This should fill the hearts of these holy parents with revenge upon Sin and
Satan, which have so debauched, and defiled, and destroyed their dear children:
If a man should murder your child, a spirit of revenge would rise in you, and
you would say to such a one, I will have thy life and blood for the life and
blood of my child; but Sin and Satan have destroyed both the precious soul and
body of the child; therefore labor, as for other reasons, so for this also, to
be revenged of them: Labor to do as David did by the Lion and the Bear, which
took a Lamb out of his flock, he slew both the Lion and the Bear, and delivered
the Lamb; so do all ye can to reseue your poor lambs out of the jaws of Satan;
however labor to hate Sin and Satan more, to promote Gods honor and kingdom,
and the salvation of souls more: and this is the way to be revenged on Sin and
Satan for the ruin of your children.

4. I do hence exhort all holy and obedient children to acknowledge the grace
of God to them, that they are or have been the joy and crown of their parents:
It is his distinguishing grace that made you to differ from all wicked
children, and perhaps from some that came out of the same womb, and sucked the
same mothers breasts as you did. Consider four things which are great matter of
praise.

1. That ye are the children of holy parents; that ye may comfortably come to
God in prayer, and say, we are the children of thy servant our father; we are
thy servants, and the children of thy handmaid our mother: bless God for your
parents good counsels and examples, and for a great part of an age of prayers,
which ye are daily receiving the benefit of; if your parents are dead, and in
heaven, it may put you into a holy and spiritual frame to think of the graces
of God that did shine in them.

2. That the same graces which dwelt in your good parents, are in you: Paul
speaks of it as matter of praise to God, that the same faith was in Timothy,
which dwelt first in his Grandmother Lois, and his Mother Eunice; and the
Apostle John rejoiced greatly, that he found the children of the elect Lady
walking in truth.

3. That thou art freed from those stings of conscience, which graceless
children shall one day feel for their disobedience to their parents; thou
may joyfully reflect, that thou wast the joy of thy holy parents, and that
their lives have been made sweeter, and their crosses easier by thee; that thou
art the honor and seal of their holy education, when wicked children are the
shame and reproach of their parents.

4. That thou have a right to that rich and precious promise annexed to the
fifth Commandment, and mentioned Ephesians. 6.2, 3. So that thou may be assured
that it shall go well with thee both in this world, and in the world to come; I
do seriously profess, I had rather have a right to that one promise made to
obedient children, than to the best estate and inheritance under the Sun.

I shall finish this discourse,

1. In prescribing some means to be used by those that may be, or are parents,
to prevent this calamity.

2. I shall direct those parents that groan under this calamity, how to bear it.

3. I shall give a serious exhortation to such children who are the grief and
bitterness of their parents.

First, I shall prescribe means to be used to prevent this calamity.

1. Use all holy prudence and care in your choice of a yoke fellow; for if ye
make your selves the husbands or wives of fools, ye are like in time to become
the fathers or mothers of fools; when before the flood, the members of Gods
Church married with a wicked generation, Genes. 6.2. they brought forth a
wicked posterity; but to have a holy yoke fellow, is the way to have a holy
seed; and therefore what ye would most desire to have for your selves, that
labor to find in the person who is to be one flesh with you: thou would have
thy self born of God; thou would have the Image of God, and the life of
Christ in thy self. Labor that these things be in the person whom thou chusest
for thy yoke fellow; but never make choice of one for thy husband or wife, whom
thou should not choose for thy companion.

2. Be faithful and upright with God, Prove. 20.7. The just man walks in his
integrity, and his children are blessed after him: If you would have grace and
mercy for your children, love and please the God of all grace and mercy;
whatever secret sins are in thee, kill those sins for thy poor childrens sake,
lest the sins you too much harbor in your own hearts, do break out in your
childrens lives: Parents may often see their own sins against their heavenly
father in their childrens disobedience to them; when your children despise you,
remember your want of honor, and fear, and reverence of God; when they vex and
trouble you, remember how ye have grieved and provoked him; when they decline
your company, remember how your hearts have wandered from God in his Ordinances.

3. Bewail and beg pardon of God for your failings heretofore to your parents;
for many do often reap from their own children, what they formerly sowed by
their sins against their parents; and their miscarriages to their parents do
fall upon them in the wickedness of their children: the best may sadly reflect
upon their want of due honor, and obedience, and thankfulness to their
parents; ye may remember your peevish looks, undecent behavior to them; your
grieving them in quarrelling with your brethren and sisters; your unjust
censuring them for partiality in their love to their children, and judging them
to want love to you, when you were wanting in your duty to them; and many, who
are now godly parents themselves, may remember, that by greater sins in their
youth they were the grief and bitterness of their fathers and mothers; and
therefore pray mightily to God to pardon you, and not to visit these sins upon
you in the disobedience of your children.

4. Pray to God not to visit your sins upon your children: When Manasseh was in
Heaven, Amon his son followed the steps of his unconverted estate; and
Jehoiakim was carried captive into Babylon for the sins of Manasseh: Pray that
your children may not be like you in any thing, wherein ye are unlike God; and
that their teeth may not be set on edg for the sour grapes that ye have eaten.

5. Be deeply affected with the corruption of nature in your children: For as
no man will value a Savior for himself, who is not convinced of the sin and
misery which he must be saved from; so ye must be sensible of your childrens
sins, or else ye cannot labor for their salvation. When your sweet babes are
born, ye rejoice to find that in Gods book all their members were written; but
ye should also be sensible of that body of sin they are born with, and that by
nature they are young Atheists, and Infidels, and haters of God, and
basphemers, and whoremongers, and liars, and thieves, and murderers; for they
are naturally inclined to these and all other fins, and are by nature children
of the wrath of the infinite God; and being convinced of this, ye will find
that your chief care of them should be to save them from this dreadful state of
sin and misery.

6. Be convinced what a great deal of work lies upon you to endeavor the
salvation of your children: young children always make a great deal of work;
they make work for parents, and work for servants, and work for all that are
about them; but to save them from sin and hell, is the greatest work that
belongs to their parents: for this purpose they have a great deal a work to do
in their own hearts; they must know, and believe, and love, and obey the
doctrine of salvation themselves, that they may be able, and sit to instruct
their children therein; for a man cannot train up his child in the way he
should go, if he do not know the way himself: We read Deuteronomy. 6.6, 7. These words
shall be in thy heart, and thou shall teach them diligently unto thy children;
it is fitly rendered in the margin, thou shall whet or sharpen them; the word of
God is more keen and sharp when it has first done its work on the parents
hearts, and so comes from their hearts to their children: Parents must keep
their own graces in exercise, to put authority and savor in all that they say
and do for the salvation of their children: Grace must work in their prayers;
grace must rule their tongues; grace must guide the rod, and grace must shine
in their lives: and then it is a great work which is to be wrought in the
children; it is a great work for them who are born of the flesh, to be born of
the spirit; a great work to make Religion and Godliness natural to them; to
make the children of the devil to become the children of God Almighty: and
parents must constantly labor in the use of means to accomplish this work.

7. Be mighty in prayer for your children; for all the good ye desire for them
must come from God, and therefore must be begged by prayer; it is in vain for
them to be taught of us, except they be taught of God; Whose words, Lord,
(says holy Augustine) were they but thine, which by my faithful mother thou
have sung in my heart. Pray, and pray in faith and hope; thy ears (says
Augustine again) were at my mothers heart, when she prayed for me; ye must pray
with tender and melting hearts: the same Father tells us, that his mothers
tears watered the earth when she prayed for him: and ye must pray for their
salvation: this also Augustine calls the hinge of his holy mothers prayers for
him.

8. Solemnly dedicate them to God by baptism; and then ye must heartily consent
that God alone be the eternal life and happiness of you and your children, and
that Jesus Christ be their and your Redeemer, to redeem you and them from all
sin and misery, and to bring both to God; and that the Holy Ghost be their and
your Sanctifier, that by him you and they may have a Scripture-right unto, and
be made meet and fit for this happiness.

9. When they are capable of it, instruct them in the Covenant, which by
baptism they were solemnly entered into. For this end ye must diligently teach
them these six things:

1. To know the evil and danger of sin; for till they come to know what sin is,
and what it is to be saved, or damned, and what it is to lose, or enjoy God;
they will not value or accept of Christ, but will despise the Redeemer of the
World as good for nothing: ye must therefore labor to make sin odious, and
Christ precious to your children, and then they will value Christ, and obey
you: It was prophesied of John the Baptist, that he was to prepare the way of
the Lord, and to turn the children to the parents: so let it be your care to
make way for Christ in your childrens hearts; and if ye prevail in that, they
will be obedient to you.

2. Inform your selves and them in the doctrine of God the Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost: for this is the doctrine whereinto they are baptized; and by
baptism they are solemnly entered into Covenant with these sacred persons,
against the flesh, Satan, and the world: show them the glory and love of God
the Father in choosing, ordaining, fitting, and sending Jesus Christ, and in
commanding him to be a sacrifice for us; inform them that God the Father is the
fountain of life; for Christ lives by the Father: the fountain of Authority;
for Christ received all power in heaven and earth from him: the fountain of all
the Christian Religion; for Christ first heard these truths from the Father,
and then made them known to us; and the fountain of glory, for the Father has
exalted Christ, and all glorified Saints are the blessed of the Father. Labor
by these and all other means, that God the Father have the greatest place in
your childrens hearts. Teach them to know and prize Jesus Christ; without this
they cannot be true Christians: show them all the fullness and glory of the
Godhead in Jesus Christ: Labor to make them see his glory as the only begotten
Son of God; and all that he as Mediator and Redeemer has done in the state of
his humiliation, and is doing, and will do in the state of his exaltation, for
the salvation of lost sinners. Labor to imprint these great Truths upon their
hearts.

1. That it was the Will and Law of God the Father, that God the Son in our
nature should be a sacrifice for our sins: this fully appears Heb. 10.5, etc. A
body have thou prepared, or fitted me, meaning to be a sacrifice: and, says
he, Lo I come to do thy will, O God: and Psalm. 40. Thy law is in my heart;
meaning that will and law of the Father, which bound him to offer and sacrifice
himself for our sins.

2. That Jesus Christ by his obedience to the death of the cross, did perfectly
obey and fulfill this law and will of God the Father.

3. That all salvation and happiness is by the Covenant of Grace settled upon
all, and only those who believe and obey the Gospel, only for the sake of this
sacrifice and obedience of Jesus Christ: and therefore, says the Apostle, Heb.
10.10. By the which will we are sanctified through the offering of the body of
Christ once for all: that is, by Christ's fulfilling the will of his Father, in
once sacrificing himself for sinners, we and all true believers are sanctified,
that is, perfectly saved.

Ye must also acquaint them with the office and work of the Holy Ghost, which
our Savior tells us, John 16.13. is to guide or lead them into all truth; that
is, to enable them to believe, and love, and obey the saving-truths of God
revealed in the Gospel: for to the end, that they may know and keep their
baptismal-covenant, they must know how all the Three sacred persons, the
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost are interested in the great work of Salvation.

3dly, Labor to convince your children of the Excellency of the Life of
Religion, and obedience to God: commend this to them as the most honorable
life; for our Savior tells us, John 12.26. If any man serve me, him will my
father honor. What shall be done to the man (says Ahasuerus) whom the king
will honor? But who is able to tell what shall be done to the man whom the
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ will honor? Let them also know, that this is
the wisest life; it is Jobs inquiry, Where shall wisdom be found? and, says he,
Job 28.28. Behold, the fear of the Lord, that is wisdom; and to depart from
evil, is understanding: And further, that it is the safest life, for God is a
shield, and rock, and wall to all that obey him; and although such things which
they have in common with other men are exposed to danger and loss, yet their
persons, and their whole portion is always safe; and also, that this is the
most gainful life, for hereby Saints gain God, and Christ, and Heaven, and lose
nothing; for we cannot lose by a Savior, who saves us from all evil, and
brings us into the possession of all good; and though death it self strips us
naked of all things under the Sun, yet death is unspeakable gain to all who
live this life: and ye must further assure them, that this is the most pleasant
life, for it is a life of faith, and love, and praise, and joy, and a life of
victory over sin; and they who live this life, have all things to please them;
they have God to please them; Christ and his Merits to please them; and a
prospect of a holy and a blessed Eternity to please them: ye would never be the
fathers and mothers of fools, if ye could persuade your children to be so wise,
as to prize and love a life of obedience to God.

4. Commend to your children the glory and amiableness of the House and Church
of God: this is the body whereinto they are baptized; take your child with you,
and go walk about Sion, and go round about her, and tell the towers thereof,
and mark well her bulwarks, and consider her palaces, as ye are taught, Psalm.
45.9. Present to their view King Jesus, and at his right hand standing the
Queen (his Church) in gold of Ophir, Psalm. 45.9. say to them, as the Angel said
to John, Rev. 21.9. Come hither, and I will show you the bride, the Lambs wife:
show them that glorious sight, Rev. 12.1. The woman clothed with the Sun, and
upon her head (that bright and glorious constellation) a crown of twelve Stars,
that so the company of those who live in communion with God and Jesus Christ,
may be desirable, and delightful to them; and that they may forsake evil
company, which is often the bane of youth.

5. Teach them to esteem aright of Gods Ordinances: for by baptism they are
solemnly admitted into that house and family which is blessed with these, as
the means of salvation: Labor to beget in them good thoughts of Gods
Ministers; for ye shall ever find, that those children will despise you who
make light of them: teach them to pray; ye can never have comfort in your
children till they cry to God, Abba Father: teach them to know, and prize, and
long for the Lord's Supper, and therein to take Christ and all Salvation in a
little bread and wine: teach them to honor and delight in the Lord's Day, as
the Diamond in the ring of time; those children are always the honor and joy
of their godly parents, who make conscience to keep holy the Lordsday.

6. Make them sensible that time is short and precious, that an eternity of
glory and misery is at hand; and that death, and judgment, and heaven or hell
are at the door of young children.

I shall further add five Directions to godly parents, to prevent this sad
calamity.

1. Labor to save your children from those sins which provoke God, and will
destroy them, as well as from those sins which will also bring loss and
reproach upon you: some are sadly affected to see their children given to
drunkenness, or whoredom, or the like sins; but are not so much concerned for
their unbelief, and impenitency, and want of love to God, and for their
covetousness; which shows such parents to have too much of the love of the
world, and too little love to God and their childrens souls; but we must take
our measures of the evil and danger of sin from the word of God, which tells
us, 1 Cor. 6.9, 10. that the covetous, as well as drunkards and whoremongers,
shall not inherit the kingdom of God: and this will teach parents not only to
mourn over a debauched child, but also over a covetous, though he be a wealthy
child.

2. Observe what sins your children are most prone unto, and labor to fill
them with revenge and hatred against those sins: If your child have a foot, or
hand gangrened, ye will cut off the incurable member, rather than bury your
child; so ye should do what ye can to pull out the right eye, and to cut off
the right hand; and the right foot of sin in your children, rather than suffer
their bodies and souls to be cast into Hell: As ye should especially kill those
sins in your selves, which your natures are most inclined unto; so ye should do
by your children, who are so great a part of your selves: we are taught, Prove.
20.11. That even a child is known by his doing, whether his work be pure, or
whether it be right: Parents may much discern by the manners and ways of their
children in their childhood, what they are like to prove in their riper years;
and therefore they must observe them, that they may encourage them in the good,
and discourage them in the evil, which they then appear to be most bent unto.

3. Choose to place your children in families of holiness and prayer; ye will
not plant your trees among briars and thorns; much less should ye choose to
place your children to serve those who will not serve God.

4. Give them due correction: this has God commanded to kill their sins, and
to save their souls, Prove. 23.13, 14. Withhold not correction from the child;
for if thou beatest him with the rod, he shall not dye: thou shall beat him
with the rod, and shall deliver his soul from hell: It is better thy child be
whipped, than damned; and let not thy child's weeping and crying under the rod
move thee to withhold due correction, Prove. 19.18. Chasten thy son, and let not
thy soul spare for his crying: If your child's bone be out of joint, ye will
have it set, though he cry and bawl under the hand of the Surgeon; and will
say, It Is better he cry now, than be lame so long as he lives; so it is better
your children cry now under the rod of their father, than that they should weep
and wail for ever under the wrath of the infinite God: and therefore that ye
may perform this duty, take these five Directions.

1. Do not allow your servants to correct your children; for correction is an
act of authority, and therefore cannot belong to those who are merely your
servants; I would not have parents to permit their children to despise and
abuse their servants; but for parents to suffer their servants to correct their
children, is the way to make their children stubborn, their servants proud, and
themselves contemptible in the eyes of both.

2. Convince them that it is your duty to correct them for their sins; and
therefore it is advisable, that you make them get those Scriptures without
book, which bind you to correct them; also some of those Scriptures which
condemn the sins which you correct them for, that their consciences may
justify you in doing your duty; and that they may be more afraid of sin, than
the rod; and of provoking God, than offending you.

3. Correct them betimes, Prove. 13.24. and Prove. 19.18. Chasten thy son while
there is hope: Use the rod wisely to them, before they become scourges and
scorpions to you.

4. Labor to be in a good frame when you correct them, that love, and
prudence, and meekness, and not rage and fury may govern the rod; and do not
exercise too much severity toward them, that ye may not provoke them to wrath,
lest the wrath of the children prove the grief of the parents.

5. Pray to God for a blessing upon your correcting them, that it may be
effectual to drive out that foolishness which is bound up in their hearts.

Lastly, Be good examples to your children; let them not see you in any sin,
for that may infect them, and make them despise you; but let them always see
you shining in the Image of God, and that is the way to make them honor, and
obey you in the Lord: live so, that ye may say to them, as Paul to the
Philippians, Chap. 4.9. Those things which ye have both learned, and received,
and heard, and seen in us, do, and the God of love and peace shall be with you.

2dly, I proceed to direct those parents who are under this calamity, how to
bear it.

8 Directions.
1. Abhor it as a great sin to faint under this affliction; that is, either to
be disabled for thy duty, or to sink in thy comforts; for it is a sign that thou
did place too much of thy happiness in thy children, if their wickedness make
thee faint under this calamity. I shall only plead with thee, as Joab did with
David, when he made that bitter lamentation for his son Absalom, 2 Samuel 19.6.
Thou have declared this day, that thou regardest neither princes, nor servants:
So I say to thee, thou hereby declarest that thou regardest not God and Christ,
if thy soul faint under the burden of a disobedient child.

2. Consider what I have proved, that this is an affliction which ordinarily
befalls Gods dearest children: ye must not think of this, as if ye were the
first godly parents of ungodly children; or as if herein some strange thing
happened unto you. I confess where a calamity seems singular or extraordinary,
it is more apt to overwhelm the afflicted, because they will be then apt to
think that there is some extraordinary displeasure in God against them; and to
say with the Church, Lam. 4.12. Behold and see if there be any sorrow like unto
my sorrow, wherewith the Lord has afflicted me in the day of his fierce anger:
But this affliction is ordinary, and is consistent with the saving and
distinguishing grace of God to them; and is a rod that has usually lain on the
lot of the righteous.

3. Consider that there might have befal'n thee greater miseries than this.

I shall instance in three greater Evils which would have made thee more
miserable.

1. Thou might have been a wicked, an ungodly wretch thy self; and for the
great Jehovah to have cursed and damned thee for ever, would have made thee
unspeakably more miserable, than to be tormented a*while with a wicked child.

2. Thou might have had an ungodly yoke fellow to be as rottenness in thy
bones: Solomon seems to speak of a troublesome yoke fellow, as more grievous
than a wicked child, Prove. 19.13. A foolish son is the calamity of his father,
and the contentions of a wife are a continual dropping: This is like the
constant dropping of rain into a house, which rots the building, spoils the
goods, and ruins both house and inhabitants: and forasmuch as thy yokefellow is
nearer, and ought to be dearer to thee than thy child; to be afflicted therein,
is a greater calamity.

3. God might have left all your children to perish in their sins: but if ye
have but one godly child, your joy in that should much abate your sorrow for
your other wicked children.

4. Consider, thou have greater things to affect thee with grief and sorrow
than thy wicked children: there are whole Empires and Kingdoms of men, and
women, and children who have as precious souls as thine, or thy childrens:
these dishonor the same God, and perish under his wrath; and multitudes that
have the Scriptures and Ordinances, despise the same Christ, and the same
Gospel as thy children do: and why should thou be more concerned for one, or
more of thy wicked children, than for the whole world that lies in wickedness?

5. Let your sorrow be guided by Scripture and Reason, that ye may not provoke
God, and defile your souls, and wound your consciences by sinful groans and
tears. For this end observe two Rules.

First, Mourn more for their sins whereby they provoke and dishonor God, and
defile and destroy themselves, and others, than for any shame or loss in
worldly things that befall you hereby; that it may appear that the love of God,
and your childrens souls, and not the love of the World, has the greatest
influence on your sorrow; for I fear that there is usually in good parents too
much of carnal sorrow, and too little of godly sorrow in their mourning under
this great calamity.

Secondly, Let not thy sorrow disease thy body, and impair thy health: God does
not require us to mourn more for our childrens sins, than our own; and he never
makes it our duty by sorrow for either, to destroy our bodies, which are the
Temples of the Holy Ghost: and the truth is, that godly sorrow is the health of
the soul, and never hurts the body; for Grace is always a friend, and never an
enemy to nature; and therefore do not deprive thy self of all opportunities to
honor God, and serve his Church; do not make thy yoke fellow desolate, nor thy
children Orphans by such sorrow, that will neither please God, nor ease thy
self, nor do any good to thy wicked and miserable children.

6. Labor to get your Graces strengthened under this great affliction; for ye
have need of more knowledge, and wisdom, and faith, and hope, and love, and
meekness, and patience, to enable and fit you to bear this, than most other
affections; and ye must see and enjoy more of God and Christ, to keep up your
hearts under this, than under most other troubles; yet by the strength of
Christ ye may be enabled not only to bear, but to glory in this tribulation;
and the greater the trouble is, the more good ye may gain by it.

7. Comfort thy self, in that the greatest and best things which thou have most
prayed for, and trusted unto, and expected, and chiefly loved and desired, are
all safe and sure.

1. Thy God is, and will be blessed and glorious for ever, whatever becomes of
thy child; all his infinite perfections are working for his glory: Christ
himself is Gods, and does the whole work of a Mediator as his servant, and for
his glory; all the blessed Angels and Saints will for ever honor, and admire,
and love, and praise him.

2. God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, are for ever thy own, and will to all
eternity be glorified in making thee blessed and glorious: thou have a bad
child, but a good God; all thy work will be done, thy sins pardoned and killed,
thy graces perfected, and body and soul glorified: and shall an ungodly child
make all thy consolations herein small to thee?

Lastly, Consider, this trouble will last but a little while. I confess I do
not know, or can upon search find any thing that can lift up the heart above
this trouble, but the knowledge and sense of the infinite love of God in Christ
to a man's self, and of that holy and glorious eternity which this love will
shortly bring him unto; to tell you, that this is and has been the case of
other godly parents, may allay something of your grief: But what is this, but
to tell you, that others are, and have been as miserable as you? or to tell
you, that as wicked children as yours have been sanctified and saved, yields
some hopes; but it can amount to no more than to think they may be saved, or
thy may be damned; and there is as much reason to fear the one, as to hope for
the other: But for a man to see a gainful death, ready to loose him into that
world, where there is none of this sorrow; and to know that at the day of
judgment his wicked children will be no more to him than bloody Bonners, or
Gardiners, or damned Devils, and that he himself shall sit with Christ to judge
them; and that he shall love and delight in the holiness and justice of the
Judge of all the World, in passing that sentence upon them, Depart ye cursed
into everlasting sire, prepared for the devil and his angels: This is
sufficient to overcome all immoderate grief for his ungodly children.

Lastly, I shall finish this discourse in a serious exhortation to these
ungodly children, who are the grief and bitterness of their good parents: And
herein I shall,

1. Endeavor to convince them of their sins.

2. Of their misery.

3. Persuade them to forsake their sins, that so they may be freed from that
misery.

First, I shall set before you the greatness of your sins in these four
particulars:

1. Ye have broken your Covenant with God.

2. Ye have broken the Bonds wherein ye were bound to the Church of God.

3. Ye have broken the Bonds of your duty to your parents.

4. Ye have broken the Bonds of your duty to your other relations.

First, Ye have broken your Covenant with God, whereinto ye were solemnly
entered by baptism; for it is clear by that Scripture before mentioned, Levit.
19.3. That by casting off the authority of your parents, ye have disowned the
Lord to be your God. Your breach of Covenant with God appears more fully in
these four particulars.

1. Ye do in your hearts and practices deny the Being of God; the first Article
of the Covenant is, that ye should acknowledge and believe that the Lord he is
God; for he that comes to God, must believe that he is, Hebr. 11.6. But this
is the language of your hearts and lives, That there is no God: Ye deny God to
be the first and best Being, in preferring the creatures before him; and saying
in effect, That the creatures are all, and the great Jehovah is but as a cipher
to you.

Ye deny his Omnipresence; he fills all places where ye are, but ye take no
notice of him; the presence of a Father or Master has some influence upon you;
but it works not at all upon you, that there is a God in the room.

Ye deny his infinite Wisdom, that Wisdom of God in contriving the work of
Salvation by Jesus Christ: I say that Wisdom which is so glorious and wonderful
to the principalities and powers of heaven, is to such proud and ignorant boys
and girls as you, but a foolish and ridiculous thing.

Ye deny his Power, in daring to war against him; and like those hectoring
Atheists, Job 15.25, 26. Ye stretch out your hands against God, and strengthen
your selves against the Almighty: ye run upon him, even on his neck, upon the
thick bosses of his buckler, as if ye were able to fight God, and overcome the
Almighty.

Ye deny his Holiness, and think that God is altogether such a one as your
selves, Psalm. 50.21. And that ye may not be terrified by your enmity and
unlikeness to him, ye will please your selves in fancying that God is like you;
as if ye must rather be a pattern to him, than he be a pattern to you; and so
ye will persuade your selves that he is the God of Atheists, and Whoremongers,
and Drunkards, and Liars, and Thieves, and not the holy God of a holy people.

Ye deny the Truth of God; one of the greatest and best truths that ever God
spoke to man is that, 1 John 5.11. God has given to us eternal life, and this
life is in his Son: and yet herein ye would make him a liar, in not believing
this solemn record which he gave of Christ; a liar is one of the worst
characters of the devil: and this ye give to the true and holy God. These
things I write, as it were, upon the brazen faces of all ungodly and
disobedient children.

2. Ye break the Covenant, in refusing to take God for your God and happiness;
the greatest promise that ever God made to man, is that Hebr. 8.10. I will be
to you a God: but this signifies nothing to you, ye will not accept of him for
your chief honor, and treasure, and joy; it is no honor to you to have the
great Jehovah for your F^ther; ye see no good in him, and account not your
selves the better for him; and if ye lose him, ye think ye lose nothing; ye
neither love, nor desire him, nor take any delight or pleasure in him.

3. Ye have broken the Covenant, in renouncing God the Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost, in whose Name ye were baptized: your lives declare that ye had rather
have the love of a debauched companion, than the love of the Father of Jesus
Christ; ye despise the Lord Jesus, and account the great price of redemption to
be worth nothing; and would rather keep your sins, than be saved from them: ye
defy the wrath of God, and scorn that the Mediator should make your peace with
him: ye resist the Holy Spirit, and would rather be made filthy, and wicked,
and be taught to lie, and swear, and steal, than that the Spirit should teach
you to love, and serve, and delight in God.

4. Ye have broken the Covenant, in taking part with the devil, and the world,
and sin, against the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost: and this ye have done two
ways:

1. In believing the promises of the devil, the world, and sin, and in not
believing the promises of God; the devil, the world, and sin, are the three
great cheats of mankind, and they deceive men by making seemingly great and
high promises: and by these they have prevailed with man to break both the
Covenant of Works, and the Covenant of Grace: the devil tempted our first
parents not to believe that word of God which he gave them to deter and keep
them from sin, which word is written, Genesis 2.17. In the day thou eatest thereof
thou shall surely dye: the devil tempted them to look on that word as a lie,
and makes them that great promise, Genes. 3.4, 5. wherein he promises them,
that if they eat the forbidden fruit, they shall not only be safe from all
evil, saying, Ye shall not surely dye; but that they shall also be preferred to
greater happiness than God had then placed them in; for, says he, your eyes
shall be opened, and ye shall be as gods, knowing good and evil: and by
believing this promise of the devil, they brake the Covenant of Life, and
brought that deluge of sin and misery which came upon all mankind; and since he
prevailed with men not to believe the word of God, which he spoke to keep them
from sin and destruction; now his work is to tempt them to make God a liar in
the word which he has spoken to save them from sin and ruin by Jesus Christ:
and this is the word of the Covenant of Grace, which promises eternal life and
salvation to all that believe in Christ, and repent of their sins, and live the
lives of new creatures, according to the rules of the Gospel: but the devil
tempts men to break this Covenant by promising them life and all happiness in a
course of sin; and these wicked children believe the devil herein, and bless
themselves in their sins, saying with those bold ranters, Deuteronomy. 29.19. We shall
have peace, though we walk in the imagination of our own hearts, to add
drunkenness to thirst: and thus ye break your Covenant with God, and make a
Covenant with Death and Hell.

2. In obeying the devil, the world, and sin, and in disobeying God; ye call
God your Father in heaven, but ye do the lusts of the Devil your father in
hell; ye walk according to the course of this world, Ephesians. 2.2. and are the
servants of sin, Romans 6.20. and ye hate, and fight against God your Maker and
Redeemer; and were it possible for you, ye would every day kill him who only
has immortality: And thus like a company of renegado's ye live as if ye were
baptized in the name of the devil, the world, and the flesh, to renounce the
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.

Secondly, Ye have broken the Bonds of your duty to the Church of God; ye were
born members of the Church, and subjects of the Kingdom of Jesus Christ; and by
baptism were solemnly admitted into that great, and holy, and victorious, and
blessed society, Hebr. 12.22, 23. Mount Sion, the City of the living God, the
heavenly Jerusalem, the general assembly and Church of the firstborn written
in heaven; but ye have forsaken this Church, and turned your selves out of the
family and house of the living God, and are become of the same party with the
devil and his seed, and have labored to fill the world with sin, and the
kingdom of Satan; and ye would have Jesus Christ to have no Name, or Kingdom,
or Ministers, or Ordinances, or People in the world.

Thirdly, Ye have broken the Bonds of your duty to your parents: This appears
in that those black characters already given of wicked children are found on
you; whereunto I shall add this one, which includes all the particulars of your
disobedience which can be mentioned, namely, Ye do not love your parents; for
love works no evil unto, but always wills and seeks the good of the
beloved: Love ever inclines persons to please them whom they love, and to love
and delight in their company; and causes such looks, and words, and behavior,
as are expressions of love; how pleasant has it been sometimes to me to see,
as it were, the heart and soul of a child running out in his pleasant and
loving looks to his parents! but ye disobedient children do not love your
parents, but do them more hurt, and cause them more sorrow than all the
malicious enemies and persecutors they ever met with in the world; ye are
always vexing, and crossing, and provoking them, and are as continual pricks in
their eyes, and thorns in their sides; and had rather be with liars, and
swearers, and drunkards, and with your wanton and idle companions, than with
your wise, and grave, and holy parents; how merry and jovial are ye in the
company of such who will join with you to serve the devil, and dishonor God,
and destroy your souls? but how uneasy, and lumpish, and sour, and discontent
are ye in the presence of your parents? your spiteful looks, and sullen words,
and scornful carriage does betray your hatred, and anger, and envy against your
good parents: Ah wicked wretches! that ye cannot find in your hearts to love
your parents, from whom ye had your Beings under God, and who have used all
holy means to make you holy and blessed.

Lastly, Ye have broken the Bonds of your duty to your other relations, and to
all men; ye cannot be good brothers, or sisters, whilst ye are such bloody
children to your parents; ye cannot be good servants or apprentices, or good
husbands or wives, or good subjects to Magistrates, whilst ye are bad children;
for the same sins that debauch you in that relation, will debauch you in all,
and will make you an encumbrance to your place, the troublers of the world, and
a very plague and curse to your generation.

2. I shall now endeavor to convince you of your misery; and oh that I had a
heart and tongue to think and speak of this as the matter does require!
Consider, ye are cursed children, Deuteronomy. 27.16. Cursed be he that sets light
by his father or his mother, and all the people shall say, Amen: Observe, God
himself does here proclaim you cursed; he only can curse or bless you, having
all curses and blessings at command; and can set his love, or pour out his
wrath where he pleases; he is able and faithful to fulfill his own threatenings;
and he knows you to be cursed, for he knows all the children of his Grace, and
all the children of his Wrath. Observe further, that all Gods Ministers are to
pronounce you cursed, verse. 14. The Levites shall speak and say to all the men
of Israel with a loud voice, Cursed be he that sets light by his father or
his mother: The Ministers of God must with a loud voice, as if they would ring
in the years of all, declare you to be cursed; and I, a Minister of the Gospel,
do hereby proclaim all wicked and disobedient children, (though some of them
may be the fruit of my own body) to be cursed. Nay further, all people, yea
your own selves are to judge you cursed; and all the people shall say, Amen:
They and you are to believe it, and to approve of it as most just and
righteous, that ye be cursed. But that I may convince you of your misery, I
shall further set before you these four things:

1. Ye are out of the way of all good: God has his way of mercy, and his way
of wrath; and ye are out of the way of his mercy, for ye do not stand in the
grace and love of God, which causes all good; and are children of his wrath,
which causes all misery; and (as I have told you) ye have broken that Covenant
which conveys all Grace and Mercy: so that no good can come to you, except ye
turn to God and your parents.

2. Ye are in the very way and road to all wickedness: Many of the most horrid
sins in the world first began in disobedience to parents; and most of those who
have proved Liars, Drunkards, Whoremongers, Thieves, Murderers, were first
ungodly and disobedient children.

3. Ye are in continual danger of some remarkable judgment of God in this life,
Exodus 21.17. He that curses (or revileth) his father, or his mother, shall
surely be put to death. Prove. 20.20. Who so curses his father, or his mother,
his lamp shall be put out in obscure darkness. Your lamp of life and pleasure
may seem to burn and shine at present, but there is a black and dismal night
hastening on all disobedient children, Prove. 30.17. The eye that mocketh his
father, and despises to obey his mother, the ravens of the valley shall pick
it out, and the young eagles shall eat it: None are more like to pass into the
eternal world, through a shameful and untimely death, than disobedient
children; when God leaves children to disobey their parents, it is a dreadful
sign of their approaching ruin: it is recorded of Eli his sons, 1 Samuel 2.25.
That they hearkened not unto the voice of their father, because the Lord would
slay them.

4. If ye go on in your course of disobedience, ye will for ever be damned in
Hell; for (I say) ye have broken that Covenant which promises eternal life to
all that believe and obey the Gospel, and does as certainly bind over to the
wrath and vengeance of God all that live in disobedience to God and their
parents. Miserable children! I have sent this poor little book to overtake you,
before the wrath and vengeance of God do overtake you: I am not altogether a
stranger to the terrors of the Lord, but do know what is before you, and what a
meeting there will quickly be between God and you, better than ye do; and have
labored to affect my heart, in seeing what lies at your door; I know that
whilst ye are following the chase of your filthy pleasures, evil from God is
hunting you, and will find you out to destroy you; and I dare not damn my own
soul by not warning you of those sins, which will be the damnation of yours:
Foolish boys and girls can now laugh at the hearing of death, and hell, and
judgment to come; and when Ministers sound the trumpet in their ears, to give
them warning of these things, they can, like the War-horse in Job, say among
the trumpets, Aha; for the devil tempts his children to make sport of those
things at which he trembles himself: but when I remember how I have seen in
some of you your down-looks, your pale-faces, your shivering-limbs; and as Job
speaks of the Adulterer, when he comes to be known, Job 24.17. that ye have
been as in the terrors of the shadow of death, when your mortal parents have
found you out in your sins: I cannot but think how your countenances will fall,
and your stout spirits sink, and your metal fail, when ye come to fall into
the hands of the living God.

Lastly, I come now to exhort and persuade you to abhor and forsake your sins,
that ye may escape this misery. I would have you to repent and believe with the
Saints of God, that ye may be saved, before ye come to repent with the damned
in hell; and with the devils, to believe and tremble. For this end I shall, 1.
Endeavor to convince you of your Folly. 2. Direct you how to attain true
Wisdom.

First, I shall endeavor to convince you of your Folly: ye see the Text calls
a wicked son, a foolish son; God who knows you best, and has a true judgment
of you, calls you fools, and would have all the world to be of the same
judgment with himself, and therefore to account you fools; and ye will at last
call your selves fools, when ye come to have the portion of fools; and except
ye judge your selves fools, ye cannot be wise. And that ye may, as in a glass,
see your own folly, I shall propound to you these five Questions; and as God
said to Job, so do I in his name say to you, Job 38.3. Gird up your loins like
men: I will demand of you, and answer ye me.

1. Are ye not very fools in that ye do in your hearts and lives deny the being
of God? There are no worse fools than they that say in their hearts, There is
no God, Psalm. 14.1. For such a one says in effect, that there is no Religion,
no Sin, no Heaven nor Hell; yea, he says, that he himself is nothing, and that
there are neither Heavens, nor Earth, nor Seas, nor Men, nor Beasts, nor any
other creatures; for if there be no God, there can be nothing else; so that ye
have the name of fools written on your foreheads; and as it is said, Eccles.
10.3. Ye say to every man that ye are a company of fools.

2. Are ye not fools to make such a foolish choice? It is the infinite goodness
of God, that ye have life and death, blessing and cursing set before you; and
that ye have a God and Christ, and the Holy Spirit, and the heavenly glory to
choose; and ye have Beings capable to choose them, and may take them for your
own, and use them as your own every day, and that ye are called and commanded
to choose them, and have time and opportunity to choose them, and shall certainly
have them, if ye choose them: and yet these, as Solomon speaks, Prove. 17.16. are
but as a price in the hands of a fool that has no heart to it. Consider, there
are two sorts of Affections in all humane creatures, and all are wise or fools,
according as they set and place these; there are affections of union, as love,
desire, and delight, which do unite the heart to their objects; and there are
affections of opposition, as hatred and anger, which do separate the heart from
their objects: And are ye not monstrous fools, in that ye hate and abhor God
and your Redeemer, in whom there are all reasons for your love, and desires,
and joy; and in that ye love, and desire, and delight in sin, and the devil,
and death and hell, in whom there are all reasons for the hatred and revenge of
your souls? To love those things which are altogether loathsome, and and to
hate what is altogether lovely, is a plain argument of your madness and folly.

3. Are ye not fools in suffering every thing to deceive you? The Scripture
tells you, that the devil is a deceiver; it tells you of the deceitfulness of
your hearts; of the deceitfulness of sin; of the deceitfulness of riches; of
the deceitfulness of wine and strong drink; of the deceitfulness of harlots,
who promise pleasure, but prove a deep ditch, and a narrow pit; of the
deceitfulness of a lying tongue, which promises that lies shall serve the
liars turn, and do his work, but proves to be but for a moment; of the
deceitfulness of theft and unjust gain, which seems sweet at present, but soon
after proves as gravel in the mouth: and yet notwithstanding all the shame, and
rags, and stings, and torments of conscience, which have come upon you by
trusting in these; yet ye will still believe them, and suffer your selves by
these deceivers to be cheated of God and Christ, and of your souls, and of your
time, and of heaven.

4. Are ye not fools in being so set and bent to ruin and destroy your selves?
Prove. 18.7. A fools mouth is his own destruction, and his lips are the snare of
his soul. Eccles. 10.12. The lips of a fool shall swallow up himself: ye are so
bent on your own ruin, that your hearts rise in anger and hatred against your
good Parents and Ministers, and all that labor to save you; and ye account
them your worst enemies, who would not have you damned. Miserable children!
allow your selves but one hours serious consideration of your eternal estate,
and ye will see reason to condemn your selves for a company of proud and
ignorant fools, in attempting to run down God, and his Kingdom, and Religion,
and in valuing your cups, and lusts, and lies at such a rate, as for them to
exchange the eternal life and happiness of your souls.

5. Are ye not fools in not preparing for death and judgment, which are ready
to overtake you? To convince you of this, be informed, That men are prepared
for death and judgment, who by faith, and repentance, and holiness, are become
heirs of the promises of the Gospel, and so have a right unto, and fitness for
all that glory, which in performance of these promises, God will give them the
possession at those great days; but men are unprepared when they are under the
wrath and curse of God, and are condemned to those eternal torments which are
threatened in the Scriptures, and will at death and judgment be executed upon
them. Now prove your selves by these things, and ye may then see what fools ye
are, in not preparing for these days; for if ye were prepared, ye should then
enter into a world where all will love you; God, and and Christ, and all
Angels, and all Saints will love you, and ye will for ever be holy and blessed
in their love to you, and in your love to them; but being unprepared, ye must
then be cast into a world where all will hate you, and where you will hate all
the holy and blessed; God will there hate you, and be a consuming fire against
you; the devils, and all the damned in hell will hate you, and you will hate
them; and we find that our Savior brands him for a fool, Luke 12.20. who
promises to himself an easy and merry life for many years, when that very
night he was to lose his soul: and he gives the character of foolish virgins,
Matthew. 25.2. to those who were unprepared for that great, and terrible, and
sudden cry, The bridegroom is come, go ye out to meet him. Poor children! let
these common things be imprinted on your hearts; Death is certain, the day of
death is as certainly appointed, as was the day of your birth; and as your
birth kept its time, so will your death keep its time; ye cannot sin away
death, though ye sin away the sense of death. Consider also, that death is
near; whatever ye think of your lives, they will be but as a vapor, or shadow,
or smoke, as God speaks them to be; and though ye put death far from you, yet
it will be within a hands-breadth of you; one day or hour may put an end to
your space of repentance, and conclude your day of grace and salvation, and
dispatch you into that world where no new creatures are made: ye now defy
death, as if ye were a fit match for the king of terrors; ye scorn the grave,
and scoff at the day of judgment, and deride everlasting burnings; but when God
shall pour upon you your own wickedness, Jer. 14.16. then ye will too late
condemn your selves for fools, when ye come to reap the fruit of your own folly.

Secondly, I come to give you directions to direct you to true Wisdom, that ye
may be such wise children, as to make glad fathers, and not to be the heaviness
of your mothers.

1. Do not dare to put off your repentance any longer; it is not too late to
repent, so long as God calls you to repentance, and gives you time for it: Yet
is the accepted time, yet is the day of salvation: God, and Christ, and Angels,
and the Church, and your bleeding parents are yet ready to receive you in love
and joy: but it will shortly be too late to repent, though it can never be too
soon. Dear children! ye must either persuade your selves that the word of God
is a lie, and so think ye are secure from hell, because ye deny the Bible that
threatens it; or ye must presume that ye are not ungodly children, as indeed
ye are; or else ye must conclude that your present state is not safe and good,
and that therefore ye must either repent or be damned; and perhaps the devil
himself does not tempt you to resolve, that you will never repent, but to think
that it is yet time enough, and that therefore ye will repent hereafter. I have
sometimes dreaded to hear debauched children confidently say, That they do not
question but they shall be converted, and become good, when at present they
hate to be reformed; yea, I am persuaded that some secure them selves in their
sins, by presuming that the prayers of their good parents for their conversion
and salvation will at last be heard: but how many such have been, as Solomon
speaks of others, Prove. 14.32. -- driven away in their wickedness; in whom that
dreadful Scripture has been fulfilled, Prove. 29.1. He that being often
reproved, hardneth his neck, shall suddenly be destroyed, and that without
remedy. I shall here seriously reason this case a little with you; Why should
ye continue one moment longer in those sins which ye must repent of, or perish;
and defer repentance, for which ye shall have cause for ever to rejoice and
bless God when it is done? Are ye not wicked enough already, that ye must stay
to be worse? Have ye not defiled your selves, and provoked God, and refused
Christ, and afflicted your parents long enough already? Poor souls! if there be
one hour yet left wherein ye are sure that ye shall not die, and fall into
hell; or one hour wherein sin is better than grace; and wherein it is better be
a child of the devil, than a child of God; or if ye can come into the kingdom
of God, and begin an eternal life an hour too soon, take that hour, and spend
it on your lusts; but if not, stop presently, and let this be the hour wherein
ye begin to believe, and repent, and reform, and wherein ye begin to set your
faces toward heaven, with an unmovable resolution, to walk in the way of faith
and obedience till ye come there.

Direct. 2. Judge whether ye have more reason to obey the devil, or to obey
God, as the Apostles said to their Persecutors, Acts 4.19. Whether it be right
in the sight of God, to hearken to you more than unto God, judge ye: So say I
to you, whether it be right to obey the devil rather than God, judge ye.
Consider, God has authority to command you, for he is your Maker, your
Preserver, and Redeemer, and ye owe your selves to him; but the devil neither
made, nor kept, nor bought you, and therefore can have no right to command you.
Consider further, that all the Commands of God, are the Commands of his Love;
for he does not only command you as your Lord, but also as your Father and
Savior; and therefore he commands you to take himself to be your God and
happiness, to take his Son Jesus Christ to save you from all evil, and to make
you for ever holy and blessed: but the devil commands you out of hatred and
malice, and all his commands are the commands of a Murderer, and therefore he
commands you to defile, and to destroy, and to damn your selves; he commands
you to be blind and ignorant. to hate and scorn God and Christ, and to love
sin, and death, and hell. Consider also, that God is able to reward your
obedience, and to punish your disobedience; he is that only lawgiver, who is
able to save, and to destroy, James 4.12. He can crown you with eternal glory,
if ye obey him; and can cast you into everlasting flames, if ye disobey him;
but the devil, who is cursed and tormented himself, cannot make you happy, if
ye obey him; nor miserable, if ye do forsake and renounce him.

3. See the great difference betwixt those wise and holy children, who live in
obedience to God and their parents, and you who live in disobedience to both;
it is not wealth, or poverty, or beauty, or deformity, or sickness, or health,
but sin and grace that make the greatest difference betwixt persons; and ye
must know God and Christ, or else ye cannot understand the worth of a Saint,
nor the vileness of a Sinner: Some of you may look into your own families, and
there see some of your brethren and sisters like pleasant and fruitful plants
about your fathers table, when ye are as briars, and thorns, and weeds in the
family; they are the crown and joy, and you the calamity of your parents; all
that see them, may look upon them as a seed whom the Lord has blessed; but all
that see you have reason to judge you to be a cursed generation. Poor children!
is it better to be like Cain, than like Abel? or like cursed Canaan, than like
Shem? or like Ishmael, than like Isaac? or like Esau, than like Jacob? Are not
your souls and bodies as precious as the souls and bodies of your good brethren
and sisters? or can the devil, and sin, and the world be better to you, than to
them? or is not death and judgment as near you, as it is to them? or have not
ye as much reason to love and obey God and your parents, as they? or can ye
endure the loss of Heaven, or torments of Hell, better than they? if not, why
should not ye be as good as they are?

4. Do nothing but what ye are willing should be known; if ye would not have
your Parents, and Masters, and the Magistrates, and your Friends and Foes know
your lies, and lusts, and theft, and profaning the Lord's Day, and your
haunting evil company, do not practice these things; ye need not fear who knows
how holy, and just, and sober, and chaste ye are: Religion can boldly show its
shining face to God and man; but sin makes you sneak, and cowardly, and base,
and fearful; and imprints marks of dishonor and shame upon your looks and
countenances, and fills you with horror and consternation, when ye are
discovered. Consider seriously, that all from whom your greatest shame and
misery will come, do know you; the devils know you, and will accuse, and
disgrace, and torment you for the same sins they tempted you unto; and they
will not help you to hide your sins when time of grace, and repentance, and
pardon is past; your own hearts and consciences know you, and will awake out of
their present sleep to condemn and sting you; and God who is greater than all,
knows you, and all your secret sins are in the light of his countenance, and he
will bring them all to judgment: and it will then fully appear to Angels, and
Devils, and to Saints and Sinners, what ye are.

5. Therefore be not such now, as ye dare not at the hour of death profess your
selves to be: Religion and Godliness is at all times to be professed before
God, and Angels, and Men, Romans 10.10. For with the heart man believes, and
with the mouth confession is made to salvation. But what monsters would ye
appear to your selves, if ye did profess your selves to be what ye are? Suppose
ye were reading this but one hour before ye dye, and must say, We are now
falling into the hands of the living God; and by that time that the glass is
run out, and the clock strikes next, we are to give account of our selves to
the Judge of all the World: Dare ye then say, We profess our selves to be haters
of God, and children of the devil, and despisers of our holy parents, and that
we choose the way to hell?

6. Consider what account ye can give in being such burdens of the earth, and
in being so grievous and chargeable to all who are concerned with you: Is it
nothing to you to be as biles or scabs in the body, or as smoke, or a stinking
smell, or an infectious disease in the house and family where ye are, or as
weeds in garden, to cumber and annoy your place? Ye will pay dear one day for
all the sighs, and groans, and tears which ye have caused to your afflicted
parents and friends; it will sting you to think that so many have been losers
by you, and that your parents, and brethren, and sisters, have been so much
wasted and impoverished by your costly lusts; and that ye have given cause to
all your wicked companions, to curse the day that ever they knew you; and that
ye have filled so many other parents besides your own with grief and
bitterness, by infecting, and defiling, and debauching their children: and
methinks I hear all these saying to you, as Joshua said to Achan, Josh. 7.25.
Ye have troubled us, but the Lord shall trouble you.

Lastly, I shall ask you this one question, What would ye have your parents to
do with you? their love makes them to be continually concerned for you; but
they know not what to do with you, for all the means which they have yet used
for your good, has but aggravated your guilt, and their grief; whilst they
kept you at home, ye did break all the good orders and rules of government in
the family; at set-times for meat and family worship, either your places were
empty, or filled with sin; ye disquieted your parents, wasted the estate,
defiled, or disturbed your brethren and sisters, and troubled the house night
and day: When they sent you to School, ye played the truants, grieved and
dishonored your Masters, debauched your School-fellows, and were a reproach
and scandal to the School: If they set you to be Apprentices, ye hated and
wronged your Masters, and were a plague to the family: If any of you were sent
to the University, ye were the rake-hells of the College, and the Society was
sick of you, till it had expelled and cast you out; if after all other means
were used, your parents sent you to Sea, the Atheism and Wickedness of some of
the Seamen, did you more hurt, than all the Wonders of God in the deep waters
did you good; so that ye returned, as if the Sea had made you like it self,
more raging and boisterous than before; insomuch, that your miserable parents
can do nothing but spend their days in mourning for your sins, and in praying
for your salvation, and in laboring to bear patiently your ruin, and to be
content to live and die the fathers and mothers of fools.

And now, Children, I will take my leave of you, and shall leave you to the God
with whom ye have to do, and with whom ye must have to do for ever; he is the
God who will plead the cause of his own Name, and Honor, and of Religion, with
you, and who will plead the cause of your distressed parents with you; a God
whose wrath ye can neither escape, nor bear; there is a war betwixt this God
and you; and if ye can make it appear that ye are greater, and wiser, and
stronger, and better than he, ye may go on: But my design in all this
discourse, is to persuade you to believe, and repent, and obey the Gospel and
so to make peace with God through Jesus Christ; and for your encouragement, I
do assure you, that the grace of God, and the Merits of Christ are as
sufficient to save you from all your horrid abominations, as if ye were as
innocent, as when ye were newborn: God, and Christ, and Angels, and your
Parents, and Friends, and all Saints are ready to rejoice in your conversion
and salvation, and your iniquities shall never be mentioned against you; but
upon your unfeigned turning to him, God will (as he is represented in the
Parable of the Prodigal son) meet you in mercy, and fall on your necks and kiss
you, and entertain you with all the blessings of the Gospel, saying, These my
children were dead, and are alive; they were lost, and are found.

FINIS.

