A FAITHFUL WARNING WITH GOOD COUNSEL and ADVICE, TO THE Rulers and Magistrates
IN ENGLAND, That they may not countenance Wicked and Merciless Men to oppress
and spoil the Innocent under Pretense and Color of a Law.

By one that really desires the Prosperity of the Truth, and the Welfare of
all Men, Alexander Lawrence.

And Judgment is turned away backward, and Justice stands afar off; for Truth
is fallen in the Street, and Equity cannot enter.

Yea, Truth fails, and he that departs from Evil makes himself a Prey; and
the Lord saw it, and it displeased him that there was no Judgment, Isa. 59.14,
15.

Printed in the Year 1675.

A FAITHFUL WARNING WITH GOOD Counsel and Advice, etc.
TO You Rulers and Magistrates in this Nation and elsewhere, who think to
establish Cruelty and Oppression by a Law, and thereby to exalt your selves,
and Lord it over the Heritage of the most High God, as the Seed of Evildoers
did in all Generations, as you may read in the Scriptures of Truth, Exodus 5.2.
and so on. Pharaoh, that great Oppressor, when Moses and Aaron spoke unto him,
to let Israel go to serve the Lord, said, Who is the Lord that I should obey
his Voice, to let Israel go? I know not the Lord, neither will I let Israel go,
etc. but instead thereof made their Task heavier, v. 6.7. So proud Haman whom
King Ahasuerus gave Command that all should bow unto, but honest-hearted
Mordecai, who was as much or more the King's Friend as Haman, did not therein
obey the King's Command, knowing Haman to be of the Agagites; and when Haman
understood, he was vexed, but thought it Scorn to lay his Hand on Mordecai
alone, but sought the Destruction of all the Jews, as you may read, Ester 3. at
large. And for Nebuchadnezzar, who made an Image of Gold, and set it up in the
Plane of Dura, in the Province of Babylon, and commanded that all should, at
what Time they heard the Sound of the Cornet, Flute, Harp, Sackbut, etc. fall
down and worship the Golden Image, etc. Dan. 3. at large; but Shadrach, M^shach
and Abedn^go, whose Hearts were upright and steadfast before the Lord, would
not; and it was told the King, and the King was full of Fury, etc. and said,
Who is that God that shall deliver you out of my Hands, verse 15. etc? And the
backsliding Jews, when their Hearts turned from God, though they cried, The
Temple of the Lord, etc. yet they killed the Prophets, and stoned them that
were sent; and when Christ the Son was come who is Heir and Lord over all, they
said, We have a Law, and by our Law he ought to dye. Several more Instances
might be given, how many went about to establish Cruelty and Oppression by a
Law, as in the Ten Persecutions, and in Queen Mary's Days, who was called, A
Christian Princess, yet how many suffered Martyrdom by a Law in her Days, for
their Testimony for God and the Truth, according unto what God had manifested
unto them in their Day and Time; and if you go about to do the same Thing, and
persist in it, know ye, that the Lord God of Heaven and Earth, whose Power is
Irresistable, when he rises to plead with Man for Sin, and whose Glory far
excels the Sun in its Brightess; the same Way by which you think to exalt your
selves, and Lord it over his Heritage, will he assuredly bring you down, and
cause you to bow before him, either to acknowledge his Power and Soveraignity
over all, and that he alone ought to be worshipped, as King Nebuchadnezzar did,
and that in Truth and Vprightness of Heart, or worse, to wit, bring Destruction
upon you, as he did upon Pharaoh and his Host, who thought to bring Israel
again into Bondage; and as he did Haman and his Sons, who thought to have the
whole Stock of the Jews in the Provinces of King Ahasuerus, destroyed; but the
Lord wrought their Deliverance, and brought Destruction upon their Enemies:
therefore in vain is it for Man to strive against his Maker; for when did any
arise up against God and his People, and prosper? Therefore be instructed, and
take Counsel you Rulers and Magistrates in this Nation, and elsewhere, who
oppose the Appearance of God in his People, and would limit all according to
your Way and Will, or otherwise they must suffer; be not overwise in your own
Eyes, neither think it an Undervaluing unto you to take Counsel and Advice at
so mean a People as we, the despised People of the Lord called Quakers, are:
For of a certain Truth, God in the Riches of his Love, in and through Christ
Jesus, our Lord and alone Savior, has appeared unto us, and manifested the
Way of Life and Salvation in us, and unto us by his good Spirit, which he has
given unto us to profit withal; and many have been the Admonitions, Counsels
and Advice of the Lord unto you, through and by his Servants; which ye too
little have regarded, but rather made a Mock of them and what they have spoaken
and written, accounting them as Mad Men, as they of old did the Servant of the
Lord, 2 Kings 9.11. Nevertheless, as a Servant of the Lord, and in Love and
Good Will unto you, as one that really desires your Good and the Good of all
Men, my Advise and Counsel unto you is, to hearken and lend an Ear unto that
Light in you, which secretly manifests Sin, and reproves for it; for of a
certain Truth, that is a Measure of the Good Spirit of God, that will reprove
you for your Cruelty and Oppression, and show you you should not do so against
your Fellow Servants; That will reprove you for your Pride and Haughtiness of
Spirit, and show you what is Good, and what the Lord requires of you, that is,
to do Justly, to love Mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God, Mic. 6.8. That
will reprove you for Swearing, Cursing, Vain and Idle Talking, Wantonness,
Whoredom, Drunkenness, and all Manner of Uncleanness and Evil whatsoever,
though done never so secretly, yet the Lord is privy to it, and his all-seeing
Eye beholds all the Actions of the Sons and Daughters of Men, and by the
Measure of his Good Spirit he strives with them, and shows them they should
not do the Thing that is Evil; and by the same calls unto them for Amendment
of Life; and those that turn at the Lord's Reproof, he will pour forth his
Spirit upon them, and make known his Words unto them; but if you s^t at naught
the Counsel of the Lord, and will none of his Reproofs (as some of Old did, and
too many now do) then will he laugh at your Calamity, and mock when your Fear
comes as Desolation, and Destruction as a Whirlwind; then you may call, and
he will not answer, and seek him early, and not find him, because you hated
Knowledge, and did not choose (mark that) the Fear of the Lord which is to
depart from Evil.

Therefore must you eat the Fruit of your own Way, and be filled with your own
Devices that do so; But who hearkeneth unto the Lord, shall dwell safely, and
be quiet from Fear of Evil, Prove. 1.25. and so on: Therefore be instructed ye
Rulers of this Nation, and take Counsel of the Great Lawgiver Christ Jesus,
who said, As ye would that all Men should do unto you, so do you unto them; for
this is the Law and the Prophets; and remember the Parable that Christ spoak, A
certain King which would take Account of his Servants, and when he began to
reckon, there was one brought before him that owed him ten Thousand Talents,
and had nothing to pay withal; but his Servant humbled himself, etc. and his
Lord frankly forgave him the Debt; but he not doing so by his Fellow Servants,
what did befall him? And does not Christ teach his to pray, Forgive us our
Trespass^s, as we forgive them that trespass against us? Now if you cannot
forgive them that trespass against you, how can you expect to be forgiven of
God? And if Men ought to forgive them that trespass against them, then sure,
they ought not to persecute such as never trespassed against them I would ask
you one Question; Wherein have we given Occasion to be thus dealt with? what
Plots or Evil Contrivances against the King or Government have we been found in
since God raised us up to be a People? or what have you against us, except in
the Matter of our God? Now if you should say, We do not obey the Law, I then
again query, What wholesome Law is there that we disobey? But if it be a Law
that would limit in the Worship and Service of God, who alone in that Case is
the Lawgiver to his People, and ought to be subjected unto, then I query, What
Power have you to make a Law to bind the Consciences of God's People in the
Worship of God more then Queen Mary and her Parliament had, by which so many
Protestants were put to Death (which you condemn as Evil in t^em) for the
Testimony of their Consciences, according unto what God in their Day made
manifest unto them; was not she called a Christian Princess, and lawfully
descended to the Crown, etc? But if you say, They were persecuted because they
bore Testimony to the Truth, but you because you are in Error, etc. How do you
know that? could not the Ministers of those Laws say as much to the Sufferers
as you do unto us? are you guided by an infallible Spirit in what you do? nay
sure, for the Spirit of God never led any to such Things; but if any were in
Error, they were to be reproved and admonished, and after the second
Admonishing rejected, not cast into Prison, or spoiled of their Goods, and the
like. But it may be some may say They had not Power; Was not all Power in
Heaven and Earth given unto Christ? and where did he give his Church (as you
would be reckoned) Power to do so? And therefore you that are called
Lord-Bishops, and Ministers, and Spiritual Men, ought not you rather, if Men
were in Error, to convince them by the Truth, and stop the Mouths of
Gainsayers by sound Doctrine, then to stir up King and Parliament, to make
Laws to take honest Men and Women's Estates from them, imprison and banish them
for their Consciences toward God, and because they cannot put into your
Mouths; and also to press the Ministers of those Laws to put them into
Execution? did ever Peter, John, Paul, or any of those Bishops and
Gospel Ministers do so? Is this like Truth or Gospel Dispensation? Nay sure,
therefore away with it all, you that profess Christianity of all Sorts, whether
Papists, Episcopal Men, Presbyterian or what soever, and learn to do as you
would be done by; and the same Liberty you would have your selves, the same
give unto others in Exercises of Religion, they living Peaceable, not seeking
the Subversion of the Government, nor the Hurt of any; and this would heal the
Nations Breaches, and make it as a Body or Family, as it ought to be, seeking
the Good and Preservation one of another, both in Liberty and Estates, etc. But
this persecuting, killing and destroying one another about Religion, never was
of God, but sprung from the Devil, the Father of all Cruelty and Persecution;
for Truth hurts none; he came not to destroy Men's Lives, but to save them. But
it may be some may say, This is not Cruelty, but a Law that is for the Good of
the Nation; so might all say that made Laws in such Cases; but I say, it is not
any Law or Custom of a Nation whatsoever that can justify any Man before the
Just and Equal God, in doing the Thing that is unjust, and whatever is contrary
to Christ's Command (who said, as ye would all Men should do unto you, so do ye
unto them) is unjust, and to be accounted for unto the great Lawgiver Christ
Jesus: Therefore do not smooth and flatter your selves in saying, We have a Law
(and the like) for the same did they say that are gone before you, who were
found doing the same Things, and so justify the Wicked, and condemn the
Sufferings of the Righteous in all Ages; But he that justifies the Wicked, and
he that condemns the Just, even they are both Abomination to the Lord, Prove.
17.15. It is your Good we desire, and many Times it is in our Hearts bowed down
before the Lord, both in Soul and Body, to pray unto him in your behalf, that
he would change your Hearts, and cause you to be otherwise minded, that we
might live a godly and quiet Life in all Honesty as becomes the Gospel: and if
for these and such like Things we suffer, the Good will of him that appeared in
the Bush (who had heard, and does hear the Groans of his People, and was come
down to deliver them) be done, who hitherto has given us Strength and Patience
to undergo what he has suffered to be inflicted upon us for his Name sake, and
our Hope and Trust is, will do unto the End, as we abide faithful to him, to
whom be Glory over all, forever, Amen.

From One that really desires the Prosperity of the Truth, and the Welfare of
all Men, Alexander Lawrence


