AN EXPOSITION OF THE EPISTLE TO THE Hebrews.

Wherein

The Text is cleared;

Theopolitica improved:

The Socinian Comment examined.

Optimus ille Lector est, qui dictorum intelligentiam expectet ex dictis potius
quam imponant, and retulcrit magis quam attulerit: neque cogat id videri dictis
contineri, quod ante lectio^em praesumpserit intelligendum. Hilar. de
Trinitate, lib. 1. By GEORGE LAVVSON, Rector of More, in the County of Salop.

LONDON, Printed by J. S. for George Sawbridge, at the Sign of the Bible on
Ludgate Hill, 1662.

THE EPISTLE.
MAny receive their Knowledge in matters of Salvation from the Words and
Writings of other men upon trust, and at the second hand: But that is the most
certain and purest Doctrine, and the most effectual, both to inform the Mind,
and ulso to reform the Heart and Life of ignorant and sinful man, which is
taken from the Scriptures, clearly explained, and truly understood. And though
there be many good and prositable Books; yet those are the best, which are
written by learned and pious men: who being endued with the knowledge of Arts,
and the Original Languages, have by the assistance of God, and their diligent
study, found out those hidden Treasures of heavenly wisdom, contained in those
blessed Writings. Of this sacred Volume, there be many parts, and some more
edifying than others; and amongst the rest, the Divine Epistle to the Hebrews is
inferior to none. The Subject thereof, is, The Prophetical and Sacerdotal
Office of Christ, our blessed Savior, upon whom our eternal Salvation does
depend; the Frame and Contexture is wonderful and excellent; the Method, clear
and exact; the Arguments, whereby the Truth is confirmed, demonstrative and
undeniable; the Motives, whereby heavenly Duties are pressed, piercing,
powerful, and prevailing. This I have singled out to be the Subject of the
ensuing Discourse; and, after the Labors of other learned and worthy men, have
endeavored, in our native Language, to make it plain and more easy to be
understood by meaner Capacities; and my earnest desire, and hearty prayer, is,
That it may have the same effect upon our Hearts, which the blessed Apostle
intended it should have upon these Hebrews. My design, in this Work,
principally was, by searching the Original and the Translations, to find out
the sense of the Phrases and Expressions; by giving the Analysis of the several
Chapters, by showing the Connection of one part with another, and the tendency
of them to the main Scope, to make a positive clear Explication of the whole.
And by this, I improve my [Theo-Politica]: for, diverse points and parts of
divine Wisdom, concerning the Prophetical and Sacerdotal Office of Christ,
final Perseverance, Faith, the Sacrifice of our great High Priest, but briefly
touched there, are more largely handled here. Neither is this all; but, whilst
I proceed in this Work, I take notice of the Vanity of the Socinian Expositor,
who goes about to elude such Texts, as asserts the Deity of Christ, as the
eternal Word of God, whereby the World was made, his Incarnation, and his
expiation of Sin by a bloody Sacrifice offered by him as Priest, and accepted
of God before his Ascension into Heaven, and his S^ssion at the right hand of
God; Where he was not first made, but confirmed by Oath, an everlasting Priest
according to the Order of Melchizedec. For all these he denies, contrary to the
scope of the Apostle; and the express words of Scripture in other places.
Impertinent Digressions, and needless Amplifications, I have forborne: I am
neither too brief, as some; nor too large and voluminous, as others have been;
I have endeavored to observe the Golden mean. My desire is, by this Discourse,
to edify, confirm, and comfort God's People, who aim at Heaven, and seek
eternal Life by our blessed Savior. The whole, I submit unto the Judgment of
the pious, learned, and judicious Reader; who, I hope, will pardon my
Imperfections; correct my Mistakes, accept my Endeavors; and, if he find the
Work beneficial, will give the Praise and Glory to God, Who is blessed for
evermore.

AMEN.
ERRATA.
PAge 1. line 29. 15. read 19. p. 2. l. 57. both infallible, r. that infallbly.
p. 3. l. 22. dele sit. p. 4. l. 58. there, r. three. p. 8. l. 1. he, r. they.
p. 10 l. 5. dele Zurick. p. 11. l. 10. sor Zanch. Divlnes, r. or the Zurick
Divines. Ibid. l. 13. Zank, read Zurick. p. 14. l. 2. the, r. they. Ibid. l.
12. the, r. they. Ibid. l. 29. the, r. their. p. 20. l. 38. Rivera, r. Ribera.
p. 21. l. 7. that, r. they. p. 25. l. 2. then some, r. yet some. p. 27. l. 28.
so must, r. so much. p. 30. to Angels, r. 1 ot to Angels. p. 4. l. 25. in
these, r. in thesi. Ibid. l 58. of those, r. of those times. p. 42. in the
margent, for Sacraments r. Ser mons. p. 50. l. 1. our with, r. with our. Ibid.
l. 8. then those, r. then of those. p. 63. l. 12. and invest men, r. but
actually investeth men. p. 66. l. 43. (...) p. 70. l. 39. that they are, r.
that there are. p. 77. l. 56. sussabdi, r. jus subditi. p. 78. l. 11.
predicated, r. predicate. p. 88. l. 24. in, r. in my Theopolitica. p. 193. l.
15. r. Metaphorical, not a Metaphorical. p. 121. l. 33. 9. for. 6. p. 127. l.
35. him, r. them. p. 130. l. 24. excepted, r. accepted. p. 13 r. l. 1. he, r.
they. p. 152. l. 33. for 12. r. 1. 2. p. 160. l. 17. Being, r. King. p. 174. l.
5. pledges, r. pleadet. p. 177. l. 36. part, r. party. p. 188. l. 18. figured,
r. fig uring. p. 192. l. 4. or if he do not believe it, r. or if they do
believe it. p. 197. l. 56. Vet^siu^, r. Vel^sius his Copy. p. 201. l. 32.
Nobitius, r. Nobilius. p. 203. l. 10. Megittath, r. Megillath. p. 215. l. 56.
any, r. nay, p. 225. l. 2. professes, r. professed. Ibid. l. 8. as so, r. so
as. p. 226. l. 14. dele or. p. 243. l. 36. (...) p. 245. l. 5. ter, r. chapter.
p. 249. l. 7. meant, r. made. p. 251. l. 12. (...). p. 256. after the last
line, blot out the word [fountain.] p. 257. l. 13. end, r. evil. Ibid. l. 4.
49. stored, r. stered. p. 283. l. 46. impulsive mountains, r. impossible
mountains. p. 290. l. 23. to referred, r. to be referred. p. 294. l. 9.
descerti, r. deserti. p. 299. l. 56. deprivation, r. depravation. p. 303. l. 8.
that we in, r. that we may. p. 304. l. 50. receiving, r. reviving. p. 312. l.
49. regeneration, r. generation. p. 312. l. 48. portions, r. potions. p. 340.
l. 21. exhorted, r. dehorted. p. 342. l. 36. simple, r. single. Ibid. l. last.
prefection, r. protection. p. 343. l. 13. to on stand, r. to stand on. p. 349.
l. 26. are all of us by nature, r. even all us by nature are contrary.

A brief Analysis of the Epistle to the Hebrews.
THE parts of this Letter written, and sent to the Hebrew Christians,

are,

The Substance and Body of the same.

The Conclusion.

The End whereat the Apostle aims, is, The confirmation of them in the belief
and profession of the Gospel.

The Means he uses for the attainment of this end, is, Clearly to demonstrate
the excellency of Christ, as a Prophet, and a Priest, far above all former
Prophets and Priests; and thereupon to persuade them to rely upon Him, who
alone can effectually and eternally save them, and make them fully blessed.

The Method observed by him, is, to deliver,

1. The Doctrine of his Prophetical Office, and to apply the same; and this is
done in the first four Chapters.

2. The Doctrine of his Sacerdotal Office, and to apply it; this is begun Chap.
5. and continued to the 18 verse of the last Chapter.

CHAP. 1.
Wherein the Apostle taking for granted, that the Doctrine of the Old
Testament was revealed from God by Prophets and by Angels, and the Doctrine of
the Gospel by Christ; he begins his Discourse concerning Christ as a Prophet,
and proves him,

1. More excellent then all the Penmen of the Old Testament. For,

1. He was the Son of God. 2. He was the Heir of all things. 3. God by him did
make the Worlds. 4. He was the Brightness of his Father's Glory, and Character
of his Person. 5. He upholdeth all things by the Word of his Power. 6. He
expiated and purged Sin by his Blood. 7. He is set down at the right hand of
the Majesty on High.


In all these seven particulars, he far excells the former Prophets, ver. 1. 2,
3.

2. More excellent then the Angels, because he has inherited a far more
excellent Name, Power, and Dignity, ver. 4.

He has obtained, by inheritance, a more excellent Name; Because,

1. He is his [The Son], and God his Father, ver. 5.

2. God commanded all the Angels to Worship him, ver. 6.

3. They being created, are but Messengers and Servants; but Christ, the Son,
sits in a glorious Throne, and is possessed of a Kingdom which is everlasting;
and when the Earth and the Heavens, created by him, shall wax old and be
changed, it shall abide unchangeable for ever. ver. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12.

4. He is set at the right hand of God, and, by the Word and Patent of God, is
made Supreme and Universal King and Prince, a Place never granted to any of the
Angels; who, all of them, are but Ministering Spirits under Him for the Heirs of
Salvation.

This Jesus Christ, so excellent, was a Prophet; for God spoke by him as more
excellent, and in a more excellent manner then by them; so that his Doctrine is
more full, more powerful and more perfect then the Doctrine of Prophets and
Angels.

CHAP. II.
Wherein, 1. The former Doctrine of the excellency of Christ and the Gospel is
applied, by way of exhortation.

2. The excellency of Christ above the Angels; though he was lower then them
for a time, is further proved.

In the Exhortation, we may observe;

1. The Duty exhorted unto. 2. The Reason or Motive to enforce performance.


1. The Duty is, diligently to attend unto the Doctrine of the Gospel, and to,
take heed of falling from the belief and profession of the same, ver. 1.

2. The Reason, is taken from the most grievous punishment, which they cannot
escape, if they continue not in their Profession. This Reason is delivered by
way of comparison in quantity; For, if they, who disobeyed the Law, then much
more they who disobey the Gospel, shall be severely punished, and shall not
escape; The Consequence is good and clear, from the excellency of the Gospel,
above the Law. For,

1. The Law was delivered by Angels, the Gospel by Christ.

2. The Law is a Doctrine of Death and Damnation, the Gospel of Salvation.

3. The Gospel, preached by the Apostles, commissioned by Christ, was attested
from Heaven, and confirmed by Signs, Wonders, Miracles, and Gifts of the Holy
Ghost; but the Law was not.

And, from the excellency of the Gospel, in respect of the Author, the Matter,
and Confirmation; the Sin is aggravated, and the Punishment made more grievous,
ver. 2, 3, 4.

The Exhortation finished; the Apostle does not only enforce the former Reason,
but proceeds farther to demonstrate the excellency of Christ above the Angels.
The Argument is, That God has not subjected the World to come to Angels, but
to Christ; who, for a little time, was lower then the Angels: for so it is to
be understood, ver. 5.

This Argument is taken out of Psalm. 8. 4, 5. Where we may observe,

1. The words of the Psalm, cited ver. 6, 7. 2. The Apostle's Discourse upon
them; wherein he observes,


1. That all things were put in subjection to him by the Patent and Edict of
his heavenly Father; yet not actually subdued and brought into subjection, ver.
8.

2. The Humiliation of Christ, which went before his Exaltation; For He was
made lower then the Angels for a little time.

Of this Humiliation, he delivers the Causes, Efficient. Final.

The efficient Cause, was,

1. The Grace and free Mercy of God, which did decree it for the benefit of
sinful man, ver. 9.

2. The Wisdom of God, which contrived it as the fittest way in bringing many
Sons to Glory, to consecrate their Captain by Sufferings, ver. 10.

The final Cause may best be understood, if we consider what this Humiliation,
whereby he was lower then the Angels, is: It was,

1. To be made a Mortal man. 2. In this mortal humane Nature, to suffer Death.


1. The reason why he must be made Man, and mortal, was; Because he that
sanctisieth and they that are sanctified must be one; and because the
sanctified, which were to be made Sons, did partake of Flesh and Blood:
therefore he took part with them, that in this respect they might be his
Brethren: And that they were so, he proves, ver. 11, 12, 13.

2. The End and final Cause why he was made man, and mortal, was, 1. That he
might dye for his Brethren, and by his Death destroy the Devil, and deliver his
People, ver. 14, 15. And for this reason he took not the Nature of Angels, to
deliver them, but the Seed of Abraham, ver. 16. 2. Another end was, That he,
Suffering, and being Tempted in their Nature, might be a merciful and faithful
High Priest, and make atonement for the Sins of the People, and succor them
who were tempted, ver. 17, 18.

CHAP. III.
Wherein Christ is proved to be more excellent, and a greater Prophet then
Moses. For the Jews did think it very unreasonable, in any part, to recede from
that Doctrine, which they had received from God, by Prophets, Angels, Moses;
and to hearken unto Christ, except he could be proved to be a Greater Prophet
sent from God, and his Doctrine more excellent and perfect: And this was the
cause of the Apostle's Undertaking.

This part of his Discourse, is brought in by way of Exhortation.

Where, 1. The Duty exhorted unto, is, To consider Christ, the Apostle and High
Priest of our Profession, and to presevere in his Doctrine, ver. 1.

2. The Reasons, by which he presses the performance of this Duty, are,

1. Christ was not only faithful in his Trust, as Moses was, but also far
greater then Moses, in two respects: For,

1. Moses was but part in the House builded; Christ was the Builder of all
things; and especially of the Church, ver. 3, 4.

2. Moses was but a Servant in that House, Christ was the Lord and Owner, ver.
5, 6.

2. If they persevere in his Doctrine and the Faith, they shall be his House of
Glory, wherein God shall for ever dwell, and make them fully blessed, ver. 7.

3. If they that disobeyed and hardened their hearts against Mose's Doctrine
fell in the Wilderness, and by a peremprory Oath were shut out of God's Rest;
much more shall they, disobeying the Gospel, and falling from the Faith, be
shut out of God's eternal Rest in Heaven.

In this Reason, we must consider;

1. That it is taken out of Psalm. 95. the words whereof are recired, ver. 7, 8,
9, 10, 11.

2. That from these words applied unto them, he dehorts them from Unbelief and
Apostasy, and exhorts them to use all means of perseverance, that so he might
be partakers of that eternal Rest, which Christ had merited for them, ver. 12,
13, 14, 15.

3. He wishes them to take special notice of such as did, and such as did not,
enter into God's Rest, and what was the cause of the exclusion of those whom
God destroyed in the Wilderness, and would not suffer to enter into Canaan; and
that was Unbelief, ver. 16, 17, 18, 19.

CHAP. IV.
Wherein, the Discourse upon the words of the Psalm is continued, and
application made by way of Exhortation. And,

1. The Duty exhorted unto, is, To be obedient and mix the word with Faith,
ver. 1. 2. The Reasons are;


1. They are partakers of the heavenly Call; and the Gospel was preached unto
Them, as well as to their Fathers.

2. They, not mixing the Word with Faith, but being disobedient to the heavenly
Call, did not enter, but came short, ver. 2.

3. They which do believe, do enter into God's Rest, ver. 3. And here, lest
they should be ignorant, what Rest of God is meant, and to be expected, he
informs them of a threefold Rest of God.

1. His Rest of Creation. 2. His Rest, which he promised in the Land of Canaan,
to their Fathers. 3. His spiritual and eternal Rest, promised in the Gospel.


It was not the first, ver. 3, 4. For after this he speaks of another Rest,
ver. 5.

It was not the second, into which many of their Fathers, because of unbelief,
did not enter; and after this, he limitteth another Time and Rest, which had
never been mentioned, if Joshua, who brought their Fathers into the Land of
Canaan, had brought them into This, ver. 6, 7, 8.

It Is a spiritual and eternal Rest in Heaven, which remains for the People of
God, and is to be enjoyed, when they cease from all their works of Obedience
and Sufferings; as God did from his, when he had finished the work of Creation,
ver. 9, 10.

4. If they do not persevere, they may fall after the example of their
unbelieving Ancestors; and lest they should presume or be secure, he lets them
know, that Christ by the piercing Word of the Gospel, will discover their
inward and most secret sins, and will be a severe and impartial Judge, ver. 11,
12, 13.

5. The same great Prophet, who has called us by the Word of the Gospel, is
our High Priest, very sensible of our infirmities, and entered into Heaven, the
eternal Rest of God, in our behalf; and if we, wanting strength, do come boldly
by him before the Throne of Grace, we shall obtain help in due season, when we
have greatest need, ver. 14, 15, 16.

CHAP. V.
Wherein, after the discourse of the excellency of Christ's prophetical
Office, he begins to speak of his Priesthood: And,

1. Delivers the Doctrine thereof from this Chapter to ver. 19 of the 10th.

2. Applies the same, and continues the Application from the 19th verse of the
10th Chapter, unto the latter end of the last.

The scope of the Apostle, in the Doctrine, is, To demonstrate the excellency
of Christ's Priesthood, in respect of

1. The Constitution, from the beginning of this Chapter to the 8th. 2. The
Ministration, from the beginning of the 8th to the middle of the 10th.


In this Chapter, we have;

1. A Discourse of Priesthood. 2. A Digression, begun in the latter end of
this Chapter, and continued in the 6th.


1. The Discourse is,

1. Concerning a Priest in general. 2. Concerning Aaron. 3. Concerning Christ.


1. An High Priest in general, is described,

1. From his Vocation, He is taken from amongst men and ordained, ver. 1. 2.
From his Ministration, He must offer Gifts and Sacrifices for sins, Ibid. 3.
From his Qualification, He must be merciful and compassionate, ver. 2, 3.


2. Vocation, which consists in Election and Ordination, is not from Man, but
God; for no Priesthood can be efficiently conducing to Man's spiritual good,
except it be instituted from Heaven, as Aaron's was, ver. 4.

3. Therefore Christ did not usurp his Sacerdotall Power, but he had

his

Vocation Confirmation Consecration
from God.

1. His Vocation he finds, Psalm. 2. in these words, [Thou art my Son, this day
have I begotten thee]; by which, upon his Resurrection, he was made, and
constituted King and Priest, ver. 5.

2. His Confirmation, he reads, Psalm. 110. 4. [I have sworn, and will not
repent, Thou art a Priest for ever after, the Order of Melchizedec, ver. 6.

3. His Consecration, which tended to his fuller Constitution, was finished in
his Agony and Death upon the Cross; by which he became the Author of eternal
Life, to as many as obey him, ver. 7, 8, 9.

Thus far the Author's Discourse of Priesthood, which is closed up with the
Repetition of the words of Confirmation; 1. Because the Confirmation followed
the Consecration. 2. From the same, the Apostle takes occasion to make the
Digression, which follows. And therein he reproves them of their Ignorance,
contracted by their negligence; which was such, that, whereas, for the time,
they might have been more and apt to able teach others, yet were Babes, had
need to be taught again the first Principles, and were uncaple of the Doctrine,
which he intended to deliver concerning the Priesthood of Christ, ver. 11, 12,
13, 14.

CHAP. VI.
Wherein,

1. The Digression is continued. 2. The principal Subject resumed, ver. 20.


In the Digression, we have;

1. His Resolution. 2. An Exhortation.


In the Resolution,

1. The Thing Resolved upon. 2. The Reasons of his Resolution.


The thing resolved upon is expressed,

1. Negatively, Not to go back and lay the Foundation,

2. Affirmatively, To go on with his intended Discourse,

ver. 1, 2, 3.

The Reasons are,

1. If any of them, after a clear conviction and considerable progress, had
lost their Christendom, it was impossible for them to be renewed and initiated
again. For neither the grace of Repentance could be expected from the Spirit,
nor any benefit from the Sacrifice of Christ, which was never intended for to
expiate the Sins of Apostates. This is amplified and illustrated by a
Similitude: For as they, who continue, and increase in Grace, shall be like
good Ground, and receive the blessing of God; so Apostates shall be like bad
Ground, which, being well Husbanded, proves barren, is cursed, and the end is
Burning. For Apostates render themselves liable to God's Curse, and everlasting
Fire, ver. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8.

2. Though some of them might be very faulty, yet he had better hope of the
generality of them; and this his hope is grounded on,

1. God's Righteousness.

2. Their Faith in Christ, and labor of love, manifested in their constant
ministration to the Saints, ver. 9, 10.

Thus far the Resolution; the Exhortation follows: Wherein we may observe,

1. The Duty exhorted unto, which is Perseverance; ver. 11.

2. The Motive from example of

former Saints not named, ver. 12.

Abraham.

In the example of Abraham, the Apostle takes special notice of a Promise made
unto him, and confirmed by Oath; and acquaints them with the end of this
confirmation; which was,

1. To show to the Heirs of Promise the immutability of his Counsel, in
performing his Promise, ver. 13, 14, 15, 16, 17.

2. To minister Comfort to them, ver. 18, 19.

This Digression finished, he resumes the words of Confirmation, Psalm. 110. 4.
that they may be the subject of the Chapter following, ver. 20.

CHAP. VII.
THE Subject whereof is, the words of Psalm. 100. 4. formerly resumed.

The Scope, to demonstrate the excellency of Christ's Priesthood.

The Method

Begins with Melchizedec, ver. 1.

Goes on with the Priesthood of Aaron, and the Law, ver. 11.

Concludes with the Priesthood of Christ, ver. 20.

For the Author discourses. 1. Upon the last word in the Text of the Psalm,
which is [Melchizedec]. 2. Upon the words, [Thou art a Priest for ever, after
the Order of Melchizedec.] 3. Upon the words, [I have sworn, and will not
repent.] 4. Takes notice from the antecedent Context of the Psalm, to show, who
the person was, that was thus confirmed, and how excellent and perfect.

In the first part, we may observe,

1. A Description of Melchizedec. 2. A Demonstration of his excellency.


He is described from

His Offices.

The acts of his Offices.

The perpetuity of his Priesthood.

1. For his Offices, he was King and Priest, ver. 1.

2. For the acts of his

Priesthood, they were Blessing and Tything Abraham, ver. 1, 2. Regal power,
they were the righteous Government of his People, and procuring their peace.
These he inferrs from the notation of his own name, and the name of the place,
where he did reside, ver. 2.

3. For the continuance of his Priesthood; he neither had Predecessor, from
whom he did derive; nor Successor, to whom he did transmit; his Sacerdotal
power, in which respect, it might be said to be Personal and Perpetual.

This is the Description of Melchizedec, taken from Genesis 14. From which he
inferrs his excellency, especially as a Priest. And this excellency is proved,

1. From his tything Abraham, so great a Person; whereas the Levitical Priests
did but Tithe their Brethren, which were far inferior to their Father Abraham,
ver. 4. 5.

2. From his blessing of Abraham, who had the Promises, ver. 6, 7.

3. From this, That the Levitical Priests, receiving Tithes, dye; but
Melchizedec, who received Tithes of Abraham, is witnessed to live, ver. 8.

4. Levi, being then in the Loins of Abraham, when he paid Tithes to
Melchizedec, may, with the Levitical Priests, descended from him, be laid to
pay Tithes unto this great Priest, ver. 9, 10.

In the second part, which begins, ver. 11. the Apostle enters upon these
words, [Thou art a Priest for ever, after the Order of Melchizedec]; and
inferts from them.

1. That there must be another Priest of another Order, then that of Aaron,
ver. 11.

2. That if there must be, and by God's institution, another Priesthood, and
another Oder; then that Levitical Priesthood, which came in with the Law, was
imperfect, Ibid.

3. That seeing it was imperfect, it must be changed, and that if the
Priesthood, then the Law also, which was so inseparably joined with it, must
be abolished, ver. 12.

4. That seeing the legal High Priest must, by the first institution, be of the
Tribe of Levi; and Christ, this great and new High Priest was not of that
Family, but of the Tribe of Judah; therefore it was evident, the Priesthood
was changed already, ver. 13, 14.

5. That this Change must needs be made, was evident; because the Priest, which
was of another Tribe, must be after another Order, the Order of Melchizedec,
ver. 15. and another Power of endless life, ver. 16, 17.

6. That the Reason why the Law, annexed to the former Priesthood, must be
disanulled, was; because it could sanctify and perfect no man as the Gospel
does, ver. 18, 19.

In the third part of this Discourse, grounded upon these words of the
Psalmist, [I have sworn, and will not repent, and the antecedent Context], he
speaks more distinctly and directly of Christ's perfect Priesthood, and

1. Proves the excellency thereof, in that he was a Priest, by an Oath, which
the Levitical High Priest was not, ver. 20, 21.

2. Hence inferrs, That his Priesthood and the Gospel were unalterable, and of
perpetual continuance; because,

1. By this Oath he was made Surety of a better Covenant, which could sanctify
and save, ver. 22.

2. The Levitical Priests were mortal; Christ, upon his Resurrection, immortal,
and able for ever to save by his Intercession, which he ever lives to make for
them, who come to God by him, ver. 23, 24, 25.

3. He sums up the excellency of Christ, whereby it is evident, that He, and he
Alone, because of his perfections, was only fit to be our Priest, and save us,
For,

1. He is holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from Sinners, ver. 26.

2. Higher then the Heavens, Ibid.

3. He need not Offer often, or for Himself, as the Levitical High Priest did;
He offered but once, not for Himself, but for his People, and that Sacrifice
was of eternal Virtue, ver. 27.

4. The legal High Priest had his infirmities, and was not The Son; but he that
is by the Oath, after the Law, confirmed Priest, has no infirmities, is the
Son consecrated for ever, ver. 28.

All these things are implied in the antecedent Context of the Psalm; for he
that is there confirmed Priest, in this manner, was the Son of God without sin;
who having offered himself a Sacrifice unsported, was risen again, immortal,
ascended above the Heavens, and set at the right hand of God, as appears from
ver. ^^. of the Psalm, when God, by his Oath, did confirm him.

CHAP. VIII.
HItherto the Apostle has demonstrated the excellency of Christ's Priesthood,
in respect of the Constitution; and now proceeds to prove his excellency, in
respect of the Ministration. For if he be a Priest, he must minister and
officiate; and his ministration is twofold, or there be two parts thereof: The
first whereof, Which is his great Offering, was performed on Earth; The second,
Which is his Intercession, is performed in Heaven. He was a Priest elect, when
he offered on Earth; He was a Priest constituted and confirmed, before he did
intercede in Heaven.

These things premised, the Author does,

1. Sum up briefly the substance of his former Discourse, Concerning the
constitution of Christ's Priesthood, ver. 1.

2. Proceed to set forth his excellency, in respect of his Ministration.

1. More generally, in this Chapter. 2. More particularly, hereafter.


That he may do this the better, he takes it for granted, that the due
ministration of a Priest requires,

1. A Tabernacle or Temple. 2. A Sacrifice; or something to be offered. 3. A
Covenant, whereof he must be Mediator.


These things presupposed, he proves the excellency of Christ's ministration,
in respect,

1. Of the Tabernacle, which is not made with hands, but pitched by God, ver. 2.

2. Of the thing offered, and the service; both which are supernatural and
divine; not after the pattern of heavenly things, ver. 3, 4, 5.

3. Of the Covenant, which he did confirm, and make effectual as Mediator;
which is better then that of Works, whereof the Levitical High Priest was
Mediator, ver. 6. That it was better, he proves, because it was established
upon better Promises. Where two things are observable, 1. That the Promises of
the Covenant were better. 2. That it is stable and firm, Ibid. To make both
these evident, he,

1. Recites the words of the Prophet Jeremy, concerning both the Covenants.

2. In the words, he 1. Informs us,

1. Of the deficiency of the former, ver. 8, 9. 2. Of the excellent Promises of
the latter, ver. 10, 11, 12.


2. From the word [Now], he inferrs the abolition of the former, to bring in
the latter, ver. 13.

CHAP. IX.
Wherein the Apostle proceeds farther, to evidence the excellency of Christ's
ministration; and this he does more particularly, by setting forth the
excellency of his great Sacrifice and Offering. That he may do this the better,
he singles out from all the other legal Services, the anniversary Sacrifice of
Expiation; with the Blood whereof the High Priest alone, once in the year only,
entered into the Holiest of all: and proving Christ's Sacrifice upon the Cross,
to be far more excellent than this; he does clearly evince the excellency of
Christ's Priesthood.

The parts of the Chapter are two,

The first is concerning the Typical

Tabernacle.

Priests.

Service.

The Tabernacle is described, ver. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.

The Priests, ver. 6, 7.

The Service, Ibid.

The imperfection of their Service, ver. 8, 9, 10.

The principal part of the Tabernacle, was the Holy of Holies.

The principal Priest, the High Priest.

The principal Service, the presenting of the Blood of the Expiatory Offering
in the Holiest place. Where the Apostle observes,

1. That because none but the High Priest alone might enter within the 2d Veil;
therefore the way into the Holiest was not yet made manifest.

2. That because the Services, and so the Ministration, were but carnal;
therefore they could not perfect the Performers.

The second part is concerning the Antitypical Tabernacle, Priest, Service; and
especially the Service of Christ's great Offering, which he proves to be far
more excellent then the legal great Sacrifice of expiation, and so, than all
other legal Sacrifices; from the Effects and Consequents thereof.

For by it, Christ entering the Holy place,

1. Obtained eternal Redemption, ver. 11, 12. 2. Purges the Conscience from
dead Works, to serve the living God, ver. 13, 14. 3. Confirms the new Covenant,
makes it effectual and unalterable, ver. 15.


This Confirmation is illustrated,

1. From the Testaments of Men, confirmed by the Death of the Testator, ver.
16, 17. 2. From the Sanction and Confirmation of the former Covenant by Blood,
ver. 18, 19, 20.


The former purifying and expiating Virtue of Christ's Sacrifice, is
illustrated from the Purification, Expiation, and Consecration of most things
under the Law by Blood. And hence inferrs, That heavenly and spiritual things
must be purified by better Sacrifices, ver. 21, 22, 23.

4. Entering Heaven, he appears before God for us making Intercession, and needs
not come out of that Holy place again to re-iterate his Death and Sacrifice, as
the High Priest under the Law did; but he stays there, pleading his One
Offering of eternal Virtue, until he come to Judgment, and give the actual
possession of eternal life to all such as wait for him; and this is the
ultimate benefit of this Great Offering, ver. 24, 25, 26, 27, 28.

CHAP. X.
VVHetein,

1. The Doctrine of Christ's Sacrifice is continued. 2. The same Doctrine is
applied.


Of this Doctrine, there be two parts;

1. Concerning the imperfection of the legal Offering^. 2. Concerning the
perfection of Christ's.


The imperfection of the former, was in this, They could nor sanctify, because

1. They were but shadows, ver. 1.

2. They were re-iterated, and left a conscience of sin, ver. 2, 3.

3. They were but carnal, and the Blood of Bulls and Goats could not take away
the spiritual stain and guilt of Sin, to purge the immortal Soul.

4. God did reject them, as insufficient for that purpose, and did accept
Christ's one Offering. This is proved out of Psalm. 40. 7, 8, etc. and here,

1. The words are cited, ver. 5, 6, 7.

2. The principal thing, intended thence, concluded; that not by them, but this
Sacrifice of Christ we are sanctified, ver. 8 9, 10.

3. They being many, offered many times, by many Priests, could not take away
sin; but this one Sacrifice, offered but once, and by one Priest does
consecrate the Sanctified for ever, ver. 11, 12, 13,

This he proves out of Jer. 31.

1. Citing the words, ver. 15, 16, 17. 2. Thence concluding the eternal Virtue
of this Offering, ver. 18.


Thus far the Doctrine; now follows the Application, continued from this place
to the latter end of the last Chapter.

In this Application, we may consider;

1. The Duties exhorted unto, which are many; but the principal is
Perseverance. 2. The Motives. 3. Sometime the Means.


The first Duty exhorted unto, is, To draw near with a sincere Heart, in
assurance of Faith.

2. The Motives,

The holy place is open,

A new way is made,

We have an High Priest,

ver. 19, 20, 21, 22.

The second Duty, is, To hold fast our Profession, and persevere, ver. 23.

The Means,

1. To stir up one another, ver. 24. 2. Not to forsake the Assemblies, ver. 25.


The Motives, 1. God is faithful, who has promised, ver. 23.

2. The time is near at hand, ver. 25.

3. If we fall away, after we have received the Truth, the Sin will be very
heinous, the punishment very grievous and unavoidable, ver. 26, 27, 28, 29, 30,
31.

4. They must remember their former constancy in great Afflictions; when they
suffered in their own persons, and also with others, ver. 32, 33, 34.

5. If they persevere, the Reward will be great; the enjoyment will be very
certain, and shall not long be delayed, ver. 35, 36, 37, 38.

CHAP. XI.
Wherein Perseverance is urged, upon other Reasons and Motives, as

1. From the excellency of Faith in it self: For,

1. It can secure us of glorious Rewards to come,

2. Assure us of things far above sense and reason,

ver. 1.

2. From the Effects, and also the Consequents thereof: For,

1. The Effects thereof are so excellent, that by them the Saints of ancient
time became famous, and obtained an excellent Testimony from God himself, which
is upon Record in sacred Scripture, ver. 2.

2. By it we know, the World was made of things that did not appear, ver. 3.

3. From the particular examples of the Elders, endued with this heavenly
Virtue, who obtained so good Report. And in this Argument from Example, we must
observe;

1. That it is only proposed in this Chapter, and applied in the next.

2. That the rare Effects of this Faith, in them, were, that they

1. Obtained great Mercies. 2. Suffered great Afflictions. 3. Did rare
Exploits.


3. That they being many, are Marshalled in order, and reduced to three
Companies.

1. Such as lived near the Creation, and before the Flood. 2. Such as lived
after the Flood, before the Law. 3. Such as lived under the Law, till near the
time of the Incamation.


4. Some are mentioned by Name, and the effects of their Faith specified and
expressed; some are not named at all.

5. The Apostle insists most largely in Abraham and Moses, as rare and eminent
Patterns.

6. All these lived before the exhibition of Christ; and this is their great
commendation, that in the times of imperfection, their Faith was so excellent,
and had so rare effects.

CHAP. XII.
Wherein, 1. The Motive from Examples proposed in the former Chapter, is
applied, and these Hebrews exhorted to imitation, ver. 1.

2. The unparalled Example of Christ is proposed, as a mighty Motive; seeing,
for the Joy that was set before him, he, with great patience, endured more then
ever any did, and that from wicked men, ver. 2, 3.

3. Though they had suffered much, yet they had not resisted to Blood, and loss
of their lives, ver. 4.

4. They must consider, that all their Afflictions, which they Suffer, come
from God, as a Father loving them; and looking upon them, not as Bastards, but
as Sons, and chastising them in Wisdom to make them more holy and more happy,
ver. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11.

And the Means of perseverance, which they must use, are,

1. To encourage themselves, and renew their strength.

2. To live in peace and holiness.

3. By Discipline, to cast out from amongst them Apostates and scandalous
Persons; as Fornicators, and profane Persons, as Esau: And the Motives to use
these means, are,

2. Lest they be turned out of the way. 3. Lest the Blessing be irrecoverably
lost, ver. 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17.


5. The sad estate of fear and bondage under the Law, and the blessed and
glorious estate under the Gospel, in the Kingdom of Christ, should persuade
them much, To be constant, and never to think of returning back to Judaism
again, ver. 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24.

6. If they which refused to hearken to the Law given on Earth were severely
punished; How much more must they suffer, who disobeyed him speaking from
Heaven, ver. 25?

7. They must persevere in their Profession, and serve God accordingly;
because, the former dispensation, under the Law, is altered and taken away; and
the dispensation, of the Gospel, shall never be shaken. That this Dispensation
continues for ever, he proves out of Haggai, by whom God said, Once more I will
shake not only Earth, (as I did, when I gave the Law) but Heaven too: And after
this, there never shall be any more shaking or alteration in his Spiritual
Kingdom, ver. 26, 27, 28. And, lest they should not live according to their
Profession, he lets them know, that, God is a consuming Fire, ver. 29.

CHAP. XIII.
Wherein the Apostle,

1. Exhorts. 2. Concludes.


1. He exhorts to brotherly-Love, Hospitality, and other Duties; and urges the
performance by several Reasons and Motives, from ver. 1. to the 18th.

2. He concludes with,

Request. Intercession. Entreaty. Information. Salutation. Benediction.


These things give light unto the Whole: and the more particular Explication
you may expect in the Comment.

AN EXPOSITION OF THE EPISTLE TO THE Hebrews.
CHAP. 1.
. 1. OF the Divine authority, the Author, the Language, and Translation of
this Epistle others have spoken at large; the Matter is the principal thing. To
do something, and cast in my mite, after other learned men have done their
part, and to unfold the mysteries thereof is my design. And before I enter upon
particulars, I think it expedient to acquaint the Reader with the scope and
method of the Apostle: The end and scope is easily known, if we read the whole
together, and seriously consider the Contexture: For upon this done, it will
appear, and that very clearly, that the whole and all the parts tend to the
confirmation of the blebrews in that Christian Faith, which they had professed,
and for which many of them had suffered. For the divine Author knew full well,
there was danger of Apostasy, or at least of doubting in all, because of the
relapse of some. He was not ignorant, what the Devil by subtle persuasions, or
cruel persecutions might do. For though some were strong, yet many were weak:
and loss of Goods, Imprisonment, Banishment, and hazard of Life were shrewd
temptations. And though it was God who must assist, strengthen, support, and
establish them; yet he might make him an Instrument in that work so far as to
furnish them with Weapons and Armor, and persuade them to make use of them.
Yet we must not think that the inward motive, which stirred him up to write,
was meetly his natural affection to his Brethren and desire of their good: or
that he used only such means to confirm them in the Truth, as natural reason,
and humane prudence did dictate. We must have far higher conceits of this
Letter, which for matter is divine and far above the dictates of reason: For he
was inspired, moved, and infallibly directed by the Holy Ghost. The Though the
principal subject be the prophetical and sacerdotal office, yet there is
mention made several times of his Regal excellency.
principal Subject of the whole is Christ's prophetical and sacerdotal Office,
wherein he did excel not only the former Prophets and Priests, but Angels too.
The attentive and intelligent Reader will easily find this, and from thence
observe his method. For, he single out his prophetical Office, wherein he
proves him far more excellent then Prophets, Angels, and Moses himself; and all
this in the first four Chapters. In the fifth he begins his discourse of his
Priesthood, as far above that of Aarons; yea, above Melchlsede^ks, and in this
he Tpends the fifth, sixth, seventh, eight, ninth, and part of the tenth
Chapter. The test of the Epistle from the 15th. verse of the tenth, unto the
end is chiefly exhortation to continue in the profession of that Faith in
Christ their only Prophet and their only Priest, and a life suitable to this
profession, as the only way and means whereby they may obtain eternal
Salvation. For no other kind of profession and life could serve them; yet in
all this you must understand, that the divine Author with his reasons, whereby
he demonstrates the excellency and sufficiency of Christ, does intermix
exhortations, motives, reproofs, and sometimes digressions; yet all to good
purpose, so that no part or parcel is impertinent. The reason why I pitched
upon this Epistle, is, 1. Because in it we find more of Christ's prophetical,
and especially of his sacerdotal Office, then in all the Scriptures besides: 2.
To clear it from the false Glosses of Crellius, who seeks to elude those
places, which so clearly contradict their Socinian Errors; especially in the
Deity and Satisfaction of Christ. And this I do the rather, because his Book is
translated, and speak; Socinianism in English, and goes abroad under the ^^me
of Dr. Lushington: for though we find not his name in the Book printed, yet he
is charged with the Translation and making it public. Whether it be a mere
Translation I cannot say, because I have not seen Crellius.

. 2. To enter upon the first part, which is concerning Christ's prophetical
Office; we must observe, that the substance of the first four Chapters is
reduced to two Propositions: The first is, That Christ is a Prophet more
excellent then the former Prophets; then Angels, then Moses: The second, That
therefore he must be heard; The first is the Doctrine, the second the use; That
he is far above the former Prophets and the Angels, is proved in the first
Chapter. The Use is to hearken unto him, in the second, where we have a
digression: in the third, he is proved to be more excellent then Moses. The Use
is an Exhortation to hearken unto him and believe him; the reason is, lest, as
the Israelites, hardening their hearts, were overthrown in the Wilderness; So
we, not believing Christ, never attain our eternal Sabbatism or Rest: upon this
the Apostle enlarges in the third and four Chapters. His excellency, above the
former Prophets, we may understand in the three first verses; above the Angels
in the rest of the Chapter. So that the Propositions of this first Chapter, are
two: First, That Christ is more excellent then the Prophets. Secondly, Christ
is more excellent then the Angels. To understand the first Proposition, we must
note, that the excellency of one above another cannot be known, except they be
compared and laid together. Therefore the Apostle, though he do not express
it, yet implies a Comparison; which is in quantity, and presupposes a former
in quality. That in quality is this, That as the holy men of Old were
excellent, so is Christ; they are excellent, he is excellent, both are
excellent. That in quantity is, That though they were excellent; yet he is
more, yea far more excellent: The meaning whereof is, that

1. They are compared as Prophets; for they were Prophets, and so Christ is a
Prophet.

2. Christ is a more excellent Prophet, not only the party prophesying is more
excellent, but also as a Prophet, or in respect of his prophetical Office and
the exercise thereof.

. 3. God, who at sundry times, etc. ver. 1.] Before we can understand that
Christ is more excellent then the Prophets, we must know, 1. Who those Prophets
were, 2. Who Christ is. Therefore the Apostle gives us here, 1. A description
of the Prophets, ver. 1. 2. Of Christ, ver. 2, 3. The former Prophets are
described to be men by whom God spoke unto the Fathers at sundry times, and in
diverse manners or ways. This implies, that a Prophet is one by whom God speaks
to men; and because God spoke to men by them, and also by Christ, therefore
both they and Christ are Prophets. In I take prophecy in a large sense.
prophecy therefore we may consider.

1. The matter. 2. The form.


1. The matter is the mind of God infallibly made known to Man or Angel: here,
to Man.

2. The form is the infallible declaration unto Man, of this mind of God first
infallibly known.

The mind of God, is, Something contrived by his Wisdom, and decreed by his
will concerning Man, as subject to his Power; and ordinable to an estate of
happiness or misery.

2. This is represented unto Man, apprehended by Man, and both infallible, so
that he has a more certain and infallible knowledge of the thing revealed.

The form thereof is an infallible declaration of thy; mind of God known
infallibly. It may be

declared to others by Word Writing Both
and this declaration also must be infallible, or else God

does not speak by them. For because, that God is true and necessarily true,
therefore his Word is necessarily true: Hence the Divine authority and absolute
Truth of the Scriptures; because God speaks in them and by them to us; and for
this reason are they ^^^^ed, The Word of God.

God speaks to Men immediately mediately by men
infallible and inspired. falllble, not inspired.



He spoke immediately, and at the first hand to the Prophets; mediately by the
Prophets at the second hand; at the third hand by such as understand and teach
the Doctrine of the Scriptures. A Prophet, as receiving his knowledge from God,
may be called (...) Ro^h, in respect of his declaration and speaking to others
(...) And he is but God's Instrument, Officer, Minister; if he prophesy by
Word, he may be said to be God's mouth: if by Writing God's hand or scribe, or
secretary. And because God is the principal Agent, upon whom in this work the
Prophet totally depends, therefore he is said to speak by them: God spoke by
the Prophets.

. 4. This explication premised, does give us to understand what the Prophets
were, (...). Men by whom God spoke unto the Fathers of Old, at sundry times, in
diverse (...). 1. God spoke by them, and this did make them fit to be Prophets;
and this may be s^id to be the general, wherein they agree with Christ: For God
spoke by him, and in that respect he was a Prophet. 2. In the rest they differ
from him, and that in four things. 1. They sp^^e to the Fathers; that is, their
Ancestors, who lived formarly in the times of the Prophets, 2. They prophesyed
of Old, in former days, before the incar^ation and ex^ibition of Christ. 3. God
spoke by them to the Fathers at several times, ^^ as some (...) it, in many
parts. This implies, 1. That the Prophets by whom God spoke, were (...). For
the Doctrine of the Old Testament was not either spoken or written by one man,
but by many. 2. That Doctrine was delivered by parts; the whole body and
systeme was not (...) up at once, but first one part, then another, then a
third, till the whole was finished. One part was declared, as it was revealed
by one Prophet, another by another, a third by a ^^ird. 3. That one part was
written at one time, another at another, and the whole ^^ several and sundry
times. 4. There was a considerable time between the Prophet, and the parts, and
a great distance between the first and the last. For some of the best
Chronolog^ts ^ell us, that the time from Moses to Malachi was a thousand and
two hundred years. 5. This (...) ^ay referr to the matter, which was various.

4. As it was delivered by parts, and in several times; so it was revealed and
declared many and several ways, as it seemed good to the manifold wisdom of
God, ^ho (...) many ways, both to inform his Prophets and instruct his People.
In this they all agreed, that they were moved, inspired, illuminated, and
infallibly directed by the Holy Ghost. Yet this eternal Spirit did inform them,
by several representations made to the o^^ward (...) whilst they were waking;
or to the inward senses in Dreams o^ Ex^^fies; or more partly of immediately to
the immortal Soul by illaps and powerful pen^^^tion with a divine Light into
the intellectual Spirit. And as he did notify and make known his thoughts and
(...)lent Counsels several ways unto the Prophets, so by them he declared them
to ^^^ People in any ways; as by words, by writing, by writings read, by
visible Figures. So that he (...) any way; did apply himself to the Fathers,
and used several means to cause them to understand his Will. He omitted no way,
which was either necessary or expedient for their good: From all this, we may
collect a Description of that part of the Scripture, which we call the O^^
Testament: It is the Word of God, which at sundry times by parts, many (...)
times past he spoke by the Prophets to the Fathers. These were not all the
Prophets (...) the beginning; For Adam was a Propher, so was E^och, and (...)
and N^^h, ^^^ Abraham; but these were they by whom God spoke to the Fathers and
Ancestors of those (...) and were the penmen of the holy Scriptures of the Old
Testament, whereof (...) were Priests and Kings. That God by these was pleased
to speak unto the Fathers, (...) a peculiar mercy and special favor to that
People above all other People, and was in act of ^^^gular care and
extraordinary providence. And it was a prerogative, and a (...) privilege that
they were trusted with his Oracles: It Is true, that the Church never was
without some Prophecy and Word of God; whereby he supplied the ignorance and
negligence of men, and defects of humane reason, and memory in divine things in
(...) known those things concerning man's eternal good, which otherwise could
never have been known.

. 5. The first Proposition is, That the Prophets are excellent; as has been
made evident. The second follows, and affirms, That Christ is more excellent;
and that, not only as a Prophet, but many other ways. Both are excellent,
because God spoke by both: and the Fathers, as also their Children happy,
because God spoke to both. Yet Christ is more excellent, because God spoke by
Him, as by his Son; and their Children more happy then the Fathers, because God
spoke to them, not by Prophets, but his Son.

For in these last Days, God has spoken to us by his Son, etc. Ver. 2. In the
words, four things are to be considered:

1. Who spoke? 2. To whom He spoke? 3. When He spoke? 4. By whom He spoke?


1. Who spoke? It was God, the same God, who spoke unto the Fathers. For the
same God is the Author of the whole Canon of the Scripture, both of the Old
and New Testament.

2. To whom did He speak? To us, that is, the Children and Posterity of the
Fathers living in the time of Christ, and the Apostles. Such were these Hebrews
and the Apostles. For whom God reserved this special happiness above their
Ancestors. For many Prophets and Kings desired to see those things which they
saw, and did not see them; and to bear those things which they heard, and did
not hear them, Luke 10. 24.

3. When did God speak to the Children? Even in the last days, which in this
respect were the best days, because of clearest light and greatest mercy,
wherewith this time was blessed above the former days.

4. By whom did he speak then unto them? By his Son, the Greatest and most
Excellent of all the Prophets, and far above them all. For the Word was made
Flesh, and dwelt amongst them, (and they beheld his Glory, the Glory as of the
only begotten of the Father) full of Grace and Truth, Joh. 1. 14.

. 6. The intention of the Apostle in these words, is, to set forth the
excellency of Christ, and therefore he gives us a description of Him; which we
must, 1. Understand, 2. From thence conclude his Excellency, both absolutely
and comparatively. In the description, some things affirmed of Christ agree to
him, as the Word not made Flesh; some agree to him as the Word made Flesh, or
Incarnate. Christ Jesus, if we observe, is the Son of God, by whom he spoke,
whom he has made Heir of all things; by whom he made the Worlds, the
brightness of his Fathers Glory, etc. 1. He is the Son of God, and that in a
Supereminent manner; so as neither Men or Angels, though Sons of God, are;
therefore is He said to be his only begotten. He is a Son, not only in respect
of his person Divine, but of the humane Nature united to the Word. He is a Son,
not only because like God, or because adopted; but by a divine and ineffable
generation and production, which far transcends the capacity of humane reason.
As the Word, He is so near to God, that He is God; as Flesh and Man, He is
nearer then either Men or Angels.

2. This Son of God is a Prophet; for God spoke by him as he did by the
Prophets, yet by him in a more perfect and excellent manner.

3. God has appointed him Heir of all things,] To be Heir, is to be Lord; to
be made Heir, is to receive Power: to be made Heir of All, is to receive an
Universal and supreme Power, not only over Men but Angels. This Power he
received, and it was given him upon the Resu^rection: Therefore being risen, he
says, All Power in Heaven and Earth is given unto me, Matthew. 28. 18. This
includes, 1. A right, 3. A possession upon a Solemn investicure. In this
phrase, he seems to allude unto the privilege of the first born Son, who was
Lord of the whole Inheritance, and must Rule over his Brethren. And this agrees
to Christ as Man, yet united to the Word.

4. By him he made the Worlds;] This is affirmed, and to be understood of
Christ, as the Word not incarnate and made Flesh. In the words we may observe,
1. Worlds made, 2. The making of them, 3. By whom they were made? 4. Who made
them by him?

1. By Worlds, some understand, 1. All times, 2. All things in all times:
Others think, that he used the expression of the Rabbis, who make there
Worlds; 1. The lowest, which is the Earth, Sea, and all things in them. The
second and the middle is the Air, and the Ethereal part with the Spears. The
third is the supreme, the World of Angels, God and Souls. Yet all these are but
one World, and systeme of Heaven and Earth; and the Word signifies all times
and durations, with all places, and all things, in all times and places.

2. The making of these Worlds, is the giving them their Being after that they
had no Being, and is the same with creating and framing, as we may read in many
other places.

3. These Worlds were made by the Word, which once made Flesh was Christ, For
by the Word and Wisdom of God, which was the Rule and Idea of all things, all
things were modeled and received their forms, shapes and distinct beings.

4. It was God, who by this Word, which was his Word, and was with him in the
beginning, and also from eternity, so that it was God, as he was God, the same
God, the same essence. Yet we must not understand this so, as though God made
the World by his Son, as by an instrument, or inferior distinct Agent, but
Father, Word, and Spirit, were an individual efficient sole cause of the Worlds.

This is the same with that of the divine Evangelist: All things were made by
him, that is, by the Word, and without him was not any thing made, which was
made, Joh. 1. 3. The Apostle Paul expresses this more particularly and
distinctly; for speaking of the Son, he says, That by him were all things
created that are in Heaven, and that are in ^ar^^, visible and invisible;
whether they be Thrones or Domin^ons, or Principalities or Powers, all things
were created by him and for him, Colos. 1. 16. This is so clear, that I wonder
with what face Cr^llius could expound the words so, as by the Worlds to
understand Man; and by making and creating the Worlds, the reforming and
restoring Mankind. This seems to be more strange, seeing he understands those
words. [By Faith we understand that the Worlds were framed by the Word of God,]
Heb. 11. 3. of the Creation of the World. The cause of this his false
exposition is plain enough; For this being affirmed of Christ, that by him God
made the Worlds; it did plainly evince his Existence before his conception of
the Virgin Mary, nay before the World, which was contrary to their damnable
Error. Therefore he wilfully devised this interpretation, lest he should grant
the etemity of the Son of God. But in Chap. 11. 3. where there was no mention
of Christ, he could give the genuine sense.

. 7. Ver. 3. Who being the brightness of his Glory,] To be H^i^ of all things,
did agree to him upon the Resurrection; that God made the Worlds by Him,
referrs unto the work of Creation: but to be the brightness of his Fathers
Glory, and the express image of his person, agrees to Him from eternity. For in
these words we may observe his eternal generation and production: Some think
the expression is taken out of the Book of Wisdom, though Apocry^h^l, Chap. 7.
26. where Wisdom is said to be [(...)] the brightness o^ effulgency of eternal
Light. For we find diverse expressions of those Apocryphal Books taken up and
used in the New Testament. For the better understanding hereof, we must
observe, 1. That God is often called Light, because this bodily and visible
Light is Glorious, and in several respects resembles that eternal glorious
essence of God. 2. That here God is said to have Light or Glory, not that Glory
or Light is an accident in God, but because he is said to have, that which he
is: For God is not only lightfome and glorious, but Light and Glory* Therefore
this Glory is essential Glory or Light. ^. 3. The Similitude here used is taken
not from accidental but substantial Light, as the same is said to be a Light.
Purity, beauty, delectability in Light do teach us something of Him.

4. Brightness or effulgency here must not be understood to be either an effect
or an accident of this spiritual, infinite and eternal Glory: yet it is
something issuing from; and produced by, that Glory; as the mental Word, which
is a kind of invisible brightness is the issue, product, or brood of the
intellect, which is a spiritual Light. From this p^ice; and such like the
Nicene Fathers did conlude, That Jesus Christ was the only begotten Son of God,
begotten of his Father before all Worlds God of God, Light of Light, very God
of very God; begotten, not made, being of one substance with the Father, by
whom all things were made. By this we may easily understand, that they
believed, 1. The Glory to be a substance, 2. The brightness to be a substance,
not an effect or accident, 3. That the glory and brightness were one and the
same substance, 4. That the brightness issued from, and was a product of the
Glory not merely as from a substance, but as from a substance acting, and
acting upon it self. 5. That Christ in this respect did exist from eternity. We
know little of this bodily Light; less of the intellectual Light of the Soul;
and least of all, of this eternal Light. Therefore we trust believe according
to plain Scripture most certainly, that which we cannot clearly understand.
From hence we may understand the reason, why Jesus Christ is called the Word;
and it is, as because the word of the Intellect reflecting upon it self to know
it self, is a product of it self; so is the Son of God the product of the
eternal Intellect, beholding it self to know itself: yet this is the
difference; that this Word of the Soul is not so perfect nor real, as this Word
of God.

And the express Image of his person,] If Light produce Light, then the Light
produced must be like unto and in some measure represent, more the Light and
Glory producing; and the more perfect and immediate the production is, the more
perfect is the resemblance and expression. And because this production was
perfect, therefore this brightness is said to be the express Image of his
Father. The word translated here, the express Image, is, (...), a Character or
impression made by Sculpture, or some other way: and this Character, if rightly
made, is a lively expression of the samplar, as an ectypon of the prototype.
This brightness is said to be the Character of his Hypostasis, which some turn
substance, some turn person. This implys, 1. That he is a substantial Image,
yet not another, but the same substance: 2. That there is a relation between
God, who is this eternal Light, and this image or brightness; for he is the
Image of this Glory. 3. Yet he is not the Image of, nor has relation unto the
Essence, for that cannot be. But he has relation to the essence as acting upon
it self, and producing an Image of himself; for Christ is the Word and Image of
the Father and his Person. This is the same with that we read in another place,
That he is the Image of the invisible God, Coloss. 1. 15. The word invisible
seems to be added, for to distinguish Christ from these visible Images of
visible things. For God is not visible to mortal and bodily Eyes, neither is
his Image visible in that manner. For though Christ had a body; yet he neither
in that body, nor in his humane Soul, but as the Word, was he the express Image
of his Father. Crellius, his gloss upon these words is gross, and nothing to
purpose. For he tells us, 1. That Christ is the luster, ^ay and beam of God's
Majesty; this is very obscure, and, in proper sense affirmed of Christ as the
Word, is false. 2. That he was thus a ray and beam, only as sent and manifested
in the humane Nature unto us: This is agreeable to his erroneous Doctrine,
denying the Deity and Incarnation of the Word, contrary to express Scripture.
3. That Man resembles God in some attributes, but Christ is the Image of his
Person as Lord and Sovereign. This is both obscure, illiterate, and
impertinent; For to resemble God in Power and Dominion, and to bear his person
as his Substitute, is political; to resemble him in Wisdom, Knowledge, Holiness,
is physical; and to be his Image, as he had said before, that Man is. These he
jumbles and confounds together, and contradicts himself. Again, to be his
Image; and, bear his person in respect of Power and Dominion, is the same with
that of being Heir of all things. And will any man imagine that the Apostle in
so few words so full of different matter would tautologize? And where do we
find political representation, for Power and Lordship signified in Scripture by
such terms? But that he was guilty of a willful Error, he would never have
sought to elude the genuine sense, by such a ^rosse sophistication.

. 8. And upholding all things by the Word of his Power,] As before he made the
Worlds, and with the Father created all things, so here he is affirmed to
support and order all things; so that he is Creator and Preserver. We may here
observe two things: 1. The Word by his Power. 2. The upholding of all things by
this Word of Power; his Word of Power is his powerful Word. Christ is the Word
in respect of the Father, the eternal Word of the Father, and there is a word
of the Word in respect of some thing to be done and effected. This word of the
Word for effecting something (ad extra) out of God, is here meant. This is the
Word of Creation, whereby God sald, 'Let there be Light, and there was Light.
And it is the Word of Providence, as in this place we must understand is. This
word is, sometimes an expression, sometimes a decree, sometimes a command,
sometimes a deed. Here it is a decree and command expressed, whereupon the deed
follows; and something willed, decreed and expressed is effected. This is a
Word of Power, that is very powerful, of almighty Power; so that what is
spoken, is done, and what the Word signifies is effected. This Word (Power) is
added to signify the efficiency and wonderful efficacy of the Word, which is
such, that we cannot well distinguish betwixt the Word and the executive Power.
Therefore it is said, God spoke, and it was done; he commanded, and is st^^d
(...), Psalm. 33. 9. And the same Nown. Verbal, both in Hebrew and Greek, which
signifies a Word, signifies a deed. And Christ's Word is his deed; this Word
being a Word of Power is the cause, the effect here is the upholding of all
things. The word [(...)] may signify to preserve, and as Erasmus, a Lapide,
Heinsius observe, to govern. And so it may express the two acts of Providence,
Conservation and Government, and both universal; for it upholds and orders all
things. This is the same, which we find in another Scripture, That by him all
things subsist, Coloss. 1. 17. In which place we may observe, that as all
things both visible and invisible were created by him, so all things consist
and be upholden by him. This agrees to the Word not incarnate, though being
incarnate it does not cease to exercise the same causal power, because the Word
made Flesh remains the Word, and has its universal causality as before the
incarnation. The Socinian, lest he should grant the Deity and eternal existence
of Christ, understands this of Christ doing his Miracle by his Word, and
restrains (all things) to a few things done by Christ a Man. And this is
directly contrary to the Apostle affirming all things to consist by Christ,
even all things created, and that from the beginning.

. 9. When he had by himself purged our Sins,] This was an act of Christ, 1. As
the word Incarnate. 2. As a Priest. 3. As a Priest offering himself a Sacrifice
for our sins. 4. This Sacrifice, as not only offered, but accepted of God had
this power. This purging of our Sin is not only actual pardon or
sanctification, but something antecedent, and an immediate effect of Christ's
Death, as of a Sacrifice offered and accepted in behalf of sinful man. In the
words, we have an effect [the purging of sin], and the cause, Christ by
himself. In the effect, the object is our sins, the act the purging of them. By
sins, our sins are meant, the consequents of sin, and in particular the guilt
of sin, yet joined with the stain. These are the sins of Men not of Angels,
[our Sins]. The act of purging is the making of the consequents of sin,
especially the guil^, removable upon certain terms determined by God our
supreme Judge and Lawgiver. This was done by satisfaction of divine justice,
and by merit. For upon Christ's Sacrifice offered, and the punishment due to us
for our sins, willingly suffered by him God was so well pleased, as that he was
willing to pardon that sin, which was punished, and by himself, in his ownSon.
Sin therefore here, by a Metonymie, is said to be purged, when this Sacrifice
(by which, believed and pleaded, sin is actually pardoned,) was offered and
accepted; because as offered and accepted, it did make sin immediately
pardonable, and had a causal virtue to procure the actual pardon. This causal
virtue and vigor is said to be Purging: But of this more hereafter, especially
in Chap. 9. The cause of this expiation is Christ by himself; for he alone was
the Priest, he alone the Sacrifice. He and he alone offered, he and he alone
was the thing offered; he was the sole cause and efficient of this purging.
Neither Men or Angels did cooperate in this Work as co-efficients with him.
Crellius expounds these words; yet so, that his expression is neither exact,
nor clear, nor altogether true. For, 1. By expiation and purging, he
understands the removing of guilt and punishment, and affirms that by the
oblation they are removed, whereas instrict sense it did not remove them, but
make them removeable, and so he himself says afterward, That it had then only
an efficacy and power. 2. He distinguishes between the Slaughter and the
offering of the Sacrifice, and says, That the Slaughter was on Earth, and the
Offering in Heaven. That Christ dyed and suffered Death on Earth is clear; That
he willingly suffered this Death, to expiate the sin of Man in obedience to his
heavenly Father, none can truly deny: and this willing Suffering for sin in
obedience, may be truly said to be an offering and an act of a Priest as
properly a Priest, though they will not have him to be a Priest, until he
entered Heaven, which is very untrue. Was not the High Priest a Priest before
he entered with the expiatory blood into the holy Place? There were many
Sacrifices offered to God, the Blood whereof was not presented in the holy
place; yet it may be granted, that if type and antitype agree so far as the
Scripture makes them so to do, then Christ must present himself in Heaven; and
he did so. For by his own Blood he entered in once into the holy Place, Heb. 9.
12. But whether he entered as mortal or immortal, in Soul only or in Soul and
Body, as dead or living, when he presented himself before the Throne of the
great eternal Judge, may be doubted. That his Soul, that very day he dyed was
in Paradise, it is certain; and that entrance was properly by Blood with his
Soul separated from his Body, and made the expiation. For when he enters the
second time forty days after his Resurrection, he enters as immortal, in Soul
and Body to make Intercession; not to make Satisfaction and expiation, or to
merit.

. 10. S^te down on the right hand of the Majesty on High,] This was a reward
for his suffering and being obedient unto Death, the Death of the Cross. This
agrees unto him as the Word incarnate, and in respect of his Manhood. And thus
to sit, is to be next to God, above all Men and Angels, and every Creature in
holiness, bliss, honor, and especially in Power and Dominion. This properly
agrees to him as King: This is not to participate of the divine perfections and
excellency, as infinite and eternal, but so far as the most noble Creature was
capable. From all this is manifest the excellency of Christ above all Prophers,
both as a Prophet, and in other respects. For as a Prophet he knew more of God,
and of his mind then all the Prophets joined in one. He declared his Will more
fully, clearly, and powerfully then he did, and this both by himself and by his
Apostles. God gave the Spirit not in measure, but in fullness unto him. He is
more excellent, not only as a Prophet, but in other respects; 1. As the Son of
God. 2. As Heir of all things. 3. As he by whom the Worlds were made. 4. As he
is the brightness of his Fathers Glory, and the express Image of his Person.
5. As upholding all things with the word of his Power. 6. As by himself purging
our Sins. 7. As set down at the right hand of the Majesty on high. There is not
the least of these (though all be very great) but therein he far excels the
Prophets. This might be added, that he spoke by him; 1. As by his Son, so did
he not by any of the Prophets. 2. In the last Days, after which he will speak
no more to mortal Men, neither will there be any need.

. 11. The second Proposition is, That Christ is more excellent then the Angels,
[Being made so much better then the Angels,] This might be a conclusion of the
former words, but that in them Christ is compared with the Prophets. Therefore
we will consider it as a distinct Proposition concerning Christ, as compared
with the Angels. And if he be more excellent then them, he must needs be more
excellent then the Prophets. He is more excellent then the Angels in the seven
sormer Respects; but the Divine Apostle seems to insist principally upon the
last, as will appear by that which follows. The occasion of this Discourse may
be this, because the Jews or Hebrews might say, That though Christ was more
excellent then the Prophets; yet he was inferior to the Angels, by whom the
Law was given, and who spoke to the Fathers and the Prophets: so that they were
Prophets, and God spoke by them; and it is not like that Jesus of Nazareth was
above them, or equal with them. This is the more probable, because it follows,
If the Word spoke by Angels, etc. Chap. 2. 2. Which implys, that some part of
the Old Testament, especially the Law, was declared by Angels: For the Law was
ordained by Angels in the hand of a Mediator, Gal. 3. 19. The Revelation was
signified to John by an Angel of Christ, Revel. 1. 1. And this Angel calls
himself a Prophet: For he had the Testimony of Jesus, which was the Spirit of
Prophecy, and was one of the Brethren the Prophets, Revel. 19. 10, and 22, 9.
So that some part of the New Testament was delivered by Angels. Now to take
away this conceit of the excellency of Angels above Christ; he not only
affirms, that Christ is equal with, but above the Angels; and not only affirms
it, but ptoves it. His first argument in form is this, He that has inherited a
more excellent Name then Angels, is more excellent then the Angels; but Christ
has inherited a more excellent Name; therefore he is more excellent.

. 12. Let Us first consider the terms of the Major, then the connection of those
terms, or the Consequence. The terms are Angels Name, a Name by Inheritance:
1. Angels are Spirits, or spiritual Substances, the most noble and excellent
Creatures God made: and because Angels are good or bad, who being made good,
became bad by their own folly; here the Apostle understands the holy, loyal,
and obedient Angels, who never sinned against God. They are called Angels by
reason of their Office and employment, not of their nature. The Word signifies
Messengers, because they are God's Messengers sent by him, not only to do, but
declare his Will. Angelus is the same that Malaach, N^^tius, Lega^us; and those
names agree to their Prophetical Office. 2. These Angels have a Name, but
Christ a more excellent Name. By Name in this place is not signified a bare
Title, but the Dignity and Power of Christ; and a more excellent Name, as a
more excellent Dignity and Power. Thus the word [Name] is used, Phil. 2. 9.
Ephesians. 1. 21. For Fame, Glory, Dignity, it is signified by [Name] in the Old
Testament, and in many other Authors, and in several Languages. That the
Apostle understands thus for a Title, not only of Dignity, but Power inherent
in the person whose Titlo it is, may easily appear from what follows. 3. This
more excellent Name Christ has by Inheritance, it is Hereditary, and he is
invested with it, and actually possessed of it to enjoy it for ever. Yet the
word in the Greek signifies sometimes only to acquire, possess, enjoy, and so
does Iarash in Hebrew. The Connection is clear, for whosoever has greater
dignity and power then another, and that justly, must needs be more excellent.
For excellency is a proper necessary consequence of Power.

. 13. For to which of the Angels said he at any time, Thou art my Son, this day
have I begotten thee? And again, I will be to him a Father, and he shall be to
me a Son.] By these words he proves that Christ has or does inherit a more
excellent Name, which is the minor. 1. This is a proof by an inartificial
argument or testimony, which depends upon the authority of the Person
testifying. 2. The party testifying is God; therefore the authority is Divine,
and without exception, especially to the Hebrews, who acknowledged the Old
Testament to be from God, and infallible. 3. He produces two places out of the
Old Testament. 4. He alleges both, especially the first by way of
interogation, affirmative, which is a more vehement Negation. For, to which of
the Angels said he? that is, to none; and he challenges the Hebrews, or any
other, to prove that God said so to any Angel. The first Testimony we find
Psalm. 2. 7. which must first be examined: The words are used by the Apostle to
prove the Resurrection of Christ, Act. 13. 33. and his Priest^ ^ood, Chap. 5.
5, 1. By the first place Psalm. 2. we understand that upon the Resurrection,
after the time of his Humiliation was past, he was made a King; and by the
second, Hebr. 5. 5. he was made and created a Priest. 2. That both are to be
understood of Christ, and of Christ raised up from death. 3. That upon this
Resurrection Christ was constituted King and Priest universal and supreme in
Heaven and Earth. Therefore he said after his Re^^rrection, and before his
Ascension, All Power is given unto me in Heaven and i^ Earth, Matthew. 28. 18.
Therefore [this day] is not Eternity, nor are the words to be understood of his
eternal Generation, as some of the Ancients expounded them; but it is the day of
Resurrection, when he laid aside the Form of a Servant; and that Work, which in
that Form he must accomplish, was finished. This place truly understood, does
plainly inform us, that as none of the Angels did so humble themselves as he
did, to do so great and glorious a Service as he performed; so none of them
were rewarded with the honor and power of an universal Kingdom and Priesthood
as he was: He had a better Name, a higher place, and a greater power; for the
Regal power he gave him was such, that the very Angels were subject unto him,
as to their Lord and Sovereign. The second place alleged we find 2 Samuel 7. 14,
16. and the words of that former History contracted a C^ron. 22. 10. in this
manner, The Lord speaking of a Son who should succeed him, faith, He shall
build an House for my Name, and he shall be my Son, and I will be his Father,
and I will establish the Throne of his Kingdom over Israel for ever. To
understand this passage of Scripture, you must consider,

1. That the words are to be understood of Solomon; for David intending to
build a House and Temple to God, was certified by Natha^ from the Lord, that he
should not build Him an House; but Solomon his Son, who should sit in his
Throne after him, should undertake and finish that Work.

2 That Solomon was but a Type of Christ, and that in three things: 1. In
building God's House. 2. In being a King. And 3. In the perpetuation of his
Kingdom.

3. You must know, that when any words are spoken of a Type, as a Type, they
are to be understood of the Antitype, and that principally, to agree more
exactly to the A^^^-type. For here, to build God a spiritual House, and to
succeed David as an everlasting King, did agree fully to Christ, not to Solomon.

4. The words understood both of the Type and the Antitype make but one
literal sense: For that I call the literal sense which is intended by the
Spirit. And this is the excellency of the Scripture, that by the same word it
signifies not only one but several things, and tha^ as the words signify
things immediately, at first hand, so these things signify other things-things
past, or present, or things to come: For such was the wonderful Wisdom of God,
that he ordered things of old so, that they plainly shadowed out things to
come, and so did teach Mysteries not only by words but things, and many things
by one word.

5. Christ and his Apostles do sometimes so quote the words of the Old
Testament, that they only Point at the place, and refer the hearer to it,
where he may read more than he hears, and the whole when a part only is spoken.

6. This place joined with the former does plainly tell us, that to be a Son,
is to be a King universal over the Church for ever; and this is the more
excellent Name and hereditary Power given to Christ, never given to the Angels:
David himself by these words understood, that God therein promised the Mess^as
and his eternal Savior, who was afterward called the Son of David, and his
Throne and Kingdom the Throne and Kingdom of David. By Son in both places is
meant, 1. Not a Servant. 2. Not any kind of Son, but the firstborn. 3. Not the
firstborn of any but of a King. 4. Not the firstborn of any King, but of God
as universal and Supreme King; for his Son, this Son, must be Heir and Lord of
all.

. 14 Ver. 6. And again, when he brings in the first-begotten, etc.] These
words are taken out of Psalm. 97. and are found in the Septuagint, Deuteronomy. 32. 43.
They are brought to prove the excellent Name of Christ above the Angels,
affirmed in the Minor of the Apostle's Argument. Expositors differ in the
manner of bringing in these words upon the former, but agree in the matter. The
difference is twofold: 1. About the Adverbs (...). 2. The bringing of Christ
into the World, whether it was his Incarnation (as some affirm), or his coming
to Judgment, as others. For the Adverbe (...) turned again, some make it only
a word of Connection of these words with the former, as an Addition of a third
Proof of the Minor out of a third place. His first was from Psalm. 2. The second
from 2 Samuel 7. which is added to the former in this manner [And again]. The
third is this, from Psalm. 97. So that the word here signifies only an Addition
of a third Proof to the two former: Thus Beza, Trimellius, Vatablus, the
Tigurines, Zurick, Erasmus, Sasbout, and our English Translators understand it.
Others think this too harsh a Transposition, and join it with the Verb
[bringeth in]; when he brings again, or a second time, the first-begotten into
the World; thus the Vulgar, a Lapide, Ribera, Mr. Mede. The former is very
probable; the latter cannot be demonstrated to be intended, but gives occasion
of the second doubt, which had been none if they had not fallen upon this
Criticism: For it gives occasion to doubt what coming of Christ into the World
is here to be understood, whether his Incarnation, or R^surrection, or last
Judgment; Some understand the first, some the second, some the last. Two things
persuade us to believe it of that second coming; 1. Because the first proof,
out of Psalm. 2. speaks of the bringing of Christ into the World as King, I have
s^t my King upon my holy Hill of Zion; for upon his Resurrection he was made
King by Decree and Patent, according to those words, I will declare the Decree.
The second place 2 Samuel 7. speaks of him as King, firstborn, and Lord of all.
2. The 97. Psalm does not speak of his coming to Judgment, but 1. Of his
Exaltation above all Gods, whether Men or Angels, For thou Lord art high above
all the Earth, thou art exalted far above all Gods, Ver. 9. 2. Of his Laws, and
the Promulgation of them. These Laws are given to Jews to Heathens, to Angels,
with threatenings of Punishment, and promises of Reward. There is not a word of
the Summons, Appearance, Sentence, Execution, and final Retribution of eternal
Rewards and Punishments. But these things wherein some differ are not so
material as that wherein they all agree, which is, The Command of God to all
the Angels to worship Christ.

Let all the Angels of God worship him,] In Psalm. 97. 7. Worship him all yo
Gods.] These seem to di^^es much: But here you must take notice, that the
Apostle uses the words of the Septuagint, and, that which is strange, the
words of the Septuagint as used in Deuteronomy. 32. 43. ^ather than those we read
Psalm. 97. 7. The words of the Psalm are translated by Hi^rom, Prat^^s^s,
Ju^ius, Vi^tublus, our Translators, [Worship him all yo Gods.] By Pagnin^, the
Tigurine, the Vulgar, and the Septuagint, Worship him all his Angels. And it is
certain, that the Greek Translators either followed an Hebrew Copy different
from ours, or else they understood the word [Malachin] Angels, and expressed it
in their Version. For that Translation is not wording, but rather a Paraphrase,
and many times gives the sense; and sometimes where they are most blamed, as
forsaking the Original, they are most excellent, and give greatest light, as
the Chalde^ Paraphrast many times does. But not to insist upon the
Translations, nor upon the word Elohin^, which is said to signify God, Angels,
Princes, excellent men, Idols: The words of the Apostle following the
Septuagint are plain; and inform us. 1. That the 97. Psalm is to be understood
of Christ, as King and Lord Redeemet reigning in glory. 2. That God by this
Command and Edict subjected all his Angels to Christ. 3. That he did this upon
the Resurrection and Exaltation of Christ, when he raised him up from the dead,
and set him at his own right hand in the heavenly places, far above all
principalities, and powers, and might, and dominion, and every name that is
named not only in this World, but that which is to come, Ephesians. 1. 20, 21. For
1 Pet. 4. 22.
Christ is gone in^o Heaven, and is at the right hand of God: Angels, and
Authorities, and Powers, being made subject unto him. 4. That not only some
but all the Angels of God are subject to him; for all the Angels must worship
him, and acknowledge him to be their Lord. 5. Therefore Christ has obtained a
more excellent Name, a Name above every Name, Phil 2. 9. And this is not only
a Name of Dignity, in respect whereof the Angels must honor him, but of
Subjection to his Power, by which he might command them as his Subjects and
Servants to obey him.

. 15. Ver. 7. And of the Angels he says, Who makes his Angels Spirits, and
his Ministers a flame of fire,] These words may be referred either to the
Context, Antecedent, or Consequent. If to the Antecedent, they seem to be a new
Argument to this purpose; If Christ be a Son, and Lord of all, even of Angels,
and Angels but his Legates and Servants then Christ is more excellent than
Angels. If they refer to the Context following, then the Apostle argues in this
manner: If Angels be but Servants, and Christ an everlasting King, then Christ
is more excellent than Angels; but they are but Servants, and he an everlasting
King; therefore he is more excellent. There can be no doubt of the Major. The
Minor or Assumption has two parts, 1. That the Angels are Servants. 2. Christ,
an everlasting King; he proves both, and out of the Psalms, out of which are
taken all the proofs except one in this Chapter, and the most material proofs,
whereon he principally insists thorough out the first 9. Chapters of this
Epistle. This first part, that Angels are but Servants, he confirms out of
Psalm. 104. 4. 1. There is little, or in effect no difference in the
Translation, nor much in the Exposition of the words; for most do understand
the place of Angels, as spiritual and immortal Substances, though some very few
interpret it of the Winds, and the fire, which must needs be untrue, except we
will make the Apostle's Argument invalid, 2. Yet there is some difference about
the manner of Allegation, in these words, And of the Angels he says; for the
Original seems to say, that these words were spoken of the Angels, not to the
Angels; So Vatablus, Jumus, Tremelius, the Tigurines, Zanck Divines, and out
Translators turn it. The Vulgar reads it [ad Angelos] to the Angels; yet a
Lapide expounds the words [of the Angels], and thinks that the Vulgar follows
the Hebrew, wherein (...) is sometime taken for (...), ad for super, to for of.
And they of Zanck conceive there is an Enallage of (...) for (...): Yet
Heinsius understands it in another manner, and thinks it may well be translated
[ad Angelos], and the sense is, [Quod ad Angelos spectat,] As for the Angels he
says; and this is likely to be true. Yet howsoever, the words of the Psalmist
are not spoken to, but of the Angels. 2. Its added [he saith], in the Greek
[(...)] says, without any expression who says, whether God, or the Psalmist,
or God's Spirit by the Psalmist; or it may be understood, yet to the same
purpose, that the Scripture says. The words are the words 1. Of the Scripture.
2. Of the Psalmist. 3. Of the Spirit, who is God. But to the words themselves;
1. The Subject of them is the Angels. 2. The Scope is, to prove that they are
inferior to Christ, because Servants. 3. They teach us, 1. The Nature. 2. The
Place or Office of Angels. 3. That God made them such for Nature, such for
Office. First, For their Nature, they are Spirits, and a flame of sire; for
Office, Angels and Ministers. 1. They are Spirits; that is, spiritual and
intellectual Creatures: For whereas many think, because Ruack in Hebrew; and
(...) in Greek signify sometimes the Winds; and that here the Angels are
compared to the Winds for swiftness, it is poor: For the word signifies, the
Soul of Man, the Affections and Operations, and the Mind; it signifies also,
Angels both good and bad, as they are spiritual and intellectual Substances. 2.
They are a flame of fire, or flaming fire; that is, Seraphims, bright,
glorious, and excellent Creatures: They are called Cherubims and Seraphims,
which are Spirits near unto the Throne of God, ever in his presence, like
Princes tending upon his Majesty, ready ever to do him Service, and glorify
him. 1. God makes them, and gives them an excellent Being, and qualifies them,
and makes them fit to be his Servants. 2. He makes them Servants and Officers,
to do him high and glorious Service. 1. They must be Angels, to know and
declare his Will to those to whom he sends them. 2. They must be Ministers, to
do and execute his Will. He made them, both their excellent Nature, and their
Office, and both from him. Here it might be noted, that the Angels are not any
kind of Servants, but such as are in eminent place, as Officers be; yet
Officers are but Servants, and not Lords. The Sum of all is, that Angels,
though excellent Creatures, are but Servants and Ministers; and this the
Apostle intended out of these words to prove.

. 16. Ver. 8, 9. But unto the Son he says, Thy Throne, O God, etc.] Where we
must consider, 1. The Connection. 2. The Translation. 3. The principal sense. 4.
The Scope of the Apostle.

1. The Connection is not copulative but discretive, and implies an opposition
and an eminency: For Christ is here opposed to the Angels, as Servants and
Subjects are to Sovereigns, as invested with a super-eminent Dignity and Power;
therefore the particle o is well translated but.

2. The Translation is, 1. Of the words of Allegation. 2. Of the words alleged.

First, Of the words of Allegation, which may be translated, either as they are
here read, [To the Son he says,] or, as the former [of the Son he saith]; or,
[as for the Son he saith]. He, that is, God, or the Psalmist, or the Scripture,
or the Spirit by the Psalmist in the Scripture, says thus of the Son.

Secondly, Of the words alleged, the Translation is somewhat doubtful; for
they may be turned, Thy Throne, O God, as they are commonly translated; or, Thy
Throne is God, as Genebrard ieforms us; some Rabbis understand it, or thy
Throne of God; and every one of these may be true.

3. The genuine sense is this, that the Power of Christ is from God a royal and
divine Power; for his Kingdom was not of this World, but an heavenly Kingdom,
of universal and eternal continuance, and of a perfect constitution and
administration: For because that he loved Righteousness and hated Iniquity, so
far as to be righteous and holy, not only in life but death, and by his death
to expiate the sin of Man, and to sanctify all that believe in him for ever;
therefore God, even his God, anointed him, that is, exalted him above all Kings
and Prophets, even above the Angels. By Oil of gladness, is meant Oil that
makes glad, which here signifies not only the gifts but the power of the holy
Spirit; and to be anointed with this Oil, is not only to receive gifts and
ability, but power and authority spiritual and divine, and the same
super-eminent above all power communicated to any other. And this transcendent
power was given him for his great and glorious Service, in the work of
Redemption, by his Death and Sufferings.

4. The Scope of the Apostle is, to prove that Christ is more excellent than
the Angels, and the reason is strong; they are but Messengers, Ministers,
Servants: God never made any of them an universal and eternal King, but such he
has made Christ. The Apostle implies that the 45. Psalm speaks of Christ.

. 17. Ver. 10, 11, 12. And thou Lord in the beginning have laid the Foundation
of the Earth, etc.] How these words agree with the Scope of the Apostle, so as
to prove Christ to be more excellent than the Angels is difficult to
understand: They are taken out Psalm. 102. The whole Psalm is a Prayer directed
to God Redeemer by Christ; the matter of the Petition is, to hasten the coming
of Christ, and his glorious Kingdom, the repair of the Church and the
enlargement of it to all Nations, that the People may be gathered together, and
the Kingdoms, to serve the Lord; that is, the Lord Christ; and that his Saints
being mortal may be changed, and inherit eternal life, by that Lord Christ, who
shall destroy all Enemies, consume the World with fire, and eternally glorify
the Saints. The Propositions or divine Axioms contained in these words are, 1.
That Christ, being Jehovah, made the World. 2. That Heaven and Earth, created
by him, are mutable, and shall be changed by him. 3. That he is immutable, and
his Kingdom everlasting. 4. That his Subjects and Servants, though mortal,
shall enjoy eternal peace and happiness by him. In all these things Christ is
far above the Angels, especially in this, that he being Creator of the World
shall be an everlasting King, of an everlasting and unchangeable Kingdom: Yet
this is so to be understood, that it does not agree to Christ as the Word
alone, because as the Word alone he is not Redeemer; nor to Christ as Flesh or
Man alone, for as such he could not create the World; but it agrees unto him as
the Word made Flesh, and exalted at the right hand of God. This may be
considered, either as a distinct proof from the former, or a confirmation of
the same, in respect of his eternal Throne and Kingdom. The Socinian upon this
place 1. Denies Christ to be the Creator of the World, and so to be God. 2.
Affirms, that the intention of the Apostle is, to prove Christ more excellent
than the Angels, only by one thing in the words; and that is, by his secondary
power to change Heaven and Earth, which power God never gave unto the Angels.
And his design in all this was to cloud this place, which so plainly affirms
the Deity and immutable Being of Christ. 1. That Christ is the Creator of the
World, has been clear from Joh. 1. 2, 3. from the second Verse of this
Chapter, from Coloss. 1. 16. For Christ is not merely Man as they affirm, but
the Word by which all things were made, which in fullness of time was made
flesh. 2. That he that made the World is the same that shall change it, and
shall abide the same for ever: For to create the World, to change it, to remain
for ever, are all affirmed of one Person, and if that Person be Christ, then
all, not only one of them, agree unto him. This Erasmus Johannes did very well
observe in his dispute with Socinus concerning some kind of existence which
Christ must needs have before the Incarnation. Socinus in his Answer does
miserably shift, and offers plain violence to the place; Volkelius does the
like. Crellius, Volkelius, Socinus, make this the Scope of the Apostle in this
first Chapter, to demonstrate that Christ is more excellent than the Angels
only in such things as he received as Man from God after his Death and
Resurrection. But as you heard before, his intent is to prove, 1. That Christ
is more excellent than the Prophets. 2. Than the Angels. And as he was more
excellent than the Prophets, not only as sitting at the right hand of God, but
as creating the World, and being the brightness of his Father's Glory, and the
express Image of his Person; so he was more excellent than Angels, not only as
set at the right hand of God, but as creating the World. It was an hard thing,
and is still, to understand the Mystery of the Incarnation. That the eternal
Word and Wisdom of God, by which he created the World, should be made Flesh,
and possess, dwell in, and be united to the Nature of Man, is plain Scripture:
but how he does possess it, dwell in it, and is united to it, so as he never
possessed, or dwelt in, or was united unto any other Man or Angel; is far above
our reach and capacity. Believe, that it is so, we must, we may, we are bound
unto it; it is clear, certain, and the Word of God expresses it plainly:
Understand the manner how it is, we cannot. And how should we? seeing we are so
ignorant how the Soul and Body are united. In this Case, as in many other, Non
vivacitas intelligendi, sed simplicitas credendi, not our evident Knowledge, but
our Faith must save us. But it is a wickedness, which God will punish, to deny
that which God does plainly affirm, because we cannot fully comprehend it.

. 18. Ver. 13. 14. But to which of the Angels said he at any time, etc.] These
words may be understood to be a Conclusion of the former premises, or a new
Argument: If a Conclusion, then we must conceive the premises and the former
discourse to amount to this, that God set Christ at his right hand and not the
Angels; and here he briefly sums up the whole, and inferrs, therefore Christ is
above the Angels. Yet they rather seem to contain a new another Argument taken
from the Psalmist, Psalm. 110. The Lord said unto my Lord, Sit thou on my right
hand, etc.] 1. To sit at the right hand of God is not only to be for ever
happy and blessed, by enjoying those pleasures which are at God's right hand
for evermore, nor only to be advanced to the highest place of honor and
dignity next unto God, but to be invested with a supreme and universal Power
above all Men and Angels, and by the same actually to reign; for, with the
Apostle, to sit at the right hand of God is to reign, 1 Cor. 15. 25. This is to
be Administrator-general, as Lawgiver and Judge in that spiritual Kingdom,
whereby God orders sinful Man unto eternal Glory: This agrees to him as the
Word made Flesh, raised from the dead, and ascended into Heaven. 2. This Glory,
Dignity, and Power, was given to Christ as Man, yet united to the Word; For the
Lord said unto my Lord, that is, David's Lord, who yet according to the Flesh
was David's Son; who, though Flesh, was far greater after his Humiliation than
his Father David, not only as the Word, and the same Supreme Lord with the
Father, but as Flesh and Man. The Chaldee turns it [to his Word], the Lord said
to his Word, yet to his Word made Flesh. 3. The party who advanced him to his
right hand was God; for it was God who gave him a Name above all Names, none
else could give it. 4. He gave it him by his Word and Edict: For [he said]. In
this word we have the Patent or Commission of Christ, in which he signifies his
Will was, that he should be Lord and King, and with the word gives him the
Power, so that his Title is good and valid, and stands firm and inviolable. 5.
The date of this Reign is expressed in those words, until his Enemies be made
his Footstool; that is, till the Resurrection and final Glorification of all
his Saints. This being the meaning of the words, the Apostle insists chiefly
upon that part of the Text [said to my Lord], as though he should say, 1. You
confess that Psalm to be part of the holy Scripture revealed from Heaven. 2.
That the words are not to be understood of Angels, but the Messiah. 3. That in
the first words of that Psalm God speaks to some certain Person to whom he
gives Power to reign. 4. He did not by those words give Power unto the Angels,
but to Christ; thence he argues, If God gave this Power to Christ, and never to
any of the Angels did the like, then Christ is more excellent than the Angels,
and the Angels inferior to Christ; But this was said, this power was given to
Christ and not to the Angels; therefore he is more excellent. This Argument is
stronger and more convictive, because it is negative and exclusive; for they
might have said, that though God did advance and honor Christ, and gave him an
everlasting Kingdom, yet he might do the like to some of the Angels. To prevent
this, he out of the Text proves that God said this to Christ, and there is no
mention there nor in any part of the Scripture of God's advancing any of them
to his right hand. And that his Argument might be more forcing, he proposes it
interrogatively, To which of the Angels said he at any time? That is, He said
not any such thing at any time to any of the Angels: If he did, he challenges
them to prove or produce the place, which they could never do.

. 19. Ver. 14. Are they not all ministering Spirits, etc.] These words may be
considered absolutely in themselves, or relatively, as conducing unto the main
Conclusion intended by the Apostle. The subject of them are Angels, of whom
something here is affirmed: The manner of Expression is Rhetorical, by way of
Interrogation: The Answer employed is affirmative; for they say, that negative
Interrogations are more vehement Affirmations. The Proposition in general is,
That all the Angels are ministering Spirits, sent forth to minister for them,
who shall be Heirs of Salvation. The parts infolded in the general or the
whole, are many:

1. They are Spirits. 2. Ministering Spirits. 3. Sent forth to minister. 4. The
Minister for the Heirs of Salvation. 5. They are all such.


1. They are Spirits that is incorporeal, incorruptible, intellectual, active
substances; the most noble and excellent Creatures God made.

2. They are ministering Spirits; To be Ministers is, 1. To be Servants in
general. 2. To be Officers, and employed either in sacred or civil Service;
therefore the word does signify Priests or Magistrates. Yet these are Ministers
or Servants in the Court of Heaven under God the Supreme Lord of all. 3. They
are sent forth; for as they have their Office, so they have their Employment,
they are sent forth to Minister. They do not go of their own head, but have
their work designed by God, and receive both Direction and Command from him. 4.
The parties for whose good the Minister are, the converted Believers, who are
designed Heirs of Salvation and eternal Glory. For though they be God's
Servants, yet they serve for the good of his Children, and this is their
principal work, and their happiness is the end of their Service. 5. They are
all and every one both Servants, and also sent forth for this Service, the
greatest is not exempted. This is the absolute consideration of the words.

The relative, as they referr unto the scope of the Apostle, is to prove that
Christ is more excellent, and they inferior to Christ. The force of the
argument lies chiefly in this, 1. That they are Ministers and Servants. 2. That
all of them, none excepted, are such. For all and every of them be Ministers,
not Lords and Kings, then they are inferior to Christ. Nay, they all, and every
one of them are subject to Christ, as the Word from the Creation; and after
Christ, as the word incarnate was set at the right hand of God, they all were
his Servants, commanded and sent by him for the promoting of the Salvation of
his redeemed ones believing on him. So that they are not only Servants, but his
Servants: this Doctrine informs us, 1. Of the excellency of Christ, advanced in
our Nature above the Angels. 2. Of the benefit of Believers, they are Heirs of
Salvation; and the Angels, the heavenly Spirits must take a special care of
them. 3. Of our Duty. 1. To believe that we may be Heirs of Salvation, and
enjoy the guardance, guidance and protection. 2. To be humble Servants unto
God, to do good to others; especially the Household of Faith, seeing Angels,
though excellent, are humble Servants to Christ for our good.

This principal matters in this Chapter are several. The first is, concerning
the excellency of the Scriptures, wherein God speaks by Prophets, and by his
own Son. 2. The excellency of Christ in respect of the Prophets and the Angels.
3. The Nature and Ministry of Angels. The Use of this Doctrine follows in the
beginning of the next Chapter.

CHAP. II. Ver. 1.
. 1. THis Chapter is an Exhortation to the constant Profession of the Doctrine
of the Gospel. These words may be considered, 1. In that Connection with, and
dependence upon the former. 2. In themselves. The Connection and Dependence is
signified by the illative therefore, which implys, that the proposition in the
first verse is a conclusion inferred from some premises in the former Chapter,
wherein the Apostle had not only affirmed and proved, that Christ was a Prophet
more excellent then the former Prophets, but the Angels. And if he was so, then
it follows he must needs be heard, and his Doctrine observed, which is the
substance of the first verse. For seeing God speaks by the Prophets, and more
excellently by Christ; therefore Prophets, much more Christ, are to be heard.

. 2. This is a Connection: The words themselves we must consider, First, As an
Exhortation, And secondly, in the same: 1. The duty exhorted unto. 2. The
reasons whereby the performance is urged. An exhortation is reducible to a
Rhetoric, and proper to a deliberative Theme, according to Aristotle and
Tully', whose Rules are not merely Rhetorical, but Political, and are
miscellaneous. It presupposes the party exhorted to know, and remember the
thing exhorted unto, and a persuasion that it is good; especially honest and
just. The end of it is to move, inslame, and stir up the Will and Heart of the
Auditor to performance. This upon the by; To proceed, we have, 1. The matter of
the Exhortation, or the Duty exhorted unto. For the subject of divine
Exhortations, is some duty possible by the power of Grace to be performed. Duty
presupposes a Command of God, upon which follows an obligation to performance;
and a duty is nothing else; and is a duty, whether performed or not. The duty
is affirmative or negative. So that in the words we have not only an
exhortation, but a dehortation too; yet to speak properly, they are but
employed: For the Apostle signifies rather that the matter is a duty, then
exhorts unto it. The affirmative is to give the more earnest heed to the things
heard, the negative not to let them slip; yet the former must be done, lest the
latter, which is a Sin, should follow. The matter of the duty, is, the things
heard, that is, the Doctrine of Christ, the great Prophet and his Apostles as
made known and heard by them. The act is attention, earnest attention; the more
earnest attention, because spoken by Christ, more excellent then the Prophets,
then the Angels. This attention is not only a diligent consideration of the
things heard, but a belief and constant profession joined with practice, and
presupposes the knowledge of them. The negative, which upon the neglect of the
affirmative, will follow, is, not to let them slip. Thus it is translated in our
English, but with diverse Latin Interpreters it is, to leak, or flow out or
aside. And here Expositors compare the Soul unto a broken Cistern or
torn-Vessel, which will not keep any liquid substance powered into it. In this
sense to let slip, seems to be nothing else then to forget: But the Sytiack
turns it so, lest we fall off or from our profession. The Septuagint use the
Apostles word, Prove. 3. 21. where the Hebrew word is (...) Luz, which signifies
not only in that Language, but in the Chaldee, to depart, go back, decline from
a thing. Therefore here the sin we must take heed of, is, not only to forget
the Doctrine of Christ, but to fall from the Faith and Profession of it. And
the reason, why they must be so careful, is, because there was great danger,
and many temptations, which would prove the more effectual against the
careless and the negligent. In a word, the duty is upon most dillgent
attention, constantly to believe and profess the Doctrine of Christ, and never
to recede or fall from it. Thus to do is our duty; there is a necessity of
precept, God's Command binds us, we ought and the reason is, because the
Doctrine we have heard is the Doctrine of Christ, the Doctrine of God made Man.
And it was God's Command to hear him the great Prophet, upon peril of total
Destruction. This duty is reducible to the first Commandment, evangelically
understood; and not to hear, believe, profess the Doctrine of God Redeemer by
Christ, is a grievous sin there forbidden. As the duty presupposes the
Command, so the Command presupposes that God spoke by his Son more excellent
then the Angels and that they had heard his Doctrine. This may be the Use or
Application of the Doctrine delivered and confirmed in the former Chapter: And
the Use after the present mode of preaching is an Instruction, which virtually
includes an exhortation with a dehortation.

. 3. Ver. 2, 3, 4. The reason which may persuade, and motive which may incline
us, to performance of the duty both affirmative and negative, follows. And it
is twofold, 1. From the grievous unavoidable punishment, to which upon
nonperformance we shall be liable, and in the end suffer. 2. From divine
Ordination. The first we read, ver. 2, 3, 4. where we may observe,

1. A punishment

grievous

unavoidable.

2. The cause of it

1. There can be no Punishment, where there is no Law transgressed. For where
there is the Law, there is no Transgression, Romans 4. 19. And where no
transgression or sin, there is no ^^ath or punishment. For the wages or desert
of Sin is Death, Romans 6. 23. Punishment therefore is some evil determined and
threatened in the Law, by the Lawgiver against the Transgressou^ as due unto
him upon the transgression. It Is opposed properly to a reward promised, not to
a benefit, which is no reward. This punishment is grievous, and the
grievousness is employed in a Comparison. For if the Transgressors of the Law,
then the Transgressors of the Gospel shall be grievously punished; and if the
former, much more the latter: if their punishment was grievous, much more
grievous shall ours be. It Is expressed in two words in the Original, in three
in our translation, a just recompense of reward; yet according to the Greek,
it is a just retribution or rendering of wages; that is, a punishment of Death,
which they deserved, and was justly due unto them. To deserve and to be ^able
to punishment, is a consequent and moral effect of transgression, by virtue of
the Law: to determine this punishment is an act of the Lawgiver; to infact it
is an act of the Judge, which infliction is a rendering of some evil as due, to
the party suffering as deserving it. But as it is first grievous, so it is
unavoidable. This is expressed, 1. In that they under the Law receved it. 2. In
that we under the Gospel cannot escape it. How shall we escape?

. 4. The cause of this grievous unavoidable punishment is some sin, which is
here expressed: And to understand this more fully and distinctly, let us
consider, 1. The sin and punishment of transgressors under the Law. 2. The sin
and punishment of the transgressors under the Gospel. 3. The force of the
reason. The words of the second verse informs us, 1. Of the sin. 2. The
punishment of former Offenders. 1. The sin is the transgression of the word
spoken by Angels. 2. The punishment was the destruction of the Offenders. In
the Text, we have, 1. A Law, 2. The transgression of this Law. 3. The
punishment of the transgressors. 4. The efficacy of the Law in this
punishment. If we reduce it to Propositions, they are these: 1. That a word was
spoken by Angels. 2. This word was disobeyed. 3. The disodient suffered condign
punishment. 4. By this punishment the Law was made firm and valid. In the first
we have, 1. A word. 2. The the same spoken. 3. The same spoken by Angels. 1. By
word is no doubt understood a Law consisting of precepts, prohibitions,
promises, threats or comminations, which are principally here understood as a
part of the Law. Some think this Law to be the Decalogue: yet this cannot be
here intended as it stands alone separated from the Judicials and Ceremonials,
wherein we find many fearful penal Statutes and Comminations. So that by Word
is understood the whole body and systeme of those Laws God gave by Moses to
Israel; neither let any wonder, that (...) should signify a Word and a Law. For
in Hebrew, Chaldee, and Arabic, the same verbes, which signify to speak,
signify to govern; and the same Nouns which signify words, signify Commands
and Laws. 2. This word was spoken, that is, this Law was published and
promulgated. For, the matter of the Law, the mind and will of the Lawgiver,
the declaration of both, do all concur to constitute the essence of a Law. 3.
The word and Law was spoken and declared by Angels, though the matter and the
binding decree was from God, and neither of them from the Angels, who were used
by God in the promulgation. Though God in a more special manner is said to have
uttered and written the ten Commandments or Decalogue; yet in giving of the
whole Systeme of the Law, he used the ministry of Angels. For they received the
Law by the disposition of Angels, Acts 7. 53. And it was ordained by Angels in
the hand of a Mediator, Gal. 3. 19. where by Law cannot be meant the Decalogue
alone, as appears by the context, antecedent and consequent. And God, Angels,
Moses, did all concur as one efficient of the promulgation before it could be
complete. Therefore there is no need with H^insius to understand by Angels, the
Prophets, as Angels, that is, Messengers of God. Hence appears the vanity and
error of Crellius. For, he does suppose and take for granted, that if the Law
was spoken and published by Angels, then it was not published by God, or the
Son of God in the person of the Diety. For by this he might argue against the
express words of the Apostle, Chap. 1. 1. that because the Old Testament, and
the Doctrine thereof, was published and declared by the Prophets; therefore it
was not published, declared, and spoken by God; whereas it is expressly said, God
spoke by the Prophets to the Fathers.

2. He argues to this purpose, that if the Law was in proper sense delivered by
God, or the Son in the person of the Deity, then it would follow that the
Apostle's argument to prove the Gospel above the Law were not good; for if the
Law was published by God, or the Son in the person of the Deity, the Law must
be more excellent then the Gospel. But first, He takes the Law only for the
Decalogue, which should not be done. 2. He mistakes the Apostle's comparison
and argument: For the comparison is not in respect of him that spoke, but of
those by whom he spoke. The Old and New Testament do not differ in this, that
God does speak and declare them: For both are the Word of God, both were spoken
by God, in which respect they are equal and the same. If God had not spoken in
both, both had not been the Word of God: But the difference is in respect of
those by whom he spoke. For of old he spoke by the Prophets, in the last days
he spoke by his Son, and the Son is more excellent then the Prophets; for here
is the inequality and the excellency of the Gospel above the Law spoken by
Angels and Prophets, not by the glorious Son of God. This is the first
Proposition concerning the Law given.

. 5. The second proposition is, that this Law was transgressed and disobeyed.
The sin, which was the cause of the punishment, is expressed by two words,
Transgression and Disobedience. By these words we must not understand any kind
of sin; as of ignorance, or infirmity, or a sin upon surprizal, or in petty
matters; for the best of the Saints and Prophets under the Law sinned in this
manner. But by them is understood some more heinous sins; as Idolatry,
Blasphemy, and such like; or rebellion, or apostasy, or an habitual and
continued course of Sin joined with contempt of the Law. For these were
capital, and capitally punished.

The third Proposition concerning the Punishment you heard before. The fourth
is concerning the Efficacy of the Law, It was steadfast. A Law should be armed
with power and coactive force, otherwise it cannot be executed; and without
Execution, which is said to be the life of the Law, it is but words, and can
neither be a sufficient ground of hope in the Promises, or fear in the
Comminations: When the Punishments threatened are inflicted, it strikes a
greater Terror. In this respect the Law proved firm and steadfast, when the
Offenders were punished according to their Transgressions; and by suffering the
penalties, they knew that the word spoken by Angels was not vain, but valid and
effectual. There is a threefold stedfastness or firmness of a Law; the first
is in respect of the unalterable Will of the Lawgiver; the second in respect
of the Execution; the third in respect of the Party to whom its given, who
firmly and certainly believes it: The first is supposed; the second is meant,
and is a great cause of the third: The Emphasis is in the first words [If the
word spoken by Angels]; that is, the word spoken by Angels, and not by the Son,
proved firm and valid, and was made and manifested to be such by the punishment
of the Transgressors, and especially in this, that every transgression with an
high hand, contumacy, and contempt was punished, and not say such Offense
escaped unpunished.

. 6. After the Sin and Punishment of Offenders in the times of the Law and Old
Testament; follow the Sin and Punishment of Offenders in the times of the New
Testament. The Sin is the neglect of the Gospel: The punishment is employed in
the words How shall we escape? In the first we may consider, 1. The Word or
Law. 2. The Transgression of it.

In the Law we may observe,

1. The Title, or Name. 2. The Publication. 3. The Confirmation.


The Title is this [so great Salvation], by which is meant the Gospel,

which is called Salvation. So great Salvation.

As in the Law, so in the Gospel which is the Law of God Redeemer by Christ
exhibited, we have 1. Precepts and Prohibitions, determining men's Duty. 2.
Promises and Threats, declaring Punishments and Rewards according to men's
Disobedience or Obedience; and as in respect of the former the Gospel is the
Rule of Man's Duty, so in respect of the latter it is a Rule of God's Judgment.
This Gospel is called Salvation, because it promises Salvation, and being
followed brings loto Salvation; and is said to be the Power of God unto
Salvation; and therefore is called the Word of Salvation, and the Gospel of
Salvation: So that it is called Salvation by a (...), 1. Of the Subject for the
Adjunct, because the matter and subject of it is Salvation. 2. Of the Effect
for the Cause, because it ^ath a causal virtue and power to save: As it is
Salvation, so it is great Salvation, because it does promise and conduce to the
attaining of eternal deliverance from eternal punishments and the greatest
Enemies, and of eternal bliss and full happiness: the Word spoken by Angels did
no such thing. This is the Name or Title.

2. The Publication or Promulgation is two fold: 1. Began by Christ, 2.
Continued by them who heard him. The Gospel is a Law, and the Law of God
Redeemer in Christ; yet it could bind no man except it were published: And it
was first published by Christ. The Law and the Doctrine of the Old Testament
was spoken and published by Angels and Prophets; but this by Christ the Son and
Lord: Jesus Christ is our Lord by Redemption, whereby he acquired a Right unto
us, and Power over us; for because he suffered death for our sins, God raised
him up, and made him Lord and Christ, and being at his right hand he has Power
to command men and Angels, and is the head of the Church, which acknowledges
his power and submits unto it. He began to speak and declare the Gospel both
before and after his Resutrection, and they who heard him were especially the
Apostles, by whom afterward ^^dued with the holy Ghost he declared it, first to
the Jew and these Hebrews, then to the Gentiles: It was so spoken as it was
known by him and them, so fully and clearly as was never done by Prophets and
Angels before. This is the Publication.

3. The Confirmation follows; where we must observe, 1. To whom. 2. By whom. 3.
By what it was confirmed.

1. To whom? It was confirmed, says the Author, to [Us]; that is, to himself
and these Hebrews; so it is commonly understood. That it was confirmed to the
Hebrews there can be no doubt, and also to Paul who was an Hebrew; to whom the
Gospel was preached as to the rest of the Jews, and also confirmed to him,
though he did not at the first believe it. Yet it will not follow from hence
that Paul received his immediate and infallible Knowledge of the Gospel from
the Apostles: For this he received immediately by Revelation from Christ as the
rest of the Apostles did, though they heard Christ as many more did, who yet
were no Apostles. In this respect none can ground an Argument upon these words,
to prove that Paul was not the Author of this Epistle, as diverse do. Again, the
word [Us] is often taken largely and indefinitely, not strictly and precisely
so as formally to include the person speaking. And in this sense, because it
was confirmed to the Hebrews, whereof he was one, he might say, It was
confirmed to Us; especially seeing it is he that writes unto them.

2. By whom was it confirmed? It was confirmed by those which heard him: Now
many besides the Apostles did hear Him, and also confirm the Doctrine of the
Gospel: Yet the Apostles did it in a more eminent manner, and may be
principally, though not solely here intended. Yet Paul did not hear Christ as
the other Apostles did: for though Christ spoke to him from Heaven, yet he did
not speak to him as he did to others whilst he conversed on Earth.

3. By what was this Doctrine confirmed? It was confirmed by two things:

1. By Miracles. 2. By the Gifts of the Holy Ghost.


Miracles are called Signs. Wonders. Powerful Works.


They are called 1. Signs. 2. Wonders. 3. Powerful Works.


because they 1. Signify God's Approbation of the Doctrine. 2. Cause men to
wonder. 3. Are done by a divine and supernatural Power.


The same words are used 2. Cor. 12. 12. In Signs, Wonders, mighty Deeds. They
are said to be diverse, because they are not only many of one kind, but of
several and different kinds, as dispossessing of Devils, raising the Dead, and
miraculously healing all kind of Diseases; and as they are Works of
extraordinary Power and Wisdom, so they are of Mercy.

2. By Gifts or Distributions of the Holy Ghost according to his own Will.

So that there were Gifts of the Holy Ghost. Distributions of them. These
according to his Will.

Gifts of the Holy Ghost were extraordinary Qualities and Powers, given such as
heard the Apostles Doctrine and believed it; as power to heal, to speak in
strange Languages, to prophesy, to do Miracles. They are said to be Gifts and
Effects of the Holy Ghost, because they had them not by Nature, or Industry, or
Instruction by Man, but from the Power of God-Redeemer, and the Spirit of
Christ. They are called in the Original, distributions or divisions, because
they were 1. Communicated to diverse Persons. 2. Were many of different kinds.
3. Were given in several degrees. They were distributed according to his own
Will, 1. Freely. 2. To whom he will. 3. What Gifts he will. 4. In what measure
he will. For there are diversities of Gifts, 1. Cor. 12. 4. But all these
works that one and the self-same Spirit, dividing to every man severally as
he will, Ver. 11. The Effect of these Miracles and Gifts was the confirmation
of the Doctrine of the Apostles, which they did confirm by Word and Deed: For,
1. They did most certainly affirm and assert this Doctrine, as having heard it
immediately of Christ, and as having received the immediate Knowledge there of
from him. 2. They did these Signs, Wonders, and mighty Deeds, and upon the
Imposition of their hands Believers received the extraordinary Gifts of the
Holy Ghost; yet they neither did these Miracles, nor gave these Gifts by their
own power, or holiness. But the Works were done, and the Graces given by them
as Instruments; in the Name of Christ as risen and glorified, and from God. So
that the Power of God, the merit of Christ, their Ministration, did all concur
to the production of these glorious Effects: God was the principal Cause,
therefore is it said, that by these God did bear them witness and attest their
Doctrine to be true, and from him; so that this confirmation was a giving
credibility to the Doctrine of the Gospel, so far as it was new, and delivered
the positive truths concerning Jesus of Nazareth, dying for our sins, rising
again, sitting at the right hand of God, and the dependence of Justification
before the Tribunal of God, and eternal Glory upon Faith in him making
Intercession in Heaven: For there was no need thus to confirm the Ceremonials
of Moses, and the Covenant of God with Israel before Mount Sinai to the Jew:
For these things he made no doubt of, nor was this confirmation needful for to
persuade the Gentile of the Equity and Justice of the Morals of the Scripture;
for the natural light of Reason did approve them. These Miracles and Gifts were
Proofs very strong and powerful; for they were no juggling Impostures or
Delusions, but real demonstrations of the divine. Will, and clear to the senses.

. 7. The Transgression is a neglect of this divine Doctrine thus declared, thus
confirmed: This neglect implies a contempt, and is a disobedience to that Law
of God-Redeemer by Christ, exhibited in not believing and repenting, or a
positive de^ial of this excellent truth in such as never professed it, or in
Apostates who once received it: The punishment is eternal death, which can no
ways be avoided by the Offenders neglecting this Salvation. The force of the
Argument is the last and chief thing to be considered: To understand this, we
must observe the Form of the Apostles Argument, which is this, That sin which
makes us liable to grievous and unavoidable punishment must with earnest heed
be avoided: But to let slip, or recede from, and neglect the Doctrine of the
Gospel is such a Sin; Therefore with all earnest heed to be avoided. The
Apostle in this Argument presupposes, 1. That sin makes liable to Punishment,
^ainous sins to grievous punishments; some sins to unavoidable punishments. For
the punishment of some sins are avoidable; and the sins whereby we are made
obnoxious, though committed, yet may be remitted: Some are not by the tenor of
God's Laws remissible. 2. That we are made liable to punishment by the divine
comminations, 3. That the end of Comminations in God's Laws, is, by
representing the penalty as certainly due upon Transgression to restrain us
from Transgression and Disobedience: For though the Love of God and
Righteousness, and hatred of Iniquity, are the principal Motives to Obedience,
and Restraints from sin, yet the hope of Rewards and fear of Punishments may
have great force; because we love our selves, desire our own peace and
happiness, and abhor such things as tend to our misery and ruin: These things
taken for granted make the Proposition good. But the doubt might be of the
Assumption. That neglect of the Doctrine of the Gospel will make us liable to
such a grievous unavoidable punishment. This he therefore proves, thus; If
Disobedience unto the Law, much more will the Disobedience to the Gospel, make
us liable to such a Punishment: But Disobedience to the Law made the Offenders
liable to such a Punishment. This the Hebrew and Jew would grant, for they knew
it; but the Proposition only could be controverted by them. Therefore he
confirms it from this presupposed in general, That greater sins make us
obnoxious to greater Punishment; but disobedience to the Gospel is the greater
Sin. And this he proves fully, and that from many particulars. For this end, he
proves the Doctrine of the Gospel more excellent than that of the Law, and more
powerfully binding men to receive it and retain it: And if it be so, then to
sin against it, is more heinous than to sin against the Law: That it is as
excellent, there could be no doubt; for it has all the excellencies of the
Law: But that it was more excellent he manifests by four things: 1. It was the
Doctrine of so great Salvation, for such the Law was not. It by it self without
the Promise could not save eternally and suppose it could, yet it was not so
full, so clear, so powerful, and effectually conducing to eternal life. 2. It
was first spoken by the Lord Christ, who is so far above the Angels by whom the
Law was given. 3. It was confirmed by Miracles far more in number and more
glorious. 4. Upon the hearing and receiving the Gospel the Believers received
many different and extraordinary Gifts of the Spirit, which the Hearers of the
Law did not. For the Apostle says to the Galathians, He therefore that
ministers unto you the spirit, and works Miracles amongst you, does he it by
the works of the Law, or by the hearing of Faith? Chap. 3. 5. Where he does
imply, 1. That he did not so many and great Miracles amongst them to confirm
the Doctrine of the Law, but to confirm the Faith, that is the Gospel. 2. He
did not minister the Spirit, and gifts of the Holy Ghost by the preaching, nor
they receive the Spirit by the hearing, of the Law, but of the Gospel. 3. That
God, to testify the excellency of the Gospel above the Law, did concur to work
Miracles, and give the Spirit in confirmation of the one, not of the other.
Therefore if the Gospel in so many respects be more excellent then the Law;
then to let it slip, to recede from it, to neglect it, is a far greater sin;
and therefore makes us obnoxious to far more grievous punishment. So we are
come to the principal Conclusion, which is, to take heed of departing from, or
neglecting of, this Doctrine of so great Salvation.

. 8. The application of this is to be made unto all and every one, who having
the use of reason has heard the Gospel. Let every one of them seriously
consider, that God speaks in it, he speaks not by Angels, but his own Son; it is
the most clear, full, and powerful Doctrine that ever was revealed from Heaven,
a Doctrine of eternal Salvation: it is confirmed by most glorious works, and the
excellent Gifts of the blessed Spirit. It Is a discovery of profoundest wisdom,
a manifestation of greatest love, and the last warning God will give. No other
knowledge so useful, so excellent, so absolutely necessary as this. Therefore
receive it readily, lay it up in your hearts, never forget; ever remember it,
prize it, never neglect it, never depart from it. If the love of God cannot
persuade you, let the fear of his eternal displeasure, and the love of your own
Salvation prevail with you. What? will you despise his sweetest mercy? reject
the tender of Salvation? bring upon your selves eternal and unavoidable misery?
It will be the greatest Sin that you can commit; and make you obnoxious to the
greatest punishment, if you shall refuse to hearken to this great Propher.
Shall the word of Angels transgressed be so severely punished? and shall no
Offender escape? And shall the word of the eternal Son of God be disobeyed, and
any Offender guilty in this particular escape everlasting penalties? Let not
any slatter themselves, and think to escape: For how shall we escape, if we
neglect, etc?

Ver. 5. For unto the Angels has he not put in subjection the World to come,
whereof we speak.. 9. The words are difficult to be understood, and must be
explained before the scope of the Apostle in them can be discovered. The
subject matter of them is the World to come, and God's subjection of it: The
greatest difficulty is to know what is meant by, the World to come, which many
think referrs to the state of glory, and the World which follows the
Resurrection. Thus a Lapide, and some of the Ancients: Riverae understands the
Church-Christian as opposed to the Church of former times; especially under the
Law. This is the more probable sense: For the Apostle speaks of these last
times; wherein God spoke unto men by his Son; and it is opposed to the times,
wherein he spoke by his Prophets and Angels. Yet we must not understand it of
the Church exclusively, as though God had not subjected other things, even
Angels for the good of the Church. That World, and those times, whereof the
Apostle speaks are here meant; but he speaks of the times of the Gospel. The
proposition is negative, God subjected not the World to come, to Angels: In
former times God had used very much the ministry of Angels in ordering the
Church, and put much power in their hands to that end. Yet now in this last
time he made Christ his Son (who by reason of his suffering was a little lower
then the Angels) to be the administratour-General of his Kingdom, the Universal
Lord; and subjected the very Angels unto him. The expression seems to be taken
from Esaias 9. 6. for whereas there, amongst others Titles given to Christ, one
is, ^verlasting Father, the Sep^uagint turn it, (...), The Father or Governor
of the World to come, Beza upon the place.
which seems to be the genuine sense of the Hebrew words. The sum is, that God
did not subject the Church in the times of the Gospel; nor the World of those
times to Angels, but to Christ. The words thus understood, may inform us; 1.
That Christ is more excellent then the Angels. 2. If the Law and Word spoken by
Angels, when neglected and disobeyed, was so severely punished; much more
severely shall they, who neglect the Gospel spoken by Christ, be punished. 3.
That if it was the duty of the Fathers, and those who lived in former times to
hearken to the Word spoken by Angels, which are but Servants. Then it is much
more the duty of us, who live in these last times to hearken unto the Word of
so great Salvation spoken by Christ, made Lord of All. From hence we may
understand the scope of the words to be the same with that of the former, and
that may be considered either a^part of the former reason, why we should
hearken to Christ, and not neglect the Gospel; or they may with the latter
words following contain another distinct reason, and in this manner, that
seeing God has not to the Angels subjected the World to come, but to Christ,
who by his Suffering and Death was for a little time, made lower then the
Angels, and for that suffering, afterward made Lord of all, even of Angels,
then we ought to give the more earnest heed to his Doctrine. Crellius
understands by the World to come Heaven, but without any reason; but rather
contrary to reason, and to the purpose of the Apostle.

. 10. The former Text being negative, does not express but imply, that the
World Ver. 6, 7, 8, 9; etc.
to come was put in subjection to Christ. But in these words he does not only
express it, but prove it. And to this purpose he alleges the words of Psalm.
8, 4, 5, 6. In this testimony,

we may observe the allegation or the words alleged. application of them.

The manner of the allegation we need not examine; the Author neither names
the Book of Psalms, as a distinct part of the Scriptures of the Old Testament;
nor the particular Psalm, which is for number the 8th; nor the Author of the
Psalm, David. But says, 1. That one, or a certain man, testifies. 2. He
testifies in a certain place. This he did not through ignorance or defect of
memory, but out of some other reason. He knew, that the testimony, or thing
testified, was the principal thing, and that these Hebrews were well acquainted
with the Scriptures; and especially with the Book of Psalms. To return to the
words alleged out of the holy Scriptures of the Old Testament, received by the
Jews as Divine and from God; the difficult Question is of whom that Psalm
speaks, and whom he means by man, the Son of man, so minded, so visited by
God, so humbled, so advanced. Some will have it to be man in the day of his
Creation; some think it is man fallen; some determine it to be man restored in
Christ; some are resolute that it is Christ himself as man. Thus Cramerus,
Tarnovius, and the Lutherans generally, who bitterly inveigh against Calvin,
interpreting otherwise. Calvin had his fellows and followers. Others tell us,
that it agrees to Man in the literal to Christ in the mystical sense: others
that there are two literal senses, the one whereof agrees to Man; the other,
which is the principal, agrees to Christ. Vatablus seems to agree with this,
Cramerus teckons this amongst the prophetical Psalms. The intention of the
Psalmist is to praise God for his glorious works, wherein he manifested his
power, wisdom, and special mercy. The works are not only those of Creation, but
of his special providence over Man, and amongst those works of special
providence, that of restoration of Man, by the humiliation and exaltation of
Jesus Christ, who is the principal subject of the Psalm, according to the parts
of it alleged in the New Testament, where we find ver. 2, 6, 8. applied to
Christ. Upon this ground Cramerus, Tarnovius, and others, understand it only of
Christ: It Is true, that some things here mentioned do agree to Man in the state
of Creation; yet the special care of Man, in respect of his spiritual and
eternal estate, appears most of all in Christ; to whom, set at his right hand,
he subjected all things, for this end, That he might convert man, and make him
converted for ever blessed. So that in the words alleged, we may observe, 1.
God's special care of Man, and his singular love toward him. 2. The same
manifested in a most glorious manner, in the humiliation and exaltation of
Christ. 3. The admiration, or rather amazement at such a stupe^dious
manifestation of such stupendous love. All the works of God are in themselves
excellent and wonderful, but the work of Redemption by Christ is matter of
greatest wonder and astonishment even to the Angels.

. 11. The Application follows, where the Author takes special notice of the
last Ver. ^.
words cited out of the Psalm: They are these, Thou have put all things in
subjection under his Feet. These are not the last words of the Psalm, but of
the words alleged out the Psalm. These, understood of Christ, proves that
which he intended, That unto the Angels God has not put in subjection the
World to come, but to some other; even to Man, that special Man whereof the
Psalmist speaks. Concerning these words, he delivers two Propositions. The
first, as a conclusion. The second, upon the By. The first, as a conclusion, is
this, That he left nothing that is not put under him; this necessarily follows,
if God put all things under his Feet. Therefore he is the Lord of the World to
come, and Angels are subjected, as included in the word all: That these words
are understood of Christ, and not of any other Man, as Heinsius would have them
to be, is evident from 1 Cor. 15. 27. For he has put all things under his
Feet: but when he says, All things are put under him, it is manifest, that he
is excepted, who did put all things under him. Where two things are observable,
as clear and evident: 1. That it was Christ risen from the Dead, and set at the
right hand of God; under whose Poet, as his Footstool, all things were put. 2.
That nothing is excepted, as not put under, but God, who subdued all things
unto him. The second Proposition upon the By, is, But now we see not all things
put under him: The meaning whereof is, that though God has given him Dominion
over all things, and all things are subject to his Power; yet he has not as
yet exerclsed his Power to destroy all Enemies, and reduce all his People to
subjection. And this we shall never see, till the last Saint be converted, and
Death the last Enemy destroyed; which cannot be, before the Resurrection,
whereby all his Servants and Vassals shall be made immortal, and fully, and
for ever freed from Death.

Ver. 9. But we see Jesus, who was made a little lower then the Angels, etc.
This is the second Application of those words of the Psalmist, Thou have made
him a little lower then the Angels; thou have crowned him with Glory and
Honor. Which we find differently expounded, translated, read, pointed. Yet the
matter is plain, and it is evident they speak of Christ; and, concerning Him,
deliver two things: 1. His Humiliation. 2. His Exaltation. 1. His Humiliation,
in three things: 1. That he was lower then the Angels. 2. He suffered. 3. He
suffered Death for all men. And the substance of the whole is, That though in
the state of his humiliation and mortality, in respect of his suffering Death,
he was a little, or a little while, lower than the Angels; yet he rose again,
and is now crowned with Glory and Honor at the right hand of God, and made
Lord of All. And there was a special reason, why for a time he should be mortal
and suffer Death, even because that was the way unto Glory, and the means of
eternal deliverance determined by God. Though all this be clear, yet the place
is woefully obscured, and especially by Henisius, whilst he tediously endeavors
to make it more plain. I will not trouble the Reader either with his pointing
the words, or his manner of rendering them, or his exposition: in all which he
thinks T^cla's Manuscript does favor him; which it does not.

. 12. In these words these things are manifest: 1. That the subject of them are
the words of Psalm. 8. 5. 2. That he applys them unto Christ. 3. That in them he
observes the Humiliation and Exaltation of Christ. 4. Gives the reasons, why
Christ must first be humbled, before he can be exalted, and to show this last
is, He signifies,

1. That the Hebrews had no reason to be offended with the death and
humiliatiof Christ.

2. That this humiliation was no hinderance of, but a means unto, his
exaltation; and it was so ordered by the wisdom of God for the unspeakable
benefit of man, who ^ould ^ot he saved but by this being lower then the Angels.


the scope of the Apostle in the rest of the Chapter unto the end. It Is not to
prove that Christ is Man, as some do think, nor to make a digression to speak
of his Priesthood, as others tell us. That he mentions some acts of Christ as
a Priest, and other things agreeing to him as Man, and as a Priest or King it is
upon the By. In them we find three Propositions:

1. That we see Christ, for the suffering of Death, Crowned with Glory and
Honor.

2. This Christ is he that was first made a little lower then the Angels.

3. One end why Christ was made lower then the Angels, was, that by the Grace
of God he might ^asto Death for every Man.

The meaning of the first Proposition is easy; For it affirms, 1. That Christ
was Crowned with Glory and Honor. 2. And that, for suffering Death. 3. They
did see it.

To be Crowned with Glory and Honor, is to be invested with great Glory,
Honor, Dignity and Power; and the words signify the exaltation of Christ at
the right hand of God. We need not here distinguish of Crowns, which were of
many sorts; For if the Author did allude to any of these, the sacerdotal Mitte,
and the imperial Diadem did most of all resemble the eminency and dignity of
this Celestial Pontiff, and this universal King. But why may i^ not be an
Hebraism? (...) from whence (...) a Crown does signify, To compass about: for
God had circuminvested Christ with the highest and most eminent degree of
Dignity and Power, and this is the Word used by the Psalmist.

For the suffering of Death] This passion was the meritorious cause, his Glory
and Honor the Reward; according to another Scripture, which informs us, that
because Christ was obedient unto Death, the Death of the Cross; Therefore God
did highly exalt him, Phil. 2. 8, 9. Neither need we fear to say that Christ
merited eternal Glory for Himself, if we confess he merited it for Us. It Is
true, he could not merit the personal union; and such things which necessarily
followed upon the same: but this is nothing to that Crown of Glory, which was
given him in consideration of that most excellent piece of Service, which he
performed in expiating the Sin of man, and that by his own Blood, which is
plain Scripture. Some referr this clause unto the former, of Christ being made
a little lower then the Angels, yet understand it differently. For some say, He
was made lower then the Angels, by or in respect of his Death: Others think,
that it denotes the final cause of his minoration; as though the end, why he
was cast below the Angels, was, that he might suffer. But neither of these are
probable we see; that is, it was manifest both by the glorious Miracles done,
and excellent Gifts of the Spirit given in his Name, and other ways, and they
did therefore see it There is no need to distinguish between (...) and (...),
between videre ^^d cernere.
.

The second Proposition, He was made a little lower then the Angels,] It Is not
material, whether we understand by little, a little measure of inferiority, or
a little time; for both are true. But the principal thing in these words, is,
where in he was made lower then the Angels; and that was in this, that he was
man and mortal. Man is inferior to an Angel as man; and much more as mortal,
because the Angels never die: Now, Christ had the body of a man, and a Soul
separable from his body till the Resurrection; and that was the little time
here meant, the time of his mortality: Both might be joined in one divine
Axiom thus. We see, for the suffering of Death, Crowned with Glory and Honor,
that Jesus who for a little time was made lower then the Angel.

The third Proposition, That he by the Grace of God might taste of Death for
(...) man,] In these words we have the reason and the end why Christ was made
lower then the Angels for a time: For it was, that through the Grace of God he
might redeem us by his Death. In the words we have, 1. The Death of Christ. 2.
The parties for whom he dyed. 3. The inward motive which inclined God to give
him to Death; and the first Original of Redemption. 1. It Is said, He insted of
Death, we need not play the Critic in the explication of the word It may be a
word which suited with the metaphor of a Cup wherein is contained some bitter
po^ion, which torments him who tastes of it.

Therefore Christ compares his sufferings to such a Cup,' when he says, Let
this Cup pass from me.


taste: For the plain meaning is, that he suffered Death; and by this is
signified all his Sufferings, which were many and bitter the principal and
consummation whereof was Death wherein they all ended, and without which there
had been no expiation. 2. He suffered Death for every man; not that every man
should absolutely enjoy the ultimate benefit thereof, for every one does not:
yet every man as a sinner has some benefit by it, Because the immediate effect
of this Death was, that every man's sin in respect of this Death is remissible,
and every man savable; because Christ by it made God propitious and placable,
in that he had punished man's sin in him, and laid on him the iniquities of us
all. And the reason why every man is not actually justified and saved, is not
for want of sufficient Propitiation, but upon another account. 4. That which
moved God to transferr the punishment due to our sins upon Christ his only
begotten Son, was his Grace and free love. For he so loved the World, that he
gave his only begotten Son to be the propitiation for our Sins. The end
therefore why Christ was made lower then the Angel, was, that he being man and
mortal, yet holy and innocent, without sin, might suffer Death, that our sins
might be expiated, divine justice satisfied, and a way made for mercy to save
us.

Ver. 10. For it became him, etc.. 13. These words must be considered
absolutely in themselves. relatively in their connection.

Absolutely considered, they inform us, and do affirm, that it became God, to
bring us to Salvation by the Suffering of Christ. This is the substance: In the
words, we may

observe the end. means. convenience of the means.

1. The end is to bring many Sons unto Salvation. 2. The means is to perfect
their Captain by Sufferings. 3. The convenience of these means in respect of
this end, it was such as that is became God to use them.


All these may be reduced to certain Propositions, which are these:

1. Christ is the Captain of Salvation. 2. God made this Captain perfect by
Suffering. 3. This was the means to bring many Sons to Glory. 4. Thus to do
became him for whom and by whom are all things.


1. Christ is the Captain of the Salvation of the Sons of God,] The word (...),
turned Captain, signifies a Prince of a multitude, eminent for dignity and
priority: or one, who besides his eminent Dignity; is invested with Power to
command, direct and order the rest inferior and subject to his Power: or one,
who in any work is a principal cause, and has a great and eminent influx upon
the Subject to produce the Effect. In all these significations, Christ may be
here taken: For he, in respect of all Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, Saints,
Martyrs, and Believers; is the most eminent for dignity, and invested with
supreme and universal Power, and in both respects he is called their Lord, and
King, and Head; for as the Head is in respect of the members, so is Christ in
respect of his Saints, and many Sons of God. He is also the Author, Beginner,
and principal, cause of their Salvation; both for the merit of it, and the
application of the merit, and the actual consummation and collation. He by his
Death laid the foundation, and by his Word and Spirit makes them capable of
Salvation, and gives them a right unto it. He by his Intercession procures
their actual Justification, and Glorification: He, by his Power, does raise
them up, and gives them everlasting life. He Is that Joshua, who leads us, and
gives us possession of our spiritual and celestial Canaan.

2. This Captain, Prince and Author was made perfect of God by Suffering, or
God made him perfect by Sufferings.

To be perfected in this place, is to be consecrated and made a complete
Priest, or at least to be put in an immediate capacity to act as a Priest.
Aaron, and the Levitical Priests had their Consecration, and it was not without
Blood and the death of Sacrifices, and the form was instituted and prescribed
by God, who alone could give them this Glory, Power, and Office. That Christ
was a Priest is express Scripture, as we shall understand in this Epistle
hereafter: Yet such he could not be without Consecration, neither could he be
consecrated without Blood and suffering of Death, and offering a bloody
Sacrifice. And the difference of the Consecration of other Priests and him was
this, that though both were consecrated by Blood, yet they were consecrated by
the blood of Bea^^s sacrificed; He, by his own Blood, when he sacrificed and
offered himself without spot unto God. The reason of this was, Because he must
be a Meditatour between God, and sinful Man, to reconcile them* but no
reconcilion without Blood, and no Blood but his own Blood immaculate would be
accepted. For though God was merciful and willing to be reconciled, yet his
justice would admit of no reconciliation, but upon satisfaction to be made by
this Blood, God did manifest his Justice and hatred of sin by punishing it in
Christ, before he would pardon it in Man: It was God that did Consecrate him;
for no Man or Angel could conferr this Office upon him, or make him an
universal and eternal Priest to officiate and minister in Heaven; only God
could do this. And he as supreme Lord and Law-give^ could appoint and accept
him to be Redeemer, prescribe the manner of Consecration, and as supreme Judge
accept of his Consecration once finished, and invest him with this sacerdotal
Power: In these respects God is said to Consecrate him.

By him thus consecrated, many Sons are brought to Glory,] There are many Sons
brought to Glory, he that brings them to Glory is God; he does this by Christ
consecrated and made their Captain. To bring to Glory is, in the end, to give
possession of Glory, and that everlasting and most excellent Estate prepared
for the Sons of God. These are many, and are made his Sons by Regeneration and
Adoption: The one does make them capable of, the other gives them right to
Glory, which they shall fully enjoy, when their heavenly Birth and gracious
Adoption are perfected: They derive their title from their Captain as
consecrated by Suffering, and received by Faith. For as they are the Sons and
Heirs of God, so are they joynt-Heirs with Christ and in his right: And if he
never had been consecrated by Sufferings, they never had been either Sons, or
Heirs, or Glorified. For he by his Sufferings merited all, and laid the
foundation of their eternal Happiness: And for this Suffering he made him
Captain and Head of all his Sons, and gave him power to give eternal Life to as
many as he had given him. It Is God who brings these Sons to Glory, by their
Head and Captain; He loved Man, he gave his Son to Death, he raised him up
again made him King and Priest, and gave him power to convert us; and by him he
adopts us, and by him he gives us Glory. The sum of all, is this; The
glorification of sinful Man from first to last is from God, it is he and he
alone that brings him to Glory; yet though the persons glorified be many, yet
they are all Sons, and none but Sons shall enjoy the Inheritance; neither are
they Sons by Nature, or of themselves: He makes them such by Christ, and Christ
was consecrated by Sufferings, and made their Captain.

It became him for whom and by whom are all things, in bringing many Sons to
Glory, thus to do,] God is here described from his efficiency, where-by he is
the cause of all things, the universal Agent, who produces, preserves,
orders all things to their end, especially his Sons, unto Glory. For though
his works be many, then some are more excellent then others, and one of the
chiefest, is the Salvation of man. Some do think that by these words for whom
and by whom, are meant; that God is the final and efficient cause of all: yet
in strict sense God cannot in himself be said to be the end of any thing, yet
the manifestation of his glorious Perfection may be said to be intended by him
in all his Works. To consecrate the Captain of all his Sons by Sufferings did
become him, that is, it seemed best to his divine Wisdom to use this means as
most fit to manifest his justice and mercy in the Redemption and Salvation of
man. What Ways and means as conducing to this end he knew, or his divine Wisdom
did dictate unto him, is hidden from us; but this here mentioned, he resolved
upon as the best and most agreeable to his excellent perfection. For God does
nothing but that which becomes him so glorious in himself, and so excellent an
Agent; Men may do many things unbeseeming, and no ways befitting them to do:
nay Angels have done many things, which did not become so noble Spirits to do;
but God does nothing, but what God may do. And this is the reason why Christ
must taste of Death for every man; Because it seemed good to God by that way
and means to save sinful man. And this is the relative consideration and
connection, employed in the causal conjunction, For. They give a reason why
Christ was lower then the Angels, and suffered Death: And why? It became God so
to do.

Ver. 11. For both he that Sanctifies, etc.. 14. The Apostle in these, and the
following words does manifest how it became God to cast Christ below the
Angels, and consecrate him by Sufferings; and he does so manifest it, as that
it may appear to be agreeable to Reason, which is a spark or ray of divine
Light. To understand this the better, you must remember, 1. That Christ was
lower then the Angels in suffering Death. 2. That as God or Angel he could not
suffer Death. 3. If he could have suffered Death as a Spirit, yet that Death
was not so fit to redeem Man, or expiate his sin, and sanctify him. 4. That
seeing he must both die, and die for man, he must be Man, and mortal Man, to
sanctify man. These things premised, the Apostle proves, that it became God to
make Christ a mortal Man; and the reason is, because he that sanctifyeth and
they who are sanctified ought and must be of one; and this is the coherence. In
the words themselves, we have the unity and indentity of the Sanctifier, and
sanctified: By the Sanctifier, or the person sanctifying, is meant Christ; and
by the sanctified, sinful men: by being of one, that they are some ways, one.
The reason why Christ is said to sanctify, is, because he has an active power
to sanctify and free from Sin such as are polluted with Sin; and men thus
polluted are said to be sanctified, when they are freed from Sin: Christ does
sanctify them by his merit, and the application of his merit by his Sacrifice,
and his Spirit making use of Word and Sacraments. And man is first sanctifiable
by the Death of Christ, and actually sanctified upon his Faith in this Death.
That this is the sense, is plain by these words of his, By which Will we are
sanctified through the offering of the body of Christ once for all, Chap. 10.
10. The meaning whereof is, that by the Death and Sacrifice of Christ remission
of Sin, and freedom from the pollution was merited, so that this doing of his
Fathers Will in suffering Death for the sin of man was so accepted of God, that
it has an eternal virtue of purging the conscience from sin; and, in
consideration of the same, God is always ready upon man's Faith, actually to
remit and to take away his sin. These two are said to be of one; Crelli^s is
here mistaken, as in the former verse: For he tells us, that God brings many
Sons to Glory, by perfecting their Captain Christ through Sufferings, because
by his example God does teach us, that by Suffering, and by Death, though
grievous, we may attain eternal Glory; and suffering is the way unto it. This
he spoke to delude his Reader, and seduce him; because he would not confess the
satisfying and meriting power of Christ's Sacrifice. That Christ in his
Suffering Death did give us a rare example of many heavenly virtues, and an
encouragement by his Resurrection and Glorification is true, but not intended
in this place. So neither may we approve of his exposition of these words, as
any ways genuine and agreeing with the scope of the place. For he makes Christ
and Believers one as Brethsen, because they have God as one Father. But this is
wide, and far from the Apostles intention; That of Junius and others is the
best, that they are (...), of one mass and humane Nature, alluding to the
offering of the first Fruits at the Passover, or the two Loaves waved at
Pentecost, by the which all the rest of their Fruits and Bread were sanctified.
That he means so, he expresses plainly afterward, ver. 14. which informs,
that to be of one is to be partaker of Flesh and Blood, as they are Flesh and
Blood. Therefore the Socinian must be either blind or impudent; yet to
understand his unity the better, you must know, 1. That as man had sinned, so
he was resolved to redeem and deliver him. 2. That his wisdom did not think
good to redeem him immediately himself, nor mediately by Angels; but Man must
be redeemed by Man. 3. That seeing man by sin deserved, and was liable to
Death, he determined to deliver him by the Death which another must suffer for
him, 4. God as God could not die, therefore God must some way become Man, and by
his Word assume Flesh and Blood, that he might in and by that humane nature
suffer Death. 5. He that must be Man, and suffer Death, and so sanctify all the
rest, must be one with them; and not only as having Flesh and Blood as all men
are, but must be the Head, Captain, representative of all mankind; and this,
Christ was both by divine Institution, and his own voluntary susception. And
this is the difference between this unity of him with all mankind, and the
unity of all other men amongst themselves; that he is so one with them as to be
their Head, and general representative for Redemption and Salvation. And the
difference between all other men considered as men, and him considered as man,
is not only in this, that he was holy and they sinful, but that he was
personally united to the Word; they were not, for they were distinct persons in
themselves.

. 15. That they were of one, is proved in the words following, and that two

ways 1. In the (...), that it is so by testimony of Scripture. 2. In the
(...), and the reason why it is so, and that taken from the end, to manifest how
it became God thus to do.

The first is proved out of the Old Testament, and first from Psalm. 22. 22.
That the Psalm is understood of Christ is clear, not only because the first
words thereof were used and taken up by Christ, even when he was Suffering upon
the Cross, but also many things in that Psalm were clearly fulfilled in
Christ, to the very casting Lots upon his Seamless Coat. In the words Christ
calls his Apostles and Disciples (and all such as should believe in his Word,
declared unto them) his Brethren, not Strangers or Aliens, not Servants or
Slaves. And by this acknowledgment and owning them, he does signify that he
sanctifying, and they being sanctified, were one. For he was man, and they were
men; he was the Son of God, they the Sons of God: he was amongst these as a
Brother of the same Society, but as the Head of the Society, and the first
begotten amongst many Brethren. The argument is this, Brethren are one, and of
one; but Christ, and those who are sanctified by Christ are Brethren; therefore
they are one, and of one. That they are Christ's Brethren is evident, because
Christ calls them so, and is brought in by the infallible Scriptures giving
them that Title. And how great a condescension was this, that the Son of God,
Lord of Angels should vouchsafe us this honor as to acknowledge us sinful
Wretches raised out of the dust, his Brethren. And though he cites other words
besides these, as that [He in the midst of the great Congregation would sing
praise unto God]; yet the principal words for which the 40 Psalm is quoted, is
the word [Brethren], a term given by Christ unto his Disciples.

The second proof is found in many places of Scripture, but yet they must be
taken Ver. 13.
out of some place which speaks of Christ, so as these words may be evidently
the words of Christ. Some, yea many think they are taken out of 2 Sa^. 22. 3.
or out of Psalm. 18. 2. where, in the Septuagint, we find words to the same
purpose. But seeing the Apostle does follow the words of the Septuagint, when
he alleges any place out of the Old Testament, and these words are not found
in either of the former places, neither is that Psalm so properly understood of
Christ; therefore it is not likely that the Apostle intended to cite any thing
out of them. Therefore feeing we find the words following concerning trusting
in God, and concerning him and the Children, which God had given him in the
Prophet Esaias, and in the same Chapter of that Prophet, and close together too;
therefore we may conclude with a Lapide and Heinfi^s, that the place here cited
is, Esaias 8. 17, 18, verses, where we have in the Septuagint the very words here
used and alleged of the Apostle. In that part of the Chapter we have a clear
prophecy of Christ fulfilled in the time of his abode on Earth, and before his
ascent into Heaven. There is a plain prediction of Christ's Incarnation and
living amongst men, and of his Disciples who did believe on him; as also of the
unbelief of the greatest part of the Jews, of their rejection of Christ; and of
God's rejection of them; and the destruction of Jerusalem. And Christ is
brought in saying, And I will wait upon, ^^ for, the Lord, that hides or
turns his Face from the House of Jacob, and I will trust in him [as in the
Septuagint]; Behold, I and the Children which God has given me. These words
are to be understood of him as one with his Disciples, and man as they were
men. And in that Chapter we find some passages directly agreeing with the words
of Simons, which he spoke after that he being in the Temple, had received
Christ being then Incarnate, and an infant into his arms. So that to understand
the Apostle and the Prophet too, we must not so must stand upon the words in
themselves severed from the rest, but jointly with the context of the Chapter
speaking of Immanuel, that is, Christ Incarnate.

. 16. In ver. 11, he had said, That both he that sanctifies, and they that are
sanctified, are Ver. 14.
of one; and in these words he assumes, but the sanctified are par^akers of
Flesh and Blood, and so concludes, that he must have Flesh and Blood, and
therefore says, He likewise took part with them. And those which he called,
[The sanctified by him,] ver. 11. Here he names Children according to the words
of the Prophet, and these were Disciples, and such as believed in him. And it is
to be observed, 1. That to be of one, is to be Flesh and Blood, and so man. 2.
That there is a twofold union of Christ with M^ns^ The first, by his
Incarnation: And the second, by his actual Sanctification. In the first respect
he is one with all mankind, as they are men; and the Head of the whole body of
them. In the second respect he is one in a special manner with his Elect. By
him ^^ man, and dying for man, all men receive this benefit to to be savable,
which Angels sinning do not. By him as man dying and believed upon, all such as
do believe are actually sanctified, and in the end saved. And He, and the
Sanctified, which are the Church, are one in a special manner: yet because, to
take part with the Children, and be man, was not sufficient, except he dyed for
them, that by his Death he might be beneficial unto them; therefore it is added,
That he took part with them, that he might destroy him that had the power of
Death, which is the Devil. Where we may observe two things, 1. That the Devil
has the power of Death. 2. That Christ by Death destroyed him. The first is
employed, The second is expressed. The word [Devil] is to be understood
collectively for the [Devils], but in a special manner for the Prince of
Devils, who is said to be a Liar and a Murderer, Joh. 8. 44. because by his
lies he deceived our first Parents, inducing them to Sin, whereby they were
made liable to Death. For by his Temptations, and false Suggestions, he
insinuates into man, and infuseth his poison into their Soul. Man yielding
unto his Temptations, falls into his hands, and comes under his Power, so that
he has dominion over him, reigns in him, blinds him, perverts him, inclines
him effectually to sin, and by sin stings him to Death. And because he has so
great power to draw man into sin, he may be said to have the Power of Death,
because by this means he makes man more and more obnoxious to Death, which so
unavoidably by the Law follows upon Sin: yet he may be said to have the power
of Death, as a Jaylour, Hangman, or Executioner may be said to have such a
power; and God in his just Judgment may deliver disobedient man into his hand;
and by him execute his punishments, as some understand the place; and by divine
permission he may have great strength to torment and destroy man. Otherwise he
can have no right unto Man to judge, condemn him, punish, as being his Lord and
Judge; For that belongs only unto God, who, if man yield unto Satan, may deliver
him into his hand, and he may detain him as his Captive. The Scripture speaks
much of the power of Satan over man, till God deliver him out of his hand; and
this power can be no power of Life, but of Death and Destruction. This is the
first thing employed, the second is, That Christ by his Death destroyed him. He
destroyed him, he destroyed him by his Death. To destroy him, is not to take
away his immortal Life and Being, but to take away his power or strength: For
the word is (...) not (...). For the power of an Enemy over a Captive, is not a
legal and regular power and authority. This strength and force, and also right
unto man as his Captive, Christ took away by his Death. For by his Death he
satisfied God's Justice, and merited a power and right to him, as having by a
[lutron] or price paid to the supreme Lord and Owner, bought him. So that upon
this price and ransom paid and accepted, man became his, and the Devil had
only the possession of him; though Christ had the right unto him, and the
propriety in him. Therefore Christ in his prayer does acknowledge, that his
Father had given power over all Flesh, that he should give eternal life to as
many as he had given him. Again by this Death, Christ made Death removable,
because by it he made man's sin remissible. Bacon Thorpe tells us, that the
Devil, by putting Christ being innocent to Death, lost all his power over man;
because he had no Commission from God to put any person innocent, and free from
all sin, unto Death; yet for this he brings no clear Scripture, though this be
certain, that God gave all men to Christ, because he dyed for them. This Death
aimed at a further end then the destruction of the Devil, as having the power
of Death. Christ indeed came to destroy the works of the Devil, 1 John 3. 8.
and though the Devil at the first, as a strong man, keeps peaceable possession;
yet Christ is that stronger man who takes away his power, disarms him, takes
possession, and all this is done to deliver man out of his hands. For 1. Christ
must be lower then the Angels, and mortal Man, that he may die. 2. He must die,
that he may destroy the power of the Devil. 3. He must destroy the power of the
Devil, that man may be delivered from the danger of Death. Man cannot be
delivered, except the power of the Devil be destroyed; this power cannot be
destroyed, except Christ die: Christ cannot die, except he be lower then the
Angels, and made mortal Man. This connection and subordination of these things
did become God, and was agreeable to his heavenly wisdom: whereas the Socinian
says, That for Christ to take part with Men, and be Flesh and Blood, as they
are, does not prove that the Incarnation is true; if we consider it barely in
it self, as a participation of humane nature and mortality. Yet if we consider
the subject of this participation, and the person taking part with man to be
the Son of God, by whom he made the Worlds, the brightness of his Fathers
Glory, and the express Image of his Person; and look upon him as that word
which was in the beginning, and was with God, and was God, then if this Son,
this Word be made Flesh, as here the Apostle does affirm and elsewhere; then
the Incarnation is plain and clear enough, it cannot be denied.

. 17. This farther end is expressed in these words,

Ver. 15. And deliver them, who through the fear of Death, were all their
lifetime subject to bondage. This Text represents unto us two things: 1. The
sad condition of such as are under the power of Satan. 2. A deliverance or
freedom from it. The sad condition is an estate of perpetual slavery and fear
of Death: For to be subject to bondage, is to be a slave; and to be thus
subject all the time of his Life, is to be a perpetual slave for time of Life.
And this is a grievous slavery and bondage, not only because it is perpetual,
but because of the great danger. For by fear of Death may, by a Metonymy, be
meant the danger of Death: For the proper cause of fear, is danger once
apprehended; for it is true, that men may be in danger, and yet without fear;
because the danger is not seen, apprehended, known. And the bondage of
perpetual fear is woeful, if not intolerable: This Death, which is so dangerous,
and ever threatens to terrify and torment us, is not only bodily, but
spiritual; not only temporal, but eternal; and the greatest Evil of all others:
and if we be Satan's slaves, and in his power, he is a most cruel Tyrant and
Enemy, and seeks our extreme and everlasting misery; and we can expect nothing
better from him, who delights in our destruction: Oh that man did but see his
condition, and were sensible of it! For then he could take no rest Day or
Night, and he would seek and cast about for deliverance. We see how sad it is
by the terrors and torments of Judas and Cain, and by the fears, griefs,
troubles, wounds, sigh^, groans, of such as were once sensible of their sins,
and apprehensive of the wrath of God. Though this be a sad condition, yet there
is deliverance from this continual danger, this perpetual fear, which is the
greatest slavery of all other. The beginning of comfort is to know that there
is a possibility of Freedom, and that the Danger is avoidable or removable. The
first degree of this deliverance is in Christ's Death, whereby divine justice
was satisfied, and freedom merited. 2. That the power of the Devil was
destroyed; for whilst it continued, this fear could not be removed. 3. This
freedom and liberty is more complete, when upon Faith in Christ's Death, Sin
is pardoned, and the cause of this fear is taken away. For the justified have
peace with God, are freed from condemnation and the Law of Sin and Death, and
they who feared eternal Punishments rejoice in the hope of Glory. Then this
slavery is changed into a blessed liberty, fear into hope, and the sorrow of
Death into the joy of Life.

. 18. It follows;

Ver. 16. For verily he took not upon him the Nature of Angels, but he took on
him the Seed of Abraham. In these words, it is conceived, a reason is given, why
Man and not Angels are delivered from the slavery of death, and danger of
eternal punishments: and the reason is this, because the Word was made Flesh,
and Man, not a Spirit or an Angel. And they more clearly explain these words,
[Seeing the Children were partakers of Flesh and Blood, he took part with
them]. By Death to deliver them: For if he, 1. Took part with them. 2. To
deliver them. 3. Deliver them by Death; then he took not part with Angels, but
with the seed of Abraham, as a fit means, which it became God to use. The
Conjunction [(...)] is not always causal, to infer a reason of some thing from
the cause or some other argument. For it is sometimes expletive, sometimes has
another signification, and so it may be here. But to let that pass, let us
consider the Text in it self, which logically considered, is a discretive
axiom, denying the same thing of one subject, and affirming it of a another.
Christ took upon him something; But, 1. That was not the Angels, or nature of
Angels. 2. He took upon him, or to him, the seed of Abraham. So that in the
words, we have two simple axioms or propositions. The first is negative, For
verily he took not upon him the nature of Angels. The second is affirmative, He
took on him the seed of Abraham. The negation in the former proposition is
strong; for it is not barely said, He took not; but he, no where, or, not at
all. For (...), may signify nusquam, aut nequaquam, no where, or, in no wise;
(...), signifies verily. To understand the whole Text is difficult, because of
the Verb (...), which some turn [apprehend it] he took hold on, and think the
expression is taken from such as pursue and follow hard after one that flies
from them, to take hold on him, and bring him back. So Man runs from God, and
God became Man to follow after Man, and take hold on him to save him. Thus
Chrysostom, and from him Bishop Andrews, Heinsius, a Lapide, with others.
Crellius and the Socinians turn the word another way, and understand the place
thus, Christ succored not the Angels, but succored the seed of Abraham. This
and also the former may be true, but not pettinent. The reason why Crellius
likes the latter sense is because he likes not the Doctrine of the Incarnation,
he cannot digest it. The word (...), translated, and that rightly, by Vatablus,
Beza, the Turgurines and Tremelius out of the Syriack assumpsit, he assumed,
and by our English took on him, does answer to the Hebrew (...) or (...) turned
by the Septuagint several times (...), the word here used. And not to take the
Angels, that is, nature of Angels, is, not to be made an Angel or Officer; the
individual substance of an Angel, to redeem the Angels that sinned. To assume
or take the Seed of Abraham, is, 1. To be a man, as Abraham and his Seed were
men, and partakers of Flesh and Blood. 2. That whereas he became man in latter
times, he must needs be of some Nation and People, with reference to the Head
and first Father of that Nation: and for Nation he was according to his humane
Nature a Jew, the first Father of which Nation was Abraham. The reason hereof
is this, because God had made a special promise to Abraham, That in his Seed
all Nations should be blessed. By which word, Seed, is meant Christ, and Christ
as descended from him according to the Flesh: He is also called the Son of
David, because God promised, That he should be born of his Family in Bethlehem,
the native place of David. This sense, 1. Is most agreeable to the Context
antecedent, where it is said, That Christ must be lower then the Angels, must
taste of Death, must be consecrated by Suffering, must be one with the
sanctisied, must be partaker of Flesh and Blood, and deliver sinful man from
the Devil. But if he had assumed the nature of Angels, none of these could be
affirmed of him. 2. The former two senses cannot be good, because then he
should have only apprenended and succored the Seed of Abraham, according to
the Letter of this Text. Therefore seeing he took upon him the Seed of Abraham,
as he did the Seed of David; therefore to take on him, or assume the Seed of
Abraham, is to be of the Seed of Abraham, as he was of David, 2 Timothy 2, 8. and
to be made of the Seed of Abraham, as he was made of the Seed of David,
according to the Flesh, Romans 1. 3. And it is the same with that of the Divine
Evangelist, The Word was made Flesh, Joh. 1. 14. Crellius here trifles
egregiously, for he excepts against this sense, 1. Because to apprehend or take
hold of a thing, is not to assume the nature of it. 2. The word Angels which is
plural, should have been singular. But, 1. Who will grant him, that which
neither others do, nor he can prove, that the word must be turned [apprehended]
in this place, whereas it has other senses, both in the Septuagint and in the
New Testament, and is turned oftener and by more Translatours, assume, as was
showed before. 2. If Christ had assumed the individual substance of an Angel,
he had assumed the Nature of Angels. He did but assume one individual Flesh and
Blood, yet he is said to take part with the Children which were many.

He again objects, that if it be said that he took the nature not of Angels but
Men, then these words cannot contain and render a reason, That Christ was made
lower then the Angels, because it is the same. But, 1. How will he prove that
[(...)] is causal, if it should be denied. 2. Who told him, that it referrs
only to those words of the 7th. verse as a reason of them; whereas it is plain,
if the conjunction be causal, it referrs to that which went immediately before.
3. To be lower then the Angels, and assume the nature of Man, are not precisely
the same: For now he is Man, and yet above the Angels. These words thus
explained and cleared, inform us, 1. Of some special love of God showed unto
Man, and to Angels; and of some benefit issuing from that love, and given unto
Man, and denied to the Angels. He so loved Man, that he gave his only begotton
Son to be the propitiation for his sin, and not for the Angels. Christ and the
eternal Word must be Man, and die for him; but he must not be an Angel to die for
Apostate Angels, or redeem them. The cause of this, was the free will of God,
who might have neglected both the one as well as the other: for both were
sinful, and deserved Death. Yet there might be a reason why he passed by the
Angels, and not Man; even because Angels were not tempred, yet sinned: but Man
was deceived, and so was a subject more capable of mercy, though he deserved no
mercy. Yet if Man will be obstinate in his sin, and refuse to acknowledge this
love, and receive Christ, God will turn his love into hatred, and send him, a
cursed wretch, into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels,
and he shall lose eternally the benefit of Christ's Redemption, which is
remission and eternal life.

2. They let us know the condescension and deep humiliation of the Son of God,
who vouchsafed not only to be Man; but took upon him the form of a Servant, and
was obedient unto Death, the Death of the Cross. And this Incarnation is a
deep mystery, and this humiliation a matter of greatest wonder.

3. They acquaint us with the excellent dignity and high advancement of the
humane Nature, in that it was assumed and inseparably united unto that eternal
Word, which is God. The Angels in many things are above us, and more excellent
then we are; yet in this we are above the Angels, and nearer unto God, and our
nature in Christ is Lord of Angels.

4. We learn from them, that the Seed of Abraham, and the People of the Jews
have a priority and privilege above all People. For Christ took upon him their
Flesh and Blood, and they were his Brethren, of whom, according to the Flesh,
Christ came, who is over all, God blessed for ever, Amen, Romans 9. 5. This is
the reason, why he said, when he lived on Earth, That he was sent to the lost
Sheep of Israel; and why he chose out of them the Apostles, preached the Gospel
unto them first (for the tender of eternal life was first made to them), and
why he began and finished the work of Redemption amongst them.

5. From them we understand something of the nature of the Incarnation. For
herein we have, 1. One person, the eternal Word, and the Son of God. 2. Two
Natures, Divine and Humane. 3. The union of these two by assumption; for the
Word assumed the nature of Man, and this Nature was thereby united to the Word
in the unity of person. 4. The distinction of these two Natures; for the Word
is God and not Man, this humane Nature remains Man and is not God, and the
difference is very great and perpetual. And thus God-Man is Christ our blessed
Savior and Redeemer; and happy are they, who know him, and believe in him.

Ver. 17, 18. Wherefore in all things it beh^^ved him to be made like unto his
Brethren, etc.. 19. In these words we have another reason, why Christ must be
lower then the Angels, Man, and like his Brethren. One end was, that he might
suffer and die; and this he could not do, except he be partaker of Flesh and
Blood: and therefore he took upon him the Nature of Men, and not of Angels. The
end why he must die, was, 1. That he might destroy the Devil, who had the power
of Death, and so deliver them that were in continual danger. 2. That he might
be a merciful and faithful High Priest, and so make reconciliation for the sins
of his People, and be able to succor them. So that the Apostle, 1. Affirms,
that he must be Man, and that being Man he must Suffer. 2. Proves why he must
be Man. 3. Why being Man, he must Suffer. The Text is brought in by an illative
[wherefore], and the conclusion inferred is, That in all things it behooved
Christ to be like unto his Brethren: And the premises do not go before but
follow in the last words of this verse, and is explained more fully in verse
18. The conclusion is concerning Christ; and the thing affirmed of him is, That
he must be like his Brethren, for it behooved him in all things to be like
them: Where, 1. We must understand what the word [(...)] (...) [behooved] does
import. 2. What it is, In all things it behooved him to be like them. The
Syriack word which signifies [it was meet, convenient, right] does best
express the meaning. For it was most agreeable to God's wisdom and Man's
condition, That he should be like his Brethren. Some make this convenience to
be a kind of duty to be performed, or debt of money to be paid, or of
punishment to be suffered; because the Word is so used in other places of the
New Testament: but none of these significations are here intended, or can well
be meant. 2. For the words [in all things, (...)], they may be referred either
to the Verb [behooved], and then the sense is, It was altogether convenient,
and in every respect sitting; or, to the Adjective [like], that is, He must be
like us in all things, there must be [similitudo ^nmimods]. And whereas some
tell us, that this must be understood with a limitation and exception of sin,
it is needless. For if he must be a Savior and expiate the sin of others, he
must needs be without sin. This exception is made by the Apostle, Chap. 4. 15.
but upon another account. The meaning therefore is, That he must be like unto
us in [all things] which are necessary or requisite to make him a complete
Redeemer and Savior of sinful man. But to this, sin was neither necessary nor
requisite: but it was absolutely necessary, he should be free from it: This is
the conlusion.

. 20. The premises or Principle from whence it is inferred is this, Because he
must be a merciful and faithful High Priest. If we bring the Apostles discourse
into form, it is this, onto this purpose: If Christ must be a merciful and
faithful High Priest, etc. then in all things it behooved him to be like unto
his Breth^ren: But he must be a merciful and faithful High Priest, etc.
Wherefore, or therefore, In all things it behooved him to be like his Brethren.
In these words, and those that follow, we may observe that Christ,

1. Is a merciful and faithful High Priest, etc.

2. How he became such; and that was by suffering and being tempted. In the
first part we have,

1. Christ's Office. 2. The Qualification for this Office. 3. The Work of
Function of his Office.


1. His Office is to be an High Priest in things pertaining to God: A Priest is
an Officer in things appertaining to God, that is, in matters of Religion,
wherein we have some Communion or Converse with God the Supreme Lord, upon whom
we depend for all things, especially such as tend to our spiritual and eternal
happiness. Therefore Priesthood is an Office distinct from all Offices of a
civil state; Of this we shall hear more, Chap. 5. Amongst Priests, some are
inferior, some are superior, and some above all the rest; and the chief and
highest Priests differed from the rest, by some power proper to them and to
none else, as to enter into the Holy of holies, and make the general Expiation:
Christ was a Priest and Mediator between God and Man in matters of Religion,
and he was the highest, supreme, and universal Priest, and had a proper power
far above all other Priests, and could enter the Sacrary of Heaven, and does
minister in that glorious Temple. This is his Office.

2. His Qualification, which is always requisite in a Priest, is, in two
things, He was

1. Merciful. 2. Faithful.


1. He must be merciful; for he must deal with God for sinful and miserable
Man, for to help him and relieve him: And he is then merciful, when he does not
only know Man's misery, but is inwardly sensible of it, as his own, so as to be
moved and resolved and that effectually, to succor him. This mercifulness is
opposed not only to Ignorance of others misery, and senslesness; but also to
harshness, severity, cruelty. And Christ was more merciful than ever any Man or
Angel was, and there was great need he should be so; for if every Offense, nay,
if many and great offenses, should move him to Passion, and enrage him so as to
reject them and their Cause, or proceed to plead against them, or condemn them;
how many thousands should perish everlastingly?

2. As he is merciful, so he must be faithful, and such as poor sinners may
safely trust unto, and depend upon, when they commit their Cause concerning
their eternal estate into his hands. Christ may be said to be faithful, either
to God who has given the Office of High Priest, and a Command to discharge it;
or unto Man, who according to the Rules of God's Word believes in him, trusts
upon him, and commits himself, and all that he has unto him: And then he is
actually faithful, when he performs all things belonging to his Sacerdotal
Office, and goes thorough with his Work until he has perfectly finished, and
sinful Man attains that for which he trusted him. Man may be merciful, and not
faithful, Christ is both; and will be sensible of our Case and Cause, will
mind it, and do it as his own: In this respect our Hope is firm, and our
Comfort is unspeakable; Blessed are all they who trust in him. This is his
Qualification, the best that ever was or can be in any Priest.

3. The Work, the principal Work is, to make Reconciliation for the Sins of his
People. 1. He has his People, and they are such as know him and trust in him.
2. These have their Sins, and are guilty. 3. Reconciliation therefore is
necessary; otherwise they die, they perish everlastingly. 4. There must be some
one, and the same a Priest both merciful and faithful, to make this
Reconciliation, and this is Christ. The word that is translated [to make
Reconciliation] is (...); which, taken actively and transitively, is, to make
God propitious and merciful to sinful Man, so, as to free him from Sin, and the
woeful Consequents thereof: And this must be done, so as to deliver Man from
sin, fully and for ever, before this Sacerdotal Work shall cease. This
Reconciliation is first made, and the Foundation of it laid in his Suffering
Death, and offering himself a Sacrifice unto the supreme and universal Judge
for the sin of Man first to make it remissible. But it is actually made, when
Man believes, and this High Priest makes intercession effectually for his
People, who come to God by him; and then it is consummate, when all the sins of
his People are for ever pardoned, and they finally justified. This is a Work of
great Mercy, and if God commit it to him, he undertake it, and Man rely upon
him, if it be not done; how can he be said to be faithful? To reconcile and
propitiate is a Work of greatest fidelity, because of greatest Consequence.

Ver. 18. For in that he has suffered, being tempted, he is able to succor
them that are tempted.. 21. In this Text, and by these words, we are informed
of the Reason why Christ is so merciful and faithful an High Priest, and how he
became such; and that was by suffering and temptation, whereof he had
experience in himself. In the words we have

his Suffering and Temptation. Power to help the tempted.

1. His Sufferings were many and cruel, and such as never any did endure; yet
his greatest Sufferings were reserved to the last: And though he never sinned,
yet he knew and felt the woeful Consequences of Sin, and the Punishments it
deserves.

2. He was tempted; for no sooner was he baptized, and publicly initiated and
declared in the sight of Heaven and Earth to be the Son of God, but Satan the
great Enemy set upon him, and attempted his ruin; yea, all his Sufferings, as
from Satan, were temptations, and it is very likely he did assault him most
violently in the end. By both these he knew what a sad and woeful thing
Suffering for Sin is, and how hard a thing it is to be tempted and not to sin,
and how much such, as being violently tempted, do sin, are to be pitied: For if
he, who had the greatest power that ever was to resist and overcome
temptations, was hardly put to it; he must needs know, and could not be
ignorant how dangerous Man's condition is, and how easily a frail Sinner may be
foiled.

2. This Suffering and Temptation made him more merciful and faithful, and able
to succor: To succor, is to do all things for the procuring the
Reconciliation of his People; and his ability to succor, is his mercifulness
and fidelity, whereby he is every way fitted, powerfully inclined, and
effectually moved to succor them. To be able sometimes is to be sit, as
Varinus observes, and so it may be here taken: And the more fit, the more
able. The saying is, None so merciful as those who have been miserable, and
they who have not only known misery, but felt it, are most powerfully
inclined, not only to inward compassion, but to the real relieving of others
miserable. And this was a contrivance of the profound Wisdom of that God, who
is infinitely knowing and merciful, to find a way how to feel misery, and be
merciful another way: This was by his Word assuming Flesh, that in that Flesh
he might be tempted violently, and suffer most grievously, and all this, that
he might be more merciful, and effectually succor sinful Man. This is the most
powerful Remedy against despair, and the firmest ground of hope and comfort
that ever sinful miserable Man, sensible of his Sin could have. And that was
the great reason why Christ must suffer being tempted, that he might be a
merciful and faithful High Priest; and, that he might be such, was the end why
it behoved him to be like his Brethren, not only in being Man, and assuming
flesh, but in Suffering and Temptation too: And thus the Son of God, for a
little time, was made lower than the Angels. This the Apostle insists upon so
largely, to let the Hebrews know, that there was little reason why they should
be offended with his Humiliation, either because he was a mortal Man, or that
he suffered death: For 1. It was foretold that he must be lower than the
Angels. 2. That he should be lower for a little time. 3. That this his
Humiliation for a time was a way to Glory; he was lower than those heavenly
Spirits for a little time, that he might be above them for ever. 4. That thus
to be humbled became God, and it seemed in his Wisdom to be the most excellent
way of consecrating the great Captain of our Salvation. 5. It was most fitting,
that he that was sent to redeem and sanctify Man, should be Man, and not an
Angel. 6. It was infinitely beneficial unto us; for by this means, 1. He tasted
death for us. 2. By his death destroyed the Power of Satan. 3. By destroying
his Power, delivered us from the slavish fear and danger of death. 4. By his
Humiliation, in Suffering and Temptation, he became a most merciful and
faithful High Priest, and most able effectually to procure their
Reconciliation. And why should this voluntary Humiliation be either any the
least derogation from the Excellency of Christ? or stumbling block unto the
Jew? or seem foolishness to the Gentiles? There is no reason at all, but it
argues the Ignorance, if not the wilful blindness, of both Jew and Gentile. The
Errors of Crell^us we shall meet with hereafter: For 1. He denies Christ's
Sufferings to be Punishments. 2. He affirms, that to succor is to expiate
Sin. 3. He says, that the principal Function of Christ's Priesthood is
performed now in Heaven, and was not performed by his death on Earth, which he
denies to be an Expiation by suffering Punishment for our sins.

CHAP. III. Ver. 1.
. 1. THE Sum and Substance of this Chapter is an Exhortation to perseverance in
the Christian Faith, yet upon new grounds and reasons, distinct from those in
the two former Chapters: For they show, that Christ was more excellent than the
Prophets and the Angels; and that the World to come was not subject to Angels,
but to Christ; who, though by his Sufferings he was for a little time lower
than the Angels, yet upon his Resurrection and Ascension, was far above them.
This Chapter manifests his Excellency far above Mofes; and argues, that if
Moses was to be heard, then Christ much more, and if they which disobeyed Moses
were punished, much more they which disobey Christ. In the Exho^tation we must
observe,

1. The parties to whom the Exhortation is directed. 2. The Duty exhorted unto.
3. The reasons whereby the performance of the Duty is urged.


And these Reasons are taken

from the Excellency of Christ. Benefit of Perseverance. Punishment of
Apostasy. The Punishment is set forth by an Example of their Fathers Proposed.
Applied.

Ver. 1. Wherefore, holy Brethren, partakers of the heavenly Calling, etc.. 2.
This is the Description of the parties exhorted: They were Hebrews, yet
Christians, and described

as Brethren, Holy, Partakers of the heavenly Call.

They were Brethren, and as such related to Paul, an Hebrew, and one unto
another. And the ground of this Relation and Fraternity was not only
Generation, but chiefly Regeneration; not so much natural as supernatural: For
though they were Brethren by natural Generation, as descended from Abraham, the
same Father, as the unbelieving Jews were; yet here they are called Brethren,
as believing in Christ; and holy, as sanctified by the Spirit of Christ: So
that this is a Fraternity in respect of Religion Christian. They became such
Brethren, and so holy, by the heavenly Call; they were partakers of the
heavenly Calling. For as they were not Brethren, so neither were they holy by
natural Generation, but by supernatural and spiritual Regeneration, as before.
To be partakers of this Call, is either barely to be called, or to be partakers
of this Mercy, together with others: It Is said to be Heavenly, as some
understand it, in respect of the efficient and the final Cause, It Is from
Heaven, that is, from God, who is the principal Cause of this Work; and because
they are to be called to Heaven, that is, eternal Glory, which is the end and
ultimate Effect thereof. In it we may consider, 1. The Work of God. 2. The Duty
of Man. 3. The Benefit following upon both. The Work of God is by the Word of
the Gospel, and the Power of the Spirit, to enlighten and sanctify man, and
gave him a Divine Power to believe and turn unto Him. The duty of Man is to be
obedient to the heavenly Call. The benefit is the admission of him as obedient
unto his heavenly Kingdom, and receiving him as an Heir of Glory. Upon this
heavenly Call follows a great change, both in the disposition, and condition
of man called. For his disposition, he is made of unholy, holy, and therefore
said to be called with an holy Calling, and to be called unto Holiness. For his
condition, he is made of miserable, happy; and therefore said to be called unto
eternal Glory. And because the distance between holiness and happiness, and
sinful and miserable Man, is so great; therefore this work of God is a work of
great power: and, because the change is so happy, therefore it is a work of
great mercy, wherein God freely prevents man; so that if he should not thus
prevent him, he would be for ever sinful and miserable. Woe unto all such as are
disobedient to this heavenly Call, and neglect this preventing Grace, for as
their Sin is more heinous, so their Punishment shall be more grievous. The
Apostle seems to put them in mind of this Calling, to let them know how deeply
they are engaged to God, and how unworthy they should be, if they should not
persevere unto the end.

. 3. The duty exhorted unto, is expressed ver. 6. It Is to hold fast the
confidence and rejoicing of the hope firm to the end; and is repeated, ver. 14.
It Is opposed to unbelief, ver. 12. Take heed, Brethren, lest there be in any of
you an evil heart of unbelief, in departing from the living God. The duty
therefore is persevetance, which presupposes that they had received the Truth
of the Gospel, and professed their Faith in Christ; and is a contin^ance in
this Faith once received, and professed to the end. This Faith was from God,
and was wrought in them by the heavenly Call, and the continuance of it depends
upon God. He gave it at the first, he continues it to the last; yet so, that
man must be obedient at the first, and use all means with diligent care to
preserve it to the last. Some refuse to obey at the first, others who have
professed and received the Truth fall off before the end; and both these are
sins, and they only guilty of them.

. 4. The reasons follow, 1. From the excellency of Christ, which is set forth
by Comparison. The parties compared are Christ and Moses, both excellent, but
Christ far more. And here it is observable, 1. That the duty is the same with
that, which was pressed, Chap. 2. 2. That the ground of that, was the
excellency of Christ above the Angels; of this, the excellency of Christ above
Moses. 3. The reason there, was, that if the disobedience unto the word of
Angels was punished with Death, how much more grievously shall they be punished
which disobey the Gospel of Christ? 4. The reason here, is, that if their
fathers for their unbelief and disobedience to the Doctrine of Moses, were
eternally shut out of God's rest; how much more shall they he shut out of
Heaven and Christ's eternal rest, if they do not continue in the Faith of
Christ, but fall off from their profession. To understand this first reason, we
must consider, 1. The excellency of Christ, and the excellency of Moses
absolutely and positively. 2. The excellency of both comparatively, that so we
may understand the excellency of the one f^t above the the excellency of the
other. 1. Therefore they must consider the excellency of Christ Jesus, which is
this, That he is the Apostle, and High Priest of their Profession. Their
profession was of the Christian Faith and Religion, which they did profess.
The Author, Apostle, and Legate sent from Heaven, who first published this
Faith and Doctrine was Christ the Son of God, by whom God spoke, who was
formerly proved to be more excellent then the Prophets, then the Angels. So
that their Religion was from God, nor by Prophets or Angels, but by Christ the
great Prophet: For here to be an Apostle, is to be a Prophet. Yet Moses (and
so, many others) may be Prophets, yet no High Priest; but Christ Jesus is not
only the Prophet, but the High Priest, who mediates between God and Man, and
officiates so, as to make his Doctrine effectual and saving, and expiate his
Peoples Sin, that they may be reconciled to their God. This twofold power was
necessary, as without which he could not have been a perfect Savior. These are
his two Offices upon which the Apostle so much enlarges and insisteth. But
(...) may be an Officer, and yet prove unfaithful, and not discharge his trust;
yet Christ was faithful. For it follows,

Ver. 2. Who was faithful to him that appointed him.]. 5. This is concerning
Christ's fidelity expressed both absolutely in these words, and comparatively
in those which follow.

1. Absolutely; He was faithful to him, who appointed him. 2. Comparatively; As
Moses was faithful in all his House.


The former words 1. Imply his ordination. 2. Express his fidelity to him that
ordained him.

Where we have two Propositions:

1. That God appointed Him. 2. He was faithful to God.


In that He was appointed, or made an Apostle and High Priest of our Christian
profession (for so the words are to be understood); it is evident, that He did
not Usurp this twofold Power and Office, but received it, and acquired it
legally; and none could invest Him with this Power, but only God: and the
reason is, because it is so eminent and transcendent. After he was once
advanced, he was faithful to that God who advanced, and trusted him with so
great a Power: This fidelity was the true and full discharge of his Apostolical
and Sacerdotal Office, in perfectly doing all things necessary for the eternal
Salvation of Man, so far as it depended upon this twofold Office. As an
Apostle or Prophet he clearly and fully revealed the Will of his heavenly
Father, and taught Man all things necessary to be known, believed, and
practiced, to his Salvation. And from him we received that perfect Rule of
Christianity, which directs us to Heaven, which he confirmed by his holy Life,
glorious Miracles, and the excellent Gifts of the Holy Ghost, and sealed it
with his precious Blood. As a Priest, he offered himself a pure unspotted
Sacrifice to satisfy divine Justice, to propitiate the Supreme Judge, to merit
his favor, and all spiritual Blessings; and is ever ready to officiate and
make intercession in Heaven. For in all these things God trusted him:

This is his Absolute fidelity, his Comparative follows in these words,

As also Moses was faithful in all his House.] This may be a Comparison either
in quality or quantity. In quality, it is a similitude signifying that he was
like unto Moses in this particular of fidelity: Moses was faithful, so was
Christ. It may be also in quantity, and so signify an equality, that He was as
faithful as Moses; and in fidelity not any whit inferior to him: both are
true. Moses was a Prophet, and did order all things in the whole Church of
Israel, and all matters of Religion, according to the pattern showed him in the
Mount, and with all care and diligence did follow close the directions given
him from Heaven: So Christ did not his own Will, but the Will of him that sent
him, and that in all things.

. 6. The Apostle knowing full well, that it was not sufficient to prove Christ
to be equal to Moses, proceeds to show that he was far more excellent.

Ver. 3. For this Man was counted worthy of more Glory than Moses, etc.] To
understand these words, many things are to be observed; As, 1. That the scope
of the Apostle in this Epistle; as you heard before, is to confirm these
Hebrews in the Christian Faith, and so prevent Apostasy. 2. That one means, and
the same principally conducing, to this end, was, to set forth the sufficiency
and excellency of Christ; and that not only absolutely, but comparatively to
those persons which were of most excellent account as Prophets and Angels, both
sent unto Men by God, and by whom God had spoken to Men; and also above all
Priests, which had nearer access to God, and as Mediators did officiate for
Man before the Throne of God. 3. That formerly He had demonstratively proved,
that He was more excellent then Prophets or Angels. 4. That Moses was one of
the greatest Prophets of all the rest, as one that had nearer familiarity with
God then others, and as one that was trusted by him in very great and weighty
matters. 5. That the Jews and these Hebrews did much honor Moses, and much
depended upon him. 6. Therefore the Apostle, lest their high conceit of him
should any ways derogate from Christ, or diminish his Glory; he proves in this
place, that Christ was not only like unto Moses, and equal with him, but also
far above him. These things premised, the words are easily understood: The
subject of them is the excellency of Christ as far above Moses. This is set
forth by a Metaphorical Allegory; and in that manner, that we have not only a
Comparison in quality, but also in quantity. They are brought in by this
rational or causal Conjunction [For], which some referr to the word [consider],
as giving a reason why we must consider Christ. But it is many times prefixed
before the conclusion as inferred upon premises following, as here it seems to
be; and so it was used, as you heard, in the former Chapter. Yet it is sometimes
adversative, and the same with [sed or but]; sometimes it is used only to bring
in a sentence: but this I write only upon the By, lest when we find it used in
the New Testament, we should in every place look for a reason from the cause,
or think that it always tenders a reason for to prove or infer a conclusion.
The comparison or comparative terms are taken from a Builder and an House, and
from a Lord of the House, and a Servant in the House. The argument in form is,
The Builder is far above the House, and the Lord above the Servant: But Christ
is the Builder of the House, and Moses but a part of the House: Christ is the
Lord, and Moses but the Servant in God's House: Therefore Christ is far more
excellent then Moses, and to be counted worthy of more Glory. To be counted
worthy of greater Glory does presuppose, 1. That the object of all Honor,
which is here called Glory, is some excellency. 2. That the more excellent any
thing is, the more worthy of honor it is. 3. That because every thing is to
have it is due, and to be accounted as it is; Therefore, if Christ be more
excellent, and worthy of greater Honor, then he ought to be honored above
Moses. That the Builder is more excellent then the House, no rational Man can
doubt, because the cause, especially the principal efficient (such an Architect
is) must needs be more excellent then the effect. This proposition presupposes
another, which can hardly be doubted, that is,

Ver. 4. For every House is built by some man,] The word [House] may be taken
either for an earthly artificial House, or for any spiritual and metaphorical
House, as the Church: yet here it seems to be an earthly artificial House made
for habitation. The reason why every House must have a Builder, is, because no
House can build, no effect can produce, it self; but every effect (as every
House is an effect) must have a cause. From hence it is consequent, that this
House whereof the Apostle speaks, must needs have a Builder; even both that
House wherein Moses, and also that House wherein Christ was faithful. Yet there
may be Houses which may be built by Men, and by Builders who are particular
Architects of some particular House or Houses; but there must be some universal
Architect and Builder of all things, and that is God.

But he that built all things is God,] that is, God is the supreme Agent: the
principal and universal cause of all Buildings and Effects is God. And if of
all things and Buildings, then of the Church; that Church, that House wherein
Christ was faithful. These words are conceived to contain the Minor of the
Argument, so far as it speaks metaphorically of Building; and then the sense
is, that Christ is the Builder of the Church. But some do conceive, that it is a
proof or confirmation of the Minor, in this manner; God is the Builder of all
things, and especially of the Church; therefore Christ is Builder of the
Church: for Christ is God, because he is that Word which was with God, and was
God, and by whom all things were made at first; and that Son by whom he made
the Worlds, who, as the Father, works hitherto, and upholdeth all things by
the word of his Power. That God is the Builder of the Church, whose House it
is, is express Scripture; that Christ does build it, is so too. For thus
Christ says to Peter, Upon this Rock will I build my Church, Matthew. 16. 18.
Some restrain the word [(...),] all things to the Church, but that is not
probable. For the better understanding of these words, you must observe, 1.
That one of the most noble Effects and Works of God, is the Church, a most rare
and curious piece. 2. That to Frame, Build, and Constitute this, must be a
special act of that excellent and universal Builder. 3. That as by the Word.
God created all things, and built the World at the first; so by this Word
Incarnate, dying and rising again, sending down the Holy Ghost, revealing the
Gospel, he built and founded the Church-Christian, which shall stand for ever.
4. That because he built this Church not merely as God, by the word
not-Incarnate, but Incarnate and made Flesh; therefore it must necessarily
follow, that Christ is not part of the House, nor the House it self, but the
Builder of the House. For, though he does many things by the word
not-Incarnate, yet he never built the Church but by it. The substance of the
words is, That, presupposing this for a certain truth, That every House has a
Builder; therefore this House must have so too: yet because it cannot be built
by Men or Angels, it must be built by God; and because the materials of it are
Men first sinful and guilty, God must build it by Christ, who is the Word made
Flesh. This discourse implies, that Moses was not a Builder, but a Member of
this House; yet an eminent Member, and one advanced far above the ordinary
rank of other Members; not only because a Prophet, but an excellent and
eminent Prophet too.

. 7. Thus far the excellency of Christ above Moses, set forth by a Similitude
taken from building. The second Comparison is between Him and Moses as between
Lord and Servant: For it follows,

Ver. 5. And verily Moses was faithful in all his House as a Servant, for a
Testimony, etc.] These words are part of the Minor Proposition, and, with the
words immediately following, inform us of two things; The one concerning Moses,
the other concerning Christ: 1. Concerning Moses, That for his place he was a
Servant. 2. Concerning Christ, That He was Lord of God's House. They both agree
in this, that they had some certain place in the House of God; but differ in
this; That the one was in a lower, the other in a higher place. Moses, though
faithful, yet was but a Servant; He was God's Servant in an honorable Place,
and in an Office of great Trust: For the word [Servant] signifies an Officer;
yet because all Officers are Servants, therefore by a Synechdoche, they are
often called Servants under their Sovereign. He was a kind of Steward trusted
with a general superintendency and inspection over God's House, the Church of
Israil: In a word, he was a Prophet and a Prince. Yet here he is considered as
a Prophet; for he was to testify and declare unto the People the Laws and other
things God should reveal unto him. And it was an Honor to be such a Servant,
and a greater Honor to be faithful, as he was to declare and testify all
things which God revealed unto him; and to do this, without diminishing the
least, or adding any thing unto God's Word. This is one proper Duty of Christ's
Ministers to be witnesses of Christ, and declare the whole counsel of God
faithfully; and how happy might the Church be, if her Prophets were such: As,
1. Who did know what the Will and Word of God is, 2. Did teach it faithfully
and wisely, according to their Commission. Though Moses in this respect was
counted worthy of Honor, and deserved to be heard and obeyed by that People;
yet Christ was worthy in this respect of far greater Honor. For it follows,

Ver. 6. But Christ as a Son over his own House,] Here Son is opposed to
Servant, and his own House to the House of another which is the Master. Christ
is the Son, Moses but the Servant: Christ is in the House, as his own built by
him; Moses was in the Church of the Jews as a Servant in the House of his
Master, giving directions for all things to be done therein, according to the
Will of God his Lord and Master. Christ is not here called Lord, but Son; but
by Son is meant the Heir, which is Lord of all. For as you heard before God had
made Christ his Son Heir, that is, Lord of all, Chap. 1. 2. The Church is his
own House; for he redeemed and purchased it by his own Blood, he gave himself
for it, which Moses never did: and his Father has given all things into his
hands, and made Him Head of that Church and House which he himself has Built:
Moses was never advanced to this Honor, he never had any such Title. This
excellency of Christ both absolute and comparative, we are exhorted to
consider: It Is represented unto us fully and clearly in the Gospel; yet will be
of little use to us, if we consider it not, so as we may the more clearly and
distinctly know it, and be effectually moved to honor Christ, and prefert Him
far above Moses. For the end of consideration is a more clear and perfect
knowledge of the things considered, and in practicals the end of that knowledge
is to move and incline out hearts. This exhortation is but subordinate unto
another, as the duty of Consideration is but subordinate to an higher and far
greater, and that is Perseverance which is here thus expressed.

Ver. 6. -- Whose House We are, if we hold fast the considence, and rejoicing
of hope firm to the end.]. 8. The Duty exhorted unto, is final perseverance;
and is here described by the Apostle to be an holding fast of the considence,
and rejoicing of hope firm to the end: This is opposed to Apostasy, or a
falling off before the end. Per^everance is conceived to be no virtue distinct
in it self, but an adjunct of virtues, and especially of Faith. The virtues
here are considence, and rejoicing of hope; The nature of it is, 1. To hold
these fast and firm. 2. To hold them fast unto the end. The subject immediate
of this constancy and perseverance, is confidence and hope: 1. Confidence in
this place presupposes a firm and certain belief of the Truth of the Gospel
concerning Christ, as the only sufficient Savior by whom alone God will give
us everlasting Life. 2. This confidence is a reliance and resting or reposing
of our hearts upon God promising remission and eternal Life for Christ's sake
alone. For seeing God, who is almighty in Power, infinite in Wisdom,
unchangeable in his Purposes, has signified his willingness to save us, and
has bound himself by his promise, upon certain terms expressed in his promise;
we may be confident, that what he has promised he will perform, and will in no
wise fail, or be unfaithful. He is a firm, unmovable, eternal Rock, whereon we
may securely settle and fix our selves; and so much the rather, because there
is not any other besides him in whom we may trust. 3. The effect, if not the
act of this confidence, is, boldly, without any fear of Persecutions or
Sufferings, to profess our Faith in God, and Christ our Savior. For where
there is true Faith within, there will be profession of it without: And though
the inward confidence be the principal thing, yet profession outward is
necessary, and should be inseperably joined. The second thing is the rejoicing
of hope; Hope may here be the thing hoped for, which is Salvation and eternal
Glory: yet not as considered absolutely in itself, but as due to us by Christ's
merit and God's promise, in which respect we expect it, and look for it, and
that upon most sure grounds; The rejoicing of this hope is rejoicing in eternal
Life as hoped for. Eternal Life, and the state of Glory is the principal,
though not the adequate object of Christian hope, and is often so expressed in
Scripture. It may be known and believed on Earth, yet it is to be enjoyed in
Heaven: As only known and believed, it cannot be a cause of joy, but as either
possessed or hoped for at least. Neither can any man hope for it, except he be
so qualified as to be capable of it, and have a right unto it by virtue of
God's promise, and a certain possibility to obtain it, and that by divine
assistance and constant use of means ordained to that end. And this
well-grounded hope, makes it in some sort present though imperfectly to the
party hoping: And to look upon it represented and apprehended by a divine Light
as ours, and to be had in due time: though for the present it be future, and at
a great distance; yet it reviv^s the heart, and warmes it with an unspeakable
joy. This confidence and this hope are Duties required in the first
Commandment* understood evangelically, and are found in every true Believer,
and never are without this heavenly joy. Now, because these heavenly virtues
are not essential to the Soul, not eternally inseparable adjuncts, and may
continue inherent for a time, and yet not finally, except God preserve them in
us, and we use the means of continuation; therefore the Apostle exhorts us to
hold them fast and firm unto the end. And this is the Duty exhorted unto, which
is called perseverance, which is not in our power, but depends upon the divine
assistance. For that God, which did first work them in these Hebrew-Christians,
must continue them; yet so, that he requires a performance of Duty, and an
humble dependence upon him in the use of all means appointed to that end, with
a serious consideration of those weighty Reasons and Motives which are proposed
in the Scriptures, and apt of themselves to work effectually upon us. This
exhortation presupposes faith and hope as already qualifying the Soul; for
there is no holding fast of that we have not, no continuance of that which has
no existence in us. And the more deeply and firmly they are radicated in the
Soul, and intensively increased, they will be more easily preserved, though the
continuance depends [ab extrinseco] from the principal Efficient, which is God,
who will never be wanting to such as carefully rely upon him, and constantly
pray unto him.

. 9. Thus you have heard, 1. Who the persons exhorted are; And, 2. What the
Duty pressed upon them is. The third thing is the Reasons and Motives, which
are (as before) reduced to three Heads. The first is the excellency of Christ,
as one so far above Moses, as the Builder above the House, and the Son and Lord
above the Servant. And this was an argument very forcible and powerful with the
Hebrews, and that not without plain reason. For if they so much honored and
magnified Moses, as they were bound to do, because he was so excellent, and the
first Author under God of their Jewish Profession; how much more upon their
own principle and practice were they bound to honor Christ, the Author of
that Christianity, which they had already received. For if Moses was sent of
God, so was Christ; if Moses was a most eminent Prophet, so was Christ; if
Moses was faithful in the House of God, so was Christ. Yet this is far short.
Christ was not a Servant, but a Son, and a Builder of this spiritual House,
which Moses was not; and every way far more excellent and clearly manifested so
to be. And if they were bound to observe the Laws of Moses till Christ came,
and to continue firm and faithful in the Covenant contracted by Moses with God
and their Fathers; how much more were they bound to submit themselves to
Christ, receive him as their Apostle and High Priest, and hold fast and firm
their Faith and Hope in Him, upon whom their everlasting happiness did so much
depend. To forsake Christ, and return to Moses, must be a very heinous Crime,
and deserving a most grievous Punishment: For Moses was no ways so beneficial,
nor any ways so excellent as Christ. That Christ is far more beneficial, is
next to be considered.

. 10. Whose House we are,] This Clause inserted, proposes a second reason of
and a motive to perseverance; and that from the benefit, the inestimable
benefit, which follows upon the performance of this Duty to such as do perform
it. If we will reduce the whole into a Proposition, it is this, That they who
persevere unto the end, are Christ's House. This [in these] is an eternal
Truth, whereon the Apostle grounds his argument; the force whereof will then
appear, when we shall understand what it is to be Christ's House: 1. We have an
House. 2. Christ's House. The word House is to be taken metaphorically for some
thing like an House. There are many kind of Houses, all made for some to dwell
in them; among these, Temples and sacred Palaces excel, because they are not
made for habitation of men, but for some God or Deity to dwell in them, and
take possession of them. Therefore some have made the perfection, if not the
essence of a Temple, the presence and inhabitation of a God. The excellency
therefore of this House here meant must be the special presence and
inhabitation of God-Redeemer by Christ. And the truth is, that as Christ by his
Spirit dwells in every true Believer, in which respect they are said to be the
Temples of the Holy Ghost; so he dwells in the whole Church, as in one House.
God dwells in us here in a special manner, but he will dwell in us far more
gloriously hereafter: And if we well consider, this House shall not be fully
Built, much less furnished and fully beautified until the Resurrection, when
Christ shall perfectly sanctify and glorify us, and so dwell in us, never to
remove, but for ever to abide, and make us for ever holy and happy. This latter
condition of this House, and more excellent habitation is here meant; For only
they who persevere unto the end shall be his House in this manner. Though it
may be said, That we are his House now, and shall be his House for ever in a
more glorious manner, if we persevere unto the end: This is the meaning of the
words. The force of the argument from them thus understood is evident, and very
great: For if this blessed and glorious estate of being Christ's House will
certainly follow upon the final perseverance in sincere Christianity; how much
will it move and work upon such as believe, and certainly hope, that upon this
duty performed so incomparable a Reward will follow? And how careful will they
be in case of all means, which conduce to this perseverance? For the greater
good believed to follow upon any performance, the greater and more powerful the
motive is: This is the second Reason.

. 11. The third follows, and that is from the penalty that will follow upon
non-perseverance and Apostasy. This reason is annexed to a dehortation from
hardening of the heart, and apostasy, which is unbelief; yet this dehortation
presupposes the principal exhortation to Faith, and continuance therein to the
end; and therefore because it is a reason of the dehortation from the contrary
sin, it must needs be a reason of the exhortation to the duty opposed to that
sin. It Is taken out of Psalm. 95. from ver. 8. unto the end. And though it seem
to be directed unto the People of those, wherein the Psalm was composed; yet it
directly points at the Gospel, and the days of the same. In that part of the
Psalm, we may observe, 1. The dehortation. 2. The reason why they should take
heed of the sin dehorted from. The reason is from an example of the like Sin
punished in their forefathers: The Sin in one word was Unbelief, expressed and
declared by the effects thereof, which were tempting of God, and so offending
him; because they erred in their hearts, and did not know or take notice of his
ways. The punishment was exclusion out of Canaa^, their rest intended by God:
Which punishment was, 1. Absolutely denounced by way of a final and peremptory
sentence passed with an Oath. 2. Executed by overthrowing their Carcasses in
the Wilderness. The sum of all this was to let them know, That if they sinned,
as their Fathers did, they should certainly suffer the like punishment. The
conclusion inferred hence, is, That they must have a special care to persevere
in the Faith, and take heed of Apostasy: This may suffice to be observed upon
the words of the Psalmist.

. 12. The next thing is the Application of these words of the Psalmist unto the
present Hebrews, to whom he writes, Wherein he, 1. Presses the Duty upon them
according to the words of the Psalm. 2. That his counsel might be more
forcible, and the Duty more diligently and carefully performed, he uses two
reasons: The first from the benefit which will follow. 2. From the punishment
they must suffer, if they fall away. 1. The duty is the same, which was
formerly urged, and that is perseverance and constancy in their Christian
Profession, which is opposed to unbelief and apostasy, which is a departing
from the living God, which in the Psalmist is the hardening of the heart. For
that passage of the Psalmist presupposes a Day and Time of God's speaking to
mortal man, and exhorts man in that Day to hear and obey constantly till the
Day of God's Voice be ended; and dehorteth from hardness of heart, Disobedience
and Apostasy. In this place the Apostle making the same application to the
Children and Posterity, which David did to their Fathers living in his time,
declares the Duty. 1. Negatively, or rather [apotreptic (...)], by way of
dehortation. 2. Affirmatively, by way of exhortation to that which will be a
means of continuance and perseverance. The dehortation is,

Ver. 12. Take heed, Brethren, lest there be in any of you an evil heart of
Unbelief, in departing from the living God.] Where we must consider, 1. The
evil dehorted from. 2. The dehortation it self. The evil is an evil of Sin, not
of punishment; where we have the root of it in the primary subject [an evil
heart of Unbelief], the fruit and effect [departing from the living God.] The
heart is the primary and proper subject, and also the cause of sin; yet the
heart, as the heart, is not the cause of actual sin, but as an evil heart, and
here an evil heart of Unbelief. Unbelief may in this place signify
perfidiousnesse, when the heart inclines to deny and forsake that Truth which
was formerly professed, and to violate that promise of Obedience made to God,
at the first entrance into Christianity; and so actual unbelief is a breach of
Covenant. This unbelieving heart is an evil, that is, a disobedient, impious,
perverted heart. This is the basest temper, and most malignant quality of the
Soul, whereby it is most contrary to the most just and holy Law of God, and the
conditions of the Covenant of Grace. That it is so, is evident from the act or
effect thereof, which is, to depart from the living God. This departing from
God, is actual and formal apostasy, which is so directly contrary to
Perseverance: This is signified by the word [(...)] in the Orginal, which is to
renounce something formerly received and acknowledged. It Is like to a
rebellion, revolt, and renouncing of a lawful Sovereign formerly acknowledged,
by allegiance and fidelity promised: These Hebrews had received the Gospel,
acknowledged Christ their Savior, made a Covenant with the living God, to whom
they submitted themselves as their Sovereign Lord Redeemer by Christ. In their
Baptism, they had solemnly professed their Faith in God the Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost, and promised obedience. To deny this profession, or this Faith
professed, to break this promise, to forsake their Christianity, turn Jews or
Heathens; especially after that by Miracles and Gifts of the Holy Ghost, that
were so strongly convinced of the Truth, must needs be an heinous sin, issuing
from an evil and malignant heart indeed. There is an hardening of the heart
against the light and motives of the Gospel, when Christ is first tendered, and
not yet received. There is an hardening of the heart against the Truth once
received; this latter, not the former, is Apostasy, and the Sin here meant:
both heinous, both forbidden by God, both tending to eternal Death; yet this
more then the other. And here it is to be noted, that, positive unbelief,
blindness, and hardness of heart are often taken for the same: The Duty
therefore is, to take heed lest there be such an heart in any of them. Where
it is employed, 1. That every one was in danger. 2. That this sin began in the
heart. 3. Therefore all and every one must be very wary, careful, diligent to
avoid the same, and all the causes thereof. For if they were not well-grounded
in the principles of Christianity, they might be deluded by the Sophisms of the
unbelieving Jews, and their cunning Emissaries: if they were not strong in
Faith, and their former holy resolutions, they might the more easily be
overcome by the sear of persecution, and the love of their Temporal Peace,
Safety, Estates, Liberty, Lives. The reason of this dehortation was, because he
knew, that if they did not carefully avoid the contrary, which was destructive
of perseverance, they could not persevere. To avoid this sin, he adds an
exhortation, wherein he prescribes a means tending to continue us in the Truth,
saying,

Vet. 13. But exhort one another daily, whilst it is called to Day, lest any of
you be hardued through the deceitfulness of sin.]. 13. Though we may exhort one
another in private, yet this seems to have some reference to their public
Assemblies for Religious Worship. For as the Psalm was composed for the public
Worship, and to be sung as a preparative to the same (especially that part,
which is concerning the hearing of God's Word): So in the times of the Gospel,
it was used by some Christian Churches to prepare the People assembled; as for
other Duties, so for that of hearing the Gospel. Thus we find it placed in our
Liturgy; And upon due consideration, it will appear to be an excellent place of
Scripture, and most fit for that end. In the words we have, 1. An exhortation.
2. A reason. In the exhortation we have, 1. The duty. 2. The time of
performance. The duty is, mutual exhortation, and encouragement of one another:
The time is, daily, while it is said [To Day]. The reason is to prevent
obdu^ation, lest any of you be hardened. Before I enter upon the particular
explication of these words, I must inform the Reader, That the Apostle having
recited the words of the Psalm, in the application of them follows the order of
the principal words and parts thereof. The first was, Harden not your heart
this he insists upon, ver. 12, 13, 14. The second, The Fathers provoked God:
this he takes up in ver. 15, 16. The third, God was grieved with that
Generation: this you find, ver. 17. The fourth is, The shutting of these
unbelieving Ancesters out of God's Rest: this you may read of, ver. 18, 19. The
fifth is, Entering into rest granted and promised to God's People, after the
days of David: This takes up the greatest part of the Chapter following. The
duty exhorted unto, is, to exhort one another, so that it is an exhortation to
exhortation. Where we must consider, 1. What it is to exhort. 2. Who they be
who are concerned in this duty to perform it.

1. To exhort, is to move, stir up, encourage, comfort, strengthen, persuade.
The end is confirmation and continuance in Christianity. The means are,
proposing the divine Precepts, the glorious Reward promised, the fearful
Punishments threatened, to manifest the clear and pure Truth of the Gospel, and
the Divine confirmations of the same, with the falsehood of all contrary
Doctrines: To these we may add their public and private Prayers, with the
Sacraments.

2. This Duty concerned all and every one. For every Christian, according as he
has power and opportunity, is bound as to convert others, so to edisy and
confirm one another converted, and mutually further and promote their
Salvation. And this is a special work of Christian Charity, which we owe one to
another is Christian Brethren, and Fellow Members of the same Body: Yet the
greater our Abillties, and the more excellent out Gifts, the greater is our
Obligation. Therefore the Sacraments in public Assemblies, were called
Exhortations.
And Ministers, of all others, are most concerned in it; and the end of out
Christian Assemblies for Religious Worship and Discipline, is to do this work.
But how guilty are we of neglect? how careless are we of this work? How justly
may God charge the Blood of the Souls of our Apostate Brethren upon us? Most
men hinder, and that many ways; and few further the Salvation of their
Brethren. It Is high time for us all to reform in this particular: This is the
Duty, to exhort one another; the time limited for the performance is, [to Day,
whilst it is said to Day]: For so the Psalmist says, To Day if you will hear
his Voice.] This presupposes a time when God will speak, and we must hear; God
speaks by his Word, and here, in particular, by the Gospel, and the Professors
and Ministers thereof. By it, he Commands all men to repent and believe; and
being once converted, to persevere unto the end: and by it he promises to such
as obey, a glorious Reward. He is further ready to accompany this Word of the
Gospel with the power of his Spirit, without which man cannot perform his Duty:
This is that, which we call Vocation; so that to Day is the time of Vocation
granted to any People, or to single Persons. And whilst God grants to any the
Word and Spirit, which are the means of conversion; He may be said to Call, and
Man is bound to hear and be Obedient. Some think this Day to be the whole time
of every man's life, whilst he is a member of the visible Church: yet we find,
that many of the Israelites were by an Oath excluded out of God's Rest before
they dyed; and that Jerusalem had by her hardness of heart made her case
desperate, and her ruin unavoidable, long before it was destroyed: so likewise
many a man's Day and Time of possibility and hope to be saved, is spent and
ended, before his life determine. Therefore by [Day] in this place is
understood in a special manner the present time, because no man is certain of
the future. Therefore they must exhort one another, whilst it is said to Day;
that is, presently, and in no wise delay, or intermit the performance of this
Duty.

The reason of this exhortation is from the end, which is the preventing
[hardness of heart through the deceitfulness of Sin.] This presupposes that
sin is deceitful, and implies that the deceitfulness thereof will harden the
heart. Sin in it self is base and filthy, and an object of abomination; and
except it be represented in some appearance of good, every one would abhor it.
Satan therefore, when he would tempt and persuade man to it, deludes his
Understanding with false colors of Pleasure or Profit, or something desirable:
but conceals the baseness, and the sad and woeful consequents thereof. This
outward appearance of goodness makes it like a bait fastened on an hook, and man
being greedy of the bait, swallows the hook. When he finds no mischief to
follow upon the Commission, immediately he goes on by degrees, till he acquire
an habit, which hardens the heart, makes it senseless, blots out the Characters
of divine Truth, and so in the end changes the very quality of the heart.
Whereas man before was very pliable, and ready to receive the impressions of
Divine Truth; now he is blinded, and become stupid: Divine commands, promises,
threats, exhortations, admonitions cannot work upon him, and then how easily
will he be persuaded to fall off from Christ, and deny the Faith he had
professed. Hardness of heart may be considered as a Judgment of God, or as a
Sin of Man; here it is to be considered as a Sin. And such it may be either in
respect of the first Call, and so is, or implies at least a refusal of
Christianity; and so it is either a rejection of that Christianity which was
once received and professed, or at least makes way for it; and thus it is to be
understood in this place. For no man can fall off from the Christian Faith once
received, but his heart must needs be hardened, and stand unmoved against all
former convictions. This considered either in the former or latter sense, may
be conceived, 1. As a Not yielding unto the Reasons and Motives unto belief and
profession proposed in the Gospel. 2. As an obstinate resisting of these
Motives and Reasons joined with some power of the Spirit. And both these may be
caused either from the delusion of the understanding, apprehending, and (...)
to contrary Motives and Reasons; which are not really such, but seem to be
such, which may be called sinful (...), as the words of the Text may be
understood; o^ from the pure malignancy of the Will, or from both. Now to
prevent all these, mutual exhortation is an excellent mean ordained by God to
that end. And the neglect of this Duty is a great Cause, or at least a great
Advantage of sin, and leaves the way open for Apostasy to come in. For frequent
proposals and representations of the true Reasons, why we should believe, and a
continual ^itring up to holy Duties, are effectual causes of the confirmation
of our profession, and so of our perseverance.

. 14. We must mutually exhort one another, whilst it is said to Day, for to
prevent Apostasy, and we must prevent Apostasy; because, without final
perseverance we cannot be partakers of Christ. For,

Ver. 14. We are made partakers of Christ, if we hold the beginning of our
confidence steadfast unto the end.] This seems to be the same with that in ver.
6. yet the expression is some what different. For to hold fast our confidence
and rejoicing of hope firm unto the end, is the same with holding the beginning
of our confidence steadfast to the end: And to be Christ's House, the same with
being partakers of Christ. So that I need not say much of this Text, only some
things may be observed; As, 1. That [Hypostasis] turned confidence may in this
place signify our Christian Faith. 2. That the beginning of it, is the first
receiving of it, or the principles of Christianity. 3. That, as it may signify
a firm standing, so it is applied to the Soul as firmly standing and continuing
in the belief and profession of the Faith, without wavering or doubting, and is
opposed to falling. For, though the principles and fundamental Truths are firm
and stable for ever in themselves; yet they are not so firm in the hearts of
many who profess them. Therefore it is our duty to seek a firm existence of
them in our hearts, and a firm fixing of our hearts upon them, never to be
removed. 4. That to be partakers of Christ, is to partake of, and attain the
great Reward of eternal Glory merited by Christ: For the word Christ is here
taken Metonymically, for the benefits of Christ. 5. That though this may seem
to be the same reason with the former; yet here it seems to be brought as a
reason from the penalty that will follow upon our Apostasy, which is an
unspeakable loss of eternal Glory, the greatest benefit Christ has purchased
for us. For if we shall be partakers of Christ only upon this condition of
perseverance to the end; then if we harden our hearts, and fall off, we must
needs lose eternal Glory, and that great Benefit, which Christ merited.

. 15. Thus far the Apostle has made use of those words of the Psalmist; [To
day, if ye will hear his Voice, harden not your hearts.] Now he proceeds to the
words following, [As in the Day of Provocation]; and enlarges upon them, in
this manner.

Ver. 15. While it is said to Day, if ye will hear his Voice, harden not your
hearts, as in the day of provocation: For some when they had heard, provoked,
etc. Where, 1. He takes in the former words with this of Provocation. 2. Though
the Psalmist do not mention whether all their Fathers provoked and tempted God,
or no; yet he observes, that only some, not all, did provoke. The connection of
these words, with the former seems to be this, That as their Fathers by
hardening their hearts provoked God to wrath; so if they hardened their hearts,
they will provoke God likewise, and he will be offended with them. The argument
in form, is this; e must Wnot do any thing that will provoke God to anger: but
if we harden our hearts, we shall provoke him to anger: Therefore we must take
heed of hardening our hearts, and of Apostasy. The proposition [in these] here
presupposed is, That hardening the heart, will provoke. The propositions here
delivered in the Hypothesis, are, 1. That some of their Fathers did provoke. 2.
That all did not provoke. That which all these imply and infer is this, as
applied to them, That they must not harden their hearts, lest they provoke.
Lest this discourse should not be so pertinent and effectual, let us first
enquire what this provodation is. The Hebrew word is translated by the
Septuagint, to signify contention, contradiction, and exacerbation, and so they
turn it only in this place. And the Apostle follows their Translation, and
uses the word (...); Which is a word, 1. Compound. 2. Derivative, and is
derived from (...), which signifies bitter, as Me^^s or Drinks are bi^^er to
the taste. The signification therefore, in this place is Mephorical, and
informs us, That as some Meats and Drinks being bitter, are very offensive to
the taste; so hardness of heart, and apo^^acy are very offensive unto God. The
words used in the Psalm may be, either Proper, and so translated [as in Meribah
and Massa]; or Anell^tive as here the Apostle understands them. This
provocation may be considered either at a Sin, or a consequent of Sin; here it
seems to be a consequent of sin, yet necessarily presupposing the Sin. Sin,
every sin, being contrary to God 's Law, provokes him to anger, and gives him
just cause to execute his vindictive Justice upon the Sinuer. Yet some sins are
more provoking then others, especially such as are committed by People in
Covenant with God, who act contrary to their solemn Vows and Engagements, as
Israel in the Wilderness did, And this hardening of the heart, so as to fall
away, is the most provoking of all: For it not only deserves punishment, and by
virtue of the Law makes the Sinner liable to it; but provoks God to pass a
definitive sentence, and to proceed to execution: This particular consequent of
sin is, that which here is called provocation. This premised, I need not much
insist upon the two Propositions following, ver. 16. The first is, Some did
provoke; these were all that came out of Egypt, whose Carcasses were
overthrown in the Wilderness. And the Sins were, their Mur^^urings, Unbelief,
tempting of God, Rebellion, Idolatry, Lustings, and the like; and that that
made up the measure of their Iniquity, was that Rebellion, which they made upon
the return of those twelve men, who were sent as Spies to view the Land. All
these sins were but so many acts of their Apostasy, and revolt from God,
contrary to the Covenant that He had made with them. The second Proposition is,
That all did not provoke; for Caleb and Joshua, with the Children of those,
were not guilty, or chargeable with the test: For many fell, some did stand,
and continue steadfast in the Covenant. This is a fair warning to all us, who
own our Baptism, and profess Christianity: Though we may have our sins of
ignorance and infirmity, yet let us take heed of provoking-Crimes. For shall we
provoke the Lord to jealousy? Are we stronger then He?

. 16. The Apostle having said, That some did, yet not all, did provoke: He, in
the next words, lets us know who did provoke and were shut out of God's Rest;
yet he does not specify them by their several names, but by their
qualification; and the cause of their not entering into Canaan. For thus he goes
on,

Ver. 17. But with whom was He grieved forty years? was it not with them who
had sinned, whose Carcasses fell in the Wilderness?] Thus these words come in
upon the former: And in these three last verses he uses a great deal of art,
not only Logical and Theological, but Rhetorical too. For the matter is
Theological concerning sin and the consequents of sin, which is the offense of
God, and punishment of Man offending. The Logical form is Dianoetical, to
infer a conclusion formerly expressed, and here employed: The Rhetorical manner
of expression is Dialogistical, and like that which we call Addubitation,
wherein we have Questions and Answers; yet these Answers are returned by
Interrogation, which imply a formal affirmative, and possitive Answer to the
Questions. The end of this Rhetoric is not only to make the sin and the
aggravations thereof more clear; but to make a more lively representation both
of the Sin and Punishment, to the end his reason and disswasive may be more
forcible. The first Question and Answer we have in ver. 17. The Question is,
But with whom was He grieved forty years? This presupposes that God was
grieved forty years with a certain Generation, as the Psalnist brings in God
complaining. In which words, taken by the Apostle for granted, we may consider;

1. The party grieved. 2. The parties grieving. 3. The time of both.


1. The party grieved, was God. 2. The party grieving, was the People of
Israel. 3. The time, was forty years. To understand this Axiom, we must first
know what it is for man to grieve actively, and for God to be grieved
passively. 1. For Man to grieve in this place, is to sin, and do something
offensive and displeasing to God. 2. For God to be grieved, is to be offended,
to be dispeased. Hi^rom turns it, Displicuit; P^guine, Litigavi^; Pratensis,
Mol^stia affectus suni; The Vulgar, offensus fui: Vatablus cum toedio pertuli.
All these interpretations signify, that God was much displeased with the
carriage of that Generation, so that He was even weary of them. Genebrard
expounds the word used by the Septuagint, to be a pressing hard upon them, and
punishing them till they were consumed. Yet because [(...)], as Heinsius
observes, sometimes signifies Idol which God did abllor and abhominate it may
be understood of God abhorring that Apostare and unbelieving People. This
informs us, how God accounts of such Sins; He accounts them as odious,
abominable, and contrary to his purest holiness, and most just Laws. We must
not think that God can be grieved, vexed, molested; but he they be displeased
and offended. 2. The party grieved, was God; and oh! how unworthy are we, who
will displease that God, who has made Us, preserved Us, redeemed Us, and
showed so much love and kindness to Us, upon whom we so much depend, in whose
favor is life, and all solid comfort. 3. The Generation that thus grieved God,
was that People of Israel, who were at Age, when they came out of Egypt, and
made a Covenant with God at Horeb, yet brake that Covenant. 4. The time of
their sinning, and God's punishing, was forty years; from the time of their
deliverance from Pharaoh, till their entrance upon the Land of Canaan. Yet this
is to be understood of them jointly, for many of them were overthrown and
destroyed within a short time of their deliverance.

This is the Question: The Answer is, He was grieved with those that sinned,
whose Carcasses were overthrown in the Wilderness; and this Answer is put
interrogatively, as though he would referr it to them, or any other indifferent
person to give the Answer. For it is very clear out of the Text, who the persons
were that grieved God; they were such as sinned, and were overthrown in the
Wilderness. And from their Sin which they committed, and the Punishment which
they suffered, are they easily discovered: Their Sin was, hardening of their
Hearts and Apostasy; their Punishment was, their Carcasses were overthrown in
the Wilderness. This the Hebrews must take special notice of, that so they may
take heed of the like Sin: The second Question or Addubitation is,

Ver. 18. And to whom swear He, that they should not enter into His Rest?] Now
he comes to the last words of the Psalm, [So I swear in my wrath, That they
shall not enter into my Rest.] Where we may observe, 1. The matter of the Oath.
2. The Oath it self. The matter or thing Sworn was, That they should not enter
into God's Rest. This Rest was their quiet possession of the Land of Canaan,
and their abode therein after their bondage in Egypt, and so journing through
the Wilderness. It was God's Rest, Because, 1. God has the propriety of that
Land, as also he had of the whole Earth. 2. God did undertake to dispossess the
Inhabitants. 3. He did promise and grant to Abraham, to plant and settle his
Posterity in it; and He, and He alone did give their Children possession of it:
It typified Heaven and that eternal Rest, which God has prepared for his
Saints. Into this rest they must not enter, not ever have any possession of it:
This was the dreadful Sentence, which God passed upon those unworthy and
rebellious Wretches. The Oath was the Oath of God, which He swear in his Wrath;
The party swearing was God, [God sware]; and because He could swear by no
greater, He swear by Himself. In this respect it differed from the Oaths both
of Men and of Angels, and could not be a part of Worship or Invocation, as
other Oaths are; and in this, he in some sort pledged his Being and Deity to
confirm his Sentence. 2. This Oath he swear in his Wrath; he swear to Abraham,
in his great mercy, to confirm unto him the immutability of his Counsel; which
was, to bless him, and this he did upon the acceptance of his sincere
Obedience. But this was in wrath, not of rash passion, which God is in no ways
subject unto; but in his severe vindictive Justice, moved by their abominable
disobedience and rebellion, after so many mercies, deliverances, wonders and
convictions. 3. The end of this Oath was, to make the Sentence immutable: His
Word and bare Sentence was sufficient: but, to manifest his high displeasure,
and to cut off from that People all hope of entrance, he added this Oath,
which, in some sort, stands good against all such Apostate Wretches, who can
have no hope of God's eternal Rest, which they have eternally forfeited. This
is the Question, To whom did God thus swear? and who were those Israelies, who,
by this Oath, were absolutely debarred of all entrance into that Land? The
Answer follows, though proposed, as the former, Interrogatively in these words,

But to them that believed not?] This is evident and very clear: and by it is
signified, 1. The Parties who were excluded. 2. The Sin for which they were
excluded, and it was Unbelief. They believed not God's Word and Promise, were
not moved by all his Mercies, and Miracles, and former Judgments. And thereupon
became guilty of the breach of Covenant, refused obstinately to perform the
conditions of it, in the obedience of God's Command. They hardened their hearts,
and departed from the living God, and became perfidious and rebellious
Apostates: From these words, he concludes the Chapter in this manner,

Ver. 19. So we see, they could not enter in, because of Unbelief. For this was
the scope whereat he aimed, to make clear, what the cause of their not entering
into Cauaan, was; that special notice might be taken of the Sin, that they
might take heed of the like Sin, that so they might avoid the like Punishment.
Where, by the way, we may take notice that God's Judgments are just, and He
never condemns any but for Sin; and as the Sin is more or less heinous, so he
proportions the Punishment. The sum and substance of this example of the
Fathers proposed in the Psalm, is this, That if they should be guilty of
hardening their hearts and unbelief as their Fathers were, they should be
punished with the like punishment under the Gospel. And if their Fathers were
so fearfully punished for their disobedience to the Law of Moses; how much more
grievously should they be punished, if they disobeyed the Gospel, and forsook
Jesus Christ their Savior. The whole Chapter, as you heard, is an exhortation
to perseverance in the Christian Profession, and that upon several Reasons. As,
1. The exocllency of Christ so far above Moses. 2. The incomparable benefit
that would follow thereupon. 3. The dreadful punishment they must suffer, if
they did fall away. To make this last the more effectual: He, 1. Alleges the
words of the Psalm. 2. Applies them to these Hebrews, that by the example of
their Fathers, they might take heed of Apostasy and Unbelief. Yet this
Application is but begun here, and finished in the next Chapter.

CHAP. IV. Ver. I.
FOR the better understanding of this part of the Epistle, we must considor:

1. The Coherence with the former. 2. The Scope. 3. The Method and parts.


1. For the Coherence: it agrees, 1. With the former three Chapters in the
subject, the prophetical Office of Christ: and in urging the duty of attention,
belief, prosession and obedience unto his Doctrine into the end. 2. It agrees
with the last part of the (...), in a special manner. For, having made evident,
that the cause why their Fathers (...) not into God's Rest, was Unbelief:
therefore they must take ^eed of that Sin, last they ^^ffer the like searful
punishment. (For he that will avoid the effect, must take heed of that cause
upon which that effect will certainly follow): He further urges that
exhortation of the Psalmist, To day, if (...) will hear his Voice, so as to be
edmitted into God's Rest, we must not harden our hearts, provoke, grieve God,
as their Fathers in the Wilderness did.

2. The scope of the Apostle, presupposing a Rest promised in the Gospel, is to
persuade them, and the them up to use with all diligence those means, whereby
we may attain it, and enter. In a word, it is the same with that of the second
and third Chapters, to confirm them in the profession and practice of Christ's
Doctrine, so as to perse (...) unto the end, and so attain that eternal Rest
and Happiness, to which it directs.

3. The parts are two:

1. A Dehortation, ver. 1. 2. An Exhortation, ver. 11.


In the Dehortation, we have 1. The thing dehorted from. 2. The Reasons. 3. The
determination of the rest.

In the exhortation, we may observe:

1. The duty exhorted unto. 2. The Reasons.


These are the parts, and this is the method; the particulars whereof you shall
understand hereafter. To enter upon the first part, which is a Dehortation. In
every Dehortation, we must observe there is some evil or sin to be avoided, and
the duty is to take heed of it. The sin is, to come short, which we cannot do,
but by falling off from our profession, which is Apostasy. And the word
[(...)], signifies [deficere], to fall off; and is called a failing of the
Grace of God; or, a falling from the Grace of God, Chap. 12. 15. The Sin
therefore is Unbelief, which was observed in the former Chapter to be the
cause, why the Israelites could not enter into God's Rest. It Is true, that many
understand it of the punishment of not entering into Rest; which is an
inevitable consequent, and moral effect of falling away. The duty, is to fear
this, and to be very careful to avoid the Sin, that they may avoid the
Punishment. This duty lies upon all and every one: For it is said. [lest any of
you]; and not only so, but lest any of you [seem], which the Syriach
interprets, lest any of you be [found]. Some indeed will have the meaning to
be, that they must be so careful to continue in the Faith, that they must not
so much as seem to fall off, or make any appearance of Apostasy. Yet there is
no necessity so to understand it; for the principal thing is to take heed of
the Sin, which, if committed, will appear, and be judged and punished. This is
the duty brought in upon the words of the former Chapter, by this illative
[Therefore], as though he should say, Seeing ye have so dreadful an example of
God's wrath executed upon your Fathers for their Unbelief; Take heed of their
Sin, lest ye suffer the like Punishment.

. 2. The reason follows from the example of their Fathers applied to them: The
sum of it is this, That, as many of their Fathers having a Promise, not
believing, entered not into God's Rest, and some of them believing, did enter:
So they having a Promise, if they believe not, shall not enter; if they
believe, shall enter and enjoy the benefit and Rest promised. The ground of
this Application is, that they had a Promise; and this thing promised, is God's
Rest: For there was a Rest remaining for them, as well as for their Fathers;
The words are,

A Promise being left of entering into his Rest.] SOme translate and understand
the words of leaving, and by unbelief forsaking the Promise; yet this cannot be
the intention of the Apostle, which is made clear by these words, There
remains therefore a Rest, or Sabbatism, to the People of God, ver. 9. where
we have the same simple, though not the same compound Verb. To understand this,
we must know, that God promised Rest unto the Israelites in the Land of Canaan,
which should be their Inheritance. Therefore some understand the word [left] to
be taken Metaphorically, as Legacies are left and bequeathed in a Testament
unto Children, and so this was left to them by God's Promise. As they had a
Promise of a Rest, so these Hebrew Christians had a Promise of a far more
excellent Rest as well as they: But then the Question is, where have we this
Promise? and who makes it, and where is it made? God makes it, and he makes it
in the Gospel. Therefore he first proves, that a Promise is left them, as their
Fathers had a Promise: For it follows,

Ver. 2. For unto Us was the Gospel preached, as well on to Them. Where we
have two Propositions: 1. That the Gospel was preached to the Israelites in the
Wilderness. 2. It was preached to these Hebrews. 1. It was preached to the
Israelites: For as a Promise was made to Abraham, that he in his Seed should
inherit the Land of Canaan; so this Promise was renewed unto them in the
Wilderness, and God was ready to perform it, and give them possession. Yet this
Promise was made, and to be performed upon certain conditions and duties to be
performed by them. And because this Canaan was a Type and Figure of the
heavenly Inheritance and eternal Rest to be obtained by Jesus Christ; therefore
the Gospel might be said to be preached to them, though darkly and implicitly.
2. It was preached to these Hebrews, yet more clearly and fully by the
Apostles: In this Gospel, as preached to them, the Promises are one principal
thing; and, amongst the Promises, that of eternal Rest is the chiefest, and
includes all the rest. This Promise is made for and in consideration of Jesus
Christ; the condition is Faith in Christ, meriting the same, and, after his
Sufferings, being entered into this rest: This Promise of Rest upon Faith in
Christ already come, is the substance and matter of the Gospel, and the
Doctrine thereof is the Gospel in proper sense; hough the Doctrine preached to
the Israelites, where^n Rest was promised upon condition of Faith, was also the
Gospel, and might be so called though imperfectly. But what was the issue of
this Promise in respect of the Israelites? It was twofold, 1. In respect of
them who believed not, it did not profit them. 2. In respect of them that
believed, they entered into God's rest; for so the Apostle informs us,

But the Word preached did not profit them, not mixed with Faith in them that
heard it. In which words may be observed, 1. The Event. 2. The Reason. The
Event, It profited not; the Reason, They believed not the Word: For though the
Word be the Power of God unto Salvation in them that believe, yet it is a Word
of eternal death to Unbelievers. Both these, the Event and the Reason, are
delivered in two Propositions; 1. That the Word preached did not profit them.
2. It was not mixed with Faith in them that heard it. The latter is the former
in order of Nature: Both include many Propositions, 1. That the Word was
preached unto them. 2. They did hear it; for how should they hear without a
Preacher? Where, by the way, note that the Gospel of Doctrine, here meant, in
the Original is called the Word of Hearing, implying, that it was so preached
as that they did or might hear it, as they were bound to do. 3. They who heard
it did not believe. The Expression in the Original is, that it was not mixed
with Faith; For that whereby the Soul receives the Word is Faith, and that
whereby it receives it effectually is a sincere Faith: For this heavenly
Doctrine is like a liquor, it is an heavenly Water, and is poured upon men by
preaching, and is of rare and excellent virtue, when it is received and digested
in the Soul by Faith. For the saying in Philosophy is true in this case, Actus
activorum sunt in passo, unito and disposito: For by the Soul rightly disposed,
and by Faith receiving this Doctrine, the Doctrine is as it were incorporated
into the Soul, and made one with it. 4. This Word not believed did not profit,
that is, did not prove any ways effectual, either for a title to eternal rest,
or for the possession of it: For, they not performing the condition, God was no
ways bound to perform his promise to them; yet this was not all, he was so
offended with them, that he pastan irrevocable sentence of exclusion upon them.
By all this we may understand,

1. That it is a great Mercy in God to vouchsafe us the Gospel, and to have it
faithfully and constantly preached unto us, so that we may hear it. This of it
self is an excellent means of our Conversion, and the mighty Power of God unto
Salvation: It Is like the Mann^, and heavenly kind of Food, which being eaten,
and received into our Souls, will nourish and preserve us. It Is a divine light
to guide us to Heaven: And ^o unto them to whom God denies it, for they sit in
darkness and the shadow of death without any hope of Salvation.

2. In this Gospel there are precious Promises, the chiefest whereof is that of
entering into God's Rest; The condition of it is sincere Faith, and continuance
therein unto the end. This Rest was merited by Jesus Christ: To believe
sincerely, and persevere therein, is the Duty commanded and to be performed; to
enter, is the great Reward. Therefore we should diligently consider, that it
promises the greatest good that God did ever give, or Man is capable of, and in
this respect is the best Doctrine in the World; yet, lest Man should presume,
he promises it upon condition of perseverance, and for the merit of a Savior.
If we do attain it, we do not deserve it; for the enjoyment of it is a free
Gift of God: yet, though God give it freely, yet he gives it to none that are
guilty of Unbelief and Apostasy.

3. Men may hear the Gospel preached, and yet receive no benefit by it through
their own fault: Meat will feed, if it be eaten; Water will quench thirst, if
we drink it, and receive it into our bodies; yet if we neither eat the one when
it is set before us, nor drink the other when put into our hands, we may perish
for hunger and thirst: So it is spiritually with our Souls, in respect of the
Word preached, and heard only our with outward ears, and not received and
received in our hearts by a true and lively Faith; So that the cause why the
Word of God being so great a Blessing, and so excellent a means of Salvation,
does us no good, is from our selves or in our selves, who either refuse it at
the first, or reject it after we have professed it, and promised to live
according to it. And this refusal and rejection, as they are heinous sins, not
only against God's just Laws, but his merciful tender of eternal life, so they
will prove in the end, the cause of our eternal misery, which shall be greater
and more intolerable than those to whom the Word of God was never preached.

4. Therefore it concerns us all to fear this Sin of Apostasy, as we fear loss
of heavenly Rest, God's eternal displeasure, Hell, Death, and eternal
Punishments. The Apostle by this word [fear] implies there is danger of falling
away; and if we consider, there is danger, and the same very great: For if we
look upon our weakness, and the remainders of corruption, the deceit and
hypocrisy of our own hearts, the imperfection of our Understanding in heavenly
things, the inconstancy of our Wills, our little experience in the ways of
God, and the violence and power of temptation from the Devil and the World; we
may easily see that it is a wonder, if not a matter of amazement, that we stand
one day, one hour yet when we look up toward Heaven, remember our Savior
Christ reigning and victorious, the power of the blessed Spirit, the helps God
has given us, the Promises of assistance, there is great cause of hope; yet
this hope does not exclude but require our diligent Care, continual Watching,
and instant Prayers, without which we cannot, by which we may, hope to stand.
Oh, how should we carefully and constantly attend unto God's Word, lay it up in
our hearts, make it the Rule of our whole life; so as to obey his Commands,
rely upon his Promises, and fear his threats, and every day call to mind the
Profession we have made, and the Promises, whereby we have engaged our selves
unto our God? And seeing so few do fear, it is no wonder so many fall and come
short of this blessed Rest. Most men presume upon the Promise, and neglect the
Duty. The Israellres had a Promise, yet did not enter, because they did not
believe.

. 3. There follows another distinct Reason from the former, and that is, the
great benefit that follows upon the performance of the Duty.

Ver. 3. For we, who have believed, do enter into Rest, as he said, As I have
sworn in my Wrath, etc. THere is some difficulty to know the coherence of these
words with the former, as also of those that follow with these, and amongst
themselves. Some say they come in upon the words immediately antecedent, and
give a reason why the Word not mixed with Faith did not profit, nor bring the
hearers into God's Rest; For only we that believe do enter, that is, There is
no entrance but by Faith; but by Faith there is. Others think they propose a
reason why we should fear Apostasy, and be careful to persevere, and that from
the happy consequent, and the glorious reward which follows upon perseverance
in belief, and that is entrance and admittance into God's Rest; yet they may
referr to those words of the former Chapter, For some when they had heard did
provoke, howbeit not all that came out of Egypt by Moses. For Caleb and Joshua
heard, and believed, and persevered; for it is said of Caleb (and it is the
Testimony of God), That he had another Spirit with him, and followed the Lord
fully, Numb. 14. 24. This he applies to himself and the Hebrews, to this
purpose, That though some did not enter because of Unbelief, yet some did
believe and did not provoke, and so entered; so likewise shall we believing do.
As the former might cause fear, so this latter might cause hope, and prove a
strong motive why we should fear to fall, and be very careful to persevere: So
that if we will sum up that which went before, it is this in brief, To day if we
will hear God's voice, we must not harden our hearts; 1. Because if we do
harden them, we shall be shut out of God's Rest, as our rebellious and Apostate
Fathers were. 2. If we do not harden our hearts, but believe we shall enter
into God's Rest, as Caleb and Joshua did. It follows,

[As he said, I have sworn in my wrath, if they shall enter into my Rest, etc.]
These words serve to inform us of three things: 1. That the Word not believed
could not profit, because by Unbelief they provoked God to wrath, and in his
Wrath he swear they should not enter into his Rest; so likewise we should fear
to be guilty of Unbelief, because if we prove such, God in his Wrath by the
like Oath will exclude us. 2. That as God by this Oath did exclude none but
Unbelievers, and brought the Believers into Canaan; so he will exclude none out
of the Rest promised in the Gospel but Unbelievers, and will without all fail
bring us believing into our spiritual Canaan. 3. That as the Oath, so the
Exhortation used by the Prophet David, implied, that as there was a Rest in the
days of Joshua, so there is another Rest besides that of the promised Land:
Therefore, because it might be doubted what Rest either David meant, or the
Gospel does promise, the Apostle proceeds to prove that there is yet a Rest
prepared for God's People under the Gospel, and determines what Rest that is.
This is done by distinction; for he informs us of a threefold Rest,

1. Of the Sabbath. 2. Of the Land of Canaan. 3. Of the eternal Rest in Heaven.


That it was the intention of the Apostle to manifest that there was a Rest for
the People of God under the Gospel, and yet that Rest was neither the first of
the Sabbath, nor the second of the Land of Canaan, is evident by that which
follows, especially Ver 19, 10. That it was expedient, if not necessary, for
him to do thus is as clear, because he had alleged the words of the Psalm, [To
day, if ye will hear his Voice,] and also said in Ver. 1. That a Promise was
left us of entering into his Rest. The first is the Rest of the Sabbath in these
words,

[Although the Works were finished from the Foundation of the World.] And

Ver. 4. For he spoke in a certain place of the seventh day in this wise; And
God did rest the seventh day from all his Works.

THE particle (...) is turned here [although], yet it may signify and be
translated otherwise, as it is by the Syriack, Vatablus, and the Vulgar. This
passage has reference to that word especially [my Rest]; for there is a Rest
of God promised in the Gospel, yet truly this is not God's Rest from his work
of Creation upon the seventh day. That was a Rest, 1. Of God. 2. That Rest
wherewith he rested himself, 3. It was his Rest from the works of Creation. 4.
It was that Rest which he rested the first seventh day of the World, after he
had finished the Works of Heaven and Earth: For this purpose the Apostle
alleges the words of Moses, Genesis 2. 1, 2, 3. This Rest indeed might signify
the perpetual Rest of Men and Angels, when they have finished their work of
Obedience, and God might institute the Sabbath for this end: Yet though this
was a Rest of God, yet it was not the Rest employed in the Psalm, not that which
is promised in the Gospel: That it was not, he makes plain

Ver. 5. And in this place again, If ye shall enter into my Rest. THat is,
there is a second Rest long after promised to Israel, and it is that which he
gave them in the Land of Canaan, this the Psalmist intends in these words, [As
I swear in my wrath, if they shall enter into my Rest,] yet this is not that
which is promised in the Gospel: This he makes evident by the words following,

Ver. 6. Seeing therefore it remains that some must enter therein, and they
to whom it was first preached, entered not in because of Unbelief:

Ver. 7. Again he limiteth a certain day, saying in David, To day, after so
long a time; as it is said, To day, if ye will hear his Voice, harden not your
hearts.

Ver. 8. For if Jesus had given them Rest, then would he not afterward have
spoken of another Rest.

THis part of the Chapter is more easily understood, if we reduce it to
Propositions, which are these,

1. That though there was a Rest of the Land of Canaan, whereinto some must
enter and did enter; yet a certain day is limited and appointed by David of
entering into another Rest.

2. This day was appointed long after the entrance of Israel into the Land of
Canaan.

3. The words whereby another day of another Rest is appointed and promised are
these, To day if you will hear his voice harden not your hearts.

4. If Jesus or Joshua had brought Israel into that Rest which David speaks of,
there had been no need of speaking of, and promising another Rest so long after.

The Apostle infers from all this, that there is a Rest yet remaining for the
People of God, though it be neither the Rest of God from the Works of Creation,
nor the Rest in the Land of Canaan: For the Scriptures mention but three Rests
or Sabbatisms, the first of Creation, the second of Canaan, the third of
Heaven; and this last is that which is meant by the Psalmist, and promised in
the Gospel. And he further adds, that this Rest had some affinity with that of
Canaan, and with that of God's Sabbath: For,

Ver. 10. He that is entered into his Rest has ceased from his own Works, as
God did from his. Which words may be understood two ways: 1. Of the Title and
Right to enter into this Rest; or, 2. Of the actual enjoyment and full
possession. In the former respect it is certain that no Man can have so much as
a Title or any hope of this eternal Rest, till he cease from and forsake his
own Works of Sin by true Repentance. In the latter respect, which is more
probably intended, no Man can actually enjoy the Rest of Heaven, until by
perseverance he has finished all his Work of Evangelical Obedience; as God did
not keep his Sabbath till he had fully finished all his works of Creation. This
is a Doctrine full of sweet and heavenly Comfort, That Christ has purchased an
eternal glorious Sabbath; God has promised it in the Gospel, and we who by the
Sanctification of the Spirit persevere in our Christian Profession and
Practice, shall certainly enjoy it fully and for ever. All men desire Rest, yet
it is not to be found on Earth, but in Heaven; not in the Creature, but in God:
Happy they which know the Excellency and Glory of this Rest, and with all
diligence and constancy use the means to attain it by following the Doctrine of
the great Prophet Jesus Christ unto the end.

. 4. Here comes in the Exhortation to the great Duty, in

Ver. 11. Let us labor therefore to enter into that Rest, lest any man fall
after the same Example of Unbelief. THese words may be considered, 1. In their
Coherence. 2. In themselves. 1. The Coherence is employed in the Particle and
Illative Conjunction [therefore], which informs us, that this Exhortation is
a Conclusion inferred upon some antecedent Premises, and that Proposition of
the Apostle, [We which have believed do enter into Rest,] Ver. 3. Which 1.
Implies, that there is a Rest for us under the Gospel. 2. Affirms, that they
who believe do enter. The former he manifests at large, that there is a Rest,
besides that of Creation, and that of the Land of Canaan, remaining for the
People of God: The latter is plain out of the Psalm: and he takes it for
granted, that such as hear and believe shall enter, and only such have
admission. Hence he inferrs, That if there be an eternal glorious Rest prepared
and promised to be enjoyed by Believers, then it is our Duty to labor to enter:
This is the Connection.

The Exhortation considered in it self, with the rest of the Chapter to the
end, does 1. Propose the Duty. 2. Urge the performance upon effectual Reasons.
The Duty is, to labor to enter into that Rest,

where we have A Rest. Entering into it. Laboring to enter.

What the Rest is, you have heard before: The entrance is to acquire and attain
the actual possession and full enjoyment; and that it may be considered, 1. As
a Duty of man, and then it is the use of all means ordained of God for the
attainment. 2. As a gift and gracious Work of God admitting and receiving us
unto the enjoyment: yet, because man should not mistake, by thinking it an
easy matter to enter at his will and pleasure; he here implies, that it is a
work of labor, of difficulty, of striving; it is an entering in at the strait
Gate: and we must labor, use all our power, and put our strength to the
utmost. For this is the greatest business which we have to do in this Life, and
our will must be most firmly resolved and bent upon it, our understanding
intended, and, as it were, set upon the rack in all the operations thereof; and
our executive power exercised to the utmost degree. For out wit, will, and
power, and all the faculties of the Soul and Body must be taken up continually
in this work; as the most necessary and excellent of all others. The word is
(...), study ye: And, as one well observe, [Studium est vehemens applicatio
axim ad aliquid agendum], Study is a vehement application of the mind to do
something. Yet that which is matter of lamentation, and a sad presage of the
eternal ruin of many Souls, is the great neglect of this Duty; for few go
seriously about it. The vigonr and strength both of our Souls and Bodies is
employed, and wholly spent in seeking the vanities of the World.

. 5. The Reasons, whereupon the performance of this Duty is urged, are three:

1. From the sad and woeful Consequent. 2. From the severity of the all-seeing
Judge. 3. From the help and assistance of our High Priest.


The reason from the sad Consequent is expressed thus;

Lest any fall after the same example of Unbelief.] THis implies, 1. There is
danger, and an evil to be feared. 2. The evil is falling. 3. All and every one
is in this danger, [lest any fall.] 4. Lest any should slight the danger, he
instanceth in the Israelites, who fell by Unbelief: To fall, may be a Sins or a
Punishment. If a Sin, it is Apostasy, which is called (...), which signify; in
this, as in many other places, Rebellion and Apostasy: If a Punishment, it is
exclusion out of God's Rest, with all the miseries that accompany it; so it
seems here to be taken. By this, as by many other places, we easily understand,
how we must conceive of Examples, and what use we must make of them. If they be
examples of Punishments, we must account them as executions of God's Laws, and
especially of his Comminations: The use that we must make of them is, to avoid
those Sins, for which they were inflicted: and to be the more careful in this
particular, because, by them, we may easily know that God's Laws are not only
words, and his Threats only wind. It Is not with God as it is often with Men, who
will threaten more then they will or can do; Thence the Saying, Threatened men
live long. But here it is otherwise, God's Word is his Deed, and his Punishments
threatened against Apostates are unavoidable. They are not made unadvisedly, and
out of rash passion; but according to the eternal Rules of Wisdom and Justice:
And let every one know, that that God that spares neither Men, nor Angels, nor
his own chosen and beloved People, will not spare Us. Therefore as we desire to
escape this fearful Punishment, let us labor to enter into that Rest which God
has promised.

. 6. The second Reason is, from the severity of the Judge: For,

Ver. 12. The Word is quick and powerful, and sharper then a two-edged Sword,
etc.] TO understand this Text, we need not doubt whether by [Word], is meant
the Scripture and Doctrine of the Gospel, or Christ Jesus, which is the Word of
God made Flesh; or the penal decrees of the Gospel: For by Word of God, is
meant the Law of God, with his judicial Sentence. For God is here brought in as
a most perfect Lawgiver, and a most severe and exact Judge. (...), [Word] is
often taken for a Law; as the ten Laws or Commandments are in the Hebrew called
Ten-words, Exodus 20. 1. And (...) Dabar, both in Chaldee, Syriack, and Arabic,
does sometimes signify to Order and Govern; and because Government is by Laws
and Judgment, therefore [Word] signifies both: This is more evident from Chap.
2. 2. Where you read, [If the Word spoken by Angels was steadfast, and every
Transgression and Disobedience received a just recompense of Reward.] Where, by
Word, is meant the Law without all doubt, as you heard before; wherein there
were not only Precepts but Comminations, according to which Judgment did
proceed and was executed. By Word, therefore, is meant the Law and Doctrine of
God by Christ, wherein we have not only precepts and prohibitions, but promises
and threats; and according to these God will judge every Man, to whom the
Gospel shall be preached. This is a defect in humane Laws, that they cannot
reach many Offenders, and leave the conscience exempt from humane Tribunals;
and this is an imperfection in many Judges, that they cannot attain the perfect
and clear knowledge of many Causes brought before them; or if they know them,
will not impartially punish them. The Apostle removes these defects, and
imperfections from this Lawgiver and Judge, this Law, and this Judgment. For
the Word, or Law, of God is quick and powerful. The latter word explains the
forn^er; for those things that are living, are said to be active in opposition
to such things which are dead, which have lost their power; and to be lively
and very active, are many times the same and this signifies the efficacy and
active power of this Law. This active vigor, and efficacy, is illustrated by a
Similitude: For the Law is compared to a two-edged Sword, which being used by a
powerful and skilful hand, does manifest how sharp and cutting it is, for it
pierces quickly into the inward parts, and divides between Soul and Spirit,
and the Bones and Marrow, which are most nearly united, and more hidden and
secret in living Bodies. So that in the Similitude we have two acts of a Sword,
or any such cutting Instrument: The first is, dividing things most nearly
united. The second, discovering things most secret. There cannot be any more
perfect division or discovery in any dissection or anatomy then is here
expressed. The reddition of this Comparison seems to be made in these words,

And is a discerner of the thoughts and the intents of the heart.] For this
cannot agree to a Sword, or any cutting Instrument; and therefore the meaning
must be, that as a Sword does divide things so closely united, and discover
things so secretly hidden in Bodies; so does this Law in the Soul, especially
when it is applied by the Judge unto the case of sinful Man, to be determined by
him. The most hidden things in Man, as a subject of God's Judgment, are the
intents and thoughts of the heart; and they seem to be closely and inseparably
conjoined both with the heart, which is the most intimate thing in Man; (for
cor intimum honunis), and also one with another. We need not curiously explain
the words, [thoughts and intents of the heart], or distinguish between them:
The heart is the Soul of Man, endued with a faculty of understanding and
willing such things as are the proper objects of it. The Soul is in continual
motion and action, framing and moulding things with in it self: Thoughts and
intents are the secret acts, both speculative and practical, of the
understanding and rational appetite. The words turned [thoughts and
intentions], may signify apprehensions, conceptions, judgments noetical or
dianoetical, consultations about men's intents concerning the ends, decrees, and
all other acts of the Soul, and may here be so understood. And many of these
acts and operations are most secret and concealed; and, in respect of them, God
says, The heart of man is deceitful above all things, and desperately wicked;
who can know it? Jer. 17. 9. Of this heart, and these motions, it is said, That
the Word of God is the discerner. For this Law must needs discern them,
otherwise it could not discover the pravity and rectitude of them, as it must
do, if it will be a perfect Rule of Judgment: The word [discerner] may signify
a perfect judicial knowledge. To understand this the better, you must observe,
1. That when it is said, the Word or the Law is a discerner, it is meant, that
God in his Word discovers and distinguishes these. 2. That in Judgment he will
as clearly discern all moral acts and operations of the Soul as agreeable or
disagreeable to this Law, and will judge the party accordingly. 3. That he, by
execution, will make this Word effectual to the eternal confusion of
disobedient and rebellious Wretches. And lest any should think that something
might be concealed from the Judge, it is added,

Ver. 13. Neither is there any Creature, that is not manifest in his sigh^; but
all things are naked and opened unto the eyes of him, with w^ on we have to
do.] THis place informs Us of the perfect knowledge of God, as He is Judge;
without which, his Judgment cannot be just and perfect. It presupposes that
perfection and attribute of God's understanding, whereby he fully and clearly
knows himself, and all things else. In this place, it is an exercise of that
perfection restrained to things created; and especially to matters of Judgment,
as all Persons and Causes of Men to whom the Gospel is made known, as to be
judged by him. Where we may observe, 1. The object, [all and every thing]. For
it is said [not any thing] and [all things]. 2. The manifestation and clear
representation of all in general; and every thing in particular. For there is
[not any Creature that is not manifest], and [all things are naked and open. We
need not here stand upon the word (...), turned here [opened]. For in it there
is a Metonymy and a Metaphor; whether the Metaphor be taken from a body laid
upon the back, or flead and excoriated, or divided through the backbone, it
all comes to one; for it signifies some thing made manifest. 3. They are thus
manifest in his sight, naked and opened to him; Which implies two things, 1.
That they are manifest, naked, opened; that is, very clearly, most evidently
and fully discovered to him. 2. That if they be so clearly and fully manifest
in his sight and to his eyes, he must needs know them fully and clearly. The
sum of this is, that God knows all things fully and clearly; and therefore
cannot be ignorant of any Man, or any thing in any Man, who must have to do
with him; that is, be judged by him. This is the matter of this Text considered
in it self, and is the same with that of the Prophet, I, the Lord, search the
Heart, and try the Reins, even to give every Man according to his ^ays; and the
fruit of his doings, Jer. 17. 10. The force of it, as a reason, is this, That
seeing we must be judged according to a just Law, by a most exact impartial and
all-knowing Judge; it concerns us much to labor, and use all means to
persevere. For if we neglect this work, or perform it slightly or secretly in
our deceitful hearts turn away and depart from God, he will one day summon
(...) to Judgment; we must appear before his Tribunal, he will fully and
clearly discover the persidiousness of our hearts, shut us out of his eternal
Rest, and cast us into everlasting Flames: and though now we will not believe
it, yet then we shall find it to our woe; what a fearful thing it is to ^isobey
the Laws of this most Just All-knowing and Almighty God. Men now do little
regard the Word of God, and his Commands, Promises, Threatenings; fear not to
transgress his decrees, seldom seriously think of that Day, when all their
baseness and treachery shall be discovered to their everlasting shame,
confusion, and destruction: This will be the end of such as do not consider
with whom they have to do.

. 7. The third Reason is from the Priesthood of Christ: For Chap. 3. ver. 1.
we are exhorted to consider the Apostle, and the High Priest of our Profession.
He has formerly pressed the duty of perseverance, upon the consideration of
his Apostleship and prophetical excellency, and here urges it again upon the
consideration of his Priesthood. This is the first connection of these words
with ver. 1. of the third Chapter: Again, he seemed in the two former Reasons
taken from the sad consequent of Apostasy, and the severity of the Judge, to
set before them the [Arduum], or difficulty of the performance; and in these
words, the [possibile], that though it be difficult, yet it may be done by
means of our great High Priest. The former arguments tended to work fear, this
to cause hope; the former well considered, might make them careful and
diligent; this last might encourage and give them comfort. This is the second
Coherence with the Text immediately antecedent: But the words must be
considered in themselves, before we can understand the force of the Reason
contained in them. For this end we must take notice that the subject matter of
them is the Priesthood of Christ, or Christ our great High Priest, Jesus the
Son of God; And concerning this High Priest, He

1. Affirms some things. 2. From the things affirmed, inferrs the main
Conclusion.


He affirms of him,

1. That he is entered into Heaven. 2. Is very merciful to us and compassionate.
3. Will prove very helpful.


The conclusion inferred, is, To hold fast our Profession; Seeing Christ, as
Priest, is the subject of the Text and this last part of the Chapter, let us
hear what he writes.

Ver. 14. Seeing then, that we have a great High Priest, that is passed into
the Heavens, Jesus the Son of God.] Where we may observe, 1. The eminency of
the person. 2. The excellency of his Office. 3. His Relation to us.


THe person, is Jesus of Nazareth, the Son of the Virgin Mary, conceived at
Nazareth, born at Bethlehem, and Crucified at Jerusalem. This Jesus is Son of
God, not only because of his supernatural Conception and Birth, but his eternal
Generation. For that Word, which was from everlasting, and by which the World
was made, was made Flesh, and did assume that humane Nature conceived by the
Holy Ghost, and born of the Virgin Mary, and possesses the same inseparably
and eternally. This is the eminency of the Person, who is Superior to all Men
and Angels: The excellency of his Office is, that he was a Priest; and not only
so, but an High Priest as Aaron was above other Priests, and President in all
matters of Divine Worship, and might perform some sacerdotal Acts, which none
but he might do. Many Highpriests were of that Dignity, that they were equal
with Kings: But he was not only High Priest, but a great High Priest above all
others, as Universal and Supreme Pontiffe of Heaven and Earth, in comparison of
whom all other Priests, even the highest, are but shadows. This is the
excellency of his Office: His Relation to us is this, that we have him, that
is, He is our great High Priest in whom we, who profess our Faith in him, have
a special Interest; so that He, as a Priest, does officiate for us, and his
excellent Office was instituted of God for our eternal good; no Unbelievers can
be said to have him in this manner. Of this great High Priest it is affirmed,
that He is passed into the Heavens: This entrance into Heaven was shadowed by
the Highpriests entrance into the inmost sacrary of the Tabernacle or Temple,
which was called the Holy of Holiest. The reason why this, which is here first
affirmed of him, is mentioned, may well be this, because by this he has not
only obtained and taken possessi^^ of this eternal Rest, wherein we must seek
to enter, but by this means has procured an entrance for us. For where he is,
there we shall be; and the Head and Members must be and abide together:
Therefore if we labor and strive, we cannot doubt of entrance, seeing he has
made a passage open for us. This, of it self, is a great encouragement, that
our High Priest is passed into the heavenly Rest, not only for himself, but
also in our behalf, even to assure us, that if we follow him, trust in him, and
labor to enter, that we shall not come short: yet this is not all, the
encouragement is yet greater For it follows,

Ver. 15. For we have not an High Priest, which cannot be touched with the
feeling of our Infirmities: but was in all points tempted like as we are, yet
without Sin. I Will not here mention the principal Exhortation expressed in the
former verse, but reserve it to the last. For it is usual, upon several Reasons
delivered, to repeat the exhortation: In the words, we may observe two things;

1. Christ's merciful disposition toward us. 2. The Reason of it.


His mercy is set down negatively, in that he is not senseless of our
Infirmities, but is one that will be touched with the feeling of our
Infirmities. To be inwardly affected and moved with the miseries of others,
does argue an excellent temper of spirit, and is a proper act of that we call
mercy and compassion; and it issues from goodness and love. Christ, as God, is
infinitely merciful, and mercy it self; and in his Word does signify how
readily and abundantly he is inclined unto it, and he would have man to know
it. And as Man, none so merciful as He; and that God might manifest what store
of his mercy he had for sinful Man, He became Man, nay miserable and mortal
Man; and, because experimental knowledge and sense is the most effectual,
therefore, as Man, he was willing to Suffer, and be Tempted. And this is the
Reason, why he is so sensible of our sad condition, because [he was tempted in
all points like unto us.] This is that wonderful way, which God by his profound
Wisdom contrived, to make his mercy greater, and in some sort more then
Infinite: He would have a kind of knowledge of man's infirmities, which, as God
and infinite, he could never have. That which makes us an object of compassion,
is our infirmity; that which makes him so sensible of our condition, is, That
he was tempted in all points like us, yet always without Sin. Infirmity is
sometimes weakness, and so the word signifies; sometime Sickness and Diseases,
which cause weakness. The one is opposed to strength, and the other to eucrasy
and health; and both are twofold, either of Body or Soul: and here is meant the
weakness and distemper of the Soul, and may be Sin or Punishment, which makes
our Case very miserable. For sin taken either for native or acquired corruption
and imperfection, does fearfully weaken the Soul; because it does not only
incline to actual sin, but makes us unable to resist temptation: so that we are
easily overcome by Satan a potent, subtle, malicious enemy; who will not only
violently, but continually assault us. This is the reason, why our sins are so
many, and we so often and so halnously guilty, and have continually great need
of mercy and pardon; which cannot be obtained without the effectual
intercession of this righteous Advocate, and merciful High Priest. And how
merciful must he needs be, that was tempted himself? For he was tempted in all
points like unto us, but without Sin; Where two things are observed, 1. That
his temptations were in all points like ours. 2. That yet he was without Sin.
Temptation may be taken for Sufferings, or for an inducement to Sin, as
directly tending to sin; and having a power or causality moving us thereunto.
As for Christ's Sufferings, they were exactly like unto Ours: To that end, he
took a Body and Soul, and continued for a while in a state of Humiliation,
whereby he was obnoxious unto them, and did actually fall under them, and felt
them. As for temptation to sin, it is inward, outward; inwardly he was not
tempted, outwardly he was: Of us it is truly said, that every man is tempted,
when he is drawn away of his own lust and enticed. But in him there was no such
corruption, lust, or inward concupiscence; yet he was outwardly vehemently
assaulted by Men and Devils, as much as ever any Man was, and was tempted to
the same kind of sins, to which, we being tempted to, do commit. This appears
from the History of the temptation and passion; yet, though we being tempted,
do often sin, yet he being often and violently tempted, never sinned, never
yielded to the temptation; but always resisted, and always overcame. This is
a great comfort to us, that he never sinned; for, because of this, his
Intercession for us, is the more effectual with God, and the more acceptable
unto him: For a guilty person pleading for guilty persons, could not have made
reconciliation for their sins. As it is a comfort, so it is a rare example for
us to follow, that when we are tempted, we should use all means to avoid Sin as
he did.

. 8. But let it be granted Christ is so merciful an High Priest, and (though
entered into Heaven) so sensible of our miseries, what benefit do we receive by
him? This the Apostle resolves in the words following.

Ver. 16. Let us therefore come boldly unto the Throne of Grace, that we may
obtain mercy, and find grace in time of need. IN which words, we may observe,
1. That, as we may, so we ought to come boldly unto the Throne of Grace. 2.
That coming thus, we may speed, and attain that which we desire. That which in
the first Proposition is presupposed, is, that God sits in the Throne of Grace:
There is a Throne of Justice, and a Throne of Grace. If He look upon Man
according to the Law of works, he must needs sit upon the Throne of Justice as
a severe Lord, and strict Judge to condemn us. But being propitiated and
attoned by the Blood of Christ, his Throne is the Throne of Grace and Mercy: In
this phrase he alludes unto the propitiatory or seat of mercy above the Ark in
the Tabernacle or Temple, which did typify the propitiation to be made by the
Death of Christ, upon which accepted of God; man's Sins become pardonable, and
God reconcilable; and without this reconciliation, it is no coming near this
Throne. If once it be made a Throne of Grace, then we may come boldly unto it:
For it is not like Mount Sinai, a Mount of Darkness, Thunder, Lightning and
Terror; but Mount Zion, a Mount of Light, Grace and Glory. So that now we need
not fear God's Wrath, but hope in his Mercy: And though we may justly be afraid
to approach, if we look upon our selves; yet when we consider that Divine
Justice is satisfied by our High-Priest's Sacrifice, and that he is the
admissional of Heaven, ready to take us by the hand, and bring us to his
Father, and plead our cause with his Blood, then we may come boldly, and ought
so to do. To come, is to pray, or to approach for to pray; to come with
boldness, is in the Name of Christ to pray with great confidence, not only to
be admitted, but to be heard for his sake. For by him we have access unto that
Grace wherein we stand, Romans 5. 2. By him we have access by one Spirit to the
Father, Ephesians. 2. 18. And in him we have boldness and access with confidence,
in the Faith of him, cap. 3. 12. But suppose we come, what may we expect, or
what shall we receive?

[ -- We may obtain mercy, and find Grace for help in the time of need.] All
our time on Earth is a time of need, for we always have need of help; yet
sometimes we have greater need than at other seasons. The word in the Original
is [seasonable help] help in due season, and then it is most seasonable when
most needful: To afford this help must need be an act of Mercy and Grace,
whereby sins past are pardoned, and power of Sanctification, with assistance to
prevent sin for time to come, obtained: And without this help, mercy, pardon,
and assistance, it is impossible to enter into God's eternal Rest, but by it we
assuredly may; So that if we persevere, and so enter, it is to be ascribed to
that Grace and Mercy which we obtain by Prayer; if we come short, the fault
will be our own, who do not seek help by our continual and instant
Supplications in the Name of Christ. To understand the force of this, as a
Reason delivered in these three last Verses, we must call to remembrance, 1.
What the Duty is, which is, to labor to enter into Rest, and to hold fast our
Profession, which is nothing else but perseverance. 2. We must consider, that
it is taken from Christ as a Priest, and it is very effectual: For if 1. He be
our great High Priest. 2. Passed into the Heavens, and has taken possession of
that eternal Rest, and also in our behalf. 3. So merciful and sensible of our
Infirmities. 4. So ready to procure us help, when we seek it by Prayer before
the Throne of Grace; then let us not only with all diligence, but with
greatest hope and confidence, labor to persevere. For a conclusion of these
four first Chapters let us observe,

1. That the Subject of them is Christ's Prophetical Office as most excellent,
and above that of other Prophets, Angels, Moses.

2. That though this be the principal and intended Subject, yet he speaks
something of his Regal and Sacerdotal Function; yet only upon the by, and with
some reference to his Prophetic Faculty.

3. That the principal Duty which he urges so strongly upon us from his
Prophetical Excellency, is perseverance in the Profession of his blessed
Doctrine, and the Observation of his Laws, given by him as a Regal Prophet and
Apostle.

4. In the pressing of this Duty, he insisteth upon the latter part of Psalm.
95. where he ^. Sexs forth the Example most clearly. 2. Applies it to these
Hebrrews.

5. The last reason is taken from his Priesthood, which is handled and brought
in with such Art, that it not only servs for to persuade us to attend to his
Prophetical Doctrine and continue in it, but also to prepare and make way for
his admirable discourse following, concerning his eternal Priesthood, and is an
imperfect Transition.

CHAP. V. Ver. I.
For every High Priest taken from among men, is ordained for men in things
pertaining to God, that he may offer both gifts and sacrifices for sins.. 1.
BEfore I enter upon the Chapter it self, the connection of this part with the
former must be considered; and I find the Agreement to be twofold, 1. General.
2. More particular. The general is very clear; for after that in the former
four Chapters the Apostle had set forth the Excellency of Christ's Prophetical
Office, wherein he was far above the former Prophets, Angels, and Moses; and
thereupon had exhorted to perseverance in the Profession of his Doctrine
declared in the Gospel, and pressed the performance of the Duty, both from the
fearful Punishment of Apostasy, and the glorious Reward of Constancy: He now in
this Chapter enters upon a discourse of his Priesthood, as ^ar more excellent
than that of Aaron's; so that there was all the Reason in the World to
persevere in respect of this Office likewise; This is the general Method. The
particular seems to be employed in the Particle [For], which many times is a
causal Conjunction, and renders a reason of something formerly delivered: For,
seeing he had formerly affirmed Christ to be an High Priest, here he proves him
to be such indeed, and to have the Nature, Properties, Qualities, and Power of
such an Officer. This particular refers to the three last Verses of the former
Chapter, which made way for this discourse that follows.

. 2. As the occasion of the former Doctrine was an high conceit which the
Hebrews had of the Law, as delivered to them by Prophets, Angels, Moses; so the
occasion of what follows was their high esteem of Aaron, and the Levitical
High Priest. The Scope is to demonstrate the Excellency of Christ's Priesthood
as far above that of the Law, and persuade them to continue in their Faith in
him, as so excellent an High Priest! as far above all others. The Method is
this, 1. He delivers his Doctrine. 2. Confirms it. 3. Applies it. The Doctrine
is this, Christ is a perfect High Priest, more excellent than Aaron, or any of
the Levitical Order. The Confirmation is from his Calling and Order, his
Ministration, and his excellent Sacrifice, and this continues from this Chapter
to the 19th. Verse of the tenth: After this confirmation finished, he proceeds
in cap. 10. 19. to Application, which is made principally by way of
Exhortation. In this Chapter the Apostle does 1. Manifest Christ to be a Priest
for ever, according to the the Order of Melchizede^k, 2. Conceiving these
Hebrews hardly capable of that discourse concerning this excellent and eternal
Priesthood, which he intended, he i^proves their Ignorance, caused by their
great negligence. In the first part, he 1. Informs us what an High Priest in
general is. 2. Shows, that none can be a lawful Priest who is not called. 3.
Proves Christ to be called, and by Commission from Heaven made an High Priest,
and invested with a Sacerdotal Power. But to proceed unto particulars, and
enter upon the Text, which gives us a description of an High Priest, and lets
us know, that he is an Officer in matters of Religion. 2. That his Work is to
offer Gifts and Sacrifices for Sin. 3. He must be of a merciful disposition,
and inclined to compassionate the People, as having Infirmities of his own. 4.
The end whereat he must aim to make God propitious, and procure his favor for
the remission of the Peoples Sin. He is an Officer in matters of Religion: To
be an Officer is the general, wherein he agrees with all others in any Office;
to be such in matters of Religion, differenceth him from all Magistrates and
Civil Officers. Before we handle the parts of the Description, we must take
notice first what the definitum, or thing described, is, and it is said to be an
High Priest. Priesthood, if we consult the Greek or Latin Name, is a sacred
Office; the word [Cohen] in Hebrew also is an Officer, either sacred or civil,
and comes of a Verb in Piel, which signify, to minister or act in political
or religious matters; and such a Person may be a Magistrate or Minister, a
Prince or a Priest: For anciently Princes were Priests, and Priests Princes; so
Melchizedeck was King and Priest; and such, if we may believe some ancient
Authors, were the firstborn of Families, and had the Power and Charge of
Civil and Ecclesiastical Government in the Family. This Office is a place of
power and dignity: Yet there usually was an inequality between Priests; for
some were Highpriests, some inferior, and the High Priest was President over
the rest, of greater dignity and power, and could and might officiate in some
things, wherein the inferior could not: In this place, the thing or Person
described is an High Priest, though many of these things might agree to other
Priests. And first, he is an Officer: For

[He is one taken from among men, and ordained for men,] By this, with that
which follows, we may easily understand, that the Priest here described is a
Man, and not an Angel, and an Officer for men, and for sinful men. 1. He must
be taken from among man, which implies not only that he must be a Man, but of
the same rank and quality with other men, who are no Officers, no Priests, but
of no Priests made Priests; yet they should be duly qualified, and fit for the
place, how else can they officiate as they ought to do? This phrase [to be
taken from among men] we find Exodus 28. 1. where Moses is commanded to take
Aaron and his Sons, from the midst or from among the children of Israel; and a
like Expression is used, Levit. 8. 1. when Aaron must be consecrated. This is a
kind of election and designation of the person, whereby he is singled out of,
and separated from, the rest, to be put in another and higher rank and order.
This designation is made by Lot, or Birthright, or Election, or divine
immediate determination; for here there must be no Usurpation: After the Person
is once designed and determined upon, he must be constituted, ordained, set
over other men for their good; for the end of all Officers is, to seek and
endeavor the temporal or spiritual good of those to whom they are made
Officers. For though God can do all things immediately himself, yet he is
pleased to make use of man, and by man communicate his Blessings to man. This
constitution is by a Mandate of him or them who can constitute an Officer, and
by this Mandate is signified the Constitutor's Will: The effect of it is to
give the Person constituted, Power, and to bind him to officiate: For every
Officer by his Ordination receivs a power and a charge to do the Works of his
place: And as the power and charge are many times great, so the Constitution is
made with solemn Rites, which are used in the Inauguration of Princes, and
Consecration of Priests. This is the general Nature of a Priest, he is an
Officer; Yet there be Civil and there be Religious Officers; but a Priest is an
Officer in Religion, and the things of God: For we have to do with Men, and we
converse with God. The Subject therefore wherein a Priest is employed is,
things pertaining to God; for he is the Supreme Lord, to whom all Glory,
Service, and Obedience are due in the highest degree; upon him we all always
do wholly depend, both for our Being and Happiness both spiritual and temporal.
And though all men must worship him, yet there are public Services which none
but a Priest may perform, so as to be accepted. Every one does not know how God
will be served, neither, if they knew it, are they fit or qualified for it.
Therefore God ordained Priests who knew his Will, his instituted Worship, and
how it should be performed, and to come to God without them was in vain; and
for any other to officiate in that place, is an Usurpation, and a great
Offense. By this Office God did signify, that sinful Man cannot come near unto
him without a Mediator: And it was an unspeakable Mercy of God to institute
such Services as he requires at Man's hands, and to ordain such Persons for the
performance as he would accept. Many think that Priesthood is of Institution.
As Religion, so Priesthood in general, sin presupposed, seems to be of the
Law of Nature: For no Nation is without Religion, no Religion without a Priest;
therefore we read in Authors so much of Temples, Altars, Priest; and amongst
these, Highpriests, and Supreme Pontiffs: Yet there may be Officers in
Religion who are no Priests, but subservient unto them; therefore we must know
what is the proper Work of a Priest, which is the next thing whereof the
Apostle informs us, in these words,

[That he may offer both Gifts and Sacrifices for Sins.] The Law and Ligh: of
Nature dictate unto us, that something must be offered unto God in
acknowledgment of his Supreme Dominion; and because men have their Sins, and
are guilty, and God is just, and has power of life and death, of punishment
and pardon, therefore Sacrifices must be offered to satisfy his Justice, avert
his Wrath; and procure his favor. But by what Gifts and Sacrifices God may be
propitiated, and in what manner they must be offered, the Law of Nature will
not teach us: These things must be revealed and instituted from Heaven, and so
must the Priesthood and party officiating too; for every one must not offer
these Gifts and Sacrifices, either for himself or others, but such as God shall
either mediately or immediately design and qualify for this Work.

. 3. Thus you have heard, 1. That a Priest is an Officer in Religion. 2. That
his proper Work is to offer Gifts and Sacrifices. The third thing is the
disposition which is most suitable to his place, 3. He must be merciful, and
inclined to compassion as one who himself has his Infirmity: For it follows,

Ver. 2. Who can have Compassion on the ignorant, and on them that are out of
the way; for that he himself also is compassed with Infirmity. THis disposition
and affection is so necessary, that no man without it, is fit to be a Priest:
For this reason God contrived a way whereby Christ, after he was risen from the
dead, ascended into Heaven, obtained fullness of joy in his presence, and
pleasures for evermore at his right hand, might be sensible of Man's misery. To
understand the words of the Text, we must consider, 1. What it is to have
Compassion. 2. Upon whom he must have Compassion. 3, Why he should be the more
compassina^e. To have Compassion, is to be inwardly affected with the misery of
another, so as to be moved and inclined, so far as we are able, to help,
relieve, and comfort them. Therefore, says one, Misericordia est ^iseria
aliena in cord nostro: The word in the Original is [(...)] to suffer
moderately, or rather in some certain measure. 1. He must suffer, for he that
is merciful does suffer with them that suffer, and mourn with them that mourn;
for we should be like fellow Members of one Body: and as there is a Sympathy or
fellow-feeling amongst the Members of one Body; so there should be amongst us.
Yet as our own Passions and Affections should be moderated by the rules of
Reason, so must this Compassion be; it must neither be boundless nor irregular:
For there be such heinous Offenders, and abominable Sinners, that they are no
fit Subjects either of the Mercy of God or Man, and we may exceed in our
Compassion. Therefore the Rules of divine Wisdom and Justice must regulate and
measure the same, otherwise we may make our selves unfit to officiate for
others; yet this was seldom the fault of Priests, whose Compassion was usually
defective. 2. The parties to be pityed, and the Subject of the Priest's
Compassion, were the ignorant, and such as are out of the way. Ignorance and
Error are often taken for sins, yet not such as are capital and crying crimes,
but Offenses committed out of ignorance, infirmity, and violence of temptation,
for which under the Law Sacrifices were prescribed, and accepted upon the
Confession of the Delinquents; for there was no Sacrifice to expiate capital
sins, for they must be punished by Death. They which were ignorant, and seduced
out of the way, willing to confess, and desirous of pardon, were to be pitied,
as a fit Subject of the High-Priest's Compassion. 3. The reason why he should
the more have Compassion on these, was because he was compassed himself on
every hand with the like infirmity, and might easily fall into the like Sin.
This should make him the more careful to make Reconciliation for them, as for
himself, because he might fall into the same condition; and it was the Wisdom
of God to make such kind of Persons to be Priests.

. 4. The end of the Priest's officiating, and his Compassion, was to make
Reconciliation for his own and their sins. For

Ver. 3. And by reason hereof he ought, as for the People, so also for himself,
to offer for Sins.] THe reason, why he must be merciful and sensible of the
guilt and misery of the People, was, that he might offer for their Sins; and
because he was compassed with infirmity, and had his own Sins, therefore he
must offer for himself. His own infirmity and sin might move him both to pity
them, and also seek their pardon, as his own. To offer for Sins, is, to do that
upon which God has promised to pardon; and remission is the very end and
ultimate effect of all propitiatory Sacrifices, and the Service of all lawful
Priests. Before I conclude this part of the Chapter, it may be expedient to
resolve two Questions.

The first is, Whether it be necessary and essential to a Priest to have sins
of his own, for which he must offer?

The second is, Whether in the times of the Gospel, after Christ had offered
his Sacrifice, and was confirmed an eternal Priest in Heaven; there be many
persons properly called Priests, and such as are here described? To both, I
answer Negatively. For, 1. It Is not essential to a Priest to have sins of his
own, or that he be a Sinner: For Christ himself is a most perfect and complete
Priest, and yet without Sin; yet he is merciful, and as sensible of our
miseries as any ever was. And this indeed was a necessary qualification in a
Priest, that must make reconciliation for Man; and he that is unmerciful, is no
ways sit to be a Priest for guilty Wretches: yet a Priest may be merciful, and
yet without sin, though there never was any such Priest in the World, but Jesus
Christ, the Son of the living God. For the second, there never was, in proper
sense, since Christ's Ascension into Heaven, in the Church-Christian, any such
Priest, as is here described. And it is observable, that such as officiate in
the Church-Christian, and minister in holy things, are in the New Testament
called Ministers, Elders, Bishops, Pastors, Teachers, Men of God, Apostles,
Evangelists, Prophets, but never styled [(...)] Priests, much less High Priest;
neither are there any Temples, Altars, Sacrifices in the time of the Gospel,
that are properly such. Some of the Church of Rome do affirm, The Mass to be a
Sacrifice, and the same with that which Christ offered upon the Cross, and
propitiatory for the Sins of the Living and the Dead. Yet seeing they confess,
1. That it is [incru^ntum] unbloody, therefore it must needs essentially differ
from that Sacrifice and Oblation, wherein the Blood of Christ was once shed,
never to be shed again, never to be re-iterated. 2. Seeing it is not essentially
the same, it cannot be properly propitiatory. 3. Seeing it is not [expiatorium
and redemtorium], as they grant it is not, How should it be the same? 4. That
which is a representation, commemoration, and application of that Sacrifice
once offered, never to be offered again; can neither be the same, nor
propitiatory. And as it is not the same Sacrifice, but essentially different
from it, it is no Sacrifice at all in proper sense, neither can any wit of Man
prove it so to be. Therefore, in respect of it, their Priests can be no
Priests, their Tables no Altars, their Temples no Temples. When diverse of the
Ancients call the Ministers of the Gospel or Bishops, Priests; the Service of
the Eucharist, a Sacrifice; and the Communion-Tables, Altars; they must either
be understood to speak tropically and metaphorically, or deliver that which is
untrue, and also contradict themselves and the Scriptures.

. 5. Hitherto the description of a Priest in general, and such as did officiate
before the times of the Gospel; the next thing is concerning their calling and
acquisition of their Sacerdotal Power, which is delivered in these words,

Ver. 4. And no man takes this Honor unto himself, but He that is called of
God, as was Aaron.] THe sum whereof is this, that the Institution of an
High-Priest-hood, and an High Priest, is from God. For the more distinct
handling of the Text, we must observe three things:

1. That no man can make himself Priest. 2. That God's Calling makes a Priest.
3. Aaron, for example, was so made a Priest.


1. The first Proposition is, that no man can make himself a Priest: For any
man to take or receive to himself or by himself this Honor, is, to make
himself such a Priest, as is formerly described. The sense is not, that no man
will usurp this sacerdotal power, or that many will not take it upon them, or
many will not presume to make others Priests which God did never make such. For
Jeroboam made of the lowest of the People, Priests. Yet, let Princes or People
presume to make Priests; let others, without any consent of God or Man, usurp
this Power: yet if God do not Institute and Call them either mediately or
immediately their Priesthood is no Priesthood, their Offering no Offerings,
their Service ineffectual, and no ways acceptable to God. And here it is
observable, that Priesthood is called an honor, because the Office is high
and honorable, and next to that of Kings, though with many it is contemptible.

2. God's Calling makes a Priest, for he not only has power to institute this
Office, and invest men with this honor: For, as all Power is of God; so is
this of Priest, as well as that of Prince. And though God gives liberty to men
for to institute some civil Offices, and make Officers; yet in matters of
Religion it is otherwise. For he has reserved that Power of making spiritual
Officers, and to appoint their Service unto himself, and the success of their
Service does merely depend on him; for without him, it can have no spiritual
effect upon the Souls and Consciences of men. Yet God does not Call all
Officers in Religion immediately, and by an extraordinary and particular
designation; but many are called in an ordinary way: yet it is necessary, that
every standing Office should be instituted either by a General, or some special
precept of universal Obligation for the time he will have such an Office to
continue in the Church. This precept determines the qualification of the
person; and this must be known and approved by the Church, ^^ such as the
Church shall trust: and this approbation must be publicly declared, before the
party that must publicly officiate can be orderly admitted; yet this rule
admits of some exception in extraordinary Cases. All the power, that the Church
in constitution of Officers can challenge, is to signify the Will of Christ
concerning the particular persons to be constituted, that they are rightly
qualified and such as Christ requires them to be. Christ, therefore in this
work, is the principal; and the Church, following the rules of Christ, is the
instrumental cause. Of vocation, ordination, imposition of hands, and
constituting of Church Officers, I shall speak more at large in my Treatise of
Civil and Ecclesiastical Government.

3. Aaron did not take this honor to himself, but was Called of God; this is
an instance, and a particular example of the divine Vocation of an High Priest:
And though it was but a particular example, yet it was agreeable to a general
Rule. That Aaron was an High Priest, and that he did not usurp this honor; and
that he was Called of God, is evident out of Scripture. For, 1. God singles out
the Tribe of Levi for religious Services. 2. Out of this Tribe, he singles the
Family of Aaron for the Priesthood. 3. Out of this Family, he separates Aaron
and his Sons, with their Posterity to be Highpriests. 4. He caused him
publicly to be set apart with his Sons, and to be consecrated. 5. Upon his
Consecration, when he first begins to minister and offer, his Priesthood is
confirmed by Fire sent from Heaven, to burn the Offering. 6. Notwithstanding
this particular institution and designation, he was unjustly challenged as
engrossing the Sacerdotal Power, till God by consuming the Company of Korah,
and causing Aaron's Rod to Blossom, and bring forth ripe Almonds, confirmed it
again. 7. Aaron's Children and Posterity acquired their power by lineal
descent, according to the first Institution; for all his Successors derived
their Power from the first Investiture of him and his Sons.

. 6. After the Description of an High Priest, and his divine Calling, follows
the Apostles discourse of the High-Priest-hood of Christ. And he, 1. Asserts
his Calling. 2. Proves it: His Calling is asserted in these words,

Ver. 5. So Christ also did not glorify himself, but he that said, etc.] THis
does presuppose, 1. That Christ is a Priest, and all things essential to a
Priest, we find in him according to the former Description. 2. That to be a
Priest, is a Glory and Honor; for it is a place, as of Power, so of Dignity
and Glory. Yet it is said, He did not glorify himself, and take upon him the
Sacerdotal Power and Dignity, though he was qualified better then ever any was.
By this we understand the intolerable pride and presumption of many in these
times, which take upon them to officiate in matters of Religion, though no
ways qualified or fitted for this work. If ever any Man or Angel, then surely
Christ might have taken this Honor to himself; yet he did not. And this will
be the eternal condemnation of all such as usurp Ecclesiastical Power without
any Commission from God or Man. How unlike unto Christ are all such, who
presume of their own merit, and despise such as Christ has called? But if
Christ did not glorify himself, and take upon him to be a Priest, how did he
acquire his Sacerdotal Power? It Is said, That God did glorify and advance him
to this place and honor. This is included in these words,

[But he that said unto him.] For he that said unto him the words following,
was God, and He made him Priest: And the truth is, the place was so high, and
required such a measure of Power, that none but God could constitute and invest
him. For it was not in the power of Man or Angel to make so great an
High Priest: As before it is said, 1. That he did not make himself an
High Priest. 2. That God made him so: by those words found in Psalm. 2. 7. he
proves both, that he was a Priest, and that God made him such. For, 1. It Is
clear that it is the Lord, and everlasting Jehovah, who spoke these words. 2.
He spoke them to Christ. 3. By them he constituted him a Priest. The words of
Constitution are these,

[This Day have I begotten thee.] This day, as you heard before in the first
Chapter, is the day of Resurrection; and for God to say that day, [Thou art my
Son, this Day have I begotten thee], is to make him both a Priest and a King.
For to have the Birthright, and be the first begotten, was to be King and
Priest. And if God, who had all Power in his hands, declare him to be his Son,
and first begotten, this is to invest him with the Regal and Sacerdotal Power.
And though he was designed for this place long before; yet, till here he was
consecrated by his own Blood, he did not receive this Honor, and it was a
reward of Humiliation. For you must know, that God his Father, by the
Resurrection, did not only restore his life, which he had laid down upon the
Cross, and made him immortal, but invested him with his Glory and Power. And
whereas this Psalm was composed long before the Resurrection and Incarnation of
the Son of God; yet the thing was not done, nor the words spoken to Christ,
till his Resurrection: for the meaning is not, that then God did speak these
words, but after the Incarnation and Resurrection, he would by them declare him
Priest and King. But he finds not only his Patent and Commission for his
Priestood, but the confirmation of it to him for ever, in another place: For
thus he writes,

Ver. 6. As he says also in another place, Thou art a Priest for ever after
the order of Melchisedec.] THe words here cited, we find Psalm. 110. 4. Where we
may observe, 1. That David was the Author of that Psalm, as appears, Matthew.
22. 43. 2. That the subject of the Psalm is Christ or the Messiah, and it is to
be understood of speaking of him. 3. That it is prophetical, and a prediction
of things which were then to come, and a long time after. 4. These things are
spoken of the Messiah by the Prophet, as moved, inspired, enlightened to see,
speak, write such things as should come to pass, and be accomplished in their
time. 5. The Apostle, in this Discourse, takes it for granted, and as confessed
by these Hebrews, that Jesus of Nazareth was the true Messiah, in whom all
these things were fulfilled. 6. The things affirmed or predicated of the
Messiah were spoken, done, sworn, not only after the Resurrection, but the
Ascension of our Savior, and upon his coming before the Ancient of Days. For
when God set him at his right hand, he established his glorious Kingdom, and he
began instantly to Reign; and then it was that he confirmed his everlasting
Priesthood upon him by Oath, and that he began to officiate and minister in
the heavenly Temple. And those words spoken by God, were sufficient, not only
to make him a complete Priest, but to confirm him. 7. Both these places prove,
not only that Christ was a Priest, but that he was made an eternal Priest of a
far higher Order than that of Aaron, and all this by God himself immediately.
And as he was made a Priest by God, so his Priesthood was the most excellent
Priesthood, and most beneficial to sinful Man, that ever was or shall be.

. 7. These two places prove Christ, 1. To be a Priest; and therefore all things
essential to that Office, must agree to him according to the Description of a
Priest in the beginning of the Chapter.

2. They manifest he was a Priest, not by Usurpation, but by Commission from
Heaven.

3. The former Scripture informs us, that he was constituted a complete Priest
upon his Resurrection; the latter, that he was confirmed in his unchangeable
and everlasting Priesthood upon his Ascension into Heaven, and Session at the
right hand of God. The words following presuppose his designation, and signify
the manner of his Consecration, which was such, as that it did fitly qualify
him to be a merciful and eternally-saving High Priest, who offered for himself,
not as sinful, but bearing the punishment of man's Sin, and for others too.
Therefore it follows,

Ver. 7. Who in the days of his Flesh, when he offered up Prayers and
Supplications, with strong crying and tears, to him that was able to save him
from Death, and was heard, in that he feared. IN which words, with those that
follow, ver. 8, 9. we may observe;

1. The Consecration of the Son of God. 2. The acquisition of a mighty saving
Power upon the Consecration once ended.


In the Consecration, by his deep Humiliation, we have;

1. His effectual Prayers. 2. His learning Obedience.


Concerning his Prayers, we are informed of,

1. The time when they were offered. 2. The manner how they were made. 3. The
party to whom they were presented. 4. The efficacy and success of them.


He offered up Prayers and Supplications, that is, he prayed in humble and
suppliant manner, with bended knees, and a bowed and deeply humbled Soul. Both
the words signify one and the same thing, though expressed by two words; the
one whereof is often, the other seldom, or rather but once, used in Scripture.
Both are Petitions, and especially such as we call Deprecations, which are used
for the averting of some evil: These Petitions were presented unto God; for
Prayer, in strict sense, is a representation of our Petitions unto God to move
him for to grant our desires. It Is a kind of Service or Sacrifice, and
therefore said to be offered unto God, and does imply an acknowledgment of his
supreme Dominion. Though the word used in the Original sometimes signify a
branch of Olive, which Suppliants used to carry in their hands; yet both the
Verb, from whence it comes, does signify humbly to request, and it does
express a Supplication or humble Petition: The Prayers here mentioned, were
the Prayers of Christ the Son of God.

And, 1. They were made for the time, in the days of his Flesh: The days of his
Flesh are the time of his humiliation, frailty, and mortality before his Death
and Resurrection; especially, the time of his Agony and Suffering upon the
Cross. For in the one he vehemently prayed, and deprecated the Cup of his
Passion; in the other, he makes a most sad Complaint of his Desertion and many
cruel Sufferings, and petitions for help and deliverance, and binds himself
upon the same by solemn Vows unto his heavenly Father, as we may read, Psalm.
22. And though he made use of the whole Psalm, which exactly agrees to him and
none else; yet the Evangelists relate only the first words, [My God, my God,
why have thou for saken me?] The prayers made at these two times in his deepest
and last humiliation, are here principally intended by the Apostle.

2. The manner how these Prayers were made, is expressed in these words, [with
strong cries and tears]; which imply, 1. His sad and woeful condition, the
anguish, sorrow, and horror of his mind, and the bitterness of his Passion.
2. Signify the fervency and importunity of his prayers. And if Man were once
sensible of his sins, for which his Savior Suffered; he would be fervent in
his prayers, and most earnestly deprecare the Wrath of God, as his Savior did.
The sense of sin will break the stoniest heart, and quicken our Prayers, cause
cries and tears. But we neither consider the grievousnesse of our sins, nor the
bitterness of our Savior's Passion; therefore our Prayers are cold and weak,
and mercy stands afar off, and pardon comes not near us.

3. These Prayers were made and directed to God, as One that was able to save
him from Death. All Petitions made to any Person, either unable or unwilling to
do that which is desired, are in vain: might and mercy, power and goodness are
necessarily required in him, to whom Prayers, which shall in the issue prove
effectual, are to be offered. And because none but God is absolutely Powerful
and Good, Almighty and Almerciful, therefore to him alone, as Supreme Lord, all
Prayers are to be made, as to the prime Author, and principal efficient of all
Blessings and Mercies. To address our selves in this manner to any other, is
flat Idolatry, and a breach of the first and great Command: None can deliver
from Death, but only He. Therefore Christ offered his Prayers and Supplications
to Him, as able to save from Death; and this ability to save in greatest
dangers, was the ground of his confidence. God was able to save from Death,
either by prevention, and not suffering him to die; or, if he suffered Death, by
raising him up again, and restoring life once taken away and lost. The latter
he did, the former he denied to do: yet by Death, in this place, may be meant
some other thing then loss of this mortal and temporal Life; for in Scripture
it signifies all kind of evils Man or Angel is subject unto, and in this place
something which he feared, prayed against, and was freed from by God his
heavenly Father supporting him, so that he did not sink under the heavy burden
laid upon him. He endured all with patience and willingness of mind, and was
not overcome or overwhelmed: He suffered something far more terrible then all
bodily pains, and that Death which is only a separation of Soul and Body; and
this was violent temptation, for he was tempted more violently then ever any
was; yet he never yielded the least, but continued firm, faithful, obedient
unto his heavenly Father, in the midst of his greatest conflicts. That which
upheld him, was the power of his Father; and that which obtained the victory,
was his support, obtained by his fervent Prayers. For,

4. His Prayers and Supplications were effectual, [he was heard, in that he
feared.] To be heard in the Hebrew is, by a Metonymy, sometimes to have our
prayers granted, and the thing requested done. And, to be heard, when we pray
for deliverance, is to be delivered, saved, helped: This might be made manifest
out of many places of the Old Testament, translated by the Septuagint. Two of
them Heinsius observes, as 2 Chronicles. 18. 31. where it is written, That
Jehoshaphat cried out, and the Lord [helped him], so the Hebrew; [heard him],
so the Septuagint: And Psalm. 56. 16. As for me, I will call upon God, and the
Lord will save me, so the Hebrew; [hath heard me], so the Greek. So that for
Christ to be heard, was for Christ to be delivered: But what was he delivered
from? certainly not from Death, so as not to suffer it; for he dyed: but from
something he seared. For the word [(...)], which properly signifies fear,
Metonymically, in this place, signifies the thing feared, which was the object
and cause of his fear. This word is once used by the Septuagint, for so they
translate the word (...) Josh. 22. 24. But what? did Christ fear Death? No, not
bodily Death, but such a Death as he suffered, wherein he was so fearfully
tempted. For if God had deserted him wholly, as he did in part, and not have
supported him; he, as man, might have been overcome, have sunk under the burden
in distrust, or despair, or impatience. This he feared, more then ten thousand
Deaths of his Body, and so to do was his holiness; and though he knew his
Father would support him, yet he must offer vehement Prayers, and be put hard
unto it, before he did obtain it. Thus though he knew he must die; yet he
defired vehemently that the Cup of his Passion, if it were possible, might
pass and be omitted. God began to hear him, when he sent an Angel from Heaven
to comfort him; but then he heard fully, when he had supported him to the end
of his Passion, so that he commended his Soul unspotted and victorious into his
Fathers hand, and made haste unto that Paradise, into which no unclean thing
shall ever enter. When all was done and suffered, the Devil found nothing in
him, could not charge him with the least Sin. This was the efficacy of his
Prayers, which he offered for himself, as different from all others that ever
were made in his extremity, whereby he learned to pity others in their
temptations and necessities. For an High Priest must offer for himself, as well
as for others, because he is compassed with infirmities. So Christ, though he
had no Sin, yet had infirmities, and was tempted, and had need to pray for
himself, as well as for his People, and

Ver. 8. Though he were a Son, yet learned he obedience, by the things which he
suffered. Where we may observe two things, and two propositions; Two things,
1. His eminent Dignity, he was a Son. 2. His obedience: Two propositions, 1. He
was a Son. 2. Though a Son, yet he learned obedience by the things ^he
Suffered. 1. He was a Son; the Son of God, and in a more excellent manner then
any, either Man or Angel was or could be. He was, as the Word, the Son of God,
so as that he was God: and, as Flesh and Man, he was assumed by the Word, and
conceived by the holy Spirit in the Virgin's Womb: yet so, that there were not
two Sons but one, the Word, made Flesh; and as such a Son, he was nearer God
then any other, Heir of all things, Lord of Men and Angels, and the
only-begotten Son of God. Yet, 2. Though a Son, yet learned he obedience. For
though, as a Son, he was very high; yet he humbled himself very low, and took
upon him the form of a Servant, and in that form became obedient unto Death,
the Death of the Cross, which was the Death of a Servant, as he was sold for
thirty pence, the ordinary price of a Servant and Slave. His obedience
presupposed his subjection, as Flesh, unto his heavenly Father, as his Supreme
Lord; and a Command, not only to Do, but to Suffer even the Death of the
Cross; and this was the highest, greatest, and hardest command to dye such a
Death for the Sin of Man: This command above all others he learned, to obey. He
learned this hard Lesson, not only to know it, but chiefly to do it; not merely
by speculation, but real experience. For to learn to obey, is to obey; and to
learn to suffer, is to suffer. God by laying on him the Iniquities of us all,
was the Master; he, by bearing that heavy burden, became the Scholar: for by
the things he suffered, that is, by suffering so many things; and, amongst the
rest, the Death of the Cross; he did perfectly learn, and experimentally
understand what obedience was. This Lesson, no Angel did ever learn in this
manner; they had no such command; neither did they ever obey it, though they
knew it. By the former words, we understand that he offered prayers for
himself, and by these that he offered himself for us, and learned to have pity
upon poor Sinners, who, in their extremities, cry unto God. By this obedience
was signified God's severity against Sin, and his tender mercy toward Sinners.

. 8. Thus Christ was consecrated, and, by this Suffering and Sacrifice of
himself, fitly qualified for to be a Priest, and a saving Priest unto all his
loyal and obedient Servants. For,

Ver. 9. Being made perfect, he became the Author of eternal Salvation unto
all ^^^m that obey him.] FIrst, He is made perfect: Secondly, He became the
Authout of Savation. 1. To be made perfect, is to be consecrated, and made fit
to minister before God as a Priest. For though God did design Aaron for a
Priest, yet he did not suffer him to minister before he was consecrated. There
is no legal Consecration; without Blood of Sacrifices; therefore Christ was
consecrated by his own Blood, the Blood of that Sacrifice, wherein he offered
his life himself. It was the Wisdom of God to order it, and his Will ^o decree
that Christ should first Suffer, and shed his Blood for the Sin of man, and so
sanctify him by Suffering, before he should have power to save. For the best
and most merciful Priest that ever was, must be made in the best and most
convenient manner: Upon this strange and wonderful Consecration, he became an
Author of Salvation. Where we may observe,

1. An Effect, eternal Salvation. 2. The Author or efficient, Christ
consecrated. 3. The Subject to which this Salvation is communicated, such as
obey him.


1. By Salvation, is meant deliverance from Sin, and all the Consequents
thereof; so as, that the party saved, is made for ever happy. There be both
bodily and spiritual, temporal and eternal dangers, whereunto man, by Sin, is
liable; and this Salvation is a deliverance from all. There is deliverance, as
from some evils, and not all; so deliverance only for a time, and not for ever:
but this Salvation is a total deliverance from all evil, and that for ever.
Eternal peace, safety, felicity, is the issue and consequent thereof: 2. This
Salvation being so noble and glorious an effect, must have some Cause, some
Author and Efficient, and this Efficient was Christ; yet Christ, as perfected
and consecrated. For by his Blood and purest Sacrifice of himself, 1. He
satisfied divine Justice, and merited this Salvation. 2. Being upon his
Resurrection, constituted and made an High Priest and King, and fit to minister
and officiate as a Priest, and Reign as King in Heaven; he ascends into that
glorious Temple and Palace, and is set at the right hand of God. 3. Being there
established, he begins as King to send down the Holy Ghost, reveal the Gospel,
and by both to work Faith in the hearts of Men, and qualify them for
Justification and Salvation. 4. When men are once qualified and prepared, so as
to sue for pardon in his Name before the Throne of God; he, as Priest, begins
his Intercession, and by the plea of his own Blood for them procures their
pardon and eternal Salvation. So that, as consecrated and perfect, he becomes
the great efficient Cause of this Salvation, by way of merit, intercession, and
actual communication. There be many other ministerial and adjuvant causes of
this effect, yet he is the principal; so the word, which signifies a Cause, in
general was understood by our Translators, who turn it [the Authour] 3. If it
be communicated from and by him, it must be received in some subject; and if in
him there be an eternal saving virtue, and he exercise it, there must be some
subject and persons in whom this saving power shall produce this effect, so as
that they shall be saved. And though this Power be able to save all; yet only
they, and all they who obey him shall be saved: Efficient causes work most
effectually in Subjects united and disposed aright. And so it is in this case;
for though the mercies of God, mericed by Christ, may be so far communicable to
all, as that all may become savable, which is a great and universal Benefit;
yet they are not actually communicated to all, because all are not obedient.
For the divine Wisdom and Justice have limited them to a certain subject, and
to regulate the manner of communicating them. And seeing the proper subject of
this Salvation are such as do obey this Savior; therefore here it is
presupposed, that Christ is a King and Sovereign Prince, and as such gives
Commands and Laws to all his Subjects; and such as submit unfainedly unto his
Regal Power, and obey his Laws, and none else may expect this Salvation. His
Laws require this sincere submission and obedience in renouncing all others,
and a total dependence upon him, and him alone; in repenting of our Sins, and
believing upon him. And this sincere Faith is the fundamental virtue, and
potentially all obedience: Therefore is it said, That whosoever believes on
him shall not perish, but have everlasting Life: And he that believes on the
Son has everlasting Life, Joh. 3. 16. 36.

. 9. Yet before he was an immediate and complete Author of eternal Salvation,
he must not only be consecrated; But,

Ver. 10. Called of God an High Priest, after the Order of Melchisedec. THese
words are added and repeated, not only to expound his former proof out of Psalm
110; but also to show, when and how he became so mighty and glorious a Savior,
and also to bring in, 1. The digression. 2. The discourse that follows. 1.
They are exegetical, and declare the meaning of those words alleged, ver. 6.
[Thou are ^^ Priest for ever after the Order of Melchisedec.] For by this Text,
we are informed, 1. That those words were spoken by God. 2. That God by those
words did make him a complete and eternal Priest, and by Oath confirmed his
Priesthood. For this Text was alleged, to prove that Christ did not glorify
himself, and usurp this Sacerdotal Office; but God gave it him, and so he came
justly and legally by it. They are, 2. Added to show when Christ became so
complete an High Priest, and to exercise his saving Power; and that was not
only upon his consecration, but this confirmation of him at his right hand. For
then instantly he began to work, and convert Men, make Intercession for them,
and bring them to Salvation. 3. Upon these words reiterated, he takes occasion
to deliver that which follows, as will appear anon. Two things here I will only
observe, 1. That (to be called) is openly and solemnly with power to be
declared: For this inauguration and confirmation was made with great solemnity,
and that in the presence of all the Host and Angels of Heaven. Whether God
commanded any Archangel with sound of heavenly Trumpet to proclaim him, and
over these words before the Throne of Glory, and the place of his special
presence in the Heaven of Heavens, we know not, It Is certain; by these words,
he was made an eternal Priest, and thereupon all the Angels of Heaven did
acknowledge him. The second thing to be observed, is, that he was not only made
a Priest, but also a King; for without either of these he could not be so
powerful a Savior, yet he was not so made by these but other words.

. 10. Now follow; a Digression: For after that the Apostle had proved him to be
a Priest, and so made of God; and a Priest for ever after the Order of
Melchisedec, and not after that of Aaron: order did require he should enlarge
upon the words of the Psalmist; yet because this Doctrine was mysterious and
profound, and they not so capable of it, he takes occasion, by the way, to
reprove their dullness, stir up their attention; and prepare them for this
Doctrine concerning Christ's Priesthood, which he intended more fully to
declare unto them. This reproof is brought in artificially by a kind of
Transition, and in this manner.

Ver. 11. Of whom we have many things to say, and hard to be uttered, seeing ^^
are dull of hearing.] IN these words, and those which follow; We have,

1. The excellency and copiousness of the matter. 2. The Hebrews incapacity. 3.
The reason of their incapacity.


The subject whereof he intended to speak, was the Priesthood of Christ; and
seeing he was a Priest after the Order of Melchisodec, he must needs speak
something of him. The copiousness and aburdince of matter is signified by those
words, [Of whom we have many things to say]; the excellency, in those [and hard
to be uttered]; their incapacity, [they were dull of hearing]. The cause of
this, [For when for the time ye ought to be Teachers, ye have need that one
teach you again, etc.] which implies their negligence.

Of whom,] Some think this Relative [whom] referrs to Melchisedec, others to
Christ as Priest. But it referrs to both; to Christ principally, to Melchisedec
in order unto Christ: For many things were to be known of Melchisedec, that it
might be made evident how he did typify Christ, and how Christ was a Priest
according to that Order, and not the Order of Aaron. This is the subject of
which he intended to speak.

Of this subject, he had many things to say,] This implies, 1. That he knew
many things concerning this Priest and Priesthood, and the same certainly and
infallibly true, as revealed unto him by the divine Spirit. 2. That these
things he could utter and express, and that clearly and perspicuously enough;
and he was willing, yea desirous to make them known, if he could have found
Scholars capable of this excellent Doctrine. But such they were not: for many
excellent things might be taught, if men would be careful to learn and improve
their time and parts.

Yet these many things, were hard to be uttered,] This implies, that they were
excellent, and above the capacity of Babes and Children. They were not hard or
obscure to him; for he knew them, and fully understood them: neither were they
such things as he learned, when he was rapt up into the third Heaven,
unutterable in themselves; but they were hard to be uttered, so as they might
understand them. For,

They were dull of hearing.] This was their incapacity: The meaning is not,
that they were deaf either in whole or part; or, that such amongst them as were
learned could not read them, if written, or understand the language; but by
hearing, is meant, understanding. There are outward ears, and outward hearing
of the body; inward ears, and inward hearing of the Soul: the former they had,
the latter they had not, so as to be capable of such things as he had to say of
this Priest and Priesthood. This was no obscurity in the matter, but an
indisposition in the Soul to receive this Doctrine: Dullness was this
indisposition, which, in general, is a defect of active Power; in particular,
in this place, of the intellective faculty, as not able to perceive, discern,
apprehend, and judge, of this higher Doctrine. It Is opposed to that we call
[ac^^^n], the sharpness, quickness, and piercing power of the wit and
intellect: yet here this dullness is restrained to a certain object; for in
other things, they might be apprehensive, and judicious enough. By reason of
this defect it is, that much excellent and divine Doctrine is lost, or, at
least useless to the greatest part of the People, who are no whit moved with
Doctrine, though excellent, if above their capacity. For this cause the meanest
Teachers are most popular; though it is true, that all wise men must have
respect unto the capacity of their Hearers, and condescend unto them: yet men
should not be always Babes and Dunces in God's School. But what might be the
cause of this dullness? The Apostle informs us,

Ver. 12. That when for the time ye ought to have been Teachers, you have need
that one teach you again the principles of the Oracles of God, and are become
such as have need of milk, and not strong meat.]. 11. THis incapacity and
defect of the Understanding, may be either from natural imperfection, as in
Idiots and Naturals, or such as are not much better; or from want of teaching,
instruction, and disciplination; or from God's just Judgment, and the delusions
of Satan; or from the negligence of such as are taught, and do not attentively
hear, heed, consider; or from the sublimity and excellency of the matter
taught, or from ignorance of the language, or terms, or manner of expression
used by such as take upon them to be Teachers; or from the want of
Understanding, in principles upon which the knowledge of other things does
depend. Dullness, and so ignorance, from some of these causes, is blamless, and
will not be charged upon man in his last trial. For ignorance invincible is not
counted a Sin; but ignorance and dullness from neglect of the means God has
given Man to improve his knowledge for his own good, is inexcusable. If the
things to be known be necessary, and concern his everlasting Salvation, or
conduce to the same, it is far more heinous. Such was the dullness and ignorance
of these Hebrews, and it is employed in this, that they had had time, and all
other necessary means to improve their knowledge to that of Teachers; and yet
they were so ignorant, that they had need to be taught again the very
principles of Christianity. This was a Sin, and the same very grievous, and a
great impediment to their Salvation, and increase of heavenly comfort. The Sin
therefore which was the cause of this dullness and incapacity, was their great
neglect of the improvement of their knowledge in the Word of God. And this their
neglect was great: For, 1. They had had time and teaching enough, and other
means to increase their knowledge so far as to be able to teach and instruct
others; and yet they had woefully misspent this time, and lost much knowledge
which they might have attained both for their own advantage, and the good of
others. 2. They had so woefully misspent this time, that they were ignorant of
the very principles of the Oracles of God, and had need to be instructed in
them by others, had need of milk, not strong meat. 3. By this means they had
made themselves incapable of further instruction in the higher and more
execellent points of the Gospel concerning the Priesthood of Christ. This was
the greater Sin, because they not only might, but also ought to have improved
their time, so as to be men of Age, able to digest strong meat, and understand
and learn higher Doctrine. In this Text we may observe, 1. That they are
principles of the Oracles of God. 2. That when these are once taught and
learned, men ought to improve their knowledge, so far as to be able to teach
others that are ignorant of these principles, and to be capable of higher
points of Doctrine. 3. That many are so negligent and careless in this
particular, that they forget their principles, are Babes, and have need of Milk
still, and be taught their principles again. The first Proposition implies, 1.
That there are principles of the Oracles of God. 2. These are like Milk. 3. Men
should be first taught these. By Oracles of God, we must understand the Word of
God revealed in the Scripture, for to direct us to Salvation. For God being
willing to save Man, gave him a Rule to direct him to eternal happiness: Man
knew not the way, neither could he direct himself, neither could any other Man
or Angel teach him. Therefore God was willing by the illumination and
inspiration of his blessed Spirit, to make known his mind unto certain men,
who, being infallibly directed, must teach others both by word and writing; and
their Doctrine must be the Rule of all other Teachers, and is sufficient as a
Doctrine to save any Man, that shall learn to know and practice it. This
Doctrine may well and truly be called the Word of God, because by it whether
inspired, or spoken by word of mouth, or written, he does express his mind, and
signifies unto Man what he must know, and do, to be for ever saved. Yet here we
must observe, that by these Oracles of God, is here principally meant, the
Doctrine of the New Testament and the Gospel: Yet here it is to be noted, 1.
That all Scripture is the Word of God, and is immediately from God, in respect
of the first Revelation. 2. That as it came first from God, it is of
unchangeable Truth; and the dictates of divine Wisdom are therein contained. 3.
That it is sufficient without any other addition in that kind, to that end, God
intended it. Of these Oracles there are Principles; In these Oracles we are
taught many things, and of them there be several parts, which are unequal and
different one from another; one part, and the chiefest is that of the
Principles. These are, 1. Such as are first in order, and first to be taught
and learned. 2. They are the chief and fundamental Truths of the Gospel, and
such as upon which the rest depend, or to which the rest are appertinent, and
which are most conducing to Salvation. These being prime Truths, are reduced to
a few Heads in a certain method, intimated in several places of the New
Testament, and contracted in the ancient Creed's, grounded upon our Saviors
words, [Go, and teach all Nations, baptizing them in the Name of the Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost, as I have showed in my [Theopolitica.] These are like the
A. B. C. or letters of the Alphabet, upon which all words and sentences so far
depend in Grammar, that except they be first learned, it will be impossible to
spell or read. They are like the Elements in Nature, of which all mixed bodies
are compounded and made: They are like the foundation of an House, without
which it can neither be built or stand. And not to teach these first to those
who are willing to learn, is a vain undertaking, and a preposterous course, and
a very unprofitable way; and we find it to be so in the learning of all other
Arts and Sciences. 2. These principles are like Milk; Milk is the fittest
nourishment for newborn Babes and Infants, and of most easy digestion; so
these are plain and easy, and such as Children, ignorant, and unlearned
People, if wisely directed, may understand, and they give great light to all
other Doctrines; and it was the great Wisdom and Mercy of God to make them
such. And, 3. They which do not first learn these, cannot profit much; some
confused knowledge they may acquit, but distinct, clear, and orderly
understanding, without these first learned, cannot be expected. For the very
matter and method of those, give great light to all other divine Doctrines of
the Scripture.

2. After the first Proposition, [That they are principles of the Oracles of
God, first to be taught and learned], follows the second, which is, [That when
these principles are learned, men may and ought to improve their knowledge so
far as to be able to teach others, and be capable of higher Doctrines.] This is
employed in these words, [when for the time yo ought to have been Teachers.] By
Teachers, are not meant, Ministers and public Teachers, who are Officers, and
have taken upon them the charge of others Souls; but such as privately are fit
and able to instruct their Families, and their ignorant Neighbors. Neither may
they presume to teach higher Points of Doctrine; but the principles, and such
as they well understand. If these would do their Duty, they might help the
Ministers much, and edisy one another; and so knowledge in necessaries might
abound. If any of these be of excellent parts, and much improved, they may be
called to the Ministry. Yet many are so ignorant, that they are not able to
teach their Children and their Servants, and so are not fit, as for matter of
Religion, to be Masters of Families.

3. The last Proposition is, [That many of these H^brews, and so others, were
so negligent, that when they might and ought to have been Teachers: of others,
they have need to be taught again the very principles of Christianity.] This is
a great Sin, and cannot be excused, and many are guilty of it for two Reasons;
1. Because they do not improve their former knowledge. 2. Because they forget,
and so lose the knowledge of the very principles which they had formerly gained,
and so become Babes, incapable of higher Doctrine, which is for men of better
improvement. By this we understand, that knowledge, by negligence may be
diminished and lost: For usually, he that increases not, decreaseth; and he
that goes not forward, goes backward. For that which is acquired by industry,
by industry must be kept and improved: If God give a Talent, it must not be
hid, but used to gain more; and where he gives capacity, helps and means, he
requires the use and exercise of them. Suppose a man should or could retain the
knowledge of the principles, and yet proceed no further; he must needs be
guilty, and unfit to be advanced to an higher Form in Christ's School. He will
prove a Babe, a Child, and render himself incapable of higher Instruction.

Ver. 13, 14. For every one that uses Milk, is unkilful in the Word of
Righteousness: for he is a Babe. But strong Meat belongs to them, who are of
fa'll age, even those, who by reason of use have their senses exercised to
discern both good and evil.. 12. IN these words, the Apostle gives a reason,
why he could not so well proceed to deliver the Doctrine of this great
Priesthood; and it is this: By their negligence, they had made themselves
incapable. This he does express in an allegorical Metaphor, wherein he compares
the Ignorant to Babes, and the more knowing Hebrew-Christians to men of full
age; and the Principles of the Oracles of God to Milk, and his Doctrine of
Christ's Priesthood to strong meat. His intent therefore is to let them know,
that as strong meat is not for Babes, but for such as are of full age, so his
Doctrine of Christ's Priesthood is not for them, which have not digested the
principles, but for such as by use and constant diligence have improved their
knowledge. Here we must observe, who are Babes in knowledge, and who are of full
age. They are Babes, who are unskilful in the Word of Righteousness; they are
of full age, who have their senses exercised to discern good and evil,
according to that Word. Where, by word, is meant that Doctrine of the
Scripture, which was revealed from Heaven to direct Man unto eternal life;
especially the Gospel. It Is called the Word of Righteousness: 1. Because it is
a righteous Doctrine, that is, just, firm, stable, and of eternal certain
Truth. For thus the word [Righteous] is sometimes taken in the Hebrew;
therefore is it called so often the word of Truth. 2. The Gospel may be called
the Word of Righteousness, because in it, is revealed the Righteousness of God
by Faith. 3. It Is the perfect Rule of Righteousness. To be unskilful in this
Word, is, to be ignorant of it, and not to understand it. To have the senses
exercised, to discern Good and Evil, may, 1. Be understood of the long
experience of such as are at full age in respect of meats, which by long use
and exercise of the senses of seeing, smelling, tasting, have acquired a more
perfect knowledge to discern what food is good and wholesome, what unwholesome.
Yet it is principally by Analogy to be understood of such, as by much attention,
study, meditation, have exercised their intellective faculty to find out the
true sense and meaning of the Gospel; and by the same to acquire a divine
discerning faculty and habit more easily to understand the truths of the same,
and by the same to judge what Doctrine is true, and what is false; and more
easily to apprehend and judge of higher points, if taught unto them. Such as
these, the Hebrews should generally have been, and then they had been sit
Scholars for his School. Where we might observe, That the proper act and work
of man's intellective faculty, is, to discern and know the differences of
things to be understood. But now amongst us there is risen up a Generation of
People, who never were well grounded in the principles of the Oracles of God,
who yet will take upon them to teach themselves and others too. These forsake
the Ministers of the Gospel, whom God has blessed with a greater measure of
divine knowledge, and by long and earnest study, reading, prayer, and other
means, have improved themselves to an higher degree of understanding in the
holy Scriptures. These separate themselves from other sober and more solid
Christians, and are divided into several Sects, and their end will be sad and
woeful; for being deserted by their God, they will fall at last into some
damnable heresy, or impiety, or iniquity; if God in his great mercy prevent it
not. This is a fair warning to all such as profess themselves Christians, first
to ground themselves well in the principles, and then use all the power and
means God has given them to improve themselves, and with all humility
acknowledge their imperfections, -- not thinking of themselves more highly then
they ought, but to think soberly, according as God h^^^ deals to every man the
measure of Faith, Romans 12. 3.

CHAP. VI. Ver. I.
Therefore leaving the Principles, etc.]. 1. THis part of the Apostle's Letter
seems to be brought in upon, and joined to the former by the Illative Particle,
and Conjunction, [Therefore], which though sometimes expletive, yet usually
inferrs a conclusion: What the conclusion inferred is, we find in ver. 1, 3.
But from what words it is inferred, seems to be doubtful. They may be antecedent
or consequent; Those antecedent are, Chap. 5. 11. [Of whom we have many things
to say], As though the Apostle should say, Though many of you be dull of
hearing, and your incapacity through negligence be such, as that you have need
to be taught again the Principles of the Oracles of God; yet because there be
many things, and excellent points of Doctrine concerning the Priesthood of
Christ, which I have to deliver unto you: Therefore I will not go back again to
initiate you, but go forward unto perfection; yet the premises may be in the
words consequent to this purpose, That seeing there is little or no hope of the
recovery of such as fall so far as to need instruction in the very principles,
and to be initiated again; and though I thus speak to warn you, yet hope better
things of you: Therefore I will leave the principles, and proceed to
perfection. Yet we need not stand strictly upon the one or the other; for, it
may be, he inferrs the conclusion from both jointly.

. 2. But to enter upon the Chapter: In it we may observe,

1. The continuance of his Digression. 2. His return unto his former Subject.


In the former we have,

1. His resolution what to do, from ver. 1. to the 11. 2. An exhortation to
these Hebrews, from the 11. to the last.


In his resolution, are to be considered,

1. The thing resolved upon. 2. The reasons of his resolution.


The thing resolved upon, is, to proceed in his Discourse concerning the
Priesthood of Christ.

The Reasons of this resolution are two,

1. That if any fall away so far, as that there shall be a necessity to return
unto the principles, and laying the foundation of Christianity anew, there is
little or rather no hope of recovery.

2. That he was persuaded better things of them, though the negligence of many
had been great.

In his Exhortation, ver. the 11. two things are chiefly to be taken notice of,

1. The duty exhorted unto; which was, perseverance. 2. The reasons, whereupon
he urges the performance.


. 2. To begin with the Resolution, the thing resolved upon, is expressed in the
first words.

1. Briefly, [Leaving the Principles of the Doctrine of Christ, let us go ^^ to
perfection.] 2. More largely, [Not laying again the Foundation, etc.]


This Resolution does imply, that in Christianity there is a Doctrine,

1. Of Principles. 1. Of perfection.


The first is for Babes and Children, the second is for persons of full age:
The Principles are like Premises, and the more perfect Doctrines like unto
Conclusions; and as some premises contain many excellent and precious Truths
deducible from them, and have affinity with many others reducible to them, so
these principles. Both Principles, and higher Doctrines, must be taught in
their time, according to the capacity of the persons to be taught. And the best
must begin with the principles, and after they are once well grounded in them,
they must proceed to higher points. The Apostle here presupposes the
principles taught and once learned by these Hebrews; therefore he resolves now
to lay them aside and omit the Doctrine of them, and to ascend to higher
matters: What he meant by leaving the principles, he explains more at large,
and in particular; It was [Not to lay again the foundation of Repentance from
dead works, etc.] Where, 1. He compares the work of man's Salvation to a
Building. And, 2. The teaching of principles to the laying of the foundation,
which is the first and principal part of the Building supporting all the rest
of the Superstructure, and the teaching of these prime Truths, is the laying of
the foundation upon which the rest of Christianity depends. 3. To lay this
Foundation [again], presupposes that he had formerly done this work, and
initiated them; and to do this again, implies they had lost their Christianity,
and were relasped into that Condition wherein they were before they did
believe, and were baptized, and there was need of re-baptizing them. 4. Yet
this he would not do: and, to leave the Doctrine of the beginning or principles
of Christ, and, not to lay the foundation of Christianity, are the same. And
lest they, or any other, should be ignorant what these principles of
Christianity and fundamental Doctrines were; he informs us, That they were the
Doctrines [Of Repentance, Faith, Baptism, etc.] To understand these words the
better, we must consider,

1. What was the way and order of initiating Christians. 2. What Doctrine is
contained in these particular Fundamentals.


1. The way and order was this, That, 1. When they had taught them Repentance
and Faith, and they had willingly received this Doctrine, and signified their
acceptance, then they most solemnly promised to repent and believe that
Doctrine they did profess. 2. Upon their promise and profession, they were
baptized. 3. Being baptized, they were confirmed by imposition of hands, and
receiving the Holy Ghost. 4. Being confirmed, they were exhorted to persevere
to the end, in hope of Resurrection to eternal life, and fear of Condemnation
to eternal punishment. To lay the foundation, in this manner, was to admit them
Christians again, after they had lost their former Christianity.

2. The Doctrine contained in these Particulars, may easily be understood by
the words themselves. The first Head or Topic is that of Repentance from dead
Works; where, by dead Works, are meant Sins, which pollute us spiritually and
morally, and also render us liable to Death, of which hereafter, Chap. 9. 14.
Repentance from these, is an acknowledgment of them with grief of heart, and a
resolution to forsake them and reform. This Doctrine presupposes the Creation,
especially of Man, in the Image of God; and contains those Truths we read in
Scripture concerning Satan's Temptation, man's Fall and Sin; what Sin is, and
what the Consequents thereof be; one whereof is Punishment and Death,
Knowledge, Confession, godly sorrow, hatred of Sin, returning to God; this is
the first part of the Creed. The second Head, is, Faith in God, under which
comes in, the Doctrine of God, who so loved the World, that he gave his only
begotten Son to redeem us from our Sins by dying for us, and rising again to
apply and communicate the benefits of his Redemption. The particulars of these
parts, are, the Incarnation, the Offices of Christ, his Humiliation; In taking
upon him the form of a Servant, and being obedient unto Death, the Death of the
Cross: The immediate effects thereof, which are satisfaction, merit, and
putting man into a capacity of Salvation; his Resurrection, upon which he was
made King and Priest, his Ascension into Heaven, his sitting at the right right
hand of God, to reign as King, and make Intercession as a Priest, and so make
his satisfaction and merit effectual.

3. The third Head is the Doctrine of Baptisms, wherein Repentance and Faith
are professed, new obedience promised, and both sealed and confirmed by
Baptism. To this Head may be referred the Covenant, and the confirmation of it:
This Covenant presupposes the Gospel, with the Precepts and Promises thereof.
This was revealed by Christ, as a Prophet sending the Holy Ghost to reveal it;
therein commanding, promising, and performing as a King, As it presupposes the
Covenant in general, so it does the making thereof in applying the Precepts and
Promises unto the particular persons to be baptized, who on their part must
profess and promise; upon which done, the confirmation on Gods part and Man's
does follow in Baptism. We need not trouble our selves with the word
[Baptisms], which is plural; nor debate the reason why he used that number,
whether it was because the Baptisms of John and Christ, both instituted from
Heaven, did differ in several particulars, and so were [Baptisms]; or, because
the Baptism of Christ was twofold, of Water and the Spirit, which both must
jointly concur to Regeneration; or because, that though Baptism in general, in
respect of the Institution, be one; yet in respect of several individual
persons baptized, it is multiplied. For the Baptism of Peter is one, the Baptism
of Paul another; and so many Baptisms there may be said to be, as there are
persons Baptized. It Is certain, he meant but one Baptism, Rite, and Ceremony
instituted by Christ, applied to many several persons; and so the Syriack
Translatour, using a Nown singular, understood it.

3. The fourth Head is that of Imposition of hands; and by this may be meant,
either the extraordinary gifts of the Holy Ghost, proper to the Apostolical
Times, given upon imposition of the hands of the Apostles and Prayer, or the
sanctifying Power of the Spirit to confirm them in the Truth, and enable them
to keep the Covenant of God. Under this Head come all the Gifts, Virtues, and
saving-Graces of the Spirit, without which they can neither be renewed or
mortified, and proceed in the ways of Righteousness and Holiness unto the
attaining of eternal life.

5. Resurrection is the fifth part of this Doctrine, and seems to signisy in
this place immortality and eternal Glory, as a Reward. This presupposes the
exercise of all heavenly Virtues, and the continuance of their Faith and
Obedience. Under this Head, may be brought, Justification, Reconciliation,
Adoption, with the continuance of the sanctifying and regenerating Spirit, and
also the joys and comforts of God's Saints in this Life, and their security and
bliss upon their departure out of this Life, until the Resurrection.

6. The sixth Doctrine, is that of eternal Judgment: Both Resurrection and this
Judgment presuppose men's Obedience or Disobedience to the Laws of God; and by
Judgment may be understood either Judgment in general, which follows the
Resurrection, and determines finally the eternal Punishments and Rewards; or,
by a Synecdoche, for the eternal Punishments which that Judgment shall award to
certain persons. This latter seems to be the intended sense, because the word
is usually taken for Condemnation and Punishment; and so much the rather,
because we never find Judgment, taken properly, said to be everlasting. This
presupposes impenitence and unbelief, both Negative and Positive; and to this
Head are reducible all the spiritual Penalties inflicted upon Man in this Life,
as forerunners of this eternal Vengeance.

It was necessary, in the first place, to lay the foundation in teaching these
Truths of Repentance, Faith, the sealing of the Covenant, the sanctification of
the Spirit, and the retribution of eternal Rewards and Punishments according to
men's observation, or violation of the Covenant of Grace. This Doctrine they
had formerly learned and professed, and it was the sum and substance of the
ancient Creeds: And if they any ways were fallen from this, it was in vain to
lay the foundation anew, and initiate them again. Therefore he was resolved to
proceed, and do that which he had proposed, if God would permit and assist him;
for all resolutions of Men are in God's Power. For he alone can so assist them,
as to make them effectual; or hinder them, so as to frustrate their designs.
This implies the Author's dependence upon God, for the carrying on and
finishing his intended Discourse concerning the Priesthood of Christ.

. 4. Thus far the Apostle's Resolution, the Reasons follow. The first is,
because to lay the foundation anew, would be in vain: It would prove so,
because such as fall from these principles, render themselves incapable of any
benefit to be received by Christ's Death and Passion, neither can they be
renewed again unto Repentance. The argument in form is this,

The Apostle presupposing that no man ought, and no wise man will do that which
he knows to be in vain, and to no purpose; he proves, that to lay the
foundation again, is in vain, thus;

To attempt that which is impossible, is in vain: But to attempt, by laying the
foundation again, to renew unto Repentance such as fall away, is to attempt
that which is impossible; therefore it is in vain.

To understand the force of this Reason, let us reduce the Apostles words into
these Propositions.

1. They which have been enlightened, and have tasted of the heavenly Gift, and
were made partakers of the Holy Ghost, and have tasted of the good Word of God,
and of the Powers of the World to come, may fall away.

2. If they fall away, it is impossible for them to be renewed again unto
Repentance.

3. The reason why it is impossible, is, because they Crucify to themselves the
Son of God afresh, and put him to open shame.

These may be reduced to one Syllogism thus;

It Is impossible that they which Crucify the Son of God afresh, and put him to
open shame, should be again renewed to Repentance.

But such as fall away from Christianity once received, do Crucify the Son of
God afresh, and put him to open shame.

Therefore it is impossible again, to renew them to Repentance.

The sum of all is this, he would not lay again the foundation of Christianity,
because it was in vain.

It was in vain, because the recovery of such, as fall away and renounce
Christ, was impossible.

In the first Proposition, I will consider,

1. What it is to fall away. 2. Who they are that may fall away.


1. To fall away, is here to be Apostates, and forsake Christianity once
received; it is not to fall into any kind of Sin, but such as are [contra
integrum faedus], contrary to the essence and substance of Christianity; such
are impenitency and unbelief, after Repentance and Faith. In this respect
David's Murder and Adultery, though very grievous Sins, and against the
Covenant; yet they were not a violation of it essentially, and formally
considered: This is falling away, or Apostasy in this place.

2. The subject of this Apostasy, and parties which may fall away, are such as
have received Christianity, and have been convinced of the Truth thereof. For
he that never was a Christian, cannot be said to fall away from Christianity;
he must be a Christian, before he can be an Apostate.

But to enter more particularly upon the Description of the Subject of
Apostasy, and persons that may fall away, 2. They are described from sive
things or adjuncts,

1. They are enlightened. 2. Have tasted of the heavenly Gift. 3. Are partakers
of the Holy Ghost. 4. Have tasted of the good Word of God. 5. Have tasted of
the Powers of the World to come.


2. The difference of several Writers in the Exposition of these five
particulars is great, For with some,

1. To be enlightened, is Repentance. 2. To taste of the heavenly Gift, is Faith
in God. 3. To be partakers of the Holy Ghost, is to receive the Gifts of the
Spirit. 4. To taste of the good Word of God, answers to Imposition of hands. 5.
To taste of the Powers of the World to come, is to have some apprehensions of
the Resurrection and eternal Judgment, with affections suitable.


Others understand,

1. By enlightening, Baptism. 2. By tasting of the heavenly Gift, spiritual
Peace and Joy. 3. By the Holy Ghost, Gifts of that blessed Spirit. 4. By
tasting the good Word of God, The sinding how sweet and comfortable the
Doctrine, and especially the Promises of the Gospel be. 5. By tasting of the
Powers of the World to come, The experience of the efficacy and moving Power of
the Doctrine of everlasting Life and Death believed.


Others not differing much, think that,

1. Enlightening, is the knowledge of saving-Truth. 2. Tasting of the heavenly
Gift, is the receiving of Christ by Faith. 3. Participation of the Holy Ghost,
is receiving of the Gifts of the Spirit. 4. Tasting of the good Word of God,
and the Powers of the World to come, is some experimental effects of the Gospel
and Spirit.


3. Yet upon examination, the first three may be one; And that is the
illumination of the heart and mind, by the heavenly Gift of the Holy Ghost
given to that end. 2. The two latter also may be the same, and that is the
affection and disposition of the heart answerable to the illumination, and an
effect thereof. The first, is a divine and supernatural knowledge of
saving-Truth. The second, is some sanctification and consolation of the will
and heart of Man.

4. The qualification and condition of these persons, were not merely natural
and moral, but supernatural. For they could not be acquired by any exercise of
the natural and moral power of the Soul, without a Divine active Power given
them, whereby they might act upon supernatural objects, according to a
supernatural Rule. And as their operations were supernatural, because they had
a supernatural Efficient, a supernatural Object, a supernatural Rule, and did
tend to a supernatural End; so the Consequents were supernatural and divine.

5. To fall from the supernatural disposition and estate, was a very grievous
Sin, and a great contempt of God's mercy, Christ's merit, and the Power of the
Holy Ghost. For, 1. These things tended directly to their eternal Salvation. 2.
They issued from the mercy of God, the merit of Christ, and the Power of the
Holy Spirit. 3. That Grace which they had received, and which was in them, was
real, true, serious, and divine; and if they had gone forward, they might have
attained to an estate of confirmation. 4. It was a Crime so much the more
heinous, because they had received the Truth of the Gospel, professed it, and
engaged by their Baptism in the Covenant, and were fully convinced, not only by
Powers or Miracles without, but by the Gifts of the Spirit, and divine effects
within.

6. Yet here is no mention of any firm inherency, or deep radication of divine
Virtues in their Souls, but rather the contrary is employed. For it is said, They
did but taste of the heavenly Gift, and taste of the good Word of God, and
taste of the Powers of the World to come. To taste, is indeed a real
participation; yet but of a little and in low degree. But there can be no state
of confirmation, till Grace, by a firm and deep radication, proceed to an
universal dominion of Sin and Corruption. Yet this radication is not a
sufficient cause in or by itself of confirmation, which depends upon the Will
of God, who has bound himself by promise to preserve Man, attaining to a
certain degree by his power through Faith unto Salvation, which shall be
revealed in the last Day. For though this estate of one that only tastes be
good and comfortable and hopeful; yet it may leave some lust or corruption
unmortified, which though it does not appear for the time to the party thus far
renewed, yet in the day of Trial it will break out and discover the hidden
malignancy of the heart nor fully regenerate. For they that have escaped the
pollution of the World, through the knowledge of the Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ, may again be entangled therein, and overcome, 2 Pet. 2. 20.

7. Yet this falling away from this measure of Grace, and hopeful Condition, is
not to be attributed to divine desertion. For God will not withdraw or
withold any necessary support, till Man by his negligence, or pride and
presumption give him cause. For he loves any degree of Grace, and is very
tender over the weak, and will not break the bruised Reed, nor quench the
smoking Flax; he will gather the Lambs with his Arm, and carry them in his
Bosom, and shall gently lead those that are with young.

. 5. Hitherto you have heard, what it is to fall away, and who they are that
may fall away, and that they all are Christians; yet so, that some may make a
further progress in Christianity, they are not all of one measure. The

2. Proposition, which for the order of matter might be the third, is,

That it is impossible for Apostates to be renewed.

To be renewed in this place, is to be initiated and made Christians of no
Christians: For initiation is the entrance and admission into Christianity, as
the Apostle intends it. To understand this better, you must know, that Apostasy
does un-Christian a man, makes void his Baptism, and takes away all Christian
Privileges by razising the very foundation. As Apostasy presupposes the
Apostate, a Christian first; so this renewing presupposes Christianity
formerly received, to be lost and forfeited. For an Apostate is like a Rebel or
a perfidious Revolter, who loses [sussabdih] and cease to be a Subject,
contrary to his Allegiance. Whereas the word [(...)] [again] is inserted, it is
rather to be joined with the antecedent Verb [fall away], and signifies, that
as he was no Christian at the first, and afterward became a Christian; so by
Apostasy he is made to be no Christian again, he returns unto his former estate
of non-Christianity. And the former estate was a kind of negation, this latter
a privation of Christianity. This renovation, if it could be made, must be by
repentance, and way of return: For the first initiation is by profession of
Faith, confession of Sin, and promise of Reformation: this therefore much more:
yet this Renovation is affirmed to be impossible. That proposition or ax^om,
which is called (...)], impossible is opposed to that which is, [(...)],
necessary and always true; for it is always false, and can never be true, the
dis unction and separation of the terms i^ perpetual. Therefore to say, That an
Apostate may be renewed by Repentance, is eternally false; because the thing,
represented by the subject, and predicated, are eternally separated; yet this
impossibility is not to be considered in respect of God's absolute and almighty
power; for he can renew an Apostate by Repentance: but it is in respect of his
Will, which has decreed it to be impossible. His Power can do it, but his Will
has limited his power, so that, though he could do it, yet he will never do
it, never suffer it to be done. This is that which the Schoolmen mean, when
they distinguish of God's Power, and say, It Is [absoluta a^t ordinata.] Whereas
some call this a Proposition modal, there is no Proposition but is such, and
essentially includes the manner how the terms argue one another; and here
[impossible] is the predicate, and [to be renewed by Repentance] is the
Subject. It was much controverted amongst some of the Ancients, whether such as
fell away in time of persecution might be admitted to penance, and reconciled
to the Church; some denied, some affirmed. And as their opinion, so their
practice was; some were more rigid, some more remiss, some moderate. The
reason of the difference was, because they did not agree in the definition of
an Apostate, and so could not unanimously judge of the parties offending, and
their offenses: whereof some were so heinous, that though they did not reach
Apostasy, yet many thought it not safe to admit them to communion, because the
example might be of bad consequence. Therefore though they did not absolve
them, yet they prayed for them, and referred them to the Judgment of God.

. 6. The Apostle not content barely to affirm this Renovation to be impossible,
gives us a reason hereof, and that in a third Proposition, which is,

They Crucify the Lord Jesus a new, and put him to open shame.

This should have been the second, but I follow the order of the words: For
this is the genuine method.

1. Christians may fall away.

2. Falling away, they Crucify Christ, and put him to open shame.

3. It Is impossible for them doing so, to be renewed by Repentance: This third
which I handled in the second place, contains the medium, whereby the
impossibility of Repentance is inferred. But,

1. I will explain the words. 2. Show how they come in upon the former.


1. To Crucify the Lord Jesus, the Son of God afresh, and to put him to an open
shame, are in some respect the same. For the Death of the Cross is a shameful
and ignominious Death and Punishment; therefore we read of shame, and the
Cross joined together. For it is said of Christ, That he endured the Cross, and
despised the shame, Hebr. 12. 2. There be many tormenting and disgracing
Punishments inflicted by higher Powers upon Malefactors; Amongst these, Capital
penalties are the greatest: Of Capital, Crucifying or putting to Death upon the
Cross, is most cruel and ignominious. This, our blessed Savior, the Son of
God, once Suffered. For such was the malice of the Jews, that nothing but his
Death, and no other Death, but the Death of the Cross, besides many other
indignities, would satisfy them. The end of just punishments are loss, pain,
and shame. Therefore Malefactors were executed publicly and openly, that
others might see, hear, and fear to do the like Sins, lest they should suffer
the like Punishments, if they should prove guilty of the like Crimes: And not
only the Punishments executed by Man, but such as are inflicted by God are
exemplary. Therefore, as the Apostle says, The punishments which the
Israelites suffered in the Wilderness, are our ensamples, 1 Cor. 10. 6, 11.
Therefore the word turned [put him to open shame], signifies to make an example
of shame and disgrace. To return unto the Text, Apostates are said to Crucify
Christ unto themselves afresh; the meaning is not, that they put Christ to
Death upon the Cross in proper sense. For that they cannot do; he dyed upon the
Cross once, and rose again, is immortal in Heaven, and shall never die any
more. For in that he dyed, he dyed unto Sin, or for Sin once, and but once;
seeing he being raised from the Dead, he dyed no more, Death has no more
Dominion over him, Romans 6. 9, 10. Therefore the words are to be understood
Tropically; they are a Metaphor, which is a contract Similitude, and signify,
that they are like unto the Jews, and deal with Christ in somethings, as they
did. For as the Jews judged Christ not to be the Messiah and Son of God, but a
Seducer, an Impostor and Malefactor, and desired Judgment against him as such,
that he might be Crucified, and put to open shame; so these Apostates denying
Christ, whom they had formerly professed, must needs account of him no better
then the Jews did, and so justify all their Accusations against him, and his
Crucifying as just, and justly deserved by him. But these Revolters especially
agree with the malicious Jews, who renounce him, blaspheme him, and persecute
him in those who profess him; such, Julian was. This is to tread under foot the
Son of God, and to count the blood of the Covenant, [that is, whereby the
everlasting Covenant was confirmed, and they sanctified] an unholy or profane
thing. This is the highest contempt of Christ and his Blood, that possibly can
be: Some observe from these words, [Crucify him afresh]; 1. That though they
cannot Crucify him, because he is far out of their power; yet for their part
they are ready and have a mind to do it, and would do it, if it were in their
power. 2. That though he was Crucified once, yet if he were living and in their
reach, they would Crucify him again.

. 7. This is the meaning of the Words: Now secondly, Let Us consider how they
come in upon the former, and what connection they have with them. They
presuppose that Apostates do Crucify the Son of God to themselves afresh, and
are guilty of this Crime: For Apostasy is their Sin, and this necessarily
follows upon it, and is inseparably joined with it. And they seem to give a
reason of the impossibility of their Renovation by Repentance. For there can be
no Renovation or Sanctification, but by the Blood of the Son of God; and this
they deny, renounce, trample under foot; therefore they can neither repent, nor
by repentance be renewed, or receive any benefit. For repentance presupposes
necessarily Faith in the Blood of Christ, and the force thereof depends upon
that Blood, and the belief thereof; without both which, no repentance can ever
do any good, or benefit any man; and this is the immutable Will and Decree of
God. Neither will God give Repentance to any Apostate, or accept him, though he
should and could repent: For Christ did never merit, nor God promise to any
such persons, either of these. The reason of all this is, That God decreed that
Christ should die but once, and that Sinners should be initiated but once; and
that whosoever makes void to himself this one Death, and this one Initiation,
shall never have any benefit by a second Death, or a second Initiation. These
are contrary to the eternal and unchangeable Rules and Laws of his Kingdom; and
by these Rules, their Sin is irremissible, and their final destruction
unavoidable. Therefore let us hear and fear, lest by any means we fall away
from that Christianity, which we have received, professed, and engaged in. By
all this it is evident, that it is in vain to lay the foundation again by
Repentance, Faith, Baptism, and the rest. This reason, to make it more plain,
is illustrated by a Similitude; which, as all other Comparisons, has two
parts, 1. A Proposition. 2. A Reddition. The Proposition is expressed, the
Reddition employed. The subject of the first part or proposition is the Earth;
and as there are two sorts or kinds of Earth, good and bad, so there be two
parts of the proposition, The first, Concerning good Earth. The second,
Concerning bad and barren Ground. 1. Concerning the good, we may consider, 1.
The Proposition, and then the Reddition. In the first observe, 1. The
Fruitfulness. 2. God's Blessing.

The fruitfulness presupposes Rain. Dressing.

For without these two; Moisture and Husbandry; no Ground can be fruitful: The
Rain is from Heaven, the Husbandry from Man.

The goodness of it is, that it drinks in the Rain. brings forth Herbs meat
for them, by whom it is dressed;

and here by Herbs may be meant all kind of Fruit that is fit for man's food.

As it is fruitful, so it receives Blessing from God: For it is God that makes
the Earth fruitful and flourishing, and without his Blessing the best Land,
though never so well husbanded, is barren, and of this we have frequent
experience.

The Reddition of this is, 1. That the thing signified in general, is sinful
Man; and especially his heart. Yet there is a great difference of men's heart;
for though no man can make his heart spiritually good, yet every man may make
his heart bad, and worse then other men's; and may, by neglect and other ways,
much obscure the light of Nature, and dull the edge of conscience, and so
render himself indisposed for better things. If this were not so, there would
be no inequality, but all men would be equally sinful, which daily experience
contradicts. A good heart is like good Ground, therefore may be an heart not so
bad, or morally good, according to the light of Nature, and the power of
Conscience, which we find in Heathens, and somewhat improved higher by
Christian Education. For the heart to bring forth fruit meet for the Dresser,
is to bring forth the fruits of the Spirit answerable to God's Spiritual
Husbandry, and the Showers of his heavenly Doctrine, and the workings of his
Spirit: It Is to walk worthy of our Calling, wherewith we are called. This is
that good and honest heart, which brings forth fruit unto perfection: The
Blessing received, is the continuance of the means of Salvation, the increasing
of heavenly Graces and Comforts, and in the end eternal Life, which is the
greatest Blessing of all. The end of this part of the Comparison, is not only
to persuade and encourage to Duty, because of the great Blessing and Reward
which will follow; but also to let others, who incline to Apostasy, know, how
they deprive themselves of God's heavenly Blessings, and these glorious Rewards.

. 8. The second protasis or proposition is, concerning bad Ground, which, 1.
Appears to be bad, by bearing Thorns and Briars. 2. Is used as bad Ground. 1.
By being rejected. 2. Nigh unto Cursing. 3. In the end burned. This Ground, is
a bad heart, which is manifested by the fruits, which are words and deeds,
tending to the dishonor of God, and the hurt of Man. And this Sin is so much
the greater, because of the means of Grace, and workings of the Spirit over and
above the light of Nature, which God has graciously afforded them. The
punishment of this barrenness in all virtue, and fruitfulness in Sin,
follows; and there are three degrees thereof. The first is rejecting, when
God takes away his Ministers, his Word; or, if they continue, withdraw the
powerful working of the Spirit; whereupon man is justly deserted of God, as
unworthy of any farther spiritual Dressing, and useless for that end God in his
great Mercy intended him. The second, he is nigh unto Cursing, and the sentence
of Excommunication, whereby he is delivered up to Satan, and a reprobate mind.
Hence blindness, hardness of heart, and the spirit of slumber: This was the
case of the unbelieving Jew, and is the greatest Curse that can fall upon man
in this life. The third, their end is Burning: For rejection, and this Curse
will end in eternal punishments, compared to torment, with unquenchable fire.
This comparison is not only an illustration for the more clear representation
of the condition of Apostates, but also a very serious admonition, to take heed
of that grievous Sin, and of all things that tend thereunto, because the end
will be so woeful, and the punishment so grievous. For if men deal thus with
their Ground, which is devoid of reason, sense, and understanding; how much
more cause has God to punish, and that so severely, men who are endued with
understanding, and enjoy so many helps and means of Conversion and Salvation?

. 9. The second reason of the Apostates resolution is given,

Ver. 9. But beloved, we are persuaded better things of you, and things that
accompany Salvation, though we thus speak THe brief meaning of the words, is,
1. That though we did sharply reprove you, and by our discourse of Apostasy,
might seem to imply, that you were either Apostates, or very near unto it; yet
I desire to be understood in another manner. For I have more charity for you,
better conceirs of you, and hopes of your continuance in Christianity, so that
you need not be initiated again by laying the foundation, and I have good
Grounds of this my hope. 2. This is the reason why I will not lay the
foundation again, but go on to perfection, and further inform you of higher
points of Doctrine, and in particular of the excellency of Christ's
Priesthood. In this reason, we may observe,

1. His hope and good persuasion of them. 2. The ground of this his hope.

In these words we have a Rhetorical Anticipation, whereby he endeavors to
prevent the thoughts which might arise in their hearts upon his former speeches
and expressions: For they might think that he did by them tacitly condemn them
as Apostates, or in the way to Apostasy. And if he did so, he must needs wrong
them and discourage them; for he did tacitly imply, though not positively and
expressly affirm, that they were of a bad disposition, and in a very sad
condition; and this Opinion of them was against charity and truth. To remove
such suspicious and jealousies out of their minds, he in these words assures
them of his Charity, and that his words were not inconsistent with his good
conceit of them. The first, that is, his Charity, he signifies by the term of
Compellation [Beloved]; for he loved them with a dear and tender Love, as
Christians continuing in Christianity: This he could not have done, if he had
judged them Apostates and Enemies to Christ. By this we are taught, that it is
our Duty not only to love our Christian Brethren, but upon occasion to express
it, and further to give the reason and ground of our love, as the Apostle here
does: For the reason and ground of this love was his persuasion of their
continuance in Christianity:

[For he was persuaded better things of them etc.] In which words, 1. He
confesses he spoke such things as might seem to charge them with Apostasy, and
condemn them as cursed. 2. He yet denies, that those words do imply any such
thing; and that he was so far from any such thoughts of them, that he was
persuaded of the contrary. He did indeed reprove them for their Ignorance and
Negligence, whereof some of them were highly guilty; and also signify the
deplorable and desperate case of Apostates, and there was danger lest some
might in time be guilty of that Sin; yet all this was not to accuse them, but
warn them, that this danger might be prevented. To reprove and admonish, are
Acts of Charity, and such as the most loving Father in the World may and
sometimes must use, if he truly love his Children. We may represent the ugly
and filthy face of Sin and the horrid pains of Hell to our best friends, to the
end they may hate the one and escape the other; Thus God does in the
Scriptures, thus Christ often does in his heavenly Sermons, and uses this as a
means to prevent their Damnation and promote their Salvation; So that his
former discourse was consistent both with Christian Charity, and his good
persuasion of them.

[I am persuaded better things of you, and such as accompany Salvation.] These
words imply, 1. That there were good things in them. 2. He was persuaded of
this. The good things (which, in comparison of the former barrenness or
fruitfulness in bringing forth briars and thorns, and cursing, and burning,
were better) were, 1. Their Qualification. 2. Their Condition: And they were
better, not because the other was good, for they were not, but very evil; but
because they were very good, as the other were very bad; This is a special kind
of Phrase and Expression, yet in some Languages ordinary, yet it is improper
though elegant: Some would call it a M^iosis, which is, when more is meant than
is expressed, and so it is reducible to a Syn^chdochs. Their qualification was
from some heavenly virtues, which did manifest themselves in their practice;
their Condition was that of Salvation. They were in the state of Salvation; for
their virtues were such, as that by divine Ordination and Promise there was an
inseparable Connection between Salvation and them: For Salvation and divine
Graces go together in one Company; the Graces go before, Salvation follows
after; yet so that the Graces take hold of Salvation, as the word in the
Original signifies; For, such Christians as these Hebrews were, have a present
Right by Faith, evidenced by the Works of Charity, unto eternal life, and Hope
takes hold of it. But what these virtues were, we shall know from the next
Verse.

2. That these better things were in them, the Apostle was persuaded; that is,
he did not deny them, no, nor doubt of them, but was confident of their good
Qualification and Disposition.

. 10. Yet if a man be confident of another man's sincere Christianity, he must
have some ground sufficient for his confidence; otherwise it is vain and
irrational. Therefore he gives us the ground,

Ver. 10. For God is not unrighteous, to forget your work and labor of Love,
etc.] The ground of his confidence concerning 1. Their qualification, was, his
Knowledge of their Divine and Christian virtues. 2. Concerning their condition,
was, his Knowledge of God's Righteousness. In the first, we may observe, 1.
Their virtues. 2. The manifestation of them, so as that he might know them. The
virtues were Faith and Love; Faith in Christ, Love of the Saints: Their Love is
expressly mentioned [your labor of Love]; their Faith is implied, in that it
was toward his Name. There were other virtues (for these could not be alone),
as their Patience in suffering of Afflictions for Christ's sake, and that with
joy; and their hope of Glory, Chap. 10. 34. The manifestation of these was in
their work and labor, in continuing to minister unto the Saints, whereof he
had certain Knowledge: Here we are informed, that Love will be working and
laboring, and ever bringing forth fruit; and that is not real and sincere Love
which is not such. Therefore another Apostle exhorts us not to love only in
tongue, but in truth and in deed, 1 John 3. 18. And what it is to love in truth
and indeed, is signified in the 16th. and 17th. Verses going before; it is to
give the lives of our bodies for them, and relieve them with our goods; it is a
dying and giving Love: And happy they which find this heavenly fire burning in
their Souls. But in most men, though professed Christians, we either find no
Love, or if any it is but cold; it will neither take pains, nor be at Charge,
much less hazard life for the Brethren, as Christ gave his life for us. This
love was fixed upon the suffering Saints, who were persecuted for Christ's
sake, they were the special Object of it; and this did argue their Love to
God, and their Faith in Christ, without which this love could not have been
truly Christian: Therefore the Apostle joins Faith in Christ, and Love to all
the Saints together, Col. 1. 4. By all which we may understand, that there is a
Connection of divine virtues: For where one is in sincerity, there all the rest
are; they cannot be separated. This work and labor in particular was their
Ministration to the Saints:

Where we must enquire 1. What this Ministration is. 2. To whom they did
minister. 3. How long they did minister.

1. This Ministration was a work of Faith and Love, whereby they used all just
and effectual means in their power, to preserve, maintain, comfort, deliver the
Saints persecuted and suffering.

2. These Saints were Christians which suffered banishment, imprisonment, loss
of Goods, and other earthly Comforts, for the Profession of their Faith in
Christ. And by this Suffering were they known to be Saints: Therefore this Love
was not merely natural, nor merely Moral, but truly Christian Love; and so
denominated from the parties that loved, who are such, as that we are bound to
love them above others, and this Love is that whereby we may know that we are
passed from Death to Life.

3. The continuance of this Love was, that they had ministered formerly, in time
past, and now for the time present they continued this Work of Love; for
Christian Love is an immortal fire, it will still burn and never die. This
Ministration was a great evidence of their good Qualification, and a good and
firm ground of the Apostle's persuasion.

The ground of his persuasion, concerning their good condition, was the
Knowledge of God's Righteousness;

[For God is not unrighteous to forget your Work and Labor of Love.] This
Proposition is Negative, and includes the Affirmative; which is, That God is
fighteous, and will remember their Christian Faith, Love, and good Works: And
it is delivered Negatively, to signify the infallible certain truth of the
Affirmative; for in this Case the Negative is more peremptory and emphatical.
The ground it self is thus expressed, his Knowledge of it is employed. But let us
consider,

1. What it is for God here to forget or remember. 2. What it is for him to be
righteous or not unrighteous.


1. God can forget nothing at any time, but always remembers all things; and
the reason of this is, the perfection of his Knowledge, which is infinite, as
he himself is. Therefore, to forget in this place is, not to take notice of
their virtues and actions, so as to recompense them. To remember, is so to
regard them as to render a Reward: To reward, is an Act of God as a Supreme
Judge. The Righteousness of God is his distributive Justice, and faithfulness
in performing his Promise in judging according to his Law: And this rewarding
of his loyal and obedient Subjects is a proper Act of his judicial Justice; for
God is the universal Judge, and is always upon the Bench, and in the end will
pass final ^^^tence upon all Men and Angels. This seems to be understood of
that final Doom, in which eternal Punishments and Rewards shall be determined.
This could be no ground of his persuasion, except he knew it, and he knew this
Judgment in general as he knew the Gospel; that is, infallibly, and by divine
Revelation: But that they should be eternally rewarded, in particular, he
understood so far as he was certain of their Works. So that the ground of his
persuasion was this, that he knew God was not unrighteous, to forget their
virtues and good works.

. 11. In this part and passage of Scripture diverse things are remarkable: 1.
Real Love to God's persecuted Saints, is a great evidence of sincere
Christianity. Therefore says the divine Apostle, By this we know that we are
passed from Death to Life, because we love the Brethren, 1 John 3. 14.

2. Where there is sincere Christianity, it will manifest it self by good
Works; for as a good tree manifests its Goodness by its fruits, so does Faith
and inward sincere Christianity.

3. To whomsoever this Christianity is thus manifested in any persons, they
ought to love them, and be well persuaded of their happy condition and state of
Salvation.

4. They that are thus persuaded ought to signify their Love and good Opinion
of them as occasion shall require: For by this they may prevent suspicions,
quiet their minds, encourage and comfort them.

5. There are certain divine Virtues and good Works, which have an inseparable
connection with Salvation and eternal Life, and which God will not forget.

6. This inseparable Connection is not necessary as from the Virtues and the
Works, as though they did merit Salvation, or necessitate God to reward them.

7. It is from God's Righteousness and Promise, with respect had to Christ's
merit, and the qualification of the parties.

8. As there are some Persons hardened and delivered up unto a reprobate mind,
and some sins committed in this life, and sometimes long before death, which
are irremissible; so there are certain Virtues and good Works found in
Christians, and that in this life, whereupon they are put in a state of
Confirmation.

9. This state of Confirmation infallibly prevents, though not all sins, yet
final and total Apostasy.

10. This state of Confirmation does depend upon God's Righteousness and
faithfulness, not upon the Excellency of the Virtues and good Works.

11. If such as be endued with these Virtues, and have done these Works, should
fall away totally and finally, then they should never be rewarded.

12. If they should never be rewarded, but forgotten, God should be unrighteous
and unfaithful; which to imagine is a bominable.

13. Therefore God has made some Promise, whereby he has bound himself
certainly to support such as attain to this Qualification, that so they may be
eternally rewarded.

God may be said to be righteous three ways: 1. In respect of strict Justice.
2. Of bounty and free beneficence. 3. Of Promise. First, He may be said to be
strictly just, when he rewards Man according to his perfect Obedience; yet no
Obedience, though never so perfect, can bind him to reward Man or Angel. 2. He
is just by way of bounty, when he rewards Man capable of Reward, and worthy,
though not in respect of his perfect Righteousness in himself, yet because he
is some ways righteous in respect of others who are unrighteous: Thus
Righteousness is often taken in Scripture, therefore it is written, that it is a
righteous thing with God to recompense tribulation to them that trouble his
persecuted Saints; and to his Saints troubled, Rest with the Apostles, 2 These.
1. 6, 7. And Righteousness for this reason sometimes signifies Metonymically,
the great Reward of eternal life; as, Seek ye the Kingdom of God and his
Righteousness first of all, Mat. 6. 33. So Psalm. 24. 5. and Isa. 51. 5. The
third Righteousness is in the performance of his Promise; for though his
Promise be free, yet if it be once made, Justice does require it, and God is
not free but bound to perform it, and if he should not perform, he should be
unjust, which he cannot be: This is the Righteousness here meant. If any reply
against this Doctrine, and allege the words of God, saying, that when the
righteous turns away from his Righteousness, his Righteousness shall not be
mentioned unto him, he shall die, Ezrk. 18. 24. The Answer is, 1. That the place
speaks of Legal Righteousness, and Legal Repentance, and Legal Life and
Death, according to the Covenant ma^^ with their fathers in the Wilderness. 2.
Yet there is a Righteousness, and a certaindegree thereof, and that under the
Gospel, from which Christians may fall finally and totally. To understand both
these, we must observe, 1. That no good Works can expiate Sins, either
antecedent or consequent to them; for there is no expiating Power in them at
all, neither does any Laws, that require constant Obedience, allow that latter
virtuous Acts should satisfy for former Crimes; nor former good Deeds though
excellent take away the guilt of future Offenses. 2. There was a Legal
Righteousness required in the Covenant made between God and Israel before Mount
Sinai, and it consisted in the Obedience of the Moral, Judicial, Ceremonial
Laws of Moses, which did prevent God's temporal Judgments, and was a means
whereby they obtained and enjoyed God's Protection, Safety, Peace, Plenty, and
many a Blessing in the good Land of Canaan: This is evident out of Levit. 26.
and many places of Deuteronomy, and in particular out of the 28th. Chapter, and
so out of many Passages which we read in the Books of the Prophets. As there is
a Legal Obedience, so there is a Legal Repentance, upon which followed
deliverance from temporal Judgments of Sword, Famine, Captivity, and the Curses
threatened in the Law. So we find, Levit. 26, 40, 41, 42, etc. and Deuteronomy. 30.
1,2,3, etc. But that Righteousness whereby they obtained eternal Peace, and
that Repentance whereby they were freed from eternal Punishments, did depend
upon that Promise of the blessed Seed made to Abraham. That there was such a
Righteousness in them under the Law, from which they might fall, and though
they did not fall, yet by it they could not enter into the Kingdom of Heaven,
appears by that young Man, who came to Christ to know what he should do to
inherit eternal Life, Matthew. 19. 16, 17, 18, etc. and by Paul, who touching the
Righteousness of the Law, was blameless, Phil. 3. 6. There is also a
Righteousness and Repentance according to the Law and Light of Nature,
according to which men are blessed or delivered temporally: But the
Righteousness, and the state thereof, which is here intended, is far higher: It
presupposes both Moral and Legal Righteousness and Repentance for the
Substance of it, yet is more. 3. Of this Righteousness, under the Gospel, is
found in many, such a degree as they may fall from it, and that totally and
finally: This Righteousness, so far as it reaches, is true, and tends much
toward eternal life; and the estate of such as do attain it is comfortable and
hopeful. But there are usually defects in it, and those very great: For 1. It
does not proceed to a deep and firm radication; nor 2. To any habitual
predominancy over all lusts; nor 3. Will it endure any great trial. There may
be, and are indeed in many Persons, Knowledge, Faith, Love, Hope, and Comfort,
and these not merely Moral, but Supernatural and divine, caused not only by
the outward revelation of the Word, but also by inward illumination and
inspiration of the Spirit; yet some of these, if they be Persons of great
estate, will be unwilling to sell all and give unto the poor, or restore
fourfold to those they have wronged, or forfeit credit, liberty, their whole
estate, and hazard their lives, out of Love to their dear Savior; yet all
these must be done, and that freely and willingly, before we can attain to an
estate of Confirmation, 4. Yet this Confirmation does not depend upon the
radication and intensive measure of their divine virtues, but upon the Will and
support of God, which certain support Man cannot expect by virtue of the
Covenant, before he arrive at such a measure of Grace, and performance of Duty:

For it is the meet Mercy of God, who delights in an upright heart, which moved
him to promise this Confirmation to persons of integrity, who have overcome the
World; for till Faith improve so far as to obtain this Victory, and that
clearly, Man may fall, and the desires and fears of the World may the more
easily prevail against him, and God may justly desert him, because he neglects
to come up unto his terms, and refuses the conditions and qualification
necessary to a complete, real, and sincere Disciple, to whom alone Confirmation
by virtue of the Promise is due. That which supports a Man against all
temptations, and prevents Apostasy, is strength; this strength is internal and
external, and both from God. The internal strength is such a measure of Faith
in Christ in Man, as is sufficient to overcome the World, and obtain a clear
victory. The external strength is that power of God superadded to the former,
which, not only, continues and preserves the inward power of Grace, but also is
continually ready to supply all defects, and make the final issue infallible
and most certain. For there is a glorious Inheritance reserved in Heaven for
those, who are kept by the power of God through Faith unto Salvation, ready to
be revealed is the last time. 1 Pet. 1. 4, 5. Where we have Faith within, and
the power of God without, and the preservation of the parties regenerate unto
Salvation, and final enjoyment, as the effect of both. Neither of these belong
unto those which have only the Spirit of preparation, and not of inhabitation:
For though they are in a fair way unto, and in good hope of both, yet they have
attained neither. Yet there are others which find the victorious power of Faith
within them, and having received the Spirit of Adoption, testifying that they
are the Sons of God, and the first fruits of Glory, may be assured of their
preservation to the end, according to the tenor of the Promises made in many
places of Scripture to such as are so qualified, as they know themselves to be.

. 12. Thus far the Apostle's Resolution, and the Reasons thereof: Now follows
his exhortation, which comes in very seasonably after his former Doctrine of
Apostasy, which was terrible; and the latter concerning the happy and safe
estate of such as were qualified as they were. For, lest the one should
occasion despair, and the other presumption and security; by this exhortation,
he intimates, that the very estate of confirmation in this life does not exempt
from duty and diligence on Man's part, not exclude some kind of desertion on
God's part. For this Confirmation differs from that which shall be in Heaven,
where there shall be no Sin, no Temptation; but perfect holiness without any
danger, and a plenary possession of the blessed Inheritance. For the estate of
the Confirmed in this time of mortality, is like that of Israel, after that
they had broken the main strength of the Canaanites, divided the Land by lot,
and did begin to enjoy it. But after all this was done, there remained several
parts of the Land not yet reduced, nor totally subdued. And God did so order it
to try them, and also to continue and improve their Military skill and valor.
So it is with God's regenerate Ones, his true Israelites, for though they have
broken the main strength of the Enemy, and, as it were, in one pi^cht Battle
obtained a clear Victory: yet the remainders of corruption may sometimes put
them hard to it, and much annoy them. And it is God's Will it should be thus to
teach them humbly to depend upon him, and that continually, to exercise their
heavenly virtues; to keep their watch, and never put off their Armor, till
they have obtained a total and final Victory. The principal things to be
observed in this Exhortation are, 1. The Duty exhorted unto. 2. The Reasons why
it should be performed. For he that will exhort effectually, must, 1. Let the
parties exhorted know distinctly what the Duty is. 2. Demonstrate that it is
very reasonable to perform it, and the more clearly and fully both these are
done, the more effectually will the heart be moved: For the rational Creature
must be moved rationally. Every exhortation implies the desire of the Orator,
or party exhorting; otherwise, why does he persuade? why does he exhort?
therefore, says the Apostle, [I desire you.] In this it differs both from a
Command and a Petition; and if the party desiring be excellent or beloved, and
the thing desired be reasonable and advantageous, it should prevail much. If
such a person as Paul, so worthy and so excellent, shall desire the performance
of a thing which is not only convenient, but necessary to the attaining of
eternal life, how ready should we be to do it?

. 13. But, To know the Duty, is most considerable; and it is Perseverance, the
same, which was formerly urged, Chap. 2. 3, 4. This duty is proposed
affirmatively, and negatively: and the performance of it, concerned all and
every one. For thus he writes,

Ver. 11. And we desire that every one of you show the same diligence, to the
full assurance of hope unto the end.

Ver. 12. That you be not slothful.]

THere is no mention of Perseverance in the Text, yet it is sufficiently
employed; for, if they must show the same diligence to the full assurance of
hope unto the end, then they must persevere. But to understand the duty more
fully, let us enquire;

1. What hope is, 2. What the full assurance of hope. 3. What it is to show the
same diligence, to the full assurance of hope unto the end.


Hope, is sometimes taken, for the thing hoped for, not as it is in it self,
but as it is an object of that hope which is a divine virtue; and this eternal
Life, which though it be not the only, yet is the principal object of our
Christian hope. Sometimes it is taken properly for the expectation of this
glorious, and great Reward of eternal felicity: It presupposes Faith, whereby
we certainly believe it possible to be had and enjoyed, with a vehement desire
and longing after it. And though the distance between us and it be great, yet
we are patient, and willing to stay God's leisure. There is a vain and
groundless hope, which is irrational; there is a rational and probable hope,
yet not so firm and certain: there is a firm and certain hope, and that is when
we have assurance of the thing hoped for, This assurance also may admit of
degrees; for it may be full, or not full This full assurance is the second
thing, and it is that which removes all doubts and fears and this it may do at
sometimes, and not at others; it may be interrupted, or continued to the end:
This place speaks of full assurance of hope to the end. This assurance will not
be had, much less continued to the end by sloth; by diligence, it may. And so
we are in the third place come unto the Duty, which is to use all means, and
that with diligence, whereby we may attain this assurance, and continue it full
unto the end. And here he implies, that they had been formerly diligent, and so
diligent, as to have attained this assurance; yet here he tells them, 1. That
they must continue the same diligence to the end. 2. That the same diligence,
zeal, affection, they had showed formerly being continued, would serve the
turn. Assurance or certainty is either of the thing, or the person: The latter
presupposes the former; for there can be no certainty to the person of a thing
which is not certain in it self. This certainty is in respect of the person,
who is either God or Man: Eternal life is certain in respect of God, who is
able to give it, and has decreed so to do. And that it might be certain unto
us, and that before the time of possession, he has signified his purpose,
bound himself by promise, and confirmed his promise by Oath; so that on his
part it is fully, and every way certain. Yet because the promise requires a
qualification, and a performance of duty in the person to whom the promise is
made; therefore, before we can be certain, we must not only perform the duty,
and have the qualification, but we must certainly know, that we have done that
which the Promise requires, and are duly qualified. And the more clear and
full the knowledge is, the more full the assurance of hope; and if this full
knowledge continue, this full assurance continues to the end, which is no
groundless presumption, but a firm and well-grounded hope. Yet this is so to be
understood, that so far as Man may neglect his Duty, and abate in the
Qualification, so far this assurance may abate. If man's diligence in
performing the Duty continue to the end, this full assurance will do so too.
For to them, who by patient continuance in well-doing, shall seek Glory,
Honor, and Immortality, God will render eternal life, Romans 2. 7. Yet this
patient continuance in well-doing, depends upon God's special assistance and
support. For it is God that works in us the Will and the Deed of his good
pleasure, Phil. 2. 13. And this is the reason why we must work out our
Salvation with fear and trembling: The full assurance not only depends upon the
merit and intercession of Christ, the Decree, Promise, and Oath of God; but
also requires the diligence of Man, and the continual support of God. God's
support, assistance, and concurrence are always ready, yet so is not Man's
diligence. For the best, and most confirmed Saints on Earth may sometimes be
remiss, and so have their failings, whereupon follow desertions to their great
discomfort. Yet neither do their failings wholly annihilate Grace, nor
frustrate the final event; but God sometimes in his wonderful wisdom, by
withdrawing his comforts, awakens and quickens them to Duty, and uses outward
Afflictions as Chastisements to improve their inherent virtues, and corrects
them. And in that he promises to be their Father, he binds himself to Chastise
them, if need require: Otherwise he should not take them as Sons, but account
them as Bastards, and so utterly neglect them. So that we may apply that of the
Psalmist in this case; If his Children for sake my Law, and walk not in my
Judgments; If they break my Statutes, and keep not my Commandments: Then will I
visit their Transgression with the Rod, and their Iniquities with Stripes.
Nevertheless, my loving kindness will I not utterly take from him, nor suffer
my faithfulness to fail, Psalm. 89. 30, 31, 32, 33. So God's adopred Children
may have their failings; yet God will Chastise them, that their Covenant may
stand firm unto the end. Yet let every one be diligent to the end, and look for
no comfort, but upon performance of Duty: For that God, who is most merciful,
will be holy and just, and he requires his Children should be so too. Therefore
let all those, who have made so great a progress in Grace, as to attain a full
assurance of hope, and a sight of their heavenly Canaan, go on with all care
and diligence: for it is a sad thing, after that we are upon the borders of our
heavenly Country, to be turned back, and wander in this Wilderness. For,

Ver. 12. We must not be slothful, but followers of them who through Faith and
Patience inherit the Promises.. 14. THE Duty exhorted unto may be sufficiently
understood by what has been said already; but that is not sufficient, it must
be performed: Yet, who will go about it, except it be reasonable? And to
manifest this, is the next Work of the Apostle, declaring the Reasons and
Motives, the first whereof is from Examples

1. Of many not named. 2. Of Abraham in particular.


Examples do prove the Duty to be not only possible, but to have been actually
performed, and as such they do not bind though they may encourage; but because
the matter of them is something commanded; they may and do oblige, and not
only so, but God commands us to imitate them, and for that end makes them
known, and proposes them; yet in these patterns there is a special reason and
motive superadded; for as they by Faith and Patience obtained the Promises, so
shall we if we follow them. The Persons intended are patterns for imitation in
two things;

1. The end whereat they aimed, which was the attainment of the Promises.

2. The means whereby they attained this end Faith. Patience.

1. They attained the Promises,] By Promises understand the things promised,
which were spiritual deliverances, blessings, and rewards, and, in one word,
Salvation; yet temporal Mercies in reference to spiritual are not to be
excluded: For God made many Promises to the Saints of old, and some of them
were more special and extraordinary, and did not belong to all but to some
particular Persons. All these, except the full enjoyment of eternal Glory, they
attained, so far as they were capable before the general Resurrection and the
last Judgment. If therefore we will make them our pattern, we must 1. Propose
unto our selves some divine and noble end, some great and glorious good: Yet 2.
Because the end in it self may be excellent, yet no ways beneficial to us, we
must aim at the attainment thereof; for Good known may delight our fancies, and
the speculation of it may be pleasing, but the real possession and enjoyment
does make us happy. 3. It Is in vain to aim at any thing, though never so good,
if God has nor promised it; for Gods Promise is the firm and immovable
Foundation of our hopes; this is the end whereat we must aim: Yet all our aims,
and desires, and intentions are vain, except we use the means. The means which
they used were Faith and Patience, and the same continued unto the end, even to
the attainment: The same means we must also use; for to imitate them in the
prestitution and proposal of the end, is to no purpose, except we imitate them
in this also: They had Faith, so must we have it; they had Patience, we must be
patient. By Faith we may understand, Confidence and relying upon God's
Promises; and it presupposes a divine Belief grounded upon the Word of God
revealed from Heaven. A probable humane Faith will not be sufficient, it is far
short and defective, it must be a gift of the Holy Ghost. Yet this without
Patience will do little, it will not reach the end; we must be patient. For ye
have need of Patience (says the Apostle) that after ye have done the Will of
God, ye might receive the Promise, cap. 10. 36. We must have Faith, because the
things promised are invisible, rare, excellent, far above the Power of any
Creature, and only in the Power of the Almighty God. We must have Patience,
because they are to come, and at a great distance. For if we hope for that we
see not, or enjoy not, then do we with Patience wait for it, Romans 8. 25.
Besides, we shall meet with many difficulties, oppositions, trials, all which
must be overcome, which without Patience cannot be: Many things must be done,
many things must be suffered, and we must make out way through the midst of
dreadful Enemies, before we can attain the end. Further, our desires are
vehement, and we long for the enjoyment which is yet to come; therefore we must
be patient, that we may quietly wait God's leisure. Though many other Christian
virtues are required, yet these are only expressed; not only because these
are never without the rest, but because the other depend much upon these two
which are the principal, and have the principal influence on the effect, as
being most actively conducing to the attainment. These are most noble and
excellent virtues, necessary and of great force; yet by Faith and Patience is
meant, the use and exercise of these two Graces, and the same continued to the
end.

. 15. After the Examples of many, he instanceth in one, and the same most
pertinent and eminent; it is that of Abraham.

Ver. 13. For when God made a Promise to Abraham, etc.]

HE did but briefly touch upon the former examples, and thought it sufficient;
but he enlarges upon this, and informs us,

1. That God made a Promise to Abraham. 2. Confirmed the Promise by Oath. 3.
That by patient enduring he obtained the Promise. 4. What the reason was, why
God confirmed the Promise by Oath.


1. God made a Promise to Abraham; There are Promises of God, and Promises of
Men. This is a Promise of God. Of Promises in general, what they are, I have
spoken [Theopolitica], and of God's Promises, as they are parts of his Laws,
and opposed to threatenings, in respect of both which the Law is a Rule of his
judicial proceedings. The matter of them is some Good to come, and the same
Spiritual and Temporal; but the principal is Spiritual. Yet, 2. This Good, and
the communication of it, must be intended by the party promising. 3. This
intention is not sufficient, except it be expressed and signified to the party,
to whom the Promise is made. 4. The effect, if not the act, is the binding of
the party promising, unto performance; and the giving a kind of right of the
thing promised unto another to whom it is made; and also an hope of receiving
and enjoying the good that does follow upon it. All these are found in the
Promises of God; yet there is something more in them, for they are added unto,
and joined with, the Precepts to encourage man to the performance of his Duty,
And they differ from the Promises of Man, as being most certain, ever stable,
never failing; because God is almighty, true, constant, faithful: and therefore
are a firm ground of hope. There was great reason, why God should intend good
to Man, if he was resolved to save him, and make him happy; for otherwise his
happiness had been impossible. Neither had this intention been sufficient,
except he had signified it in his Promise, and bound himself; for without both
these, Man could have had no certain hope or comfort. The spiritual and eternal
Mercies and Benefits, intended to Man, are so high, so excellent, so glorious,
that Man could never have thought upon them, if God had not revealed them; nor
could have had any certain and firm hope of them, if any but God had promised
them, and that freely, and upon Christ's merit: yet no Man can challenge any
immediate right, much less the enjoyment of those things promised, before he be
rightly qualified, and perform the Duty. God made many Promises to Abraham, but
the chief to which the rest were appendant and subordinate, were Righteousness
and eternal Life by Jesus Christ.

. 16. This Promise was confirmed by Oath, where we must observe,

1. The Confirmation. 2. The Promise confirmed.


In the Confirmation, we have,

1. The party Swearing, which was God. 2. The party by whom he Swear, which was
himself. 3. The reason why he Swear by himself, which was, because he could
swear by no greater.


By this we may easily understand, 1. That the ordinary definition of an Oath
is not perfect, and of sufficient extent; it agrees only to an Oath taken by a
Creature, whether Man or Angel, it cannot agree to God; yet God Swear, and this
was an Oath far different from all other Oaths. For in this God lifts up his
hand unto eternity; and lays it upon the Altar of his unchangeable and
infinite Being; He pawns and pledgeth his Godhead, and is willing, if he
perform not with Man to forfeit it. 2. Therefore an Oath in general, is a
special kind of confirmation of that which is less certain and evident, by that
which is more certain and evident. For God's eternal Being and Life is more
certain and evident to us, then his doing this or that good for his sinful
Creature. 3. God swaring is in some sort inferior to himself, and his eternal
Being. 4. This was a strange condescension in God, in regard of man's
infirmity, that He would hazard the forfeiture of his Deity. O sinful man, be
eternally ashamed to doubt of God's Promises, seeing he has so deeply engaged
himself unto thee, and has laid down his Godhead as a stake and pawn never to
take it up again, if he fail the least jot with thee. This Oath we find, Genesis
22. 16. where we have, 1. The form, [I have Sworn by my self.] 2. The occasion
whereupon He swear, and that was the extraordinary Faith and Obedience of
Abraham, whereby he was ready at God's Command to Sacrifice his Son, his only
Son. And whosoever shall attain to the same degree of Faith, which Abraham did
manifest in this act of Obedience, may be secured by this Oath; for God by it
intended to confirm the Promise of righteousness and eternal life, not only to
him, but to all Believers, who are the genuine Sons of Abraham. This was the
Confirmation, the Promise confirmed follows.

Ver. 14. Surely Blessing I will Bless thee, and Multiplying I will Multiply
thee.

ABraham had Faith before, and was justified before this time. But upon this
hard Trial his Faith did more gloriously shine forth, and proved to belike
refined Gold coming out of the Furnace far more bright, and his righteousness
and eternal reward, besides other mercies were far more firmly confirmed unto
him. The words of God spoken, are here, repeated but in part; yet so, that we
must understand the rest to be intended, and taken altogether, they are so
full, and uttered in that manner, as though God could not express how much he
loved him. For the words do signify the certainty, and abundance of his love,
which he would really manifest unto him; especially in Christ, in whom all
Nations must be blessed. There are indeed in this Promise some Blessings proper
unto Abraham, but the chief was spiritual and eternal bliss in Christ, without
which all the rest could not have made truly and fully happy.

. 17. Abraham by this Promise thus made sure by Oath, was mightily
strengthened; and by his patient enduring, attained in the end the Promise. For,

Ver. 15. So after he had patiently endured, he obtained the Promise.]

THe Promise, is the thing promised, and the thing promised was final
Righteousness, Joy, and Peace; the obtaining, is the enjoyment of this blessed
estate which he so much desired, so much sought. The means was his continued
patience, whereby he overcame all difficulties, continuing firm in the Covenant
to the end. The sum of all, and the scope of the Apostle, is to let them know
by this example of their Father Abraham, whom they so much honored; that if
they patiently endured to the end, and faithfully performed their Duty, they
should obtain and enjoy the same glorious Reward whereof he was already
possessed. And this example should quicken, incite, and mightily encourage
them; and it should so much the more encourage, because the event should be so
certain. But this is our misery, few believe these things, and so neither the
Commands, Promises, and Oath of God, nor these examples of rare Heroic spirits
do work upon us; and though we might, yet we will not be made certain of
eternal bliss. For God has done all things on his part to assure and confirm
us, as appears by this Oath.

. 18. For this was the end for which God promised and confirmed the Promise by
Oath, as it appears by the words following, wherein we may consider,

1. The end of an Oath in general. 2. The end of this particular Oath intended
by God.


Concerning an Oath, as taken and used by Men (for of such he speaks), he
observes two things,

1. That it is taken by a greater. 2. It Is for confirmation, an end of all
strife.


Ver. 16. For men verily swear by the greater, and an Oath for confirmation to
them is the end of all strife. 1. MEn verily swear by the greater; and some Men
and Angels are greater, and may have power to punish perjured persons: yet
suppose such an Oath to be lawful, as in some cases it may be, yet it is
insufficient for that end, for which an Oath in general was intended and
ordained. For neither Men nor Angels know the secrets and intentions of the
hearts of Men who Swear; neither can they punish with eternal punishments the
Offenders. But God who is Omniscient, Omnipresent, Omnipotent, and exactly
just, knows the hearts, and secrets of all Men, in all places, at all times,
and can and will punish the Offenders, and in particular false and vain
Swearers, not only with temporal, but eternal punishments, if they be not
prevented by serious and timely Repentance. Therefore men usually Swear by God,
and requires others so to do; otherwise they will not believe them, and rest
satisfied. And though they should, yet the God of eternal Truth will not be
abused and attested for to confirm a falsehood; and woe to him who shall forfeit
his interest in him, and provoke him against his own Soul, as false Swearers do.

2. Because the end of an Oath is to determine strife; therefore men swear by a
greater who can take vengeance, and certainly knows who do profane his Name.
That this is the end to determine strife, the Apostle signifies by these words,
[And an Oath for confirmation to them is an end of all strife.] Where it is to
be noted, 1. The subject matter of an Oath is some strife or controversy, that
is, a thing which may be doubted of, and is not known to them who doubt, but
only to the party that asserts it by Oath. 2. This doubt must be such, as
cannot be cleared by sense or reason, or any other argument but a testimony. 3.
Yet there is some kind of necessity of confirmation. 4. This confirmation
cannot be made but by testimony. 5. Because the testimony of man is
insufficient and unsatisfactory, therefore God is invoked to be a co-witness.
6. Because it is supposed that no man will forfeit his interest in God, and
invoke him against his own Soul, when a thing is confirmed by Oath they rest
satisfied. For the party swearing can do no more, and when he has taken his
Oath, he has done enough; except he be an Atheist, and no Atheist should be
permitted or admitted to Swear, his Oath will signify nothing.

. 19. As the end of an Oath in general is to end all strife, and finally
determine Controversies; so the end of that Oath in particular which God swear
to Abraham, is to take away all controversy and doubt about the eternal
Inheritance. For by it God, 1. Shows the immutability of his Counsel. 2. By
this showed, ministers strong consolation to the Heirs of Promise, which fly
for refuge to the hope set before them. So that the end is twofold; Immediate,
and Remote: Immediate is the manifestation of the immutability of his Counsel;
the Remote, strong consolation. The former is subordinate to the latter, and as
it is an end in respect of the Oath, so it is a means in respect of the
consolation. The first end therefore is to show the immutability of his
Counsel, unto the Heirs of Promise. For thus it is written.

Ver. 17. Wherein God willing more abundantly to show unto the Heirs of
Promise, the immutability of his Counsel, confirmed it by an Oath.] Where we
may observe,

1. The immutability of God's Counsel. 2. The more abundant manifestation
thereof. 3. The Oath of God interposed to that end.


If we reduce the Text to Proposions, they are these:

1. That God's Counsel is immutable. 2. God was willing to manifest this to the
Heirs of Promise. 3. For that end He interposed an Oath.


Proposition 1. God's Counsel is immutable,] By God's Counsel, is meant his
Decree, which is an act of the Will, as Counsel is of the Understanding: yet
it is called Counsel, because no Decree of God is made without the Counsel,
Wisdom, and direction of the Understanding. For God being an intelligent Agent,
and of most perfect Knowledge, and profoundest Wisdom, can will or determine
nothing but according to the best and most exact Understanding. 2. The Decrees
of God are many, and extend to all things done, or to be done; but here the
Decree or Counsel of God is special, and limited to a special object, the
intellectual and immortal Creatures as Men and Angels; and here to Men, and
amongst Men to the Heirs of Promise. 3. The Heirs of Promise, are the object of
it in respect of their spiritual and immortal estate; and the matter of it, was
the giving of eternal life. For he decreed to give them eternal Bliss and Glory.

This Decree once made, was immutable, and could not be altered or revoked
either by God himself, or any thing out of God. For, 1. There can be no cause
of revocation, either for want of Wisdom or Justice, for he is absolutely both
wise and lust. 2. Neitheir from the inconstancy of his Will; for the strength
of Israel will not lie or repent, for he is not as Man that he should repent, 1 Samuel 15. 29. 3. Neither need he alter, nor can his Will be frustrated for want
of Power, for he is Almighty. And if there be no ground or cause of alteration
from within, much less from without, though all Men and Angels and all
Creatures should combine together; as they have no strength to frustrate; so
they have no power to Null his Decrees, for he is the Supreme and Universal
Lord. Therefore it is said, The Counsel of the Lord stands for ever, the
thoughts of his heart to all Generations, Psalm. 33. 11. This immutability is
truly affirmed of all his Decrees, but especially it is true of this particular
determination, concerning the eternal Salvation and Beatification of the Heirs
of Promise. This counsel is part of the Election and Prede^^^nation of his
People, and is to be referred to that Head: And it is noted, that no Decree but
this was confirmed by an Oath.

Proposition 2. God was willing more abundantly to show this to the Heirs of
Promise, God only knows his own Thoughts and Counsels; and neither Man or Angel
is or can be privy to them, except they be revealed. None can reveal them but
Himself, and this he has done freely, and of his own accord; and in great
mercy has let man know his gracious thoughts and purposes, to make him for
ever blessed. In this manifestation, we may consider,

1. What the thing manifested is. 2. To whom the manifestation is made. 3. His
willingness to manifest this to them more abundantly.


1. The thing manifested, as before, is the immutability of his Counsel: For he
manifests not only his Counsel and Decree of everlasting Salvation, but the
immutability of it. Man must know what his Counsel is, and that it is
unchangeable and irrevocable; and the manifestation of both, was necessary to
the end he intended. For if Man had not known his Counsel, he could have had no
immediate ground of comfort; if he had known his Counsel, and not the
immutability of it, his comfort could not have been strong, certain, stable.

2. This manifestation was made unto the Heirs of Promise: They are Heirs of
Promise, who have right unto the eternal inheritance promised; these are
sincere Believers, and the Sons of God, who are joynt-Heirs with Christ, and by
Faith derive their Title from him by virtue of God's Promise, which in him is
Yea and Amen. By this we understand, that the Promise was not made to Abraham
alone, but to all his Seed according to the Spirit; for he was the Father of
Believers, who by Faith are Christ's: And if Christ's, then are they Abraham's
Seed, and Heirs according to the Promise, Gal. 3. 29. These, and these alone,
are they whom God intended to secure, and make certain of their Salvation, and
for their security was the manifestation made; but as for others, as they have
no right to the Promise, so they can have no benefit by this manifestation.

3. God was willing more abundantly to show this to them: It must be showed,
and so it was by his Word; it must be showed abundantly, and that was done by
the Promise; it must be showed more abundantly, and this could not be, but by
his Oath. What more could be done? what more could the Heirs of Promise desire?
But what moved him to do this? nothing but his own will, his goodness, his dear
affection, and abundant love to the Heirs of Promise. As for himself, he knew
his Counsel well enough, and that it was unchangeable; yet he had regard unto
their infirmity, and certainly intended to give them certain and strong
comfort. And for this he did not expect their Prayers, but prevented them out
his free and exceeding mercy, which was the only Fountain from which this
gracious manifestation did issue.

Proposition 3. To this end God interposed himself by an Oath, or confirmed it
by ab Oath.] This interposing or confirming by an Oath, was the means; and the
immediate end of it was the more abundant manifestation of the immutability of
his Counsel. The word used in the (...)
Original, signifies as a term of Law [to interpose], as a third person to give
security. So the Heirs of Promise, are one party to whom the Promise is made;
God, as promising, is the other; and God swearing is a third person, who
intervenes and interposeth himself as different from himself, as promising. So
he becomes [Interventor and sidejussor], for himself as promising to Believers,
to whom the Promise was made; and as a Surety is engaged deeply for himself,
promising to see his Promise made good to man, to whom he is bound. And for
this end He swear, as Surety to confirm the Covenant, that the Heirs of Promise
might know the immutability of his Decree. The words [(...)] turned [wherein]
by some are interpreted [because]; and then the sense is, that, because an Oath
is the end of all strife; therefore God to remove all doubts and fears, and
establish and assure the Heirs of Promise, was willing to swear, and by that
Oath to manifest more fully the immutability of his Counsel; and that which was
the end and issue of Men's Oath, was the end and issue of this Oath of God. If
Men will believe Men swearing; how much more should we believe and rest
satisfied in the Oath of God? From all this it is clear, that the Promise of God
is as certain on God's part, as possibly can be.

. 20. This is the immediate end of God's Oath; yet it is but a means in respect
of a further end which God intended. For thus it follows,

Ver. 18. That by two immutable things, in which it was impossible for God to
lie; we might have a strong consolation, who have fled for refuge to the hope
that is set before us.] IN which words, we have,

1. A strong Consolation. 2. The parties to whom it does belong. 3. The means
whereby it is obtained.


1. Strong Consolation is the ultimate end both of the Promises of God, and his
Oath. The mind of Man is discomforted, vexed, weakened from Doubts, Fears,
Sorrows; and whatsoever removes or abates these, does quiet, refresh, revive
and strengthen the heart, and so comfort it. This comfort, it may be weak, it
may be strong; the comfort here is strong, and prevailing comfort, and such as
will overcome all doubts, fears, and sorrows caused by Temptations,
Persecutions, Trials from without or from within. This is opposed to all
worldly and seeming joys and comforts, which appear and vanish in a moment, and
cannot firmly stay and revive the heart; for every blast of temptation scatters
them. It must be the hope or enjoyment of some solid, lasting, and substantial
good, that can be the cause of solid and lasting comfort: Some, by comfort,
understand Faith or Hope the cause of comfort.

2. Though there be a firm and strong comfort, yet it belongs not to every one;
but it is intended for Believers, the Heirs of Promise, who sly for refuge to
take hold upon the Hope set before them, where we may observe,

1. Hope. 2. Hope set before us. 3. The taking hold of this Hope. 4. A flying
for refuge to take hold on this Hope.


1. Hope in this place, is the thing hoped for, considered as a formal object
of the divine virtue of Hope; and it is that blessed and glorious estate, which
is reserved in Heaven to be enjoyed there.

2. This Hope is set before us as a prize, and represented in the Promise as
ours, which we must seek and aim at, as being called to the enjoyment thereof.
It Is set in our view, that we might eye it much, and often look upon it, and
press earnestly toward it.

3. We must take hold upon it; and that is done two ways, 1. By gaining a
title and right unto it, for so we take hold on it by Law. 2. By getting some
possession, and that either in part, as when we receive the first Fruits of the
Spirit; or in whole, which is reserved for Heaven. Both these are done by Faith
and Hope; and the more we exercise our Faith and Hope with other heavenly
virtues, the stronger hold we take. For hereby we make more evident to us our
right, and obtain a greater measure of the First Fruits.

4. We fly for refuge, to take hold of this Hope; for it is our Sanctuary and
safety, far better then a City of refuge: and it is a far greater security to
take hold on this Hope, then to take hold upon the Horns of the Altar. For many
have held fast hold upon the Altar, and have either been pulled away, or slain
in the very place, as Joab was. Blessed is the man that makes the Lord his
trust, and respects not the Proud, nor such as turn aside to lies, Psalm. 40.
4. For all things and persons, though never so great, so strong, so excellent,
are lies, and if we trust in them they will fail us, God never will. For who,
or what can separate us from his love in Christ? Eternal life is unchangeable,
and God who has promised it, and confirmed his Promise by Oath, is
unchangeable too. Those who in all dangers, storms, and tempests retreat unto
him, find strong consolation. For, what need terrify or trouble them, or shake
their hearts, when God has assured them of eternal life?

3. This security and strong comfort is grounded upon two immutable things,
wherein it is impossible for God to lie. These two things are the Promise and
the Oath of God; and, as it is impossible for God to cease to be God, so it is
impossible for God to violate his Promise or his Oath. These are sure things;
Heaven and Earth may pass away, but these cannot fail, nor frustrate our hopes.

. 21. The Apostle in the next words gives a reason why they did, and we should,
fly to take hold upon the Hope set before us; and it is this, because,

Ver. 19. [It was [to them] an ancre of the Soul, both sure and steadfast, and
which enters into that within the Vail.] Where we have a twofold Reason,

1. Because it is like unto a sure and steadfast Ancre. 2. It enters into that
within the Vail.


1. It Is like an Ancre; for, what an Ancre is to a Ship, the same is Hope unto
the Soul, that is, a stay and means of safety in the midst of all the Waves and
Storms of Temptation, in this floating troublesome World. For that which stays,
strengthens, quiets the Soul of man, is the hope of everlasting Glory grounded
upon God's Promise and Oath. For eternal life, as theirs, is the Ancre; for
though it be excellent in it self, yet it is nothing unto them, if they have not
a right unto it, and a well-grounded hope of it.

2. It enters into that within the Vail: In the Tabernacle or Temple within the
second Vail, was the Holy of Holies, which was a type of Heaven; in allusion to
this, it signified, that the object of our hope is something excellent, and
above the World; something heavenly, glorious, and eternal. Therefore it is
said, That the Inheritance of God's Sons is reserved in Heaven for us, 1 Pet.
1. 4. And that the great object of our hope is laid up in Heaven, Col. 1. 5.
Where we shall fully enjoy our God, and all things in him. And surely nothing
under Heaven can stay, and firmly fix the floating heart of man; neither can
this Ancre fasten firmly, but in Heaven. This Hope may be said to be stronger,
and our hearts more assured, because

Ver. 20. The forerunner is entered into Heaven. THis forerunner is entered
Heaven, to take possession for himself, and also in our behalf, and make the
way passible; this is more then ever Abraham did, or could do. Therefore we
have a rare example, far above that of Abraham, to make us diligent unto the
assurance of hope; for our diligence shall not be in vain. These words, with
the former, may imply, at least, distinct Reasons, why we should labor for the
full assurance of Hope unto the end; 1. Because this assurance will be an Ancre
to the Soul. 2. It will be a sure and steadfast Ancre. 3. It will be the more
steadfast, because it fastens within the Vail, a sure ground. 4. It fastens so
much more strongly, because it fastens there where our Forerunner is entered;
yet because all this referrs to hope grounded on the Promise and Oath of God,
it may belong to the example of Abraham enlarged upon. Lest we should be
ignorant who this Forerunner is, he informs us, that it is [even Jesus, made
an High Priest for ever, after the Order of Melthisedec]; and so he returns,
and that in an excellent manner, with much art, to the principal intended
subject of his Discourse formerly proposed, and now rehearsed again, as the
Theme and Matter to be handled, in the seventh Chapter following.

CHAP. VII.
Concerning the Excellency, Perfection, Immutability, and perpetual continuance
of Christ's Priesthood.. 1. THat the Reader may understand my Method, it is
this, 1. I will observe something by way of additions to my Exposition upon the
former Chapters. 2. Show the Connection of this with the former. 3. Enter upon
the Chapter it self. The additions are these, 1. That the Qualification
described by the Apostle, Chap. 6, 4, 5. (from which some do, and many may,
fall away) is such as does not reach that degree of Faith and other divine
Virtues, which is required in the Covenant; upon which follows the constant
inhabitation of the Spirit, as a constant spirit of Sanctisication, Adoption,
Consolation. For this donation of the Spirit, and the effects thereof, have a
more immediate and firm connection with eternal Life, and the final Reward, than
any other inferior degree of Grace.

2. To minister constantly unto the persecuted Saints, and suffer with them out
of Faith in Christ, and love unto the Brethren, does imply an higher
Qualification, than that which was described, ver. 4. 5.

3. Though these exercises and performances of Faith and Love, do not in
themselves merit, or necessarily infer, the final Reward; yet God will not
forget them, but certainly remember, and reward them with an eternal Reward:
and in respect of this remembrance which God has promised, the final Reward
does necessarily follow.

4. After that God had once given the Spirit of Adoption, and accounts such as
have received it as his Sons, he is bound by his gracious Promise, when it
shall be requisite, to chastise them, to prevent their final ruin.

5. In the example of Abraham, the Apostle gives a Reason, 1. Why he swear by
himself; which was, because he could not swear by a greater. 2. Why he
confirmed the Promise with an Oath; and it was to strengthen our hope of
everlasting Glory, whereof Christ has taken possession for Himself, and in our
behalf.

. 2. The Connection with the former, to the observant Reader is clear enough.
For the words referr, 1. Unto Chap. 5. ver. 6, 10. where he cites the words of
Psalm 110. 4. to prove the vocation of Christ unto his eternal Priesthood. 2.
To Chap. 6, 20, where he signisies, that Christ as our Forerunner was entered
into Heaven, where he was confirmed an everlasting Priest by Oath, and so
rehearses the words of the Psalmist, proposing them as the Theme and Subject
of this seventh Chapter. The digression comes in by a (Parenthesis); so that,
if it had been omitted, yet the Apostle's discourse had been entire, only the
Repetition had been needless. And though it be impertinent to the Subject
proposed and intended, yet it was very subservient to prepare their minds, for
the more attentive receiving of the Doctrine following.

. 3. To enter upon the Chapter it self, we may observe therein,

1. The Subject matter. 2. The Scope. 3. The Method.


The Subject matter is Priesthood, and especially the Priesthood of Christ.

The Scope is to show the excellency of Christ's Priesthood, as far above all
other Priest-hoods, and particularly that of Aaron's.

The Method is, General. Particular.

In the general, the Apostle speaks,

1. Of the Priesthood of Melchisedec, from ver, 1. to the 11. 2. Of the
Priesthood of Aaron, from the 11th to the 20th. 3. Of the Priesthood of
Christ, from the 20th to the end.


The particular Method and Analysis is by diverse Authors apprehended and
declared diversely. All agree, 1. In the Subject, which they determine to be the
Priesthood of Christ. 2. In the Scope, which is to show the excellency of
Christ's Priesthood. 3. In the manner how this excellency is set forth, and
that is not absolutely, but by way of Comparison. 4. That the comparison is not
only in quality, that he was like Melchizedec, but in quantity, that he was
more excellent than the Levitical Priests; and this was one thing chiefly
intended, to represent unto the Hebrews, who did so much honor the Priesthood
of Aaron, the excellency of Christ's Priesthood, as far above Aaron's: For the
one was imperfect, and could sanctify no man; the other was perfect, and could
eternally save. 5. That the Priesthood of Melchizedec and Aaron here are
spoken of only in reference to Christ's Priesthood. 6. The things delivered
by them are true, though their several Methods are not so exactly
consentaneous. Junius makes the parts of the Chapter two, the

1. Is concerning the Type, Melchizedec. 2. Concerning the Antitype, Christ.


This is true, though not accurate: Yet he well observes three things,

1. That this Chapter is rather concerning his Calling than his Ministry. 2.
That this Priesthood is handled by way of Comparison. 3. That the Proposition
here handled is that of Psalm. 110. 4.


Dr. Gouge, whose diligence and pains in the Explication of this Epistle are
much to be commended, does much agree with Junius in the general: For he
observes that the excellency of Christ's Priesthood is set out

by way of Similitude. Dissimilitude.

This implies, 1. That the Doctrine of Christ's Priesthood is here delivered
comparatively. 2. That the Comparison is in quality; yet the truth is, that
though the similitude and agreement, and dissimilitude and disagreement, in
quality be necessarily presupposed, yet it is not principally intended* For the
intention of the Author is, to demonstrate that Christ's Priesthood was not
only excellent, but far more excellent than that of Aaron's; because it was
according to the Order of Melchizedec, which was far above the Order of Aaron.
Where it is further employed, that if Melchizedec, as a Priest, was but a Type,
and Christ the Antitype; then Christ was not only more excellent than Aaron,
but than Melchizedec himself: So that the Comparison is in quantity, and the
same not equal but unequal, and the exceeding excellency was Christ's. A
Lapide, taking the scope of the Apostle to be, as it was, to show the
excellency of Christ's Priesthood above that of Aaron's, finds seven Arguments
in this Chapter to prove it. The first three are taken from the excellency of
Melchizedec's Priesthood, the fourth from the Imperfection of the Levitical
Order, the fifth from the Confirmation of Christ's Priesthood by the Oath of
God, the sixth from Christ's Immortality, the last from the excellent virtue of
Christ's Sacrifice. And he well observes, that the Apostle in this Discourse,
does urge and urge again, and very much insist upon these words of the
Psalmist, I have sworn, Thou art a Priest for ever, after the Order of
Melchizedec.

. 4. But if we well consider the whole Chapter till we come to the Conclusion,
it is nothing but a Discourse upon those words: And he begins with the last word
[Melchizedec]; then he proceeds to another, [a Priest after the Order of
Melchizedec,] which was Christ; then to the words [I have sworn, and will not
repent]; lastly, to those [Then art a Priest for ever]. And if you observe not
this, you shall hardly ever find the genuine Order of the Apostle's Discourse;
And the Text of the Psalm is excellently handled by way of Explication, and
Illation or drawing Conclusions from it.

The first part therefore, from the first Verse to the eleventh, is concerning
Melchizedec, declaring out of Genesis 14. who he was, and that he was not only a
King but a Priest, and that his Priesthood was more perfect and excellent than
that of Aaron's.

The second part, from Ver. 11. to the 19th. infers from this, that there must
be another Priest, not of the Order of Aaron, but of Melchizedec, that the
Levitical Priesthood must be abolished, because it could sanctify no man, or
give him hope of everlasting life; for this Sanctification and Perfection must
be by another Priest, which the Spirit signifies even whilst the Order of Aaron
was in force, must be of another Order, and of another Tribe.

The third part, from Ver. 19. to the 23. takes notice of those words, [I have
sworn, and will not repent,] and thence infers, that seeing he was made and
confirmed a Priest by oath, and the Levitical Priest was not, therefore was he
the Surety of a better Covenant.

The fourth part, from Ver. 23. to the 26. infers not only the difference of
Mortality and Immortality, between the Priests of the Law and of Christ, but
also from his Immortality and eternal Priesthood, his ability to save for ever
such as come to God by him.

In the last part, from Ver. 26. to the end, he seems to infer the eternal
virtue of Christ's Sacrifice from his innocence and holiness, which was such, as
he had no Infirmity. This last does not appear in the Text, either as expressed
or deducible from it, yet it may well be presupposed, because the party to whom
this Priesthood was thus confirmed by Oath could not be any man that had sins
and infirmities of his own, but was the Son of God, who as Man never knew any
sin.

This Discourse is to be understood of the Constitution and Confirmation, not
the Ministration of Christ's Priesthood; and in the very words of Confirmation
the Apostle observes four clear and evident Arguments of the excellency of
Christ's Priesthood above that of Aaron's, and a fifth employed or presupposed.

. 5. The first part is concerning Melchizedec, upon the Explication of which
Word the Knowledge of the whole Proposition does depend, and in it we have

1. A Description of this Melchizedec, from Ver. 1. to the 4. 2. His greatness
and excellency, inferred from this Description, from Ver. 4. to the 11th.


The whole may be reduced to two Propositions: The first whereof declares who
he was: The second, how great he was. In the Description which is taken from
Genesis 14. 18, 19, 20. we may observe,

1. His Offices. 2. The Acts of his Priestly Office. 3. The Interpretation of
his Name, and the place of his Residence. 4. The perpetuity of his Sacerdotal
Office.


1. His Offices were two:

1. His Regal; for he was King of Salem. 2. His Sacerdotal; he was Priest of
the most High God.


The Acts of his Priesthood are two:

1. His blessing 2. Tything of Abraham. The Interpretation of his Name informs
us, that he was King of Righteousness Peace.

The Perpetuity of his Priesthood is signified, in that he had no Predecessor
from whom, nor Successor to whom he might derive his Priesthood.

His Offices and Acts of his Priesthood are expressed in the Text of Moses;
the Interpretation is taken from the signification of the words whereof his
Name is composed, and from the signification of Salem.

The perpetuity is concluded from the reticency and silence of the Text: This
was the only place in the Scriptures of the Old Testament where any mention is
made of this Person, before that of Psalm. 110. 4.

The first part in the Description informs us of his Offices, that he was

1. King of Salem. 2. Priest of the most High God.


Who this Melchizedec was, is much doubted, whether he was God, Angel, or Man:
For some affirm, that he was the Spirit of God; some, that he was an Angel;
some, that he was a Man: And, of such as affirm him to be Man, many think him
to be Shem, who was certainly living at that time: Others deny it, and bring
strong Arguments for the Negative; and it is very likely, if not certain, it was
not Shem, whose Genealogy and Descent is evidently and expressly delivered in
Scripture, and there can be no Reason why he should change his Name and take
another. It Is certain he was a Person that lived in Salem, in the Land of
Canaan, at that time that Abraham sojourned there, and lived at Mamre. The word
King, as distinct from that of Priest, does imply his Civil Power: And because
Civil Power of Government may be in one or more, it signifies the Civil Power
in one; yet this Civil Power may be in one, either despotically, in an absolute
or arbitrary way, or limited. And whether this Power be in one by commission
and trust, or without commission; and whether it be greater or less, we find
that any eminent single Person that had Power to command others in Scripture,
is called a King. What kind of Power Civil this Melchizedec had over his
Subjects, we do not read, neither need we trouble our selves: That he was a
King, and had Civil Power, such as the other petty Kings of Canaan had, need
not to be doubted. The place whereof he was King, is expressed to be Salem,
which might be either the City of his residence, or his Territory belonging to
that City, or both: This Salem in all probability was that place which was
called Jerusalem in after times, for so we find it called, Joshua 10. 1. and
the Name of the King then wa^ Adonizedec which is the same Name with that of
Melchizedec; for both signify a Prince of Governor (call him King or Lord) of
Righteousness, that is, a righteous Prince or Governor: And some tell us, 1.
That the first Name of that City was Zedec, afterward it was called Salem, and
then Jerusalem. 2. That Melchizedec and Adonizedec was the common Name of the
Kings of that place, as Pharaoh was of the Kings of Egypt, and Caesar of the
Roman Emperors. Whether this King was by descent a Canaanite, or some other,
is not material to know; yet Moses informs us, that he was not only a King but
a Priest, and such he might be, and yet an Idolater: But, to take away that
doubt, it is added, that he was the Priest of the most High God. This word
Priest does signify his Superiority and Authority in matters of Religion; and
he was a prime Minister, and did officiate in things pertaining to God: As a
King he governed men, as a Priest he worshipped God. The word Cohen, which
signifies a Prince or a Priest, is here determined to the signification of a
Priest or public Officer in sacred things: Whereas it is said, that he was the
Priest of the most High God, it may be understood, 1. That he was constituted
and consecrated a Priest by God, and so received his Power immediately from
Heaven; as he must needs do, because he derived not his Power from any
Predecessor, and his Order was very high, and so high, that he was said for to
be a lively Type of Jesus Christ the Son of God, and the supreme and eternal
Priest of Heaven. 2. That he did worship no Idols or petty Gods, but the
Supreme Lord and Living God that made Heaven and Earth, and taught his People
so to do:

From these words,

Ver. 1. For this Melchizedec, King of Salem, and Priest of the Most High God,]
WE may observe, 1. That Religion was not so generally corrupted in those
times, but that there were some as well as Abraham, and even in cursed Canaan,
as well as in other places, who did worship the true God. 2. That the Offices
of King and Priest are not so inconsistent, but that they may lawfully be
assumed and exercised by one Person: For Melchizedec, though one single Person,
was invested both with Civil and Ecclesiastical Power. And if one person be so
qualified, that he is able to discharge both places so far as he is bound,
there is no doubt to be made of the Union of both in one man; and the Duties of
both might be the more easily performed by one, when the Power extended but to
a Family, or a little Territory, as this of Salem was: especially when only
the greater Services were to be done by him that was King and Priest, who had
the Superintendency and Command over the rest, who both in matters of State and
Religion were subservient unto him. Yet when Israel was multiplied to a great
Nation, it pleased God to separate these two Powers; and gave the one to one
Tribe, and the other to another: And if this separation had not been made by
God himself, the opposition made by Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, could not have
bin so heinous a Sin. And Christ himself, though a King and Priest, would not
take upon him any Civil Jurisdiction, neither did he give his Apostles any
Power Civil; for their Commission was to teach and baptize, to build the Church
and not the State; neither would he have his Soldiers entangled with the
Affairs of this life. The Work of the Ministry was so great, that there rather
wanted more Laborers to be sent into that Harvest. And for any man to take
upon him more Power than he can well manage, or a greater charge than he is
able to discharge, must needs be unlawful.

. 6. These were the Offices: The Acts of his Priesthood come next to be
considered; the first whereof was, that he blessed Abraham: For

Ver. 1. Melchizedec met Abraham returning from the Slaughter of the Kings, and
blessed him. In these words, with those that follow, we have the exercise of
his Sacerdotal Power: And in this Exercise three things;

1. The Person upon whom he did exercise it. 2. The Time when. 3. The distinct
Acts thereof.


1. The Person was Abraham, one of the most eminent and excellent men of the
World, the friend of God, the Father of Israel, of all Believers, of Christ
according to the Flesh, who had received the great Promise, and was a Priest
and Prince himself; and all this did argue the greatness and excellency of
Melchizedec. 2. The time was, when he met him returning from the Slaughter of
the Kings. For, 1. Abraham, as we read in Genesis 14. had conquered and slain the
Kings, recovered the Captives and their Goods, and taken a great Spoil. 2.
After this great and glorious Victory, he was returning toward Mamre. 3. In
his return, near to Salem, Melchizedec met him with Provision of Bread and Wine
to refresh him and his Army: Then it was that he exercised his Sacerdotal
Power. 3. The first Act was, he blessed him. The words and form of this
Benediction are these, Blessed be Abraham of the most High God, Possessour of
Heaven and Earth. This Blessing was not a mere expression of his desire, for so
any Inferior may bless a Superior; but it was a sacerdotal, powerful, and
authoritative Benediction, yet in the Name of God, as it was by Commission from
God, and therefore real and effectual upon the Subject. Whether it was
particular or general is not expressed: Some, as Mercerus, think the words to
be Indicative, and so to be understood; as though he had said, Blessed is
Abraham, etc. Others, Let Abraham be blessed; or, The Lord bless Abraham; as
the Blessing of the Levitical Priests is delivered, The Lord bless thee and
keep thee, etc. Numb. 6. 24. This Blessing is neither a Wish and desire, nor
properly a Prayer, nor yet a mere Prediction: A Prayer is directed unto God, a
Blessing unto Man; the one seeks it from God by Petition, the other pronounces
and declares it by Warrant and Commission from God: In the one the Priest does
represent Man, in this other he represents God. Here, by the way, we may
observe, That a Priest has Power, by virtue of his Office and God's
Institution; to bless: So this Priest, and the Levitical also, and the
Minister, of the Gospel, may and ought to do.

. 7. The second Act was the Tything of Abraham; for so the next words twll us,
Ver. 2. To whom Abraham gave the tenth of all;] This is the first place of the
Scriptures which speaks of Tithes or the Tenth of men's Goods paid unto God, and
received by his Priests and such as represent him in matters of Religion: And
here we may observe,

1. Who paid them. 2. To whom they were paid. 3. Of what they were paid.


1. Abraham, the party blessed, pays them; and so they who receive spiritual
Blessings and are made fit Subjects of God's Mercy in Christ must give and pay
them.

2. The party receiving them was Melchizedec, who, as a Priest blessing
Abraham, and not as King, receivs them, and to him they are paid. So Christ
appointed the Labourer in his Harvest to receive his Wages, and that they who
preach the Gospel should live by the Gospel, and that he that is taught should
communicate to him that teaches.

3. The matter of these Tithes are a certain portion of men's Goods; For when it
is said, he gave a Tenth of all, it is meant of his Goods, yet not of all his
Goods, but of the Spoils, Ver. 4. For these were Goods, yet 1. Neither the
Goods of his Confederates; nor 2. Of the King of Sodom; but 3. His own Goods,
which were justly his according to the Laws of a just War, by which Laws
indeed, the Goods of the King of Sodom, recovered and possessed upon the
Victory, were his; yet for a special reason mentioned Genesis 14. 23. he refused
to keep them. But whether he paid the Tenth of them before he delivered them
freely to that King, is uncertain, because it is, not expressed, That these
Goods are and always were the matter of Tithes, and the maintenance of God's
Worship, is evident from Mose's Law, and also the Gospel, where they are called
the Labourer's meat and his hire, Matthew. 10. 10. Luke 10. 7. Carnal things due
for spiritual, 1 Cor. 9. 11. The livelihood of such as preach the Gospel, ver.
14. A part of all the Goods of him that is taught in the Gospel, Gal. 6. 6.
From this and other Scriptures, we may observe many things.

1. That Tithes were very ancient; for they were paid in Abraham's time, long
before the Law of Moses, and therefore cannot be said to be Jewish and
Levitical, as though they were proper to those times of legal dispensation. And
though Abraham is the first man that is related in Scripture to have paid them,
and Melchisedec the first man to whom they were paid; yet from hence it does
not follow, that this was the first time that they were due, or given or
received. For as some think that the seventh day, and part of our time was
given to God from the times of Adam; so it is as probable, that the tenth part
of our Goods were due and given to God from the beginning, by the Worshippers
of the true God according to his Laws.

2. That though the Law and Light of Nature requires that a competent time, and
acompetent portion of our Goods, should be given to God as chief Lord of Time,
and proprietary of our Goods; yet, that to give the seventh part of the one,
and the tenth part of the other should be that quota pars, or determinate part
of the one and the other, is but positive: yet so, that it is by divine
Institution. For otherwise it is strange, that the Patriarchs before the Law,
the Jews under the Law; and so many Christians in the time of the Gospel; and
many Gentiles should agree upon this proportion; seeing it is so agreeable to
Reason, and not contrary to divine Revelations. For though Idolatry, and other
Superstitions, were ancient, and of general practice amongst the Heathens; yet
were they contrary both to Reason and divine Revelations.

3. The end of these Tithes, and such like allowance, was the maintenance of
such as did officiate in things appertaining to God, and of Religion, and the
Worship of God.

4. They were not given immediately to God, but to such as in matters of
Religion did represent God, and were his Ministers for the spiritual good of
the People.

5. As no man ever could find out a better proportion of time to be given to
God, then the seventh part; so never any could evince a fitter proportion of
Men's Goods for God's Service, then the tenth part.

6. Though in some places, and at some times the tenth cannot so well be given;
yet this is no prejudice either to the more general right or practice, if so be
a competency according to men's ability were allowed.

7. Under the Law they never gave less, though they gave more then the Tenth.

8. Christ and the Apostles did not require the tenth, because whilst the
Levitical dispensation stood, it was by divine Institution and Law due to the
Priests and Levites, neither was Christian Religion established and completed
in all things at the first in any place, though all things necessary for the
preservation and continuance were due from the first plantation of it.

9. A competent maintenance was always due by divine Law, as an honorable
Stipend, Hire, and Wages; and not as a mere Benevolence or Free-will-Offering.

10. The reason why Abraham gave only the tenth of the Spoils, and not of his
Goods at Mamre, was, because he had then no Goods, but the Spoils in the
jurisdiction of Melchisedec, who blessed him.

11. Though the Priests and Ministers of God are not bound to receive this
maintenance, yet the People was always bound to give it.

12. Though this maintenance may be given to others, and denied to those that
are the true and lawful Ministers of God and Jesus Christ; yet they are due
only to these.

13. Though these Tithes, where they are generally and constantly paid, may be
called a Lay-Fee, as our Laws call them, because they are given and offered to
God by the Civil Powers, and to be recovered by the Civil Laws of Christian
States, by whom the manner of paying them is determined: yet as they are a
necessary maintenance of the Worship of God, they are a divine Right and Fee.
And though there be doubts made, whether the propriety be, in the Church, or
the State, or God; yet so far as they are due by divine Law, the propriety is
in God: and both such as alienate them, and such as purchase and keep them,
diverting them to another end than they were intended, and leave the People,
who pay them, destitute, so that there is no competent means to maintain an
able and godly Minister, must needs be guilty. For though they may flatter
themselves with a conceit of a Lay-Fee, yet they will not be able to make any
good account to God.

14. Though in some times and places a comfortable and competent Allowance may
be provided for Ministers, yet for the generality of all times and places, no
wit of Man could ever find out a better way to maintain the Worship of God,
then this of Tithes: if Compositions, Customs, Prescriptions, and the unequal,
and unjust disposal, and dispensation of them were taken away. And if it be
thus, then they, who are Enemies to Tithes, where they are established for the
right end, must either be ignorant, or Enemies to God's Worship, and the Gospel
of Jesus Christ. And it is remarkable, that they who censure them as
Antichristian, and are offended with them, when they are given to the
Ministers of Christ, who labor in God's Harvest: yet like them well enough,
and judge them good and lawful, if they themselves be once possessed of them.

. 8. The third thing is the notation or interpretation of the Name of this
excellent Prince and Priest, and of the place which we learn from the words
following. --

-- First being by interpretation King of Righteousness, and after that also
King of Salem, which is, King of Peace. MElech, and so Melchi, in Hebrew
signifies King, Prince, or Governor; and such is, being one person, is eminent
in Power above the rest. Zedeck is Righteousness in that Language: This name
agrees with Adonizedeck, of Adon or Adoni, Lord, and Zedeck, Righteousness as
before. This Name did truly agree unto this Person, and he did answer to his
Name; He was a just King, and did Order and Govern his People in Righteousness,
by just Judgment, and according to just Laws, and sought their weal and common
good. Such all Civil Governors should be; for justice is essential to good
Government, and God never gave any power to any person, but bound him to
Righteousness: nay further, governing Power is no Power without wisdom and
justice; it may be [pot^ntia], but not [potestas]. Some Princes are more
righteous then other, yet this man was eminently righteous; because he proved a
Prince of Peace. For the Fruit of Righteousness, is Peace; and the more wise
and just the Government of any State shall be the greater the Peace and
Happiness of the People. But Righteousness must go before, and after that Peace
will follow; and Kings must first be Kings of Zedeck, before they can be Kings
of Salem. If the Kings of Sodom had been such, they had not been invaded,
subdued, and spoiled by a foreign Enemy. The words seem to imply, that Zedeck
and Salem were two places, from whence he had his Name and Title; first from
the one, then from the other; or that because he was so just, first he was
called the King of Righteousness; and after that, because by his just
Government the People enjoyed so great Peace, He was called King of Salem.

. 9. The fourth and last particular is the perpetuity of his Priesthood: For
thus it is written,

Ver. 3. Without Father, without Mother, without Descent, having neither
beginning of Days, nor end of Life; but made like unto the Son of God, abides
continually a Priest.] FOR the better understanding of these words, we must
consider, 1. That if Melchisedec was a man living in Abraham's Days, he had
both Father, and Mother, and Descent, and beginning of Days, and end too;
except he, as Enoch, was translated not to see Death: otherwise these words,
properly understood, and strictly taken, might justly give occasion to think he
was an Angel in humane shape, which was the opinion of some. 2. Therefore, for
the most part, the words are understood Tropically, to this purpose, That as he
is described, Genesis 14. the first and only place of the Old Testament that
speaks more largely of him; Moses, the Historian, makes no mention of his
Father, or Mother, or Descent, or Birth, or Death. And he was directed thus to
do by the Spirit of purpose; either because, he being ignorant of all these,
the Spirit did not reveal them unto him: or if he did, and he knew them, yet he
was ordered and moved by the Spirit to conceal them, that, according to that
Description, he might appear a more lively and perfect Type of Christ. 3. The
words have special reference unto his Priesthood, and gives us a real
difference between him and the Levitical Priest, and makes him far more like
unto the Son of God; our everlasting Priest. For the Levitical Highpriests had
their Priesthood by Descent and Birth, and upon their Death, their Successors.
For as born of a Father, of the Tribe of Levi, and the House of Aaron, after he
was once consecrated, and as born of a Mother, who was a woman married to one
of that House: so they derived the Priesthood from the first Investiture,
after the first Institution. And whosoever could not manifest his Genealogy and
Descent from that Family, could not minister and officiate as a Priest. As they
had beginning of Days, and by their Birth and Descent derived their
Priesthood from their Predecessors; so they were Mortal, and had end of Days,
and so transmitted their Priesthood to their Successors. Thus did not
Melchisedec; who though he might have Father, and Mother, and Descent, and so
beginning and end of Days as a man; yet, as a Priest, he had no Predecessor,
from whom, by Birth, he might receive his Sacerdotal Power; nor Successor, who
derived his Priesthood from him. So Christ, the Son of God, derived his
Priesthood from no mortal Predecessor, but immediately from his heavenly
Father; neither will he transmit it to any Successor, but when all Enemies
shall be subdued; and he shall deliver up his Commission, by virtue of which he
does now officiate and intercede in Heaven: He shall resign the same together
with his Kingdom to God, who gave him both. And thus perhaps Melchisedec, this
great Priest, and lively Type of Christ, did: And if there be any Priesthood
according to the Law of Nature, which is of perpetual continunuance; then he
seems to be an extraordinary Priest, according to the Law. For there is the Law
of Nature, the Law of Moses, the Law of Grace; and every one of these may have
their ordinary Priests, and their extraordinary supreme Pontiffs immediately
instituted of God; and the extraordinary supreme Pontiff according to the Law
of Nature, must be above Aaron, who was a High Priest according to that Law
which was but for a time, and to be abolished, and so more fit to typifie
Christ the Mediator and Priest of the New Covenant, which shall stand for
ever. And these things I referr, and in them submit my Judgment to the wise and
judicious, who may take occasion to seek further: whether Melchisedec's
Sacerdotal Title did not continue to him in Heaven, till Christ's Ascension,
and then was delivered up to Christ, and so it continued in him for ever, and
in this respect he abides a Priest continually. The first three verses seem to
be one Proposition, and all the whole description, till the last words, the
subject or antecedent; and [abiding continually] the predicate; yet so, that
there are many simple Propositions in the antecedent. And it is observable, that
Righteousness, Peace, and Blessing of Melchisedec are perpetual.

. 10. After the explication of this Description, we must consider wherein
Melchisedec and Christ agree; for there must be an agreement between the Type
and the Antitype. They agree in Offices, Acts, and Continuance.

1. Melchisedec was a Priest and a King, so was Christ; Melchisedec was a King,
first of Righteousness, and after of Peace, so is Christ: for he is the most
righteous and just Administratour of his universal and perpetual Spiritual
Kingdom, and by Righteousness procures an everlasting Peace: for our eternal
Righteousness is from Him, and the Fruit of this Righteousness is the
perpetual Peace of all his Loyal and Obedient Subjects.

2. Melchisedec, as a Priest, received Tithes of Abraham, and blessed him; so
Christ does bless all such as believe in him, and makes them eternally happy,
and all our spiritual Blessings, and our eternal Bliss, we expect to receive by
him and from him. As Abraham gave Melchisedec, as blessing him; so all
Christians should give the tenth, and a competent portion of all their Goods to
maintain his Servants, Messengers, and Ministers, who labor in the Word and
Doctrine; without which, his Worship cannot be maintained: And all those, who
deny to do this, are Enemies to Christ, and to Christian Religion, and cannot
be excused. There is a Generation of men, who under pretense of Reformation,
and greater Purity, would have all Tithes taken away; and their design is to
starve the Ministry, enrich themselves and friends: but the issue of all this
will be the destruction of the Ministry, the famishing of Souls, and the decay
of Christianity. Others would have Ministers to continue; but they must pinch
them, and keep them poor. This is a base spirit and temper, and no ways
suitable to the profession of Christianity: Ministers indeed should not cover
Riches, and the Splendour of the World; for thus to do is base on their parts,
and no ways becoming the faithful Servants of Christ. Yet they should be
comfortably maintained; and such as receive any real spiritual Blessing and
Comfort by them, will not grudge to minister unto them, and will be far from
taking from them that allowance, which by just Laws is settled upon them as
firmly as any man's Inheritance, except in the right of Alienation. Some do
honor Learning, and are willing to have it maintained; and if there be
sufficient reason for this, then it will follow, that the most excellent
Learning of all other, and the most beneficial to mankind, and in the exercise
thereof effectually conducing to eternal Salvation, should be honored and
maintained much more. Some conclude from hence, and not without cause, That
seeing Melchisedec was a Type of Christ in all things here mentioned, then
Christ Blessing man, must receive Tithes by his Ministers, as due unto Him. For
if he was a Type in the rest, no wit of man can according to the tenor of this
Scripture deny him to be a Type in receiving Tithes. And this is so much the
stronger, 1. In this, that he insists in the following words more largely upon
this particular of Tithes, then any of the rest. 2. Because Tithes, or
something as good as Tithes, are plainly necessary to the maintenance of
Christian Religion. 3. Because Christ has ordained a maintenance.

3. He was a Type in the continuance of his Priesthood: For as he did not
receive his Priesthood by Descent from any Predecessor, nor transmit it to
Successors in that manner as the Levitical Priest's did: So Christ had no
Predecessor from whom by Birth, nor Successor to whom, he should derive it. And
as Melchisedee's Priesthood was effectual for that excellent end for which it
was ordained; and because it was not so carnal and imperfect as that of Aaron's
was, there was no reason it should be abolished. So Christ's Priesthood being
perfect, and effectual to bring in an eternal glorious estate upon a perfect
Righteousness; there was all the reason in the World it should continue for
ever, and never be altered.

. 11. After the Description of Melchisedec, which is absolute, follows his
excellency and greatness set forth comparatively. And before I enter upon the
words, somethings must be premised, and enquiry must be made of,

1. What the order and connection of these words, with the former, is. 2. What
the Apostle's Scope is. 3. In what manner the Apostle does proceed. 4. What
kind of Comparison this is. 5. How the words, and discourse of the Apostle is
brought in.


1. The order is this, 1. After that the Author had informed us out of Genesis
14. who this Melchisedec was, he goes on to speak of the Order of Melchisedec.
So that the Subject of the former words was [Melchisedec], the last words of
the Text, Psalm. 110. 4. and of these words following, [the Order of
Melchisedec]. For the words of the Psalmist do imply, that there was one
Melchisedec a Priest. 2. That there was an especial distinct Order of that
Priesthood: This is the Order.

2. The intention and scope of the Author, is to show the excellency of the
Priesthood of Melchisedec: And, 2. From thence to conclude the excellency of
Christ's Priesthood. For if Melchisedec, who was but the Type; then much more
Christ, the Antitype of that Order, must needs be excellent.

3. The manner of the Apostle's proceeding, is Dianoetical; for he proves the
excellency of this Order by illation and deduction of certain conclusions from
the express words of the Text, Genesis 14. This act of Reason is called discourse,
which discovers the truths included in the bowels of the Premises. By this
manner of arguing, is manifested the vanity of irrational Sectaries, which call
for express Scripture in points of Controversy, and reject all Consequences.
These implicitly deny our Dianoetical faculty given us by God, and tacitly
blame Christ and his Apostles, for drawing conclusions from express places of
the Word. Though this discoursive power, as used to clear a truth, whereof we
doubt and are ignorant of, imply an imperfection; yet, as it is a deducing and
inferring one truth out of another, it is a perfection, and may agree to
Angels, nay to God himself, because we find him by his Spirit in his Word doing
so.

4. But what kind of Comparison is this? It Is indeed a Comparison in quantity
of imparity, yet it presupposes a Comparison in quality. For it implies, That
Abraham was great and excellent, and that the Levitical Priest's were such, and
Melchisedec also. They all agree in this, that they were excellent: but they
differ in the inequality and imparity of excellency; for one was more excellent
then another, Abraham was above the Levitical Priest, and Melchisedec above
Abraham; his Order was the most excellent: and this is the thing, which as he
intends, so he clearly proves. The Order of his Priesthood was such a by the
acts thereof did manifest the dignity and worth thereof.

5. The Author brings in this discourse with a word of Exhortation: For he
begins thus, [Consider]: So that from these words unto ver. 11. we have an
Exhortation directed unto these Hebrews, and so to us. The Text therefore is,

Ver. 4. [Now consider how great this Man was, to whom even the Patriach
Abraham gave the tenth of the Spoils.]. 12. IN these words, with those that
follow, we have,

1. The Duty in general, which is Consideration. 2. The Matter and Subject to
be considered.


1. I will not stand upon the word which seems to be a Metaphorical, but the
thing signified by it, which is the principal. Consideration, therefore, as
intended in this place, is an act of the Understanding; and especially the act
of Judgment, yet presupposing the antecedent act of Apprehension. Yet it is not
any act of Judgment, whether Noetical or Dianoetical; but a serious and more
intense act, wherein we use the utmost activity of our discerning faculty. And
because the Understanding of man, as imperfect, cannot in an instant clearly
see a truth; therefore it must make a longer stay, and more intentively and
wistly look upon the thing represented in a Proposition. Therefore this
consideration is opposed to a superficial, instantaneous, or imperfect
contemplation.

2. This being meant by Consideration, let us take notice of the thing to be
considered; and it is, in general, the greatness of Melchisedec, which was
manifested several ways. The object of serious consideration, are such things
as are subtle and obscure, and not easily discerned by us; especially when they
are excellent or necessary, or of great concernment, or all these. And of all
other things, the Doctrine of the Gospel, and the eternal saving truths thereof
represent such thing unto us, that require the most serious contemplation, and
highest degree of consideration. Amongst these, this of Melchisedec's
greatness with respect to Christ was one; and it was not easily understood out
of the Text of Moses by every Reader, but such as should be attentive and
intelligent. And to know it, was a matter of great concernment of these
Hebrews: The end of this consideration is a more clearfull, and distinct
knowledge of the thing considered. And the neglect of this Duty is a cause, why
we know so little of God's heavenly Word, and why it works no more powerfully
upon our hearts, to make us use the means to prevent our eternal destruction.

There can be no Consideration, excent there be something to be considered; for
there can be no act without an object. The object is the greatness of
Melchisedec, which is not physical, but moral: not political, as of a Prince;
but spiritual, as of a Priest. It Is an eminent Sacerdotal Power, Dignity and
Excellency: yet this eminency is not here to be considered only absolutely but
chiefly comparatively, and this Priest (and so his Order) is proved,

Greater and more excellent,

1. Then Abraham. 2. Then the Levitical Priest.


He is proved more excellent then Abraham, by two acts.

1. That of Tything, 2. That of Blessing, both Sacerdotal acts.

Yet the excellency is not in the mere acts; for the Levitical Priests both
Tythed and Blessed the People, and that by a divine right and Institution. But
it is in this, That he,

1. Tythed 2. Blessed Abraham, who was greater then Levi.

1. He Tythed or Decimated Abraham; for,

-- Unto him even the Patriarch Abraham gave the Tenth of the Spoils.] Where
it is affirmed,

1. That Abraham was a Patriarch. 2. That he gave the Tenth of the Spoils. 3.
Even he, a Patriarch, gave them to Melchizedec.


1. He was a Patriarch, that is, a first and chief Father; for so the word
signifies. He was the Head and first Father of the Jews, Isaac his Son was a
Patriarch, so was Jacob, so were the Heads of the twelve Tribes, Act. 7. 8, 9.
So David is styled a Patriarch, Act. 2. 29. Rosh Haovoth is by the Septuagint
turned, Patriarch, 1 Chronicles. 9. 9. and 24. 31. 2 Chronicles. 19. 8. and 26. 12. So
Sar, a Prince, is turned by them, 1 Chronicles. 27. 22. 2 Chronicles. 23. 20. Yet, of all
these, Abraham was the greatest and most eminent Patriarch in several respects,
as shall be showed hereafter.

2. He gave the Tenth of the Spoils: What (...) signifies is known to
Scholars, who have observed how Greek Authors use the word; for, whatsoever it
may signify, the Apostle interprets Moses saying the Tenth of all, to mean the
Tenth of all the Spoils which Abraham had taken from the four confederate Kings
whom he had slain; for this was an ancient Law and Rule of War, that the
Persons and Goods of the conquered fell unto the Conqueror. And though the
Greek word may signify the first fruits taken from the top of the heaps of
Grain, or the chiefest Spoils taken from the Commanders in War, which amongst
the Heathen were offered to their Gods, and consecrated to their Idols, or
Spoils in general; yet here by the Context it is plain, the Spoils taken in War
are to be understood. And Abraham had no other Goods at that time in
Melchizedec's Jurisdiction tythable. The Tenth of these, not all, nor any other
part, he gave.

3. Even the Patriarch Abraham gave the Tenth of the Spoils to Melchizedec.]
Abraham did not give these Tithes only in Civility out of courtesy, or out of
free and Princely bounty, or as a Free-will-Offering; but as due, and that by
some Law, and as due to this Melchizedec as a Priest, and the Priest of the
most high God, whom he did represent, and as the greatest Priest then in the
World. In this giving he did acknowledge himself as less and inferior, and
Melchizedec as greater and superior: For, to receive Tithes by a just Law as
due, is an excellency and superiority above him or them who gave them. And this
superiority of this Priest was so much the more, because Abraham was so
excellent a Priest himself of the most High God, who honored him above all men
of that time in the World; and to manifest this excellency by Abraham's paying
Tithes is the principal intention of the Apostle. The Emphasis is in these
words, [even Abraham the Patriarch gave, and gave to him.] This must be
considered, and they must consider this [^ow], that is, after he had given so
clear and full a description of Melchizedec; for before it could not so well be
done.

. 13. But if any should reply, that this was no demonstrative Argument of
Melchizedec's Excellency and Superiority, for the Levitical Priests received
Tithes of their Brethren, he adds,

Ver. 5. And verily, they that are of the Sons of Levi, who receive the Office
of the Priesthood, have a Commandment to take Tithes of the People, according
to the Law, that is, of their Brethren, though they come out of the Loins of
Abraham.

Ver. 6. But he whose descent is not counted from them, received Tithes of
Abraham, and blessed him that had the Promises.

THE Subject of these words is, Tything and Blessing: The Tything is twofold,

of The Levitical Priests. Melchizedec.

The Levitical Priests tythed their Brethren; Melchizedec tythed Abraham who
was far greater than the Priests and their Brethren. The Scope seems to be
this, to prove Melchizedec to be greater than the Levitical Priests, even in
matter of Tything. Both indeed received Tithes, and in that respect were equal;
but the matter here, is, of whom did they receive. Tithes: They received Tithes
only of their Brethren, but he of Abraham their Father the great Patriarch,
and therefore must needs be far more excellent than they. In the words of Ver.
6. we may observe,

1. The parties Tything. 2. The parties Tythe^. 3. The Warrant and Rule of
their Tything.


1. The parties Tything or receiving Tithes, are said

1. More generally, to be the Sons of Levi. 2. More particularly, they of those
Sons who received the Priesthood.


1. They were the Sons of Levi. This does presuppose the translation of the
Power of ministering in holy things, pertaining to the Service and Worship of
God among the Israelites, from the firstborn of other Families to the Tribe of
Levi: For we read, that the were set apart for the Service of the Tabernacle,
Numb. 1. 50. And this done by Command of God to Moses, Ver. 48. This was the
Reason why they were not numbered, non had a several distinct part of the Land,
as the rest of the Tribes. In this the Lord did punish, show Mercy, and gave
Honor: He punished that Tribe, in scattering them throughout all the Tribes
according to the words of Jacob, who denounced this Judgment against them for
their dissimulation and cruelty exercised upon the Shechemites, Genesis 49. 7. He
showed Mercy to the rest of the Tribes, in that they were dispersed in every
part amongst them, to teach them the Laws of God. He honored these Levites, in
that he consecrated them to his Service, and settled the Priesthood in that
Tribe. And this seems to be a Reward for their Service in assisting Moses, when
he punished their idolatrous Brethren. Therefore said Moses, Consecrate your
selves to day unto the Lord, etc. Exodus 32. 29. So wonderful is the Wisdom of
God, that by one Act he can both punish and reward the same parties, and show
Mercy unto others: Of this their separation, and taking them for the
firstborn, we may read, Numb. 3. 12. Yet though all the Sons of Levi did
minister in holy things, all were not Priests: for of the Sons of Levi only
the Family of Aaron received the Office of Priesthood, and were Priests; the
rest of that Tribe were assistant and subservient to the Priests: These had
their Office, not by Usurpation, or the voluntary consent and suffrage of Man,
but by the ordination and determination of God, without whose Power
intervening, so great an alteration in the Translation of the Sacerdotol Power,
could not have been valid or just. In the Christian Church the Office of
Ministers answers to this, which could neither be necessary or effectual,
except Christ had instituted it: And only such as enter upon this Function
according to his Institution, are legal Ministers.

2. The parties tythed were their Brethren, though descended of Abraham: The
Priesthood, with their inferior Ministry, must be maintained; and it seemed
good to the Divine Wisdom to appoint the Tithes for that end, as the sitrest
and most convenient maintenance of all other; and, if duly paid according to
his order, the least subject to inconveniences: And seeing they did serve and
minister for the good and benefit of their Brethren, sequestring themselves
from other employments, Justice and Epuity did require that they should
maintain them, and give them their Tithes. The same Rule in general holds good
in the times of the Gospel; For (says the Apostle) if we have sown unto yo^
spiritual things, is it a great matter if we shall reap your carnal things? 1
Cor. 9. 11. Yet profane World^ings who make no account of spiritual Blessings
will say, It is a great thing, an heavy charge, and we desire to be freed from
it; yet carnal things are nothing to spiritual. These Brethren were descended
of Abraham as well as the Levites and Priests; and, both as Brethren, and as
descended of Abraham, were equal: Yet they must acknowledge themselves, and
that by paying of Tithes unto the Priests, to be inferior to them who were
nearer God, and did represent him in the highest Acts and Service.

3. But by what Warrant, and according to what Rule, did these Priest receive
Tithes of their Brethren? They had a Warrant and a Rule, and both from God:
For, 1. He gave a Command they should be paid, and a Rule how they should be
given: The Command did presuppose the Power, and signified the Will of God, so
that the People were bound to give them, and the Priests had Power to demand
them as due; For the Effect of this Command was, to make them due to be given
by the People, and unto them and to none other: After this Command they could
not be a mere Benevolence, God did often signify in the Books of Moses, that
Tithes were his, and he had given them to the Sons of Levi and the Priests.
That they are the Lord's and holy unto him, we find Levit. 27. 30, 31, etc. and
they are commanded to bring them to the Priest, Deuteronomy. 14. 22. And that he gave
them the Children of Levi for their service, is evident Number. 18. 21. and they
were their Inheritance. And whosoever deteineth them, robs God, and is cursed
with a Curse, Mal. 3, 8, 9. Work and Hire, Service and Tithes, the Preaching of
the Gospel and Maintenance go together, before the Law, under the Law, and in
the time of the Gospel. Commands and Laws do not only define the Persons that
must obey, and the thing to be done, but many times, if not always, the manner
of performance. So it was in Decimation; for the Law determined not only the
Persons that must give them, but of what they must be given, and at what time
they must be paid, and into what place they must be brought, and where they
must be laid up. So that (...) signifies the Command, and (...) the Rule, and
both are parts of the Law of Tything. Some think these words are brought in by
the Apostle, to prove the Superiority of the Priests above their Brethren,
because their Brethren gave and they received Tithes; and it is true, as Tything
them they were above them. Others conceive, that in them he answers the
Objection, That Tything and Decimation would not prove the Greatness of
Melchizedec above the Levitical Priests; for these, as well as he, did
decimate. And they understand the Apostle to return this Answer, That though
they received Tithes, yet it was but from their Brethren who being the
posterity of Abraham, were far inferior unto Abraham, whom Melchizedec tythed;
yet this answer is not given by him in these words, except in part: For the
principal part follows.

. 14. For we read in the next words,

Ver. 6. But he whose Descent is not counted from them, received Tithes of
Abraham, etc. In which words we may observe two Propositions,

The 1. Negative, That Melchizedec's Pedigree was not reckoned from them. 2.
Affirmative, Yet he received Tithes of Abraham.

The first informs us, that he was not descended from Levi, neither was his
Priesthood of their Order, or derived from them. If he had descended from their
Tribe, and his Priesthood from the House of Aaron, then they would have said
that he received Tithes because he was of their Order, and would further
allege, that if one as great as Abraham should be found amongst their
Brethren, they had Power, by virtue of their Priesthood, to decimate him. But
all this he prevents by denying his Descent from them.

The second tells us plainly, that he tythed Abraham, who was far above Levi,
and the Levitical Priests, and much more above their Brethren. Yet this is not
all; he not only tythed Abraham, but

-- He blessed him that had the Promises.] Where,

1. Abraham had the Promises. 2. Yet Melchizedec blessed him.


The Promises which Abraham had, and whereby God had bound himself unto him
were many; As

1. That his Seed should be as the Sand of the Sea, though in humane Reason,
according to the course of Nature, there was little or no hope of it; and this
Seed should be both (according to the Flesh) of the Jews, and far more numerous
(according to the Spirit) of the Gentiles: For he was made the Father and Head
of all Believers in the Generations following, both Jews and Gentiles.

2. He had a Promise of the Land of Canaan, where he then sojourned, and where
at that time Melchizedec was both King and Priest.

3. He had the great Promise of all, That in his Seed all Nations should be
blessed. And this Seed, which was Christ, to descend of him according to the
Flesh, who should be the great High Priest, and bless all Nations. These words
are added to show how great Abraham was.

Yet secondly, Though he was so great, yet Melchizedec blessed him, and he was
blessed: What kind of Benediction this was, I have formerly showed. There is
one universal Author of Benediction, who blesses all things, and that is God,
as Creator. There is one universal Author of all spiritual and special
Blessings, tending to the eternal happiness of sinful Man, and that is God
Redeemer by Christ: There be many others, who ministerially under God, and by
power from God, do bless men, as the Patriarchs, as Moses, as the Levitical
Priests, as Ministers of the Gospel; yet one of the greatest was this
Melchizedec blessing Abraham. And lest any should reply, that inferiors may
bless superiors, and equals may bless equals; it follows,

Ver. 7. And without all Contradiction, the less is blessed of the better.] The
Argument in Form, is this,

The less is blessed of the better.

But Melchizedec blessed Abraham:

Therefore Melchizedec was better and greater than Abraham.

In the words, two Propositions, 1. The less is blessed of the better. 2. This
is without all Contradiction.

The former Proposition is concerning the imparity of the party blessing and
the party blessed, the one is greater and better, and the other is less and
inferior: Yet this is to be understood of the party blessing as blessing, and
the party blessed as blessed; and the blessing here meant is an authoritative,
powerful, and effectual blessing, because otherwise it cannot infer a
superiority. And the reason is, because he that communicates any good unto
another who wants it, is more excellent in that respect than him that receives
it, and in this respect is more like unto God, whom all lawful Priests, and
other persons blessing by commission from him, do represent; and in that
particular Act of Benediction.

2. And this is so clear and evident a Truth that reason cannot deny and
contradict, but presently assents unto: It Is like a Principle clear in its own
light, and far above those remote Conclusions which are doubtful and uncertain.
And this does evidently prove the Conclusion, That Melchizedec, in blessing
Abraham who had the Promises, was far greater than Abraham.

. 15. Thus far the Author has made it manifest, that Melchizedec, as a
Priest, was greater and more excellent than Abraham; Now, not content with
this, which did imply his greatness above the Levitical Priests, he proceeds to
prove more explicitly and expressly, that he was greater than them, and that in
respect of Tithes two ways:

1. In respect of his immortal Priesthood. 2. In that Levi, and so the
Levitical Priest, was in a manner tythed in Abraham his Father.


1. He was greater, in respect of his perpetual and immortal Priesthood; for
thus it follows,

Ver. 8. And here men that die receive Tithes; but there, he receives them, of
whom it is witnessed that he lives. THis by many is made a third Argument, to
prove the greatness and excellency of Melchizedec; and, if we consider the
Reasons in general, it is so: Yet if we consider them more distinctly, the
former two Reasons proved him greater than Abraham, and greater than the
Levitical Priests consequentially. But this is the first immediate and direct
Argument and Proof of his excellency, above the Priests of the Tribe of Levi:
In Form it is thus,

The Priest receiving Tithes, of whom it is witnessed that he lives, is greater
than those who receiving Tithes do die.

But Melchizedec, receiving Tithes, is witnessed to live, and the Levitical
Priests tything their Brethren die.

Therefore he is more excellent.

The former Proofs were taken from Abraham, as the party giving Tithes; this
from the party receiving Tithes, that is, from the Priest's tything, not from
the Persons tythed.

In the Words, we have 1. A similitude or agreement 2. A dissimilitude or
difference of the Priests.

They both agree in this, that they were Priests, and received Tithes.

They differ, in that the one dies, the other is witnessed to live.

The Propositions are two;

1. That here men that die receive Tithes. 2. There he receives them, of whom
it is witnessed, that he lives.


By the Word or Adverb [here], is meant either the time or place; the time was
the time of the Mosaical dispensation, whilst the Law was in force; the place
was at Jerusalem, and in the Land of Canaan, as in the Possession of Jacob's
Posterity, where the Priest's of the Tribe of Levi Tythed the Jews. Yet though
they were above their Brethren in receiving Tithes, yet they were not better in
that they died: Of the Death of Aaron, and other Aaronical Priests, the
Scripture makes express mention, as likewise of their Successors; and does
signify not only that they are mortal, but that they died. Yet Enoch was
mortal, and yet died not, but was translated.

The second Proposition is, [That there he receives Tithes, of whom it is
witnessed that he liveth]. 1. This [he] is Melchisedec, as a Priest, who, as
such, Tythed Abraham. 2. Of him it is affirmed, that he lives. 3. It Is
witnessed, that he lives. 4. This Proposition is annexed to the former, by a
discretive Particle [But], to signify the difference between the Levitical
Priests and Melchisedec; they die, but he lives. 5. It Is said [There], that
is, in the time before the Law, when Melchisedec met Abraham; or it may referr
unto the place of Scripture, Genesis 14. that there it is witnessed, That he
lives, and to Psalm. 110. There is no difficulty in this Axiom, except in this,
[That it is witnessed, That Melchisedec liveth]; which some understand of the
silence of the places of Scripture, which mention Melchisedec, especially Genesis
14. For though the holy Writings tell us, that Aaron and other Levitical
Priests died, and that their Order of Priesthood was only Temporary, and to be
altered, abolished, and so to die; yet it is no where said, that Melchisedec
died, and this, as was said before, is conceived to be done of purpose by the
Spirit; that he being represented as living, and not dying, might be in that
respect fit to represent (and be a Type of) Christ as our ever-living Priest.
But if he was translated, and continued a Priest until the moment of his
translation, then the representation is more full and lively; yet this we find
not clearly testified any where of him. Some think, That the [Taxis] or Order
of his Priesthood was of perpetual continuance, and so it was in Christ the
Antitype, of whom it is said, He is a Priest for ever.

. 16. Besides all this, the Apostle has something more to say of the
excellency of Melchisedec, in respect of the Levitical Priests. For it
follows,

Ver. 9. 10. And as I may so say, Levi also, who receives Tithes, paid Tithes
in Abraham. For he was yet in the Loins of his Father Abraham, when
Melchisedec met him.

THis is another agrument, and in form is this;

He, who so received Tithes, that he did not give any, is more excellent then
him that so Tithes others, that he Tythed himself.

But Melchisedec so Tythed Abraham, that he was not Tythed by any Superior
Priest; and the Levitical Priest did so Tithe his Brethren, that himself was
Tythed.

Therefore Melchisedec is the more excellent Priest.

The minor is proved, ver. 10. For Levi was then in the Loins of Abraham when
Melchisedec met him, and tythed him and Levi in him. The sum is: Melchisedec
Tythed Levi, and in him the Levitical Priests; therefore he was more excellent.
And because it was not proper, but tropical to say that Levi paid Tithes, and
that to Melchisedec, in Abraham; therefore he abates somewhat in his expression
by adding [if I may so say]. For by a Trope he might so say, though properly he
could not; because neither Levi, nor any Priest of Levi did then actually, but
only virtually exist in his cause. This so is true, as that it must be rightly
understood; otherwise, it may be an occasion of error. For Christ himself,
according to the Flesh, was then in Abraham's Loins; yet Christ, 1. Was not
merely Man. 2. He was not to Descend of Abraham by natural propagation. 3. He
was in Abraham as the Antitype of Melchisedec, and so could not pay Tithes to
him. 4. He was to be advanced higher then Melchisedec was, and rewarded with
far greater privileges; yet none of these did agree to Levi, or his Sacerdotal
Posterity: and so, as paying Tithes in Abraham, he was inferior, and of an
inferior Order of Priesthood. And here I might take occasion to observe, that
Parents and Children may be truly accounted as one person; and this not only
before they be born, but in many cases after that they actually exist in
themselves: and by reason of this unity and identity, the Children may be said
to do or suffer what their Parents do and suffer, and on the contrary.

. 17. Hitherto the Apostle has described Melchisedec, and set forth his
greatness and excellency; and now he proceeds to manifest the greatness and
excellency of Christ the Antitype, and of his Priesthood as far more excellent
then that of Aaron's, which is the second part of this Chapter; and this is the
Coherence and Connection. And as the Theme of the former Discourse was
[Melchisedec], the last word of Psalm. 110. 4; So now he goes on to handle in
the first place these words of that Text, [Another Priest after the Order of
Melchisedec.] For though in them we do not read the word and Adjective
[Another], yet it is employed, because the place does speak of Christ, as another
Priest, distinct not only from Aaron, but from Melchisedec. So that the
Doctrine or Proposition, which he discourses upon, is, [That after Aaron, and
the Levitical Priest, there must be another Priest after the Order of
Melchisedec.] From this proposed, he inferrs several conclusions of great
moment concerning the insufficiency and mutation of the Levitical Priesthood,
and the efficacy and sufficiency of Christ's Priesthood. And to ground this
Discourse, he presupposes that the end of all legal Priesthood instituted by
God is perfection, and then begins to argue in this manner.

Ver. 11. If therefore Perfection were by the Levitical Priesthood (for under
it the People received the Law), what further need was there that another
Priest should rise after the Order of Melchisedec, and not be called after the
Order of Aaron?] Where we must note, 1. That the words are Interrogative, and
imply, that the hypothetical or connex Axiom is Negative, and the negation is
more vehement and peremptory. For if perfection had been by that Priesthood
and that Law, there was no further need of another Priest, of another Order so
far different from that of Aaron's. That Priesthood would have been
sufficient, and there had been no reason of alteration, nor any necessity of a
Priest of another Order.

2. These words [A Priest after the Order of Melchisedec] are found in this
11th. ver. by was of supposition, and afterward repeated more fully and
expressly out of the Psalm, and enlarged upon.

3. He gives a reason, 1. Why there must be another Priest of another Order. 2.
Why this other Priest must be constituted in a more perfect manner then the
former was. And the reason of both is from the insufficiency of the Levitical
Priest, and the sufficiency of Christ's Priesthood.

4. He joins both the former and the latter Priest-hoods, and the several and
distinct Laws according to which being made, they must minister.

5. From the words of the Psalmist he, 1. In this verse inferrs the
imperfection both of the Levitical Priesthood and the Law. And, 2. In ver. 12.
the alteration of the Priesthood and the Law.

6. In this Text, ver. 11. the Apostle's argument in form is this, If
Perfection were by the Levitical Priesthood (under which they received the
Law), then there was no farther need that another Priest should rise after the
Order of Melchisedec, and not called after the Order of Aaron.

But another Priest after the Order of Melchisedec, and not of Aaron, must rise.

Therefore there is no perfection by the Levitical Priesthood or the Law. The
consequence presupposing perfection to be the end of Priesthood, and that God
does nothing needless and in vain; and that the bringing in of another Priest
and Priesthood, is clear and undoubtful. The assumption he proves from the
words of the Psalm, which positively affirms, That there shall and must be
another Priest after the Order of Melchisedec. For if they be the words of God
by his Spirit inspiring David, the Jews acknowledging the divine authority of
the Book of Psalms, could not deny it. For the words of the Psalmist, being the
words of God, must needs be true; yet the words of the assumption are not
expressly, and wholly found in the Psalm, but employed consequentially. For if
God constitute another Priest after the Order of Melchisedec, and signifies his
Will to do so, then necessarily it follows, that there is further need of such
a Priest.

7. This Syllogism is Compound, and to be referred to the second Connex; which
takes away the Consequent, to take away the Antecedent.

If we resolve this Text into simple absolute Propositions; They are these,

1. There is no Perfection by the Levitical Priesthood and the Law. 2. There
is further need of another Priest. 3. This other Priest is after the Order of
Melchisedec. 4. He is not called after the Order of Aaron.


The first Proposition presupposes perfection to be the end of Priesthood,
and the Laws of God. Where we must understand what is meant by perfection in
this place: perfection is expiation, justification, sanctification,
consecration, as may appear, Hebr. 10. 1, 2, 4, 10, 14. For, to perfect sinful
man, is to free him from Sin, and the consequents thereof, so as to make him
righteous, holy, and capable of eternal happiness in a near Communion with God.
And here we may take notice of the error of Crellius, who takes expiation for
remission and sanctification, without any satisfaction. Whereas it is evident,
that both in the Scriptures, and especially in this Epistle, it signifies to
pacify and propitiate by Blood and something offered to God; without which,
there is no justification and sanctification. And this is evident from Chap.
10. 10. where it is said, We are sanctified through the Offering of the Body of
Jesus Christ. And ver. 14. For by one Offering he has perfected (or rather
consecrated) the Sanctified for ever. In both which places it is evident, that
there must be, 1. An Offering or Sacrifice to propitiate God offended. 2. That
Sanctification and Consecration are by this Propitiation, and no ways without
it. This perfection is the end of Priesthood and Law: For Priesthood was
ordained, and with the Priesthood Laws were made to avert the Wrath of God, to
procure his favor, and to be means conducing to sinful man's Salvation, and
eternal Happiness; and that Priesthood, and that Law, which cannot do these
things, nor reach this end is insufficient, and can save no sinful man, nor
give him hope of Life. This perfection is denied to the Levitical Priesthood
and the Law; for the Levitical Priest could offer no Sacrifice that could
expiate Sin, or propitiate God offended, or purge the Conscience from dead
works. Neither could the Law do any such thing, as is plainly asserted, ver.
19. and Chap. 10. 1, 2, 3, 4. And here we must enquire,

1. What is here meant by the Law. 2. What is meant by [(...)] under which. 3.
Why this clause is added and inserted.


1. Some will have this Law to be the Law of the Constitution of the Levitical
Priesthood, others will have it to be the rule of their administration, others
will have it to be the Law of Worship, Service, and Obedience of the People,
with the Promises and Comminations; and the simple word Law, in this place
included in the compound Verb, may signify all these. Thus understood, it is
opposed to the Promise made to Abraham, and to the Gospel; and the Jews sought
Righteousness and Life by this Law, and the Ministry of the Levitical
Priesthood, and were confident of Salvation; This was their great error.

2. By [(...)] which our Translatours turn [under it], that is, under the
Levitical Priesthood, some understand [with it] [,and [about the same time]
the people received, or were subjected to the Law. Junius translates it, and
Vatablus expounds it differently from the rest, in this manner. For it, that
is, for Sanctification the people received the Priesthood, or the Law of
Priesthood: and so referr the Relative [It] not to Priesthood, but to
perfection or sanctification; and, with them, the Preposition [(...)] signifies
in this place not [under], but [for]. Crellius seems to agree with them in
part, but not fully; for he referrs the Relative as others do, to the word
[Priest-hood], and so will have it rendered. That the people received the Law
of, or touching, or concerning the Priesthood, that is the Law of Priesthood;
yet according to the use of the word [(...)] in the Septuagint, the place may
be rendered thus, [For under, or, by the Priesthood the People were directed or
ordered]. For with them [(...)] is to guide, order, direct; yet because the
Apostle puts a plain difference between the Priesthood and the Law, and makes
the one depend upon the other, and joins them inseparably, and this in the very
next Verse; therefore the first sense is the best, that with the Priesthood,
and about the time of the Institution, the People received the Law.

But thirdly, Why is this Clause added and inserted? It was inserted to inform
us in general, 1. That there is no Priesthood, especially instituted by God,
without a Law and Covenant. 2. That this Priesthood was not without a Law, and
that Law and Covenant was the same which God made with their Fathers in the
Wilderness. 3. That as the Law is, such is the Priesthood; for as they cannot
be separated, but depend one upon another, so the one cannot exceed or excel
one another. Every Covenant of God has a Mediator, and as the Covenant is
better, and established upon better Promises, so the Mediator or Priest is more
excellent: For the end of the Priest, is, by his Ministration, to avert the
Wrath of God, to make Reconciliation for the People, and procure the Blessings
promised in the Law and Covenant, and no other; therefore the Levitical
Priesthood could not so officiate or minister, as to procure any Blessings but
such as the Law, or God in the Law, did promise; nor turn away any Judgments
but such as it did threaten. And this seems to be the special Reason why these
words were added, to signify, that as there was no perfection by the
Priesthood, so neither could there be by the Law; and, that because there
could be no Expiation and Sanctification spiritual and eternal by the Law,
therefore there could be none by the Priesthood. The sum of all this, is, That
there is no Expiation, Remission, and eternal Happiness, by the Levitical
Priesthood and the Law: And whereas the Hebrews or others might demand, Why
then did God institute that Priesthood, and give that Law, if there be no
perfection by either of them severally or both jointly? Does God any thing in
vain? The Answer is, That both the Priesthood and the Law were indeed from
God, and he can do nothing in vain; neither did he ordain the Levitical
Priesthood and the Law in vain: For they were sufficient for that end he
intended them. But that was not spiritual and eternal Sanctification, or the
Confirmation of the eternal Covenant, but a legal Consecration and Confirmation
of that Covenant which was to continue only for a time. And as the Law had but
the shadow of far better things to come, so the Priesthood was but a Type of a
far better Priesthood, to which this was subordinate: For, as the Law was but
a Schoolmaster to Christ, so it may be said of the Priesthood, that it did
but lead to Christ. God never intended them for that perfection which is here
meant, though, if rightly observed and used, they might make good the Promises
of that former Covenant.

. 18. Because there was no perfection by that Priesthood, therefore there was
further need of another Priest, which is the second Proposition. David, who
lived above 400 years after the first Institution of the Levitical Priesthood,
and knew the imperfection thereof, being inspired from Heaven, and enlightened
by the Spirit, foresaw that the Lord would make his Lord and Savior sit at
his right hand, not only a King, but also a Priest, and give him an eternal
Priesthood, and did foretell, that in times to come he would say to Christ, I
have sworn, and will not repent, Thou art a Priest for ever after the Order of
Melchizedec. These words Paul by the same Spirit knew as well as any other to
be meant of Christ, as a Priest, and that to make him such was an Act of God,
which did presuppose his excellent Wisdom, which could neither decree nor
effect any thing needless. And therefore from them infers the necessity of
another Priest, which God would never have brought in, nor have signified his
Will to do so, if the Levitical Priest had been sufficient, and able to save
sinful Man. Yet there might have been another Priest endued with excellent
power and privileges, that might have been sufficient to sanctify God's
People, and of some Order, but

3. This Priest must be after the Order of Melchisedec.

This is the third Proposition: This was very fitting and suitable to the
Divine Wisdom, seeing Melchizedec was so great a Priest, and of such an
excellent Order, that from the Creation we do not read of a greater. Yet why
might he not be called after the Order of Aaron? Could not God have raised a
Priest of that Order far more excellent than Aaron? Not to dispute God's power,
and what he could have done; yet his Will was otherwise: For

4. This other Priest must not be called after the Order of Aaron.

And this is the fourth and last proposition of the Text, which informs us,
That though he might have his Name, and so his bate Title, after that Order,
yet this was no ways fitting: But if he should be constituted according to
that Order (for to be called may signify either to be named, or to be
constituted), then there could be no difference between the Levitical Priest
and Him, neither could there be any hope of Perfection or Sanctification by
him. This Negative he infers from the words, after the Order of Melchizedec:
For if he be after that Order, and so constituted, he could not be constituted
after the Order of Aaron, which was far inferior to that of Melchizedec's,
which was far more excellent.

. 19. Yet because the words speak of another Priest, therefore the Apostle
infers two things:

1. The Change of the Priesthood. 2. From that, the Change of the Law.


For so we read,

Ver. 12. For the Priesthood being changed, there is made of necessity a
Change of the Law. Where the Apostle does two things:

1. Presuppose the Change of the Priesthood. 2. Proves from that Change a
necessary Change of the Law.


The Reason why he presupposes the former Change, is, because it was
necessarily employed in the words of the former Verse, and a necessary
Consequent of the words of the Psalm, which expressly speaks of another Priest,
and the same after another Order; therefore he might well presuppose it. The
Reason why he infers a necessity of the Change of the Law, is, because some
might reply, That though the Priesthood was changed, and another Priest
brought in; yet that other Priest might officiate according to the Law, and so
be a Mediator of that Covenant. The Apostle's Argument in Form is this,

If the Priesthood be changed, the Law, of necessity, must be changed.

But the Priesthood is changed.

Therefore of necessity, the Law must be changed.

The words of the Text are not difficult, therefore I will briefly handle them,
and

1. Reduce them to propositions. 2. Declare the meaning of the word Changed. 3.
Examine the force of the Consequence.


1. The Propositions are two:

1. The Priesthood is changed. 2. There is made, of necessity, a Change also
of the Law.


2. By Change in this place is meant, an abolition and taking away the
Levitical Priesthood: For God never intended it to continue to the end, but
had fixed a time how long it should be in force, and when that time once came,
it might be said to be abolished by exspiration. Yet it seems rather to be
taken away by actual Constitution of another Priesthood, the Priesthood of
Christ; for when he had offered up his great Sacrifice, and began to officiate
and make Intercession in Heaven, the other Priesthood did cease, and could not
consist with this, which was far better, but was made useless. When that which
is perfect, and can perfectly sanctify for ever, shall come, then that which
was imperfect and could not sanctify, was put away: That it must be changed,
and the reason why it must be changed, you heard before; and this is the reason
why the Apostle does presuppose it as a thing made evident and to be granted.

3. The force of the Consequence is clear enough to him that shall observe what
has formerly been said. In the words of the second Proposition, considered in
it self, we may observe,

1. The Change of the Law. 2. The necessity of the Change. 3. This necessity of
this Change after the Change of the Law.


1. By Change is meant, the abrogation of the Law, which answers to the
abolition of the Priesthood. Though the bringing in of this Law 430 years
after the Promise could not make void the Promise, yet the bringing in of a
better Law and Covenant made null and void this Law: And God, as he limited a
time how long it should continue, so he determined to take it away by a better
Covenant and would not abrogate it till that was established and published: For
the promulgation of the Gospel, and the Instituton of Christianity did abrogate
it, and made it of no force. And this was the great Mercy of God, 1. That he
would change and abrogate that which was imperfect and insufficient. 2. That he
would not abrogate it till he had confirmed that which was better.

2. Of necessity there must be a Change of this Law: This implies, that the
Change was not casual and contingent, or arbitrary, or any ways to be
provented; yet this was not an absolute necessity, but upon supposition of the
Decree and Promise of God, and the Sanctification of sinful Man, and the
Imperfection and Inability of the Levitical Priesthood to effect any such
thing. So that it is necessitas Consequentiae, non Consequentis: This word [of
necessity] seems to make the Proposition modal, though in strict sense it is
not so; for the truth of the Proposition does not depend upon any absolute
Connection of the terms, as it comes to pass in a necessary Axiom, which is
opposed to impossible.

3. This is more evident, when we consider, that both this Change and this
necessity follows after, and upon another Change: For, though God in his
absolute power could have continued this Law, and prevented this Change; yet if
he once change the Priesthood, the Law must be changed. And so the force of
the Consequence comes in to be considered, which presupposes some strict
Connection of both, and a dependence of the Law upon the Priesthood: For if God
did determine that the Priesthood and Law should stand and fall together, then
it must necessarily follow, that whilst the Priesthood did stand, the Law must
stand; and when the Priesthood shall fall and be abolished, then the Law, of
necessity must be abrogated. And that this was the determination of God was
made evident by the event and the execution of his Decree. Again, if the
Priesthood be once taken away, the Law was useless, because there was no
Priest appointed by God remaining to officiate according to that Law, as we see
it is at this day: And this might be the Reason, why God did not only by the
Death and Sacrifice of the great High Priest, after he was once exhibited on
Earth, and his Ministration in Heaven, abolish that Levitical Priesthood, but
also destroyed the Temple and the City where he had put his Name, and to which
he had confined that Priesthood, and never yet suffered either of them to be
rebuilt: And from these Reasons the force of their Consequence is strong and
evident.

. 20. He proves further, that the Priesthood was changed, because the great
Priest, after the Order of Melchizedec, was not called after the Order of
Aaron, because he was not of the Tribe of Levi, but of another Tribe, and by
Name of the Tribe of Judah. Thus the Text informs us,

Ver. 13. For he of whom these things are spoken, pertains to another Tribe,
of which no man gave attendance at the Altar.

Ver. 14. For it is evident, that our Lord sprang out of Judah, of which Tribe
Moses spoke nothing concerning the Priesthood.

THE words of the Psalmist do prove, that the Levitical Priesthood must be
changed, and these prove, that it was already changed: And the Reason whereby
he proves the Change of the Priest, is, the Change of the Tribe; which
presupposes, that the Levitical Priest was confined to one certain Tribe, and
that was the Tribe of Levi, and to one certain Family, the Family of Aaron.
From whence it follows, that if the Tribe was once changed, and God institute a
Priest of another Tribe, the Priesthood must be changed. And this great
Priest, which is after the Order of Melchizedec, must not be, was not called
after the Order of Aaron, neither was he of that Family.

In the words he informs us

1. Who the Person, was that must be the Priest, intended in the Psalm. 2. What
his Descent is; and that two ways.


1. Negatively. 2. Positively and affirmatively.


1. The person of whom these things are spoken, was Jesus Christ. The thing
spoken of him are, 1. That he was a Prophet above Angels, all the Prophets, and
above Moses himself. 2. That he was a Priest for ever after the Order of
Melchisedec. And though a Prophet might be of any Tribe, yet a Priest must be
of the Tribe of Levi. Of this great Priest he says,

1. He was of another Tribe. 2. Of a Tribe, of which no Man gave attendance at
the Altar.


He was of another Tribe: This implies the Negative, He was not of the Tribe of
Levi; 1. This is general, and so is that which follows. For, 2. He was of a
Tribe where of no man served at the Altar. To serve at the Altar, and offer
Sacrifice, was the proper work of a Priest; and if any of that Tribe had ever
been a Priest, and according to God's Institution, then though Christ had been
of that Tribe, yet the Priesthood had not been changed. But God's constitution
was otherwise; for it excluded all the Tribes but one, that one of Levi; and so
that not any person of any other Tribe could lawfully serve at the Altar. This
makes the Negative more clear, and full, and peremptory: By this we understand,
that Christ was of another Tribe, that he was not of the Tribe of Levi; yet all
this will not inform us of what Tribe in particular he was. Therefore to give
full satisfaction, the Author adds,

Ver. 14. For it is evident that our Lord sprang out of Judah, of which Tribe
Moses spoke nothing concerning the Priesthood. THe Apostle presupposing that
which cannot be denied, that the Tribe of Judah is not the Tribe of Levi, and
that Christ, being of the Tribe of Judah, was made a Priest after the Order of
Melchisedec: seems by these things to prove, that the Priesthood is changed,
and that more particularly and distinctly then he had done in the former verse.
For it might have been argued and replied, that if he was of another Tribe then
of Judah, or Ephram, or Benjamin, or some of the rest: If he was of another
Tribe name it, or else nothing is done. And this was convenient to be done, to
name the Tribe in particular out of which Christ sprang, and it was that of
Judah. In the words, we have three propositions,

1. That Christ sprang out of the Tribe of Judah. 2. This is evident. 3. That
of Judah, Moses spoke nothing concerning the Priesthood.


The first proposition is made clear out of the Histories of the Evangelists,
delivering the Genealogy of Christ from Abraham, and David by way of
descending, Matthew. 1. and of Christ's descent from David by way of ascending,
Luke 3. It Is further evident by the Calling of Joseph his Father-in-Law, and
his Mother to be enroled with the Tribe of Judah in Bethlehem, the City of
David, Luke 2. And his Name was found long after his Ascension in these Rolls
kept in the Arches at Rome. He says our Lord, to signify that Christ was that
Lord to whom the Lord Jehovah said, Sit thou at my right hand, etc.

The second proposition, This was evident: This might be evident then to them,
not only by these Histories, but by the public Records of the Roman Cense and
Enrolment, and the Registers both public and private of their pedigrees. For
the Jews were very careful to Register their Discents for their distinction of
their Families and their Tribes; and God's providence did order it so to be,
not only by these Genealogies to manifest who had title to the Priesthood, but
principally to preserve the Tribe and Families of Judah distinct, till Christ
was exhibited, that so it might be evident that Christ was of that Tribe, and
of the House of David. By this God did manifest his Promise concerning Christ,
to Descend of David to be fulfilled, in that it was evident, that Christ was
the Son of David, and so often called by that Name.

The third proposition, That of that Tribe, Moses spoke nothing concerning the
Priesthood. These words are added to signify, that no man of that Tribe had
right to officiate as a Priest. For before he had said, that no man of that
Tribe did serve at the Altar, but this was but matter of Fact; for though none
of Judah did serve at the Altar [de facto], yet some might [de jure], as having
a right to officiate. But these prove as none did serve, so none could [jure]
justly and lawfully do it: For it they could, they might prove their title out
of the Books of Moses. Yet this cannot be done, because Moses never wrote of
any such thing; there is not in all his Books the lest tittle of the right of
any of Judah to officiate as a Priest. And the rule of the first Constitution
of the legal Priesthood is to be found there, and no where else. These words
imply, that a negative argument from the Scripture in matters of Religion is
valid: For that which is not to be found in the Scriptures truly understood,
either expressly delivered, or by consequence to be deduced, cannot be of divine
authority, so as to bind men to believe it, or do it. But those arguments,
which prove a Negative not only from the silence, but also from exclusive
terms, are the strongest. And in this particular cause, we find Moses not only
silent, and saying nothing of the Tribe of Judah concerning the Priesthood,
but also speaking so positively of the Levitical Priest, as that he so confirms
him to the Tribe of Levi, and the House of Aaron, that he peremptorily and
clearly excludes all other persons of all other Tribes from that Office. And
here we may take notice of the wisdom of God, which contrived this business so,
that he made Augustus (though he thought of no such thing) an Instrument of
this evidence. For though the Cense and Enrolment was general of all Countries
within the Roman Empire, whereof Judea was one; yet by this, he brought Mary to
Bethlehem, when she was ready to be delivered of Christ, that so he might be
born there, according to the prophesy of Micah, and that it might be evident,
that he was of the lineage of David, and so of the Tribe of Judah.

. 21. Hitherto the Apostle has manifested, that the Priesthood was changed,
because the Tribe was changed, and another Priest was risen of another Tribe.
But not content with this, he proceeds to make this far more evident. For so it
follows,

Ver. 15, 16. And it is yet far more evident: for that after the Similitude of
Melchisedec, there arises another Priest. Who is made not after the Law of a
Carnal Commandment, but after the power of an endless life. HEre the Apostle
seems to insist upon two words in the Text of the Psalm.

1. After the Order or Similitude of Melchisedec. 2. A Priest for ever after
that Order.


By both which, he is thought to prove the change of the Priesthood, and the
Law, by the Introduction of a Priest of another Order, and a Priest for ever.
The former proof was evident and sufficient, yet this seems to make the change
more evident, and not only [more], but [far more evident]. And so the words may
be taken, as by our Translatours, they are turned: That this must be
understood, we may consider, 1. What that thing or proposition is, which is
made far more evident. 2. How it is far more evidenced. The thing evidenced, is
the change and abolition of the Levitical Priesthood and the Law: A thing is
made evident, when it is so clearly represented to the Understanding, that if
it be rightly disposed, it must needs assent unto the truth of it once
received, as it is represented. This evidence may be either immediate from
Connection of the terms distinctly understood, or mediately from a third
Argument: This evidence of this change, abolition, abrogation, is mediate. And
that argument, whereby it is made so evident, is, 1. That there must be, and
then was risen a Priest after the Order of Melchisedec. 2. His Priesthood must
be personal and perpetual: In the words, we may observe two propositions. The

1. That another Priest arises after the Similitude of Melchisedec. The 2.
This Priest is made not after the Law of a carnal Commandment, but after the
power of an endless life.


In this Proposition you must, 1. Remember what has been said formerly
concerning the explication. 2. You must note, that [Order] mentioned before,
and [Similitude] here are the same, and to be a Priest after the Similitude, is
the same with being a Priest after the Order of Melchisedec; so that if Christ
be of the same, Order, then he must be like unto Melchisedec. By Order is meant
a distinct and different kind of Priesthood; and though Christ's Priesthood
be like both to Aarons and Melchisedec's, yet it was far more like unto
Melchisedec, which was far more exellent then that of Aarons. This Order might
be the better known, if we knew the Law and Covenant, whereof he was a Priest;
which was not only the Law of Nature, according to which he did minister, and
serve the most high God as Creator and Judge of this World; but of the Law of
Grace, according to which he worshipped God, as Redeemer by Christ, promised to
Abraham, Seth, Enoch, Noah, Shem, and the rest of the Patriarchs before him,
who believed in Christ to come, yet not as to descend from Abraham. Whereas
it is said, That another Priest arises, you must know, that his rising is his
constitution, manifestation, and beginning of his Officiation. And the rising
of him was the fall of the Levitical Priest, and the abolition of that
Priesthood: The force of this proposition, considered as a reason, is in this,
That this other Priest is not only of another Tribe, and in particular of
Judah, but after another Order. For it might have been said, That though Christ
was a Priest of the Tribe of Judah, yet he might be after the Order of Aaron;
and so he might be essentially the same kind of Priest, though accidentally he
might differ from the rest of the Levitical Priests, as they were of that
Tribe. To take away all color of any such conceit, this is added, That he was
after the Similitude of Melchisedec, and not of Aaron. This does prove the
change far more strongly, and therefore the evidence is far greater.

The second proposition, (to evidence the difference, yet to be far greater)
informs us according to what Law he was made a Priest; and this is done,

1. Negatively; not after the Law of a carnal Commandment. 2. Affirmatively;
after the power of an endless life.


In the Negative, we have,

1. A Commandment. 2. A carnal Commandment. 3. The Law of a carnal Commandment.


1. By Commandment, we may understand, the whole System of the Ceremonies and
Mosaical Rites prescribed from God by Moses to that People: For whatsoever else
it may signify or include here; yet these are principally, if not solily meant.
2. This Commandment or body of Ceremonies and Rites is carnal, that is,
outward, bodily, fleshly. For besides Circumcision, which was in the Flesh,
their Sacrifices and Offerings were outward and bodily; and they had their
effect upon their Bodies and Flesh, in freeing the People from legal guilt and
impurities. 3. There was a Law which did direct how these must be used, and
binding them to the observation of them; and this Law had promises of some
legal Blessings and Deliverances, and Comminations of some temporal penalties.
That they were carnal, it does imply, that they were not spiritual, had no
power upon the immortal Soul, and could not any ways procure spiritual and
eternal Blessings, nor free from the eternal penalties due to Sin. Neither
could that Priest (who was by such outward Rites and Ceremonies consecrated) by
his Ministration, according to that Law, expiate any sin, nor make any
spiritual reconciliation. The Levitical Priest was made after this Law, and to
minister according to the same: But here it is said, That Christ was not made a
Priest after this Law, which was a body of carnal precepts, in respect of the
Priest, the Tabernacle, the Service and Ministry, and the effects thereof. For
if He had been made after the Law, He could have done no more then they did;
and then both He and his Ministry had been defective, frail, and of a short
continuance; therefore it is denied, that he was made a Priest after that Law
concerning the consecration, ministration, succession, and operation of the
Levitical Priest.

2. The affirmative; He was made a Priest after the power of an endless or
indissoluble life. Where we have,

1. Life. 2. An indissoluble life. 3. The power of an endless indissoluble
life.


1. Life is either the bare continuance and duration of a living Being, or the
happiness and perfection of that Being; in this latter sense most Expositors
take it.

2. This life, whether it be the continuance of that more perfect Being, which
is living, or the happiness thereof, may be temporary or perpetual, in respect
of time to come; so that, though it may have beginning, yet it never shall have
end: Such a life is here meant.

3. The power here may be a Law, which is powerful not only in binding, but in
promising, so that the event thereof will be endless happiness; as the Gospel
is said to be the power of God unto Salvation.

Christ is said to be made according to this powerful Law, and so is, 1. Of
eternal continuance himself in his person. And, 2. Has power by this Law to
give eternal life to such as are his People, depend upon him, and come to God
by him: For by his death he merited, and by his life and intercession he
procures, spiritual and eternal Expiation and Blessings. Neither of these
could the Levitical Priest, by that carnal Ceremonial Law, and his Ministration
according to it, effect. That Christ must be made such a Priest, he proves in
the next words.

Ver. 17. For he testifies, Thou are a Priest for ever, after the Order of
Melchizedec. Where two things:

1. That Christ is made a Priest for ever, after the Order of Melchizedec. 2.
That this is testified.


The force and Emphasis is in the words [for ever] and [testified]. The first
Proposition is concerning the Eternity of Christ's Priesthood: the second
concerning the declaration of this Eternity or Perpetuity. And we must

1. Consider the meaning of the words. 2. Declare the end for which they are
brought.


In the first part we have,

1. The Order of Melchizedec. 2. The perpetuity of the Priest, constituted
according to that Order.


1. Melchizedec was formerly affirmed to have no end of days, and so in some
respect was of endless life; and for this particular Reason, these words so
often taken up are repeated here the sixth time. Christ is made a Priest after
this Order, as one who must continue for ever.

In the second part it is said, that this was testified; where, to testify, is,
Solemnly, by a formal and powerful Edict, to declare and pronounce him not
only to be a Priest, but a Priest for ever: And it was God himself, as Supreme
Lord, who made this Declaration before all the Angels of Heaven, and by it
constituted and confirmed Christ an everlasting Priest. The end why these words
are alleged and here repeated, is, to prove that Christ was not made a
temporary Priest according to a carnal and temporary Law, but according to a
Law and Power of endless life; that is, that he was made an everlasting Priest,
of everlasting power to save. The words prove this effectually, 1. Because the
words of the Psalmist signify expressly, that he was a Priest for ever. 2.
Because it was God, as the Supreme Lord, who by his solemn Declaration made him
such. This is the Apostle's Discourse upon those words of the Psalm, I have
said, Thou art a Priest for ever. The Scope of the Apostle in all this is, 1.
To prove that the Priesthood was changed. 2. It was changed to bring in a
better Priest. 3. Christ is this Priest, and more excellent than the Levitical
Priest, as being a Priest of perpetual continuance and of everlasting power,
and therefore was to be honored far above Aaron, or any Priest of that Order.

. 22. Hitherto the Apostle has proved, that the Priesthood was changed, and
given the Reason, which was, because by it there was no perfection: And by the
Change of the Priesthood, the Change of the Law is inferred, and in the words
following he gives the Reason why the Law must be changed. This is the
coherence of this Text with the former. So that this is his Method: He proves,

1. By the words of the Psalm, That there must be another Priest besides and
after the Levitical Priest.

2. That if the other Priest be brought in, the Levitical Priesthood must be
changed.

3. That if the Priesthood be changed, the Law is changed.

4. He infers the Change of the Priesthood from the Change of the Tribe, and
of the Order.

5. He infers from the words of the Psalm, that this other Priest must be an
everlasting Priest, and of everlasting power.

6. He gives the Reason of this Change, and that was, because there was no
perfection by the former Priesthood, as there is by the latter.

Now, because the Priesthood and the Law are always so inseparably joined,
that they live and die, stand and fall, begin and end together; therefore he
take it for granted, that having proved the change of the Priesthood, he had
proved the Change of the Law For, as the Priesthood could do nothing, but was
useless without the Law; so the Law could do nothing, but was useless without
the Priesthood. Therefore he thought it needless any farther to prove the
Change of the Law; for the (...), that it was changed, was evident enough and
proceeds to give the (...) of the Change thereof, in this manner.

Ver. 18. For there is verily a disanulling of the Commandment going before,
for the weakness and unprofitableness thereof.

Ver. 19. For the Law made nothing perfect, but the bringing in of a better
Hope, whereby we draw nigh to God.

BY these words we understand, that the Reason why the Law was changed, is the
same why the Priesthood was changed, and it was from the Imperfection of both:
Both were imperfect, for neither severally nor jointly could they perfect any
man. And here the Order of the things is not Order of the words; for the Order
of the matter is this,

1. The Law is weak and unprofitable. 2. It was so, because it was defective
and not effective of perfection; it could perfect nothing. 3. For this Reason
it was disanulled. 4. It was disanulled by and for the bringing in of a better
Hope, whereby we draw nigh to God.


In Ver. 18. we have,

1. The disanulling of the Law. 2. The Reason, which was the weakness and
unprofitableness thereof.


For explication, 1, You must know, that by Law is meant the Law of Moses, and
the Covenant made with the Fathers. 2. This Law is said to go before, that is,
to be a former Law or Covenant; and this it is said to be, in respect of the
Gospel, which followed after: For, consider it absolutely, many Laws and
Promises were made before it; and in particular, the Promise made to Abraham
was before it 430 years. 3. By disanulling of this Law is signified the
abrogation of it: The Essence of a Law is the binding force of it, whereby it
obliges the party subject to the power of the Lawgiver to Obedience or
Punishment: to abrogate a Law, is to take away this binding force, so as the
Subject is freed from the Observation of it, and so from all penalty upon the
Non-Observation. His not doing of it, or his doing contrary unto it, is no
Disobedience, nor can make him liable to penalty. (...), the word here used, if
it be applied to, and affirmed of, the party subject and under a Law; it
signifies a prevarication and transgression of the Law, because the party
offending, as offending, carries himself as though there were no Law, and on
his part makes it void: It Is opposed privatively to (...), which is the making
of a Law, and giving force unto it: This disanulling of it was an Act of God,
who by revealing the Gospel, took away the binding force of the Law, and made
it void, and so took away the very being of it as a Law. 4. The word (...) many
times is used expletively for ornament, sometimes it is used to signify verily,
as here it is translated; and signify; not only the truth but the certainty of
the Proposition to which it does belong, and so it may do here.

The Reason of this abrogation and nulling of the Commandment is, 1. The
weakness. 2. The Unprofitableness. Weakness is the want of internal strength
and efficient power: Unprofitableness is the want of some good, which, by its
efficient acting, a Cause may bring unto another thing capable of that Good,
which by reason of it is impotency and deficiency it cannot effect. This
weakness in the Law was not a want of Physical, but Moral and Supernatural
power, whereby it might bring some Supernatural and Moral good unto that
People, which did observe it. Yet this is not so to be understood as though it
had not the power of a Law; for it had that both in the Precepts to bind and
direct, and in the Promises to profit upon the Observation of it: For it was
sufficiently both binding and profiting in respect of that end, to which God
intended it. But he never intended it for supernatural Expiation and
Sanctification, but he annexed it unto the Promise, and subordinated it to the
Gospel, for to direct them to Christ and the Gospel to come. Therefore the Jews
before Faith, that is, the Gospel of Christ exhibited and glorified, were kept
under the Law, shut up, or confined, unto the Faith, which afterward should be
revealed, Gal. 3. 23. And they who then observed it, found it effectual in the
enjoyment of the Blessings it did promise, and they who transgressed it, in
suffering the penalties it did threaten. And this was the great error of the
Jews both before, but especially after, the Gospel was revealed, to expect
supernatural Expiation and Sanctification from it, as though they had no need
either of Christ or the Gospel.

. 23. In Ver. 19. we have,

1. The deficiency of the Law. 2. The efficiency of the Gospel.


The deficiency of the Law is, that it made nothing perfect: The efficiency or
efficacy of the Gospel, that by it we draw nigh to God. That the Law made
nothing perfect proves, that it was weak and unprofitable: 1. By nothing,
understand no Person. 2. By perfect, to justify and sanctify upon Expiation: So
that the Argument of the Apostle in Form is this,

That which perfects nothing is weak and unprofitable.

But the Law perfects nothing:

Therefore it is weak and unprofitable.

This proves, from the non-production of the effect, the insufficiency of the
Causal power in the Law: And this is so to be understood, that the Law did
neither actually perfect, neither had any power to perfect any person. But that
which it could not effect, the bringing in of a better hope, whereby we draw
nigh to God, could fully accomplish. The profit which the erring Jew expected
from the Law was perfection, and he believed there was strength and power in
the Law to produce this effect: Yet God did never teach him so, but reserved
this excellent power unto the bringing in of a better Hope, where by better
Hope is meant the Gospel, and by bringiag in, the Promulgation of it after the
Law, and upon the Law. The Gospel is called a better Hope, because by the
Promises made therein to them who observe it, we have firm and certain hope of
perfection and sanctification and so of eternal life; and this hope is so much
the more certain, because of the blessed Spirit of God, which accompanying it,
does enable us to obey the Precepts, and seals the Promises; for it writes it
in our hearts: So that what the Law could not, the Gospel can effect. Some will
have this better Hope to be the Priesthood of Christ, but that cannot well be:
For, 1. That is opposed to the Priesthood of the Law, not to the Law it self,
which is opposed properly here unto the Gospel and the Gospel to it. 2. The
Gospel presupposes the Priesthood of Christ, and the Expiation made by the
Priesthood, and it is a means of Application and Communication of the benefits
of that Expiation: The word (...) turned bringing in seems to be taken from
Lawgivers, who bring in one Law after and upon another, either to confirm, or
intetpret, or repeal and abrogate the former, at least in part. The Gospel is a
Law of God Redeemet in and by Christ, brought in and after the Law to null and
abrogate it: The effect of this Gospel upon the Expiation made by Christ is the
Perfection, that is the Justification and Sanctification of sinful guilty Man,
whereby he is freed from the sad and woeful Consequents of Sin, and especially
from the condemning vindicative Justice of God, and eternal death, and so may
draw nigh to God: Where we must consider,

1. What it is to draw nigh to God. 2. Why this Clause is added.


To draw nigh to God is sometimes a Duty, sometimes a Reward and Privilege,
given for Christ's merit to such as perform the Duty: As it is a Duty, it is
sometimes a coming to the place where God has put his Name, and where he
vouchsafed his special presence, as in the Tabernacle and Temple he did, for to
worship him. It Is sometime a worshipping of God, or performing any divine
Service unto him; for then we pretend to leave the World and turn our backs
upon all things, and to present our selves before his Throne, as in Prayer and
other Duties. Again, it is a turning from our sins with a Resolution to forsake
them, and an engagement of our selves, and that with our whole hearts to be his
Servants and obedient Subjects: And this we cannot do effectually without Faith
in Christ, and the further we depart from sin, the nearer we draw to him, and
are more like unto him.

This is a Duty: But to have peace with God, to be reconciled to him, so as to
have free access with boldness and confidence to the Throne of Grace, where he
sits as propitiated by the Blood of Christ, and as a Father looks upon us as
his Children, is a great and gracious reward and special privilege, and
presupposes the former Duty performed, and the party performing it in the
state of Justification and Reconciliation. [For being justified by Faith, we
have peace with God, through our Lord Jesus Christ: By whom also we have
acccess by Faith into this Grace wherein we stand, etc. Romans 5. 1, 2.] To
understand this more fully, we must consider. That the words are in some sort
Metaphorical, wherein the Apostle alludes either to the giving of the Law upon
Mount Sinai, where he represented himself very terrible, as sitting in the
Throne of Justice, and not of Grace and Mercy, so as that to draw nigh unto him
was a present Death. The People must keep at a distance, only Moses might come
near, and ascend the Mount, which was a special and extraordinary favor; or he
may allude unto the legal dispensation, under which no unclean person, as a
Leper, or one defiled by touching a dead body, or some other way, might come
into the Congregation, or nigh the Tabernacle or Temple, so as to worship with
God's People before they were cleansed and purified; but upon their
purification finished, they might draw nigh, and come with the rest of God's
unpolluted Servants to Worship, and to serve their God, so as to have communion
with him, and receive mercies, blessings, and comforts from him. So, in this
place, such as are perfected, that is, justified and sanctified through Faith
by the Blood of Christ, have liberty to draw nigh to God, as to a Father, to
seek and receive mercies, and increase of Grace and heavenly Comforts, and have
sweet communion with him. Before their justification and reconciliation, they
stood at a distance from their God, and looked upon him as a consuming Fire,
and to draw near was danger, though even then they might have some hope of
mercy. They are like the Publican standing a far off, and beating upon his
Breast, and saying, Lord, be merciful to me a Sinner; but when their Consciences
are purged, and their Souls by Faith are cleansed in the Blood of Christ; they
then have liberty, and draw nigh to serve and worship God with confidence, that
he will accept their persons, prayers, and other Services. This is the drawing
nigh to God here meant; yet you must know, that these approaches are not so
nigh in this life, but that there is some distance. But in the place of Glory,
the approach shall be so near, as that it will take away all distance, and we
shall have immediate and full communion with our God.

The reason why this Clause was added, which is the second thing, is to let us
know how far more excellent the Gospel is above the Law. For by the Law, no Man
was brought nigh to God, or might approach unto him in this manner. It Is true,
they might draw nigh to the place of God's special presence, if legally clean
or cleansed; and by observation of the Law, escape some temporal Judgments,
obtain some temporal Blessings, and enjoy some earthly Comforts: yet continue
spiritually unclean, guilty, and liable to eternal penalties; be far from God
with their hearts, remain unjustified, unsanctified, and so could have no
spiritual peace with God, nor any heavenly comfort, neither could they draw
nigh to God with boldness, so as to have any near communion with him. To draw
nigh to God, as to a Father in Christ, is a far more excellent privilege, and
could not be obtained by the Law. Some do make these words a reason, to prove
that Perfection was had by the Priesthood of Christ, because by it we draw
nigh to God: And it is true, that by Christ, as a Priest, and the Gospel, we
obtain this privilege which the Law could not give us. For to draw nigh to God,
presupposes the party approaching, perfected and sanctified; and by what we
are sanctified, by that we draw nigh, and this privilege does prove perfection
by the Gospel, as the effect does prove and manifest the cause. So that the
argumentation in form is this;

By what we draw nigh to God, by that we are perfected.

But by the Priesthood of Christ and the Gospel, we are perfected.

Therefore by them we draw nigh to God.

For as we must not separate the Levitical Priesthood and the Law, so neither
must we divide the Priesthood of Christ and the Gospel. In all this discourse,
two things are observable: 1. That God did not take away the Levitical
Priesthood and the Law, till he brought in the Priesthood of Christ and the
Gospel. 2. That he took away that which was imperfect, to bring in that which
was perfect and far more excellent. And all this was done as to manifest his
wisdom, so especially his mercy and serious intention to save man: For he would
leave nothing undone, that was necessary for the completing of man's eternal
Salvation. For if the Levitical Priesthood, and the Law could have justified
Man, and so given life; He had never sent Christ, and made him a Priest, and
revealed the Gospel: For then both Christ and Gospel had been needless and
useless to that end. For as the Apostle says, If there had been a Law given,
which could have given life, verily Righteousness should have been by that Law,
Gal. 3. 21. But because both Law and Priesthood were insufficient; therefore
he decreed to bring in Christ and the Gospel, which were effectual to save.

. 24. The Apostle has hitherto proved the excellency of Christ's Priesthood
above that of Aaron.

1. Because it is after the Order of Melchisedec, which was above the Order of
Aaron, from ver. 1. to the 11th.

2. Because Perfection is by Christ's Priesthood, and not by that of Aaron's;
and by the Gospel, and not the Law.

3. Because the Levitical Priesthood and the Law were changed; Christ's
Priesthood and the Gospel having a power of perpetual Sanctification abides
for ever.

Now he draws a fourth Argument from the words of the Psalm, [I have sworn, and
will not repent.] And the form is this;

That Priesthood which is confirmed by an Oath, is more excellent then that
which is not so confirmed.

But the Priesthood of Christ was confirmed by Oath, and the Levitical
Priesthood was not.

Therefore Christ's Priesthood is more excellent.

This argument we find in these words,

Ver. 20, 21, 22. And in as much as not without an Oath, he was made Priest.
For these Priests were made without an Oath; but this with an Oath, by him that
said unto him, (The Lord swear, and will not repent, Thou art a Priest for ever
after the Order of Melchisedec.) By so much was Jesus made the Surety of a
better Testament. Where we find the major Proposition, ver. 20. the
Assumption, ver. 21. the Conclusion, ver. 22. For a Priest to be constituted by
Oath, and by the Oath of God was extraordinary: Of an Oath in general, and of
the Oath of Angels and of Men, and of God, I have formerly spoken in Chap. 9.
This was the Oath of God; the Proposition we read, ver. 20. [In as much as not
without an Oath.] The words are Ellyptical, and therefore supplied and made out
by the Translators from the following verse, where it is said, [But this with an
Oath.] Not to be made without an Oath, and to be made with an Oath are the
same; for it follows, if Christ was made with an Oath, then he was not made
without an Oath, and e co^t^^. The Negative and the Affirmative expression of
the same thing makes it more evident, and implies the greater certainty. In
this [Major] we have a twofold Comparison, one in quality, another in
quantity: In quality a dissimilitude, one Priest is made with an Oath, another
without. In quantity, He that is made with an Oath, is more excellent then he
that is made without an Oath. All this is employed in ver. 20, and 22. out of
both which the Proposition is to be made: This presupposes that Priests may be
made several ways, and in a different manner. For some may be made by divine
designation, and consecrated and confirmed by outward Rites instituted by God;
some may be made such by humane Election and Ordination, and both without an
Oath. Some may be made and consecrated in another manner, and confirmed by a
solemn Oath of the eternal God. The Apostle does take it for granted, That the
more excellent the constitution and confirmation of any Office, and in
particular of a Priest shall be, the more excellent the Officer and Priest is:
For this manner of Constitution does imply, that he receives the greater power
for some more excellent end. The Assumption follows,

Ver. 21. For those Priests were made without an Oath, but this with an Oath,
etc. THis is closed within a Parenthesis; where we have not only the [Minor],
but the proof and confirmation: The Minor denies the one Priest, and affirms
the other to be made by Oath. And the Priests, being that of Levi, and Christ,
are compared as dislike; the one as made without, the other as made with, an
Oath; this is the dissimilitude. The proof of the former part, That the
Levitical Priest was made without an Oath, is not expressed; but taken for
granted, because in his Constitution as related by Moses, the only authentical
Author, who speaks of it; there is no mention made of an Oath, which, without
all doubt, had not been concealed, if there had been any such thing. The proof
of the latter is taken out of the words of the Psalmist; where we must consider,

1. The Oath. 2. The thing confirmed by Oath.


The Oath, [I have sworn, and will not repent]; and the Apostle informs us,
That the party swearing was the Lord, the eternal Jehovah, named in the first
verse of that Psalm, and implies from thence, that the party to whom he swear
was the Lord Christ, and that the time when he swear to him, was when he was
ascended into Heaven, and set at the right hand of God. For then, when he was
possessed of his everlasting universal Kingdom, was his universal and eternal
Priesthood confirmed unto him. And this Oath was made use of for the greater
solemnity, and the stronger confirmation: And by the same he signified, that he
was infinitely pleased with that great Sacrifice, wherein he offered himself
upon the Cross, that in respect he was the fittest of all other, or rather only
fit to be this Priest; that there could never be any cause of repentance or
change, neither would there be any further need of any other Priest, because he
would fully and for ever sanctify his People, which no other Priest could do.
This was the highest and most solemn confirmation that possibly could be made,
and does fully satisfy and quiet the minds of all such as rely upon Christ. For
they need not seek their Priest, they know him, and are assured that he was
made a Priest by God, and confirmed in his Priesthood by God, this is the
confirmation; the thing confirmed is, [That Christ should be a Priest for
ever.] God might have made the Levitical Priest by Oath, and yet he might have
been changed; but if he had made him by Oath to be a Priest for ever, then he
could not have repented, that is, changed; but he must of necessity have been a
Priest for ever. Therefore you must take special notice, that God did not only
swear that Christ should be a Priest, or that he should be a Priest for a long
time, but a Priest for ever; so that there should never be any Priest joined
with him, or come after him. So that if we consider the Oath, and the thing
confirmed by this Oath, two things will be manifest: 1. That Christ's
Priesthood is personal, and settled in one single person for ever; so that he
can have no Fellow or Co-partner, nor any Successor in his Priesthood. 2.
That, by this Oath, God did limit his arbitrary, supreme, and absolute power in
this particular; and took away the use and exercise of it, and that for ever.
For now he has no power to make Christ no Priest, or take away his Priesthood
at will and pleasure: And in this God did discover his unspeakable love unto
Christ, in that he did so much honor him, and so highly reward him; and his
abundant mercy to Man. For by this Oath known unto Man, he signifies that he
shall never be destitute of a powerful and effectual Priest, able for ever to
save; and this does minister unto sinful man most sweet and heavenly comfort.
And this comfort is so much the greater, because

Ver. 22. By so much was Jesus made the Surety of a better Testament.] THat is,
by so much was Jesus a better and more excellent Priest: The words with the
20th verse make up the Major proposition; and these, with those, understood in
general, or of a Priest in general, without mention of the Levitical Priest, or
Christ, may make the proposition Categorical or a simple Axiom, which otherwise
must be Hypothetical and a compound Connex. In a simple Syllogism, the
principal part of the Question is the Consequent or Predicate, and is always
disposed in the Proposition; which, for that reason, is called the [Major],
because of the principal and greater part of the Question. But to return unto
the Text, which is the conclusion of the former Premises; wherein we must
consider two things, or rather Axioms.

1. That Christ is an excellent Priest. 2. That He is a more excellent Priest.


To explicate the former, you must know, That to be the Surety of a Covenant in
this place is to be a Priest, and this may easily appear by the Context; this
in general. In particular, we must enquire, 1. What the word (...) here used
and translated by many in this place, a Testament and in the eighth Chapter
following Ver. 6. a Covenant, does signify. 2. What it is to be a Surety of
this Testament or Covenant. 3. What Covenant or Testament is here meant. 1. The
word (...) signifies a Law, a Covenant, a Testament. To know this, we need not
consult Lexicons, as Varinus, who interprets it [(...)] a Law, or Bud^us, with
whom it signifies a Testament and Covenant: For the Scriptures of Moses and the
Prophets, translated into Greek, will tell us; that it always signifies a Law,
or a Covenant, and for the most part both: So it does in the Writings of the
Apostles and Evangelists, where it very seldom signifies the last Will and
Testament of a Man: The same thing is a Law in respect of the Precepts, and a
Covenant in respect of the Promises; for Laws are nothing else but Pacts and
Covenants between the Prince and People, and the Laws of God always have their
precepts and their promises: For, in respect of God there is a twofold
Obligation, one whereby he binds his People to Obedience, another whereby he
binds himself to reward upon Obedience performed. On the People's part, there
is also a twofold bond, the first arising from the Law, whereby they are bound
to obey or suffer; the second is from their voluntary Submission to God, and
promise of Obedience. The former is passive; this latter, active: yet these
Laws of God can never properly be called a Testament, tropically and
metaphorically they may. And because Covenants had their Sanction, not by
promises and comminations, but by some solemn Rites, and Sacrifices, and
Feasts, therefore the Obligation was so much the stronger, and the danger of
them, which should violate them, the greater: This was a Law and Covenant
between God and Man, and not only so, but a Covenant between God Redeemer and
sinful Man, of which more anon.

2. (...), turned Surety, signifies one that undertakes for another to see
something paid or performed; and though the word is not found in the New
Testament, except in this place, yet we find it three times in the Apocryphal
Books, from whence several Expressions, used by the Apostles, are taken: And we
have the Verb (...), signifying to be Surety for another, as Prove. 6. 1. and
17. 18. and 20. 16. And thus the Septuagint turn (...) thrice: And they
interpret it by (...), Genesis 43. 9. and 44. 32. Psalm. 119. 121. and this in the
Canonical Books. But Varinus tells us, that (...) is Me^^^s a Mediator; and so
it is taken here, as its expounded by the Apostle in the Chapter following; and
because a Priest does undertake to procure from God both the confirmation and
performance of the Promises unto the People, and to that end mediates between
both, therefore he is a Surety and Mediator of the Covenant; and in this
respect a Surety and Mediator of the Covenant is a Priest.

But thirdly, What Covenant is this? 1. The Text faith, it is the better
Covenant. 2. If it be the better, then there is another; for a Comparison must
be between two. 3. In the following Chapter we learn, that there were two
Covenants; the first, of the Law made with the Fathers; the second, of the
Gospel. This is that of the Gospel which is described out of Jeremy 31. of
which more at large when we come to that Text. 4. As the Levitical Priesthood
and the Law, so the Priesthood of Christ and the Gospel go together, and
cannot be separated. Thus far the first Proposition, which considers Christ
absolutely in himself, which was this, That he is an excellent Priest, because
a Surety of an excellent Covenant. What it is to be the Surety or Mediator of
this Covenant, you shall hear more at large, Chap. 8. 6.

The Comparative Proposition, which is, That Christ is a more excellent Priest,
is now to be considered. This Comparison is employed in the words, By so much
and better. So much answers to as much, Ver. 20. It Is between the Levitical
Priest and Jesus, who are compared in quantity: Where we must note, 1. That
both are excellent, because both were instituted of God. 2. That the excess and
advantage is on Christ's part, he was the more excellent. 3. The reason of the
excellency is their manner of Constitution; for the Levitical Priest was made
without, Christ with the Oath of God; and is much as a Priest made by Oath does
excel him that is made without, so much Christ is more excellent. 4. The
excellency was not only in this, that Christ was made a Priest by Oath, but
also and chiefly, because by that Oath he was made personally an everlasting
Priest of a better, far more excellent, and everlasting Covenant. This is the
fourth Argument taken out of the Psalm, to prove comparatively the excellency
of Christ's Priesthood, so that the believing Hebrews had no cause to repent
of choosing Christ to be their Priest, and depending upon him for Salvation. As
for the Socinian, who makes Christ a Surety of this Covenant, in respect of his
holy Life, miraculous Works, and Death sealing it as a testimony by his Blood;
and not in respect of his satisfaction, merit, and intercession, we shall say
something hereafter, and so proceed unto the Text following.

Ver. 23. And they truly were many Priests, because they were not suffered to
continue by reason of Death, etc.]. 25. HItherto the Apostle had proved by
several Arguments, That Christ was more excellent then the Levitical Priest;
and now he proceeds further, and has something more to say, and prove his
super-excellency. He had indeed touched upon those words, [Thou art a Priest
for ever], and seems here to repeat them; yet, if we accurately consider, it is
one thing to be a Priest for ever, and another to receive an eternal
Priesthood by a solemn Oath, which now he undertakes to manifest. So that the
Subject of three verses following, the 23d. 24th. 25th. is the eternal,
effectual, unchangeable Priesthood of Christ made such by Oath. And in them we
may observe

the Perpetuity of Christ's Priesthood. Efficacy

The Perpetuity and Immutability is affirmed, ver. 23, 24. The Efficacy, ver.
25. In ver. 23. we have the discontinuance of the one, in the 24th. the
continuance of the other. And both together manifest the difference, and so
dissimilitude, between them; and the excellency of the one above the other, and
this is done comparatively. For by comparison both the dissimilitude and the
imparity are made to appear. He begins with the Levitical Priest in this manner,

[They truly were many Priests, etc.] Where we have,

1. Their Multitude. 2. Their Mortality.


And the Mortality was the cause of their Multitude: Their Multitude was
evident, [For they were many Priests]; and their Mortality, [They died.] And
hence he inferrs, that they could not continue: for the cause why they could
not continue, was Death. The intention of the Apostle is, to inform us of an
imperfection and defect in the Levitical Priests, that they were all, and every
one of them mortal, and died one after another; and none could possess and
keep the Priesthood long, but must transmit it to another; Aaron first unto
his Son, then his Son to a third, and that to a fourth, and so to the last
High Priest. So that though they might all jointly be considered as one person
morally by fiction of Law, yet they were many men, and many Priests physically,
and so the Priesthood was continued by Succession; and though the Priest died,
yet the Priesthood continued till it was abolished. In this respect it might
be said to be immortal, as Corporations and Societies are; yet this is no
perfect immortality, nor real perpetuity. This was their imperfection; Christ's
perfection was, that he continued ever.

Ver. 24. But this man, because he con^in^uth ever, has an unchangeable
Priesthood.] THe Copulative [And] in the former verse did signify the
Connection, and that of another new argument to the former; and here the
Discretive [But] implies the difference between Christ and the Levitical
Priest, in that they were Priests, but he a Priest; they were many, he but one;
they continued not, he continues for ever. In the words we have three
propositions,

1. That Christ continues ever. 2. He has an unchangeable Priesthood. 3.
Because he continues ever, therefore he has an unchangeable Priesthood.


The Apostle may seem to reason and argue thus,

He that continues ever has an unchangeable Priesthood. But Christ
continues ever. Therefore he has an unchangeable Priesthood.


1. [This man continues ever] Where, 1. By this Man, is meant Christ, who was
truly Man, though this Man, this individual Man, was united unto the Word, so
as never any was; He was so united unto the Word, that he might truly be said
to be God. Yet, as God, he was not, he could not be a Priest; and this is
evident, if we consider either what a Priest is, or what he must do. Therefore
is it said, [This Man] continues for ever, and in another place, There is one
God, and one Mediator between God and Man, the Man, Christ Jesus, 1 Timothy 2. 5.
2. He is said to continue ever, that is, lives ever; but this is to be
understood of him as risen again from the Dead. For, before in the state of his
Humiliation he was mortal, and not only so, but dyed: Yet after the
Resurrection he became immortal, and shall never dye, but continue for ever.
For Christ being raised from the Dead, di^th no more, Death has no more
dominion over him, Romans 6. 9.

2. [This Man has an unchangeable Priest-hood], The word translated
[Unchangeable] may be understood, 1. So as though the Apostle did infer from
the words of the Psalam, [Will not repent, or change], that Christ's
Priesthood should never be abolished and changed to another Order: Or, 2.
Because it may signify not passing from one another, to conclude from this,
that Christ continues ever, that his Priesthood does not pass from him to any
other his Successor, as the Priesthood of Aaron did. And this latter seems to
be the genuine sense, because he opposes the Priesthood of Christ unto that
of Levi which did pass from one to another, so that his Priesthood did
continue in this one individual Man, who lives for ever.

3. [Because he continues ever, therefore his Priesthood is unchangeable, and
does not pass, from him to another.] This follows clearly. For if he
individually be made a Priest, and a Priest for ever; and this by Oath; and he
that was thus made, was immortal, then his Priesthood is personal, and to be
continued in him, one single person for ever. Now we enter upon the Comparison,
and make it in this form,

He that lives, and continues ever, so that his Priesthood is not
transmitted to another, is more excellent then they, who not continuing by
reason of Death, transmit their Priesthood to their Successors, who are many.

But Christ does thus continue, and the Levitical Priests do not. Therefore He
is a more excellent Priest.

. 26. This excellency is yet more, because of the efficacy of the Priesthood,
and the ability of the Priest; when perpetuity and efficacy meet in one, the
Priesthood must needs be excellent indeed. But let us hear the Apostle proving
this Efficacy.

Ver. 25. Wherefore He is able also to save them to the uttermost, or, for
ever, that come to God by him, seeing be ever lives to make Intercession for
them. THE judgment of this Text is Dianoetical, as is evident from the Illative
[Wherefore], and in form he argues thus,

He that ever lives to make Intercession for them that come to God by him, is
able to save them for ever.

But Christ ever lives to make Intercession for them, that come to God by him.
Therefore he is able to save them for ever.

Where, from his perpetual and effectual Intercession, he inferrs his ability
to save for ever; and from both his super-excellency which is principally
intended. In the words we have,

1. His ability to save them for ever that come to God by him. 2. The reason of
it, because he ever lives to make Intercession for them.


In the first we have, 1. His active power. 2. The subject upon which it works
effectually. 1. His active power, that he is able to save to the uttermost. 1.
He is able, that is, he has an active power to produce some excellent effect,
and reach some glorious end. 2. This power is not physical, but moral, nay
supernatural and divine; and that is evident from the effect, which is
Salvation; he is able to save. This Salvation is not natural or temporal, but
spiritual, and a full deliverance from sin, the greatest evil, and the most
woeful Consequents thereof; for he so delivers, that he makes the parties saved,
fully happy and blessed. 3. He might save Man, and that spiritually, and yet
but for a time; but he is able to save for ever, and this is full and complete
Salvation indeed: and it is indifferent whether the word [(...)] be turned to
[the uttermost] or [for ever]; for both are intended. Neither could Christ save
fully, and to the uttermost, except he should save for ever with an everlasting
Salvation. 2. The subject and parties, whom he thus saves, are not all and
every one, but such as come to God by him. Some will not come to God at all;
some will come to God, but not by him: But they who will be saved, must, 1.
Come to God, and none else: And, 2. Must come to God by him, and by none else.
This is the qualification and right disposition of the subject, without which
it is not capable of Salvation. For [Actus activorum sunt in passo unit and
disposito], may be applied here: For as this rule is true in natural, so it is
true in supernatural Phisophy. To come to God some times, is to turn from Sin
and Satan, to God and Righteousness; and the further we depart from Sin, the
nearer we come to God. For this coming is a spiritual and divine motion between
the terms of Sin and God; it is from Sin, and to God. Sometime it is to worship
God, which, if done aright, presupposes the former motion. When a man does
worship God, he turns his back upon all other things, and leaves all other
business and company; and turns his face, the face of his Soul to God as
Supreme Lord, and the fountain of all happiness. One part of Worship is to pray
and present our petitions unto God, wherein as we seek for many things, so
amongst others we sue for pardon. This is a principal Suit, which sinful man
has to his God; therefore to come to God in this place is by prayer, to sue
earnestly for pardon of Sin, everlasting Salvation: and the more sensible of
Sin we are, the more powerful is our prayer. Yet we may come to God, and sue
earnestly for mercy, and not speed, except we take the right way. We must
therefore not only come, but come by Him, that is, by Christ: God is not
accessible to sinful guilty man without a Mediator, who may and can satisfy
his justice, merit his favor and mercy; and will effectually intercede for
him, and plead his Cause. These things only Christ can and will do; and if we
will speed, we must believe that he alone is our Mediator, and rely upon him
alone as our only Propitiatour and Intercessour. And all such as live under the
Gospel, must rely upon him, as having suffered Death already, offered his great
Sactifice, obtained eternal Redemption, has ascended Heaven, and is set at the
right hand of God, where he is made an everlasting King and interceding Priest.
They who thus come to God by him, renounce all righteousness in themselves,
acknowledge themselves guilty and miserable Wretches, plead the Blood of Jesus
Christ, and cast themselves wholly upon his infinite mercy, which he has
merited, and God has promised, with a resolution to subject their selves
wholly to him, and obey him for ever. Thus the Saints of God did come to him by
Faith, 1. In the Seed of the Woman, who should bruise the Serpents Head. Then,
2. In Christ, as the Seed of Abraham, in whom all Nations should be blessed. 3.
In the Son of David, who should sit upon his Throne, and reign for ever and
ever. 4. In him, as exhibited and glorified. The faith of the former was but
implicit, the faith of these last is more explicit, clear, and distinct. This
is his ability to save wholly, and to the uttermost.

2. The reason of this is, Because He ever lives to make Intercession for
then. Where we must consider, 1. What it is to make Intercession. 2. For whom
this Intercession is made.

1. To intercede, is to sue, plead, and solicit for another; and so in
general it is taken here. This Intercession presupposes, that he is immortal,
is in Heaven, appears continually before his Father's Throne, for all his
Clients in the Court of Heaven. He has great interest in the supreme Judge, as
a most beloved Son before a Father, sitting in the Throne of Grace: He sues for
Pardon and Salvation, He pleads his own Blood and Propititation, his Father's
Promise, his Clients Faith; and except he should plead his Propitiaion, he
could not make the cause of his Client good. Therefore we have his Intercession
and Propitiation joined together; for he is our Advocate with the Father, and
the propitiation for our Sins, 1 John 2. 1, 2. This is directly against the
Socinian.

2. The parties for whom he pleads are they, who come to God by him; for it is
in vain, and against the rules of that Court to plead for any others, who are
impenitent and unbelieving. For though the Scripture says, He died for all, to
make their sin's re^sissible; yet it no where says, He makes Intercession for
all, to obtain actual Remission and Salvation. For his Blood and Sacrifice does
merit Remission, the Covenant does promise it to Believers; Faith makes us
immediately capable and justifiable, and by virtue of the Promise gives us
right; Christ's Intercession obtains actual pardon. These, who come to God by
him, are his Clients, and he undertakes their cause, and is always ready to
carry it for them. The reason why Advocates were appointed by the imperial
Laws, as Civilians tell us, was to supply the defects of such Clients, as could
not always be present, were ignorant of the Law, and could not manage their
own cause before the Judge. So the imperfection of our prayers, our
unworthiness, and our many defects gave occasion to the supreme and universal
Lord and Judge out of his abundant mercy to appoint Christ Jesus
Advocate-General in the Court of Heaven, and to make our Justification to
depend not only upon his death suffered on Earth, but his intercession made in
Heaven. He is that Angel, which John saw in Heaven, who came and stood by the
Altar having a Golden Censer, and there was given unto him much Incense, which
he should offer [or add unto it] the prayers of all Saints upon the Golden
Altar, which was before the Throne, Rev. 8. 3. This is an allusion to the
Levitical Priest, offering Incense in his Golden Censer, upon the Golden Altar
before the Throne or Mercy-seat of God, and praying for the People. And in this
he was a Type of Christ making such Intercession in Heaven, as that the prayers
of penitent Sinners perfumed with the Incense of his merits, and offered unto
God the Supreme Judge by him, prove most effectual. In that place it is
observable, that he offers only the prayers of Saints; and in another place he
makes Intercession only for the Apostles, and such as by their word should
believe in him, Joh. 17. 9, 20. Saints and Believers, are they who come to God
by him. And this is our Duty, 1. To come to God and him alone for remission and
eternal Salvation; for they are found in him, and in him alone, and no where
else. 2. We must come to him by Christ, as our only Propitiatour and
Intercessour, who alone can and will effectually plead our cause, and make it
good. And as this is our Duty, so upon the performance of it, this will be the
comfort of all penitent Sinners, who groan under the heavy burden of their
Sins, and sigh, and long, and pray for Salvation. 1. That Christ will certainly
plead for them, and by his Intercession obtain their everlasting Salvation. And
why should poor believing Sinners quake and tremble at the Bar of God, seeing
Christ does plead their Cause; which is more then if all Saints and Angels, and
the blessed Virgin, the Mother of our Savior, should pray for him. And why
should be fear the Trial, or, upon the Trial, Damnation or eternal Death? For
who shall lay any thing to the charge of God's Elect? It is God that
justifirth: Who is he that condemns? It is Christ that died, yea rather that
is risen again, who is even at the right hand of God, who also makes
Intercession for us, Romans 8. 33, 34. It was expedient, as he said to his
Disciples, That Christ should go away, and that to his Father's House; that as
a Priest and Advocate he might be ever ready in that Court of Heaven to plead
our Cause. His presence and his perpetual Intercession there, is far more
beneficial to us, then his bodily presence here on Earth: it is not only
beneficial, but necessary. For when we have sinned, what should we do, if we
had not him our righteous Advocate and Propitiatour with his Father? we were
redeemed indeed by his Death, but we are saved and justified by his Life;
because he ever lives to make Intercession for us, and will fully and for ever
save us. For because he is a perpetual and effectual Intercessour, therefore he
is so able fully and for ever to save even all that come to God by him; and
this is a clear proof of his excellency above the Levitical Priest.

. 27. Now the Apostle seems to have finished his Discourse upon that excellent
Text, [I have sworn, and will not repent, Thou art a Priest for ever after the
Order of Melchizedec, Psalm. 110. 4.] and to conclude in these words following,

Ver. 26, 27. For such an High Priest became us, who is holy, harmless,
undefiled; separate from Sinners, and made higher then the Heavens. Who needs
not, etc. Which words may be handled, 1. Absolutely in themselves: 2.
Considered in their connection and reference to the former. But I will begin
with the coherence and connection, which is difficult to be known, as appears
by the different ^pinion; of Expositors upon the place. For some think it is a
Conclusion; and as it is the last part and close of the Chapter, it may be so
called, for in this sense the word is sometimes taken, yet this is no
proposition inferred from former premises. Others conceive, that the Apostle
proceeds by other Arguments to prove the superexcellency of Christ; and this is
true, for so he does. Others imagine, that these words give a reason why there
must be such a Priest as lives for ever to make Intercession for us; for such a
Priest became us, and none other would serve our turn. Others judge a reason to
be given here why the Intercession of Christ was so powerful; and that is from
his excellent qualification, and his pure unspotted Sacrifice. And it is very
certain, that his Intercession had not been so effectual without this
qualification of the person, and the excellency of his Sacrifice. Though all
these things may be true, yet something is to be observed; and upon serious
condesiration we shall find, that the Apostle has not done with his Text in
the Psalmist, but has something more to say upon it, and that he does in these
words. It was well observed by the Rhemists, that the Apostle scanneth every
word of Psalm 110. 4. And there was one word more to be further examined. For
we have heard, 1. Of Melchizedec. 2. Of another Priest after his Order to arise
after the Levitical Priest. 3. That he is a Priest for ever. 4. That he is made
by Oath a Priest immortal, and living for ever. Yet in all this here is no
mention of the person, who he is that is thus made, not what his qualification
was, nor of the time when he was thus made, and why he was so confirmed. But in
these words he satisfices us in all these particulars, as is employed and
presupposed in that very Psalm. 1. The party was David's Lord, [For the Lord
said unto my Lord,] ver. 1. Who was above David, not only because of his union
with the Word, but because he was advanced to far higher dignity, and invested
with far greater power, and was the Son of God who lives for ever. 2. His
qualification was excellent; For he was holy, harmless, undesiled, and separate
from Sinners. 3. The time, when he was thus made High Priest for ever, and that
by Oath, was after that he had offered one Sacrifice, not many; for the People,
not for himself; once, not often: of everlasting virtue, not effectual for some
petty expiation for a time, and after he was risen, ascended, and set at the
right hand of God. 4. The reason why he was thus made such a Priest, was, not
only his excellent qualification, and his immortality upon his Resurrection,
but because he had offered up himself without spot unto God. That this is the
intention of the Apostle, will appear by the last words of the Chapter: But to
enter upon the words,

Ver. 26. For such an High Priest became us, who is holy, harmless, undesiled,
separate from Sinners, and made higher then the Heavens.] IT may be truly said
with Junius, That in these words, with those in the verse following, Christ is
circumscribed or described, 1. From his Person; 2. From his Ministry. For his
Person, he had all the perfections of a Priest; for his Service, he was entered
the holy place of Heaven to plead his excellent Sacrifice for all his Saints.
For his Perfections,

[He was holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from Sinners.] These are
perfections which were required in the Levitical High Priest, so far as humane
frailty was capable. But they agreed to Christ exactly, and in a far higher
degree then they did agree unto any, even the best of them. And though the
words may signify several qualities different at lest in respect; yet they make
but one perfect qualification of this Priest, who was holy, as Man, in his
Conception, Birth, Life, Death; as innocent and harmless as the new born Child,
never tainted or stained with the lest Sin, and so separate from Sinners: that
though he did converse with them to convert them, yet he was far from being
drawn to sin by them, or partaker of sin with them, or any ways guilty by his
presence amongst them. All these do signify, that he was both habitually and
actually more virtuous and righteous then ever any was; and far more free from
any vicious quality, habit, act, then any Priest on Earth, or Angel in Heaven
ever was; and therefore was the fittest of all others to be a Priest, as being
more like and nearer unto God, then ever any other. In this respect he was more
fit then any to draw nearer unto God, as one that had the greatest interest in
him. And therefore,

[He was made higher then the Heavens.] For he ascended far above all Heavens,
where he ever lives and keeps his Residence; and being entered into that holy
and glorious Sanctuary, he was made King to Reign, and by Oath confirmed an
everlasting Priest to officiate there, and make his great Sacrifice effectual
and actually beneficial to all true Believers. And God advanced him not only
above the highest place, but above all the Angels and Inhabitants of that
glorious Palace. His work in this Temple is to make Intercession, not to
Sacrifice, for,

Ver. 27. He needed not daily as those Highpriests to offer Sacrifice, first
for his own sins, and then for the People's: for this he did once, when he
offered up himself.] THis Text, though here brought in upon the By, and handled
of purpose and more at large, Chap. 9. and 10. is concerning one of his
chiefest Services, which was his great Sacrifice, wherein he far excelled all
the Levitical Priests in several respects; for in this,

1. He offered Himself, whereas they offered Bullocks and Goats. 2. He offered
not for his own, but the Peoples sins; but they offered, first for their own,
then the Peoples sins. 3. He offered but once, they daily and often.


Therefore is it said, That this man Christ, after he had offered one Sacrifice
for sins for ever, sat down at the right hand of God: From henceforth
expecting till his Enemies be made his Footstool, Chap. 10. 12, 13. Where it is
observable, That this Sacrifice was of that eternal efficacy, as that he needed
not to offer any more, but only to enter into the Sacrary of Heaven and make
Intercession, and plead this Sacrifice for every penitent and believing Sinner.
And these words are added to the former, [That he was holy, harmless,
undefiled, and separate from Sinners, made higher then the Heavens.] 1. To
signify that the reason why this Sacrifice was of so great virtue, was,
because the Priest was so holy and devoid of sin, that he had no need to offer
for himself, as not having any infirmity, which the best of the former Priests
had. 2. To show why, upon this offered, he was advanced above the Heavens. 3.
To manifest the time, when he was by Oath confirmed a Priest for ever after the
Order of Melchizedec, and that was after he had offered this Sacrifice, and was
set at the right hand of God in the highest Heavens. In these words we may
note, 1. His excellent qualification, whereby he was free from all sin. 2. His
pure unspotted Sacrifice, and offering of himself. 3. His exaltation above the
Heavens upon the same, so that he had no need to offer any Sacrifice again. And
these things were so ordered of God, that one should be subordinate to another;
the first to the second, and that to the third. For without this qualification,
he could not have offered so perfect a Sacrifice; without this Sacrifice thus
offered, he could not have entered the Sanctuary of Heaven, neither could his
Intercession have been so powerful to save. No, God did not swear unto him, and
by Oath make him a Priest for ever, but as so qualified; and as by virtue of
that qualification, having offered so perfect a Sacrifice, and as by virtue of
this Sacrifice having entered Heaven. This man, and thus considered was he, who
by the Oath of the everlasting God, was made an everlasting Priest. And in the
Text we might, as formerly, observe, 1. The similitude. 2. The dissimilitude
and difference. 3. The superexcellency. 1. The similitude; they were Priests,
Christ was a Priest; they offered Sacrifice, Christ offered Sacrifice. 2. The
dissimilitude; they were many, he but one: they offered often, he but once;
they offered Bulls and Goats, and other things; he, himself; they offered for
themselves and the People, he offered not for himself as having no infirmity,
but only for the People. 3. The superexcellency of Christ above them,
especially in two things: 1. That he needed not offer for himself, as being
without sin. 2. He needed not to offer often for the People, but only once; and
by that one Sacrifice once offered, he did infinitely far more then they did or
could do by their daily offerings. This superexcellency also did appear both in
his perfect qualification, and his exaltation above the Heavens. These things
are so plain in these Enthymatical words, that there is no need to reduce them
to the precise form of a Syllogism, or Syllogisms, according to the rules of
Logic.

The first words of these two verses 26, 27. which are handled last, are these,
[For such an High Priest became us], wherein we must consider,

1. What [such] an High Priest is. 2. How and in what sense he is said to
[become us.]


1. [Such] an High Priest is one who is described from,

1. His Qualification. 2. His one perfect Sacrifice. 3. His being made higher
then the Heavens.


For, 1. He must be pure and holy without any sin, or else he cannot offer a
pure unspotted Sacrifice; which being offered, is able to purge the Conscience,
and expiate the sins of the People for ever. 2. If he do not offer such a
Sacrifice, he cannot enter into the holy place of Heaven, as the High Priest
without Blood could not enter the earthly Sanctuary. 3. Except he enter Heaven,
he cannot be ready there to make Intercession for us.

2. Such a Priest does [become us.]

[To become] is, 1. To be sit, suitable, convenient. 2. To be useful and
profitable. 3. Sometimes to be necessary. All these significations are here
intended: But to whom is he so convenient, profitable, necessary? even to us.
To understand this, we must consider what our condition is: It Is sinful,
miserable; for we are guilty, polluted with sin, liable to Death, have no
access to God, and at a great distance from eternal Life; and that which is
worst of all, we are senseless of this sad condition; and if we once know it, we
are hopeless, helpless. We cannot propitiate God, or sanctify our selves, or
come near the Throne of God's Justice; and except we find one that is fit to
mediate and deal with God in our behalf, we perish utterly and for ever. For
our own prayers and offerings, will not be excepted; they can do us no good:
The Levitical Priests have sins and infirmities of their own, and they can
offer nothing but the Blood of Beasts. And how can these purge the conscience?
There must be a Priest, an High Priest, and he must be without sin, and offer
an unspotted Sacrifice far more noble, precious, and excellent, then that of
Beasts, and enter into the heavenly Sacrary; otherwise he can do us no good:
such an High Priest only Christ is. Therefore our condition was such, as none
but he was convenient for us, could do us good, and save us. And seeing he, and
he alone was such, and without him we must needs perish; therefore he was
necessary to our Salvation. For we must of necessity have such an High Priest,
as shall by his purity, and his spotless Sacrifice satisfy God's Justice, merit
his favor and enter Heaven; and by his Intercession procure the actual
remission of our sins, and our full and everlasting Salvation. And how much are
we bound to acknowledge the unspeakable mercy of our God, who knowing our sad
condition, pitying us, and resolving to save us, provided such an High Priest
as was convenient for to save us, and reconcile us to himself for ever. But we
unworthy wretches, being ignorant and senseless of our sin, guilt, and misery,
do not understand what need we have of Christ; nor do we seek him and long
after him, nor praise our God for his greatest love in Providing him for us.

. 28. But who is this High Priest? and how? and when was he made? It could not
be the Levitical High Priest, for he had infirmities; therefore it must be some
other, and the Text following will inform us who he is, how he was made, and
when he was constituted, in these words;

Ver. 28. For the Law made men Highpriests, which have infirmity; but the word
of the Oath, which was since the Law makes the Son, who is consecrated for
evermore.] BY these words we understand, 1. Who he was that was made a Priest
for ever after the Order of Melchizedec; and it was not the Levitical
High Priest, but the Son. 2. How he was made, and that was, by the word of the
Oath. 3. When he was made, and that was after the Law; and in them he finisheth
his discourse upon Psalm 110. 4. They have some coherence with the former
words; but how, is not so clear. Yet they have much agreement with the Text
immediately antecedent, which makes mention of Priests which must offer first
for their own sins; and of a Priest, who being free from all sin, had no need
to offer for himself, but only for others, and that but one Sacrifice once, and
the same so perfect, that it was of eternal virtue. And here he gives a reason
by the rational Conjunction [for] why they had need to offer for themselves,
and that is, because he had infirmity, and the Law made no better Priests. And
also implies another reason why this other Priest, made by the word of the
Oath, had no need to do any such thing, and it is because he had no infirmity,
but was consecrated for evermore. The former Priests did not become us, would
not serve our turn; therefore God abolished that Priesthood, and would never
confirm it by Oath; and also abrogated the Law, which had no better
Highpriests. And because the Son was free from all infirmities, and able to
finish the work of man's Salvation; therefore he pitched upon him, and gave him
an everlasting Priesthood. But let us consider the words in themselves, and we
shall find in them two divine Axioms,

1. The Law makes men Highpriests which have infirmity. 2. The word of the
Oath, which was after the Law makes the Son, who is consecrated for ever.


And here it is to be observed, That these two make but one compound Axiom, and
it is discretive, as appears by the particle [But]. Therefore we must consider,

1. The parts severally in themselves. 2. Jointly in their opposition.


In the first we have,

1. Men, which have infirmities. 2. These made Highpriests. 3. These made such
by the Law.


By infirmities are meant sins, as appears from the former verse, where it is
plainly implied, That the Levitical Highpriests had sins, because they must
offer Sacrifice first for their own sins. There is a natural and bodily, and
there is a spiritual and moral infirmity: And though Christ was not subject to
the latter, yet he had something of the former; for though he had no diseases,
yet he was subject to hunger, thirst, fainting, weariness, pain, and such like
infirmities. All men born of Adam had their bodily infirmities, and all men but
Christ have their spiritual infirmities. Yet though all have their infirmities,
yet some of them were made Priests, and some Highpriests; and they must
officiate and draw near to God, and officiate and perform religious Services,
not only for themselves, but for others. And because there were no other kind
of men free from sin, therefore the Law made such men Highpriests; and the
best and the most holy of them had their failings and lesser sins, though they
were not wicked. And whereas it is said, [the Law] made them, it is meant God in
the Law made them Highpriests; and therefore they were such by the Law of God,
instituting that Priesthood; and, by that Law making them, who were men of
infirmity, Highpriests, they were bound first to offer for themselves the
great Sacrifice of expiation, and then for, others, L^v. 16. 11, 15. and none
of them could offer up themselves without spot to God.

. 29. The second Axiom is, [That the word of the Oath, which is since the Law,
makes the Sov, who is consecrated for ever.] Where we may observe,

1. The constitution, or making of the Son a Priest for ever. 2. The word of
the Oath, which makes him such. 3. The time, when he was made such by this
Oath.


1. By Son, understand Jesus Christ; who though he be the Son of Man, yet is
the Son of God in a more eminent manner then ever any other was, is, or shall
be. It Is that Son whom God has made Heir of all things, by whom he made the
Worlds, the brightness of his Fathers Glory, and the express Image of his
Person. This Son is constituted and made a Priest for ever; for, to be
consecrated or perfect for ever is nothing else, then to be made a complete and
everlasting Priest.

2. This Son was made thus by the word of the Oath, that is, God by the word of
this Oath, did constitute and make him such. The word of the Oath is, Thou art
a Priest for ever after the Order of Melchizedec; for this did signify and
declare the Will of God concerning him. The Oath was that, whereby God did
confirm this Word, and signify his Will, that the Priesthood of the Son should
remain unto him, so that it should never be changed in it self, or pass from
him, or be abolished. The word did signify God's Will what Christ should be;
the Oath did signify that this his Will should stand imm^table for ever. Yet
the word of the Oath may be nothing else but the words of the Psalmist, [I have
sworn, and will not repent, Thou art a Priest for ever after the Order of
Melchizedec.] Where we have, 1. The thing, Christ's everlasting Priesthood, 2.
The confirmation of this thing, which is by Oath, the Oath of God.

3. This word of this Oath was after the Law. For, 1. The prophesy that God
would thus swear unto his Son in future times, was four hundred years and more
after the Law. 2. The Oath it elf was sworn actually above a thousand years
after the Law, and then when Christ was ascended into Heaven, and set at the
right hand of God, and that is now a thousand six hundred years and above,
before these present times. So that whereas the Apostle had handled the several
parts of his great Text Psalm. 110. 4. severally, now in these words he sums and
knits them all up together in one divine Axiom, informing us who this
everlasting Priest was, and the time when he was fully constituted.

After the several parts considered severally, follows the consideration of
them jointly in their opposition, which is easily understood. For, 1. The
former Highpriests were but Servants, but Christ is the Son. 2. They had
infirmities, Christ had none. 3. They were made Priests by the Law, Christ by
the word of the Oath. 4. The Law was before, the word of the Oath after. 5.
They were made Priests without an Oath, but for a time; Christ was made with an
Oath, a Priest for evermore. So that in these words, we have in brief all the
former supercellencies of Christ summed up, and to this end, that these Hebrews
should not rely upon the Law and legal Priesthood, which God in the very
constitution of it, intended to continue but for a time; but upon Christ, who
was able to save them for ever, and therefore by Oath made an everlasting
Priest.

CHAP. VIII.
Concerning the Tabernacle or Sanctuary wherein Christ must minister, the
Service he must perform, and the Covenant whereof he must be Mediator.. 1. ALL
do grant that the scope of the Apostle is this Chapter, as in the former, is to
demonstrate, That Christ is a more excellent Priest then Aaron, or any of that
Order; and thus it agrees with the former and the two latter Chapters. This he
does,

1. By summing up the matter of the former Chapter. 2. By producing new
Arguments.


These arguments are taken from his ministration, as some conceive; and this
ministration is proved to be more excellent from,

1. The place, which is Heaven. 2. The Offering and Service. 3. The Covenant,
whereof he is Mediator.


Janius thinks, that the Author continues his Discourse concerning the
vocation of this great High Priest, and determines the subject of this part to
be the Office to which he was Called, and proceeds to speak of the execution of
this Office in the Chapter following, and not before. But this is not accurate,
because the vocation of Christ, to be a Priest after a certain Order, made him
an Officer, and gave him a sacerdotal Office. But if he mean by Office,
Officiation, Function, and the exercise of his pontifical Power, then it is
true, that this is the subject of this Chapter. The principal matter of the
ninth, and a great part of the tenth Chapter is concerning one principal piece
of his Service and Mistration, which was the great Sacrifice of himself, and
the excellent virtue and eternal efficacy of the same. So that the proper
subject of this part is Christ's ministration or officiation; yet this must be
rightly understood, for the Apostle does not here instance in, or insist upon,
any work or service in particular of his Priesthood, but informs us of certain
rules of this officiation. But to return to the words themselves, we thus read.

Ver. 1. Now of the things which we have spoken, this is the Sum; We have such
an High Priest, who is set on the right hand of the Throne of the Majesty in
the Heavens. THese words are said to be a Transition, and it is certain they are
a part of one: A Transition is perfect or imperfect; the perfect is defined to
be Epilogus dictorum, and Propositio dicendorum; for it not only informs in a
few words what has been said already, but also proposes the Subject of the
ensuing Discourse: These words are the first part of a Transition; wherein we
may consider,

1. That some things were spoken already. 2. The Sum of them. 3. The things
spoken and sum'd up.


1. Somethings were spoken and delivered already in the three former Chapters,
especially in the seventh, where the Apostle had discoursed at large, and that
with great Wisdom and profound Learning, and discovered and unfolded many
excellent truths concerning the Priesthood of Christ, contained in certain
Texts of the Old Testament. A Transition is a Rule of Art, and the first part
of it does necessarily presuppose something already handled and more largely
treated upon.

2. These things spoken of already are sum'd up: The word in the Original for
the most part is, a Sum or brief Contraction of many things into few; and the
Verb signify, to contract, abridge, or epitomize. We find it once used in the
Apocryphal Books Ecclus. 32. 8. Let thy Speech be short, comprehending much in
few words. The words in the Greek (...). Where we have the definition of a Sum,
as here it is taken; not for a Sum of Money, as Act. 2^. 28. but of words. It is
a speaking of many things in few words; for, when the things are many, and our
words expressing them are few, then we may be said to sum up and contract our
Speech: Yet this may be done, when nothing has been formerly delivered; but as
it is a part of a Transition, this Contraction presupposes something spoken
formerly and at large: Some think the word signifies the chief and principal
things formerly delivered, though we hardly find any where this signification;
yet when we contract many words into a few, we do little to purpose if we omit
the principal matters, or take in any other. A transition, whereof this is the
principal part, belongs to Logic, and is a part of Method. The use of it is,
handsomely to tie and knit the parts of a Discourse together, to give light,
and make it perspicuous, to manifest the order of things, and the dependence of
one upon another; and so it helps the apprehension, the judgment, and the
memory especially: The same is done chiefly by the Epilogue and former part,
which is the summing up of a large Discourse in a few words.

3. The things summed up, or the matter of this Sum, is, 1. That we have such
an High Priest, etc. Where we have two Propositions,

1. We have an High Priest. 2. We have such an High Priest, who is set on the
right hand of the Throne of the Majesty in the Heavens.


The Order of things, and not of the words, is,

1. There is such an High Priest. 2. He is ours.


1. He is a Priest, and he is such an High Priest, so eminent and so excellent,
t^^t he is set at the right hand of the Throne of the Majesty in the Heavens. A
Robe, a Scepter, a Sword, a Diadem, a Throne, are Ensigns and Ornaments of
Sovereign Power. To sit in the Throne of Majesty is to possess Sovereign Power
and Dominion. There is an earthly Dominion and Sovereignty, and also an
heavenly and supercelestial Majesty, which is proper to God as the Supreme,
universal, and eternal Lord. This is here to be understood: Christ, this
High Priest sits at the right hand of this Throne: As he is the Word by which
the World was made, he sits in this Throne with the Father and the Spirit, as
one God and Lord with them; yet, as Man, though assumed by the Word, he sits
but at the right hand of this Throne: And so to do, is, to possess the highest
degree of dignity and power next to that which is infinite and eternal. The
place of residence of Christ, this great High Priest, where he possesses and
exercises this power, is Heaven, whither he ascended after his Resurrection;
and it was the highest degree of his Exaltation, and a Reward of his deep
Humiliation. This Power and super-excellent Dignity agrees to him as a King,
who was fully invested with this Regal Power, when God said unto him, Sit thou
on my right hand, at which time God swear unto him, Thou art a Priest for ever
after the Order of Melchizedec: For Christ was both King and Priest; and from
the 110. Psalm. we learn, that he was first made King, and then at the same time
by Oath confirmed in his everlasting Priesthood; and these words are an
Abridgment of the first four Verses of that Psalm.

2. This High Priest is ours, for we have him. The Jews had their High Priest
ministering in the Temple at Jerusalem, and upon him they relied for their
Justification and Salvation: The Christians, and amongst others these believing
Hebrews had their High Priest, not on Earth, but in Heaven; and the same far
more excellent than the Levitical Pontiff, who might stand, and not sit, before
the Mercy-seat on Earth, not at the right hand of the heavenly and eternal
Throne. This was proper to Christ, who is the High Priest of all Christians,
upon whom they rely for eternal Salvation; and all such as are sincere
Believers have Interest in him as in their own: For he was made and consecrated
for them, to benefit and save them, and none other. And if we knew his
excellency, and being sensible of our sin and misery, would rely upon him with
our whole hearts, we might find unspeakable Comfort in him: It Is our honor
that we have an High Priest at the right hand of God, and our great happiness,
that he is able to save us for ever, who come to God by him: But our Ignorance
of his excellency, the senslesness of our sins, and the want of a true and
lively Faith, deprive us of those inestimable benefits we might certainly
expect from him. These things are the Sum of all that excellent Discourse in
the former Chapter, upon the Text of Psalm. 110. 4. For, that Christ 1. Is a
Priest after the Order of Melchizedec. 2. That he is a Priest for ever. 3. That
he is made such by Oath. 4. That he, after his one Sacrifice once offered, was
higher than the Heavens. 5. That he, being the Son, consecrated for evermore,
needs offer no more Sacrifice, but remains at the right hand of God, and lives
for ever to make Intercession, and by this exercise of his Regal and Sacerdotal
power makes his Sacrifice eternally effectual for his Saints, are all comprised
in these words.

. 2. If Christ be an High Priest he must officiate, and that in some place, and
so be the Minister of some Sanctuary or Temple, and so he is: For

Ver. 2. He is a Minister of the Sanctuary, and of the true Tabernacle, which
the Lord pitched, not Man. THese words may be so understood, as to be the
latter part of the transition: Yet, whether they be so or no, they plainly
speak of Christ's officiation in some Sanctuary: For in them we have

1. A Sanctuary and Tabernacle. 2. A true Tabernacle, pitched by God, not Man.
3. A Minister of this Sanctuary, this Tabernacle.


1. A Sanctuary, or an holy place, for the most part with men, is a place or
Building made by Man, and dedicated unto God, who sanctifies it by his special
Presence: For the presence of a Deity makes a Temple or a Sanctuary; and the
special Presence of the true God, manifested by some Divine effect, makes a
Sanctuary of the true God. For when God by a bright Cloud entered the
Tabernacle, and after the Temple; then he took possession of those places, and
made them his House. The word in the Original [(...)] is plural, yet may be
turned Sanctuary, not Sanctuaries, because we find it so used by the
Septuagint. The reason why it is plural is, because in the Tabernacle and the
Temple there were diverse parts and partitions, and every one of them were holy,
yet altogether made but one house. Thus it is used Exodus 29. 30. Ez^k. 44. 11.
Lev. 20. 3. and 24. 12. and in many other places. One part of this Sanctuary is
that within the second Veil, which is the principal and most holy, and
signified the holy place of Heaven, which here is chiefly meant. That Is a true
Sanctuary and Temple, and that in a most eminent manner, because of God's
eminent and more glorious presence in that place: So the word signifies, Chap.
9. 12. and is so interpreted Ver. 24. ibid. Tabernacle is here the same with
Sanctuary, and so it might be called, because the whole Building was holy; yet
in the Tabernacle, that part within the first, and that within the second Veil,
were the Sanctuary more properly: Yet these were called Tabernacles by a
Synechdoche, and the first was called the Sanctuary or Holy, the second the
Holiest of all, Heb. 9. 2, 3. And this is the difference between a Tabernacle
and Temple in the Type, that the one was removable, the other fixed. But what is
here to be understood by Tabernacle, is much controverted; Some will have it to
be the Church both Militant and Triumphant; and especially the Triumphant,
because of Christ's bodily presence there: Some conceive that it is the Body of
Christ, wherein the Schekina, or the divine Glory and Majesty, fixed it is
habitatation; Thus Junius, Beza, and others following them, expound it, and
give their reasons for that Interpretation: But their Arguments are of little
or no force at all, as, if it were worth the while, might be easily made
evident; Others, and the most for number, understand the Heavens mentioned in
the former Verse: And this is the most genuine sense, for the Priest did never
offer the Tabernacle, but in the Tabernacle; did not minister it, but in it.
And the Apostle seems to take his expression from Exodus 29. 30. where it is
said, That that Son which is Priest in Aaron 's stead shall put on the holy
garments seven days, when he comes into the Tabernacle of the Congregation,
to minister in the holy place, or Sanctuary. Where we have 1. A Minister that
must minister or officiate. 2. The Tabernacle of the Congregation into which he
must come. 3. The Sanctuary where he must officiate. The very same words of
Minister, Sanctuary, Tabernacle, are used by the Septuagint in that place which
the Apostle takes up in this place. And though the Body of Christ may be
called a Tabernacle, yet that is nothing except it be so taken here: And we find
the word here turned Sanctuary, signifying Heaven Heb. 9. 12. and also Ver. 24.
of that Chapter makes it more plain, where it is written, That Christ is not
entered into the holy places made with hands, which are the figures of the true,
but into Heaven it self, to appear in the presence of God for us. Where we may
observe, 1. That the word which there is turned holy places, and Ver. 12.
before, the holy place, is here translated Sanctuary. 2. That this Sanctuary,
or holy places, into which Christ entered, was not made with hands, which is the
same with not pitched by Man. 3. This place is said to be Heaven it self. 4.
That Christ does minister there by his Intercession for us, after that he had
offered his great Sacrifice, and by the Blood thereof entered into the heavenly
Sacrary within the Veil. To signify this, the inner Veil of the Temple rent
instantly upon the death of Christ, to signify that the great High Priest was
entering Heaven with his Blood.

2. The Excellency of this Tabernacle is set forth, 1. By the quality. 2. The
Cause. The Quality, it is the true Tabernacle: True is not here opposed to that
which is feigned, or nothing at all, but to the Typical Tabernacle which was a
real and true sacred Building; yet so far inferior to this, that comparatively
it might be said to be nothing, or but a shadow at the best, and this is the
Substance: For though that was glorious, and honored with God's special
presence; yet earthly things are poor to heavenly, though we who never saw the
inward glory of Heaven may admire them. The Cause is expressed assirmatively
pitched by God, negatively, and not by Man. By both which is signified the
excellency of it, far above any Work, and Building made by the power and skill
of Man: For the efficient power and skill of Man is nothing to the efficiency of
God, whose Power is almighty, and Wisdom infinite, and who has made Heaven a
far more glorious place than any on Earth.

3. Christ is the Minister of this Sanctuary and Tabernacle, to minister and
officiate in it: For every High Priest must have some Temple or sacred place,
wherein he must minister and serve: for Priesthood, Temple, and Service must
go together. When the Temple was destroyed by the Chaldeans, the High Priest
might pray, but he could not offer Sacrifice, burn Incense, expiate Sin by
entering the Holy of Holies with blood. These Services were confined by God's
Institution to that House and sacred Building after once it was consecrated;
Neither could they perform such Services till it was rebuilt and dedicated
again: Neither have the unbelieving Jews any High Priest, that can do any such
thing since the second Temple was demolished by the Romans. (...) is a
Minister, (...) is to minister and serve; and these two words are often used by
the Septuagint; For so they turn several Hebrew words, and especially (...) and
(...) which both signify to serve in general, but many times to serve God the
Supreme Lord, and to worship him. And though the performance of this Service be
the general Duty of all, even of private Persons; yet there are certain parts
of this Service proper to the Priests, and some to the High Priest; who is not
a private but a public Minister, as the rest of the Priests be, and mediates
between God and the People, and by whom the People offer their Services to God.
The same word [(...)] is used in the New Testament, and does signify not only
to perform the Levitical but also the Evangelical Service, and from this Verb
comes [Liturgy] a Form or Directory for the Worship of God. In this place, a
Minister is 1. A Priest. 2. An High Priest. 3. The great High Priest of the
heavenly Sanctuary, Christ Jesus. And here it might be observed, that a
Minister is not a contemptible but an honorable Title, as given not only to
the Levitical Pontiff, but to the Apostles, and to Christ himself. The Text
thus explained, contains an Argument to prove the excellency of Christ above
the Legal High Priest; for he indeed was a Minister, and did officiate, yet he
did this only in an earthly Sanctuary and Tabernacle, but Christ officiates as
an High Priest in Heaven: And this second Verse may be part of the former Sum
and Abridgment, and a Conclusion deduced from the former words. For, if Christ
be an High Priest in the Heavens, then he must needs be the Minister of an
heavenly Sanctuary; yet it is so deduced from the former, that it brings in new
matter, and gives occasion of a new Discourse concerning Christ's Ministration;
for if he be a Minister of a Sanctuary he must officiate, and amongst other
things offer something to God.

Ver. 3. For every High Priest is ordained to offer Gifts and Sacrifices;
wherefore it is of necessity that this Man have somewhat to offer.

. 3. THis Text must be examined, 1. In its relation to that which goes before.
2. In it self. 3. In reference to what follows. First, It relates to Chap. 5.
1. where in the Description of an High Priest we have the very words: For, 1.
He must be taken from amongst men. 2. Ordained for men in things pertaining to
God. 3. Thus he is ordained for to offer both Gifts and Sacrifices: For there
we have his Election, Ordination, and Ministration. And hitherto the Apostle,
having spoken of his Election and Ordination, now begins to treat of his
Ministration, in offering Gifts and Sacrifices for Sin. The nearer Connection is
with the Text immediately antecedent, and, 1. With the word Minister; for if he
be a Minister, he must minister and officiate by offering. 2. With the word
Tabernacle: For, if that signify the Body of Christ, as Beza, Junius, and Dr.
Goug^, with diverse others, do understand the place, He must have his Body to
offer: But of this I have said something already and shall have occasion to say
more hereafter.

The words in themselves are discursive; for the Apostle argues thus,

Every High Priest being ordained to offer Gifts and Sacrifices, must have
somewhat to offer.

But Christ is ordained an High Priest to offer, etc.

Therefore he must have somewhat to offer.

The principal part of this Syllogism is the Conclusion, That Christ of
necessity must have somewhat to offer. The necessity is, that if he have not
somewhat to offer, he cannot be an High Priest according to God's Ordination:
For though he may be one Titulary, yet Effectively he cannot. This necessity is
from divine Ordination, which has determined that an High Priest must offer,
but to offer without something to be offered is impossible. Besides, he must
offer something that God will accept for that end that God intended that
Office, which was to make Reconciliation for the sins of the People, and
propitiate his Majesty offended by their iniquities': The Premises from whence
this conclusion is inferred were handled before: The Proposition we find
expressly, Chap. 5. 1. The Assumption was the Subject of the former Chapter.
When it is said that he must have somewhat to offer, it is meant, that the thing
he must offer and have to offer, must be not only something that was much
different from that which the Levitical High Priest did offer, but also
something far more excellent, and such as was suitable to the Sanctuary whereof
he was a Minister, which was Heaven: What this was, which he had to offer, and
which he offered, we shall hear after, Chap. 9.

And in this respect the words refer to that which follows in the 9. and 10.
Chapters. For in this place the Author informs us only, that seeing he was an
High Priest, and a Minister of a Sanctuary, and the chief part of Ministration,
was to offer, therefore he must have somewhat to offer: But what this somewhat
to be offered is, or that he offered it, is not here so much as mentioned, as
yet. For the intention of the Author is first to prove in general his Ministry
to be the more excellent, 1. Because of the more excellent Sanctuary. 2. Of his
more excellent offering. 3. Of the more excellent Covenant, whereof he is a
Minister.

. 4. After it was proved, That Christ's ministry was more excellent in respect
of the Sanctuary; in the next place it is made evident, that he is more
excellent in respect of his Offering. This he does in these words,

Ver. 4. For if he were on Earth, he should not be a Priest, seeing that there
are Priests that offer Gifts according to the Law.

Ver. 5. Who serve unto the example and shadow of heavenly things, as Moses was
(...) of God, when he was about to make the Tabernacle. For see (says he) then
make all things according to the pattern showed thee in the Mount.]

THe Apostle presupposing Christ to be an High Priest, and that being such he
must be one either in Heaven or Earth: He does here, 1. Deny him to be a Priest
on Earth. And, 2. Proves his Negative. 1. He denies, in these words, [That if
he were on Earth, he should not be a Priest]; that is, an offering-Priest
according to the Law amongst the Jews. He should not, that is he could not in
respect of divine ordination. 2. The reason, whereby he proves this is in the
words following; which may be reduced to several Propositions. A^,

1. There are Priests, which offer gifts according to the Law. 2. These serve
unto the example of heavenly thing. 3. Moses was commanded to make all things
according to the pattern showed in the Mount.


The force of the first part of the reason is, because God has appointed
Priests to minister and officiate on Earth, in an earthly Sanctuary; and these
must be of the Tribe of Levi, of the House of Aaron, and not any other. Christ
was not of this Tribe, nor of this Family and House; And these of that Tribe
and Family were made Priests, and that, by God, and that exclusively to all
others, and by that Institution; None but they had power to offer Gifts: So
that Christ could no ways be a Levitical Priest. The force of the second part
of the reason is, because, They served according to the example and shadow of
heavenly things; for so the words may be turned. Where, 1. To serve, is to
officiate as Priests, and, in particular, in offering Gifts and Sacrifices. 2.
Their service was not spiritual and heavenly, so as to expiate sin, and purge
the conscience. 3. Their service was but earthly and carnal, and a shadow and
imitation of heavenly things. 4. All this was according to Gods Command, which
we find, Exodus 25. 4. Where Gods charge to Moses was this, Look that thou make
them after the pattern which was showed thee i^ the Mount; which words imply,
that Moses, in matters of Religion, and in manner of God's Service, did nothing
of his own Head, but that he had his direction in all things from God; who made
him to understand all things concerning the Tabernacle, Priests, and Services,
fully and perfectly, so that he was able to give directions and perfect
instructions unto others, who were capable of them. This does teach us an
excellent lesson, and that is, Not to reach any Doctrine, but that which is
revealed and confirmed from Heaven; nor perform any thing in his Service, but
according to his Institution. Humane Inventions, in matter of Religion, though
they may have a fair color of devotion and reverence, are not tolerable. God
will not endure that any Man should devise any thing in his Worship; for it is
an high presumption. And as Moses was bound to give direction according to the
pattern, so the Priests in their Service were bound to follow Moses directions.
Amongst other things, which Moses according to the pattern did prescribe, one
was, the service and offering of the Priests; and they could not lawfully
officiate but according to his prescription, both for the matter and manner of
their offerings. The pattern did only direct him to prescribe, as an earthly
Tabernacle, so carnal offerings, and none other: yet these, though but shadows,
yet were shadows, and obscure significations of heavenly things. For the
Sanctuary was a shadow of an heavenly Sanctuary, the Priest of a better Priest,
the Service of a far better Service. Therefore the pattern it self showed in
the Mount, must have some agreement with these heavenly and better things. As
the former part of the reason was in respect of the Priest that must offer, so
this latter is in respect of the service and offering, and both make but one
reason. And it is to this purpose, That as Christ, if he had been on Earth,
could not have been a Priest, because, there was other Priests instituted by
God; so neither could he have offered Gifts and Sacrifices prescribed by the
Law, which were shadows of heavenly things. For none but the Levitical Priests
might offer these: Hence it follows, That seeing Christ being an High Priest,
must have somewhat to offer; and he could not be a Priest on Earth to offer
such things as the Levitical Priests did offer: therefore he must have some
other thing, and the same far more excellent to offer, and the offering of that
was a far more excellent service; and therefore Christ's Ministry was far more
excellent then the Ministry of the Levitical Priest. And because their service
and offering was a shadow of an heavenly service and offering, therefore
Christ's service must needs be heavenly, and far more excellent then their's.
That this is the intention of the Apostle, is employed in the words following,

Ver. 6. But now he has obtained a more excellent Ministry, by how much also
he is the Mediator of a better Covenant, established upon better promises.]

. 5. BY these words, [He has obtained a better Ministry], we are given to
understand from the former Discourse of the Apostle, ver. 3, 4, 5. 1. That
Christ must have a Ministry. 2. That that Ministry of his, was far more
excellent then that of the Levitical Priest; because the Levitical Service and
Ministry was but a shadow of an heavenly Service and Ministry, which was proper
to Christ. And now the Apostle has demonstrated that Christ is a more
excellent Priest, 1. In respect of the Sanctuary, whereof he is a Minister. 2.
In respect of the ministry and offering it self, for both are heavenly. But not
content with these two Arguments, he proceeds in these words to a third, and
proves him more excellent in respect of the Covenant, where of he was a
Minister and Mediator. So that the subject of the following Discourse is that
better Covenant, whereof Christ is the Mediator; and the scope of the Author
is to prove Christ to be a more excellent Priest then the Levitical, by this
better Covenant. And to this ex^^ he,

1. Frames his argument, and then produces it. 2. Proves the Covenant, whereof
he affirms him to be Mediator, to be better. 3. He proves it to be better,


1. By the Promises, which are better. 2. By the abolition of the one, and the
stability of the other.


1. His argument in form is this;

He that is the Mediator of a better Covenant, has obtained a better Ministry.

But Christ is a Mediator of a better Covenant.

Therefore he has obtained a better Ministry.

Before we can understand the force and validity of this argument, we must
first explain the words, wherein we have,

1. A Covenant of Promises. 2. Of better Promises. 3. This Covenant established
upon better Promises. 4. A Mediator of this Covenant. 5. A Ministry.


1. The word here used in the Original, is sometimes translated a Covenant,
sometimes a Testament, though very seldom. For in the Septuagint it is used
mostly for a Covenant, and sometime for a Law or Command: And in this place, as
in many more, it so signifies a Covenant, is that the Covenant is a Law, or
implies one. A Covenant may be defined to be a Convention between parties,
mutually binding themselves upon certain terms. For in a Covenant there must
be, 1. Several parties, two at the least. 2. These parties must both agree. 3.
They agree upon certain terms, which bound and limit the agreement. 4. They
mutually bind themselves one to another for some performance, and this is done
by promises, which are voluntary obligations. The parties covenanting may be
such as were at no variance, yet free from any obligation of one to another.
They may be such as are enemies, or at difference; and then there is some need
of a Mediator, who may only intercede to bring them to terms of agreement, or
besides, that may be a Surety, and he may undertake for performance on one part
or both. It may be made between parties equal, and equally free, or between
parties unequal as Sovereign and subject. The one binds himself to protect, the
other to be faithful, subject, and obedient. A Covenant may be, 1. Private or
public; 2. Between Man and Man; 3. Between God and Man. This Covenant is
between God-Redeemer and sinful Man, and therefore between unequals. For God
may bind Man; as his Subject, to subjection and obedience, though Man never
voluntarily by promise bind himself unto God; and this he may do by a Law,
wherein we have precepts and prohibitions, binding Man to obedience, and
promises binding God to reward upon performance of obedience on Man's part, and
comminations binding Man to penalty, if he rebel or disobey. And in respect of
these promises annexed and subjoyned to the Commands, as the terms and
conditions: It may be said to be a Covenant, though it be not properly such
till Man voluntarily bind himself, as God requires him to do, and deals with
him as a rational free Creature. And these Covenants are ordinarily confirmed
by solemn Rites, as by the Blood of federal Sacrifices, Genesis 15. By
Circumcision, Genesis 17. By Blood of Sacrifices sprinkled, Exodus 24. By washing
with Water or Baptism, Matthew. 3. and 28. and many other places; and the
obligation is renewed by the Sacrament of the Eucharist. By all this it is
evident, That a Covenant is a Covenant of promises; for there is no Covenant
without Promises, neither is there any Law of God without Promises.

2. This, here meant, is a Covenant of better promises. This implies, That
there is another Covenant which has promises, but not so good either in
respect of the things promised, or the terms and conditions. This other
Covenant was that made with the Israelites in the Wilderness before Mount
Sinai, as will appear hereafter. For in that, The things promised were far
inferior to the things promised in the Gospel, and yet the terms were more
difficult. The things promised were carnal and temporal, and the condition, [Do
this, and continue in all these things.]

3. This Covenant was established upon better promises. The word [(...)] here
used [in the passive] signifies [sancio], to establish, confirm, and ratify;
because Laws are usually confirmed and made of force, and sometimes
unalterable. We read, That God said to Moses, I will give thee Tables of stone,
and a Law, and (...) which I have written, that thou may teach them, Exodus
24. 12. The word which in Hebrew signifies to teach them, is translated by the
Septuagint, [(...)], that is to estalish them solemnly by Blood sprinkled upon
the Book, the Altar, and the People. This was properly a Sanction, and the word
there used by the Septuagint is here taken up by the Apostle.

4. Christ is the Mediator of this Covenant: To be a Mediator in this place,
is not merely to mediate as Moses did between God and Israel. For a Mediator
is needful not only when there is a difference, but when there is a distance
and great imparity between the parties confederating, and this Christ might be
as a Prophet. But to be a Mediation in this place, is far more. For the
parties, God and sinful Man, were not only at a vast distance of imparity, but
at a great difference of enmity. And God stood upon these terms, 1. That his
justice must be satisfied, and that by Blood, and the Death of some innocent
and emineut person, and the repentance and reformation of sinful Man: and he
stood so strictly upon these terms, that except these were performed, he would
neither promise, not give Remission and Salvation, but Man must lie under his
eternal displeasure. Christ's mediation by entreaties, or interpretations and
declarations of the will of both the party, could do no good; to be hately a
Prophet would not serve the turn: Therefore to mediate in this place, is to be
a Surety [(...)], as you heard in the former Chapter. And as [Sponsor] and
Surety, he first undertake to satisfy God's Justice by his own purest Blood,
and so make an ar^^^ment and way for God's metoy to make promises upon easy
terms; and for the performance of the terms and conditions, he, by this Blood,
merits the Grace of the Spirit to enable man to repent's believe, reform, and
rely wholly upon God's mercy procured by Christ's Sacrifice^ neither is this
all, but in the second place he undertakes to obtain the mercies promised by
his intercessions and pleading his blood in Heaven for penitent and believing
Sinners. That he is Mediato^^ by his Blood shed and offered is evident from
Chap. 9. 16. where it is said, That for this cause is he the Mediator of the new
Covenant, that by means of Death, for the Redemption or Remission of the
Transgressions that were under the first Covenant, they which are called might
receive the Promise of eternal Inheritance. Where we may observe, 1. That he
was the Mediator of the new Covenant. 2. That he was Mediator for his Sacrifice
and offering of himself without spot to God. 3. That whereas there was no
expiation of Sin by any Sacrifice of the Law, the sins then committed were
expiated and remitted by virtue of his Death and Sacrifice. 4. That except this
expiation and remission had been obtained by this death, the called could not
have received the Promise of eternal Inheritance. That he is Mediator of this
Covenant by his Intercession is evident from 1 John 2. 1. and other places: Now
both these agree to Christ as a Priest, and therefore he is the Mediator of
this new Covenant of better Promises, as a Priest. The Levitical Priests were
Mediators for the former Covenant by their Offerings and Prayers to obtain the
Promises of that Covenant; and this Mediation was but a shadow, and an obscure
Representation of this heavenly and far more excellent Service and Ministry:
For,

5. He by reason of this Mediation obtained, and so enjoyed a more excellent
Ministry and Office of Priesthood: For he that could lay the foundation of
such an excellent Covenant by satisfying divine Justice, and as Surety make it
so valid, so effectual, and of eternal continuance, must needs be a more
excellent Priest in respect of his Ministration, which had far more glorious
effects than the Ministration of the Highpriests under the Law. Where by the
way, observe, That Christ is an High Priest in respect of his Office, and a
Minister in respect of his Officiation, which was the work and end of his
Office. From all this, the force of the Argument is clear and evident; for
every Cause is to be valued according to its causal activity, and the effects
produced by it: For, that cause which produces more noble and excellent
Effects, Physical, Moral, or Divine, is more noble and excellent. And seeing
Christ as Priest, by his Ministration, does produce far more glorious,
supernatural, and divine Effects, tending most effectually to Man's spiritual
and eternal happiness; therefore he is far more excellent than the Levitical
Priests, which were Mediators only of a far inferior Covenant, and yet could
not by their Officiation make that effectual. Yet the Apostle, not contented
with this, that he obtained a better Ministry, further adds, that the Ministry
was so much the more excellent as the Covenant, whereof he was Mediator, was
more excellent: But the Covenant was far better and more excellent by many
degrees, therefore the Ministry is such too. The major Proposition would easily
be granted, That the more excellent the Covenant, the more excellent the
Ministry: But the Assumption might be excepted against, and that several ways,
as, 1. There was no other Covenant; or, 2. If there was, it was not better or
more excellent. Both these he therefore proves, and 1. That the Covenant was
better; for it was established upon better Promises. In which words we may
observe two Arguments, one expressed, the other employed: For, 1. The more
excellent the Promises, and the Rewards, and Duties promised are, the more
excellent the Covenant must needs be; this is expressed. 2. When he says that
it is established upon better Promises, he implies, that it is stable, firm, and
ra^fied, so as not to be altered; such the former was not. Both these he
proves, and that two ways:

1. By an Artificial Argument. 2. By Testimony.


. 6. First, By an Artificial Argument.

Ver. 7. For, if the first Covenant had been faultless, then there should have
no place been sought for the second. IN the handling of this Text I will

1. Consider it absolutely, and explain it. 2. Inquire into the Apostle's
Argumentation. 3. Examine what the Apostle intends to prove.


1. Absolutely considered, it presupposes, as a thing well-known to these
Hebrews, that there are two Covenants, the first, and the second: Upon this
presupposed, we find two absolute Propositions;

1. That the first Covenant was not faultless. 2. There was place sought for a
second.


And both these are presupposed here as a ground of the Apostle's
Argumentation, though both are proved afterward. By this first Covenant is
meant, as we shall understand anon, the Covenant made with the Israelites in
the Wilderness, after they were come out of Egypt; of it we find it affirmed,
that it was faulty, or not faultless. Not to be faultless, is to be imperfect
and defective, and so not able to sanctify and perfect any man, though the Jew
thought otherwise, and through his Unbelief and erroneous Imagination sought
perfection by it: Yet God in giving it intended no such thing, but aimed at
other ends for which it was sufficient; neither could it possibly perfect any
man, because it neither gave Man any sanctifying Power to enable him to perform
spiritual Obedience; neither could the Priests by their Ministration expiate
any Sin. Therefore to be faulty is not to be unjust, or justly blamable, or
insufficient for those ends God intended it, but to be unable to justify, as
the Jew falsely judged it to be.

2. There was place sought for a second. The second was the Covenant of Grace
in the Gospel, called the second, because it came in after the first. It Is
true, that the Promise was 430 years before the Law, and was the same for
Substance with the Gospel, but differed in this, that it held out Christ only
in Promise to be exhibited in time then to come, and required Faith in him not
yet incamate: But this new Covenant of the Gospel required Faith in Christ
already come. Between these two the Promise and the new Covenant of the Gospel
enters in the Law, and that which is here called the first Covenant: For this,
it is employed, that a place was sought. By place is meant the existence and
actual Being of it as a Covenant in force, and the Order of existing, which was
in respect of time long after the first Covenant, which it did so exceed that
it abolished and abrogated the former, as surrogated into the place of it. When
it is said, that this place was sought, for it to exist, it is not so to be
understood, as though any great search was made for it, as though the
surrogation was difficult, or the time uncertain, and not easily known: For God
both certainly knew the fittest time, upon which he had determined, and could
easily bring it in, as he did. The time and order of the entrance and
succession of the Gospel were so fit, as if diligent search had been made by
the wisest they could not have been more fit. To seek, is sometimes to require
and demand, sometimes to will and determine, sometimes to consult; all which do
signify, that if we stand upon the word sought, it signifies in this place,
that God's most excellent Wisdom and Counsel determined to bring in the second
Covenant; and the place for it might be said to be sought, because it was to
come.

. 7. Secondly, After the Explication of the words, follows the Apostle's
Argumentation grounded upon the former absolute Propositions. In Form, he
argues thus:

If the first Covenant had been faultless, then should no place have been
sought for the second. But there was place sought for the second.

Therefore the first was not faultless.

Where the Apostle, from the Introduction of a second, proves the imperfection
of the first Covenant; for, if the first had been sufficient, the second had
been needless. This agrees with that of the Apostle, for if there had been a
Law given that could have given life, then Righteousness should have been by
the Law, Gal. 3. 21. And it is like to that other of the same Author, And if
they which are after the L^^^ be Heirs, Faith is made v^id, and the Promise of
vone effect, Romans 4. 14. The Text is the Proposition, which is hypothetical and
connexe. The Connection of the parts is firm; for no wise Law givers will
abrogate Laws, and change their Leagues and Covenants, if they be good,
sufficient, and effectually subservient to their main end; neither will they do
that which is superflu^^^ and needless. As this is true in general, so in
particular the Connection is far stronger, when we consider that it was God who
made the alteration by seeking place for a second Covenant. The Assumption is
the consequent part of the Proposition, which is affirmed to infer the
Antecedent.

3. The thing which the Apostle intends by this to prove, is employed in the
words not faultless; and that is not only the Imperfection of the former
Covenant, but the excellency of the latter: For, though the ^onner was good, so
far as God intended it, the latter was far better, and far more effectually
conducing to Man's Righteousness and eternal happiness. And if it was better,
then the Ministry of the Mediator was better.

. 8. That place was sought for the second, which is the Assumption, is proved
out of the Scriptures, in these words,

Ver. 8. For, finding fault with them, he says, Behold, the days come (says
the Lord) when I will make a new Covenant with the House of Israel and the
House of Judah. THese words are but part of the Proof and place of Scripture:
and, as taken from the Scripture, which is the Word of God, it is a Testimony
and an inartificial Argument, which is as good as any Demonstration, because
it is the Word of God who is truth it self: And here I will

1. Explain the whole Text, with the several parts thereof. 2. Declare what it
proves.


1. In the Explication we must consider 1. How this part of Scripture is
brought in. 2. The Text it self.

1. It Is brought in by these words, For finding fault with them, he says:
Finding fault with something, is the principal thing; but the difficulty is to
know certainly who the person finding fault is, and who or what is that which
is blamed as faulty. The Person blaming may be God himself, or the Prophet; yet
both may be intended, and the meaning then is, that God by the Prophet found
fault: But with whom did he thus find fault, or with what? for either Persons
or things must be faulty. If with persons, they are Jews and Israelites; if
with things, some think, they are the Promises: Others say, in finding fault
with the Persons, he finds fault with the Covenant. Yet the words may be turned
thus, Finding fault, he says unto them; and this Translation makes the sense
clear, and removes all scruples: For, without all doubt, it was the first
Covenant that was faulty and defective; and the words of the Prophet were
directed unto the Jews, and to them he spoke, and to them he wrote. These words
are prefixed before the Text to bring it in; for by them is signified, 1. That
the Covenant was faulty. 2. That God found fault with it. 3. It Is apparent by
the words of the Lord following. Thus the Text is brought in, and fitly joined
to the former words.

2. The Text it self comes in to be considered: Where we must observe,

1. That the words are the Lords. 2. That the matter of them is concerning the
Covenants.


1. The words are the Lords, for so the Text informs, Behold, the days come
(says the Lord). It was the Lord that said these things; For, though the
Prophet himself spoke and wrote, yet it was the Lord that enlightened, moved and
inspired him by his Spirit; for the Prophecy came not in old time by the Will
of Man, but holy men of God spoke as they were moved by the Holy Ghost, 2. Pe^.
1. 21. Yet God did not speak these words immediately to any but the Prophet,
and did dictate them unto him by his Spirit immediately, and in an ineffable
manner, so that he could not mistake what was dictated: Yet he did not speak
them immediately to any other, but mediately by him, so as to direct him
infallibly both in his words and writings, as in his understanding, which did
by divine illumination so apprehend and know the things of God, as that he
could not err and mistake. This is to be observed further, that the Prophet
uses this Phrase, says the Lord, three times in this short Description of the
new Covenant; and here the Verb which signify, to speak or say, is almost
always, as in this place, given unto God, as though only God could speak so,
as it imports, that is, certainly, most truly and infallibly, so that the
thing spoken is firm, and most worthy of all acceptance. By this the Prophet
did declare, 1. That he spoke not of himself. 2. That the Testimony was of
divine Authority; he related not the words of Man but of God, who is Truth it
self; 3. That the thing testified was firm, certain, and most stable. The
Apostle alleges the Prophet, who was divinely inspired, and one of the sacred
and Canonical Writers, and acknowledged by the Jews to be such, so that they
could not any ways except against his Testimony, as being not only divine, but
as alleged by him, very plain, and pertinent, and effectual to prove the Point
intended. And it was the more effectual and undeniable, because this Prophet
was one of the Levitical Priests, and delivered this Prophecy, whilst that
first Covenant was in power and force. Yet another thing is further to be
observed, That the Apostle follows the Translation of the Septuag^nt, except in
one word; and though it seem to differ from the Hebrew, yet it does not: For
the sense both of the Hebrew Original and Greek Version is the same. That
wherein they seem to differ most is that passage in the latter end of the ninth
Verse, [and I regarded them not.] It is strange that our English Translators
should here follow the Greek, and in Jeremy 31. 32. the Hebrew, as they
conceived; for thus they turn it there, although I was an Husband unto them.
But to reconcile both the places, we may note, 1. That the Septuagint's
Alexandrian Version is rather Paraphrastical than wording, 2. That they knew
the force and signification of the Hebrew words better than we do, 3. That
though our Lexicons give no such signification to the Verb (...) as to neglect,
or not regard; yet it may signify so, and they knew it, and did so translate
it, to make the sense more per^picuous, as they do in many other places. 4. We
find that Baal din signifies an Adversary in judgment, and that Baal aph is One
that is angry, displeased, and much offended. 5. The words, Though I had been a
Husband to them, may signify by a Me^onymy of the Cause for the Effect, to
neglect, reject, and cast off: Because their breach of Covenant was aggravated
very much, in that God had been an Husband to them, yet they forsook him, and
that was the Cause why he neglected them; and thus some understand the place.
But to enter upon the words, which we find, Jer. 31. 31, 32, 33, 34.

Behold the days come, etc. The Adverb Behold, is often used, as in other
Authors, so in the Scriptures, and for the most part is a Note of attention,
especially when the matter is rare, strange, or excellent. And though every
part of God's Word requires our attention, yet some deserve an higher degree of
consideration: For being of special and great concernment, and sometimes
extraordinary, that cannot be so effectual except we in a special and
extraordinary manner attend unto them. The word is Metaphorical, and signifies
an Act of our Eye and visive faculty, but here by similitude, an Act of the
Understanding, exercising both the apprehensive and judicial Power thereof. And
this new Covenant was a special Object of both.

The matter of the Text alleged is a Covenant described from

1. The parties confederating. 2. The time. 3. The quality. 4. The promises.


1. The parties confederating were God on one side, and the House of Israel and
Judah on the other. God was the first and principal party, who contrived the
Covenant, and resolved upon it, and by the Prophet foretold it; and all these
were Acts of his free Grace and abundant Love to sinful Man, intending to save
him: The parties with whom he would make it, was the House of Israel and Judah;
yet because there was Israel according to the Flesh; and according to the
Spirit, and a Jew who was such outwardly, and a Jew who was such inwardly,
therefore it does not exclude the Gentile: and it takes in not only the
Proselyte, but others too: Yet the Houses of Israel and Judah have the
pre-eminence, and the Jew must first be called, and the Covenant must first be
tendered unto him: And this Prophecy may be understood of them in a more special
manner with reference to their Conversion in the latter times.

2. The time, when God would make it, was then to come: and when the Apostle
wrote to these Hebr^ws, it was past: For God knew his own mind and purpose, and
signifies the same by the Prophet, long before the Execution of the Decree: for
known to God from the beginning are all his Works; yet, though he know them, he
does not instantly effect them. But he knows the best times and fittest
seasons, and when they once come, his almighty executive Power does issue out
and effect them: Yet he may signify before, hand what he will do in the times
to come, as here he did. And there may be special Reasons moving him so to do;
as, 1. To signify the Perfection of his Knowledge, 2. To comfort his People in
their great Afflictions, by letting them know what good he intends them in
future times. Yet there might be some special reasons of this particular
Prediction; as, 1. To teach them and their Posterity the weakness and
imperfection of the former Covenant, lest they should depend upon it for
Justification and eternal Life. 2. By this Prophecy to convince in future times
the unbelieving Jews, and confirm these believing Hebrews; and also to prove
the excellency of Christ's Priesthood, which is the use the Apostle makes of
it in this place.

3. The quality; it was new, and different from the former: In that it was new,
it implies, c. 1. That there was an Old Covenant. 2. That the old was the
former, this the latter, in Order of time. 3. Because new things are better
than old, and sometimes far better, in which respect Novum est eximium,
therefore he^ here may signify a more excellent Covenant; and so this was far
more excellent than the former. 4. New Covenant is another Covenant, and
different from the former; and it differs not only accidentally but
essentially: Which difference is expressed

Ver. 9. Not according to the Covenant which I made with their Fathers in the
day when I took them by the hand to lead them out of the Land of Egypt,
because they continued not in my Covenant; and I regarded them not, says the
Lord.. 9. Where many things are observable; as

1. That the former Covenant was made with their Fathers. 2. It was made when
he brought them out of Egypt. 3. They continued not in that Covenant. 4. He
therefore rejected them. 5. This new Covenant is not according to that. 6. All
this says the Lord.


1. The first Proposition signifies the parties with whom God made this
Covenant, they were their Fathers and Ancestors, in opposition to their
Posterity and Children, with whom he would make this Covenant. These Fathers in
particular were those who sojourned in Egypt, 430 years after the Promise was
made to Abraham, which informs us? that it was different both from the Promise
made before, and the Gospel, and this new Covenant revealed so long after.

2. The time expressed in the second Axiom, was the time when God brought them
out of Egypt, in the third Month after their departure out of the Land of
Bondage. They were in a sad condition, when God as a Father took them by the
hand, and it was a great Mercy to deliver them, to have such a special care of
them, to do so many wonders for them, and then bind himself in Covenant to
them. For, though that Covenant was far inferior to this new one, yet it was a
great Mercy unto them, and tended to their great good. The place where it was
made is here employed, which was the Wilderness of Sinai: Of the making of it we
read Exodus 19. of the confirming of it by Sacrifice, Blood, and a Sacrificial
Feast, Exodus 24.

3. They continued not in that Covenant; for they did prove unfaithful to their
God, and disobedient to his Laws: They forsook him, and revolted from their
Lord and Sovereign, and went a whoring after other gods, the golden Calves and
Idols of the Heathen, and polluted themselve with their Abominations. And
though God had been a Husband to them, yet they did all this according to their
lewd and whorish hearts, and this did much aggravate their sin: For the
Covenant made between God and them, was like the Covenant of Marriage, a
Covenant of nearest Union, dearest Love, and strictest Obligation; and God had
carried himself toward them, like a loving and most faithful Husband, and yet
they did Apostate from him, and made the Covenant void.

4. Therefore God neglected them, and regarded them not: For he rejected and
cast off the Kingdom of Israel, and sent Judah into Captivity. And why should
he regard a lewd, impious, whorish People, who had forsaken their God, and
refused to turn unto him; this was a just Punishment for their grievous sin.
And so it was to their Posterity, who, adhering to the old, rejected the new
Covenant.

5. This new Covenant was not according unto, but different from, this old one:
It differed in the foundation and ground, in the terms and conditions, in the
Promises, in the force and efficacy, and we might add in the Mediator. The
foundation of this Covenant whereon, as upon its Basis, it stood so firm, as
never to be shaken and altered was the Blood and Sacrifice of Christ, without
which God would not covenant upon any terms with sinful guilty man. The terms
were, Repentance and Faith, not Do this and live.

The Promises were not of legal Remission and temporal Prosperity, but of
eternal pardon of all Sins repented of, and of eternal happiness. The efficacy
and power was great; for this Covenant gave power to keep the conditions, and
could purge the Conscience; neither of which the former was able to do. Lastly,
the Mediator was the Son of God, a far more excellent Priest.

6. The Lord said this: And this is the second time wherein the Lord is brought
in as Witness; and that to signify the certainty of the whole and every part of
what was spoken. And it had been to little purpose, if any but God had said so;
for he alone had power to alter and make void the former, and establish this
new latter Covenant. He only fore-knew what should come to pass, and could
foretell it infallibly: He only could make the Prediction good: His Testimony
only was of undeniable Authority.

. 10. After that you have heard of the parties confederating, the time of
confederation, and the quality of the Covenant, as being new, and far different
from the old; you must more especially consider the Promises which are
essential parts of this Covenant, by which is manifested the real difference of
it from the former, and the excellency and perfection thereof: For, the former
was so defective, that it could sanctify and justify no man; nay, by reason of
the unfaithfulness and untowardliness of the People under the same, it did not
reach the end which by it was intended. The parts thereof seem to be only
Promises, yet the Covenant had Precepts and Terms, as conditions, with
threatenings of penalty if not performed; and though these are not expressed,
yet they are not excluded, but employed. The reason why the Promises are only
mentioned is, because they are the principal part upon which the attaining of
the ultimate end did most depend; And these are solemnly ushered in by these
words

Ver. 10. For this is the Covenant that I will make with the House of Israel
after those days, etc. FOR God, not content to say, I will make a new
Covenant, adds, That this is the Covenant: By the former words he signified his
Will to make a new Covenant, and by these he informs us what this Covenant is,
and what be the Promises By the former we understand that it was different from
the former, by this latter we learn wherein the the difference consists, and
that is chiefly though not only in the Promises, which are so excellent that
the Promises of the former Covenant were not worthy to be named with them; yet
this is not all, but he again informs of the time, after those days: For as
the former Covenant was made after the deliverance out of Egypt, so this
latter must be made after the return of Babylon's Captivity. And it is
remarkable, that he deeply humbles by great and bitter Afflictions both the
Fathers and the Children, before he makes any Covenant with them: For he knew
this to be the way to prepare them, and make them more ready to obey, more
capable of his Mercies, and more desirous of his Blessings. So much Corruption
is in Man, that God has much a-do with us for to reduce us, and make us a
Subject fit to receive his Covenant and his Promises. And here again, God is
brought in a Witness the third time, by that Clause [saith the Lord], to
signify how excellent and important, and also how certain the matter is: The
Promises which are the principal part of this Covenant are, Ver. 10.

I will put my Laws in their mind and write them in their hearts, -- This is
the first Promise, wherein we may observe,

1. Some things to be written. 2. The Book wherein they must be written. 3. The
Scribe or Penman who must write them. 4. The Writing it self.


The things to be written, are the Laws of God; the Table, Men's hearts; the
Scribe and Penman is God; the writing is a wonderful Work of God, whereby the
Soul is enlightened, sanctified, and made capable of nearer Union with God. 1.
The things to be written are the Laws of God; but what Laws these are may be
doubted: For some will have them to be the several Commandments of the
Decalogue. Yet these are said to be written in the heart of the very Heathens,
Romans 2. 15. Yet suppose they be already in their hearts, yet the writing of
them there is very imperfect; for both the Knowledge of them, and power to keep
them are very imperfect, so that the Love of God and our Neighbor may be
imprinted there more perfectly. Yet the word turned Laws signifies in the
Hebrew, Doctrines; And these are the Doctrines of the Gospel concerning
Christ's Person, Nature, Offices, and the Work of Redemption; the Doctrines of
Repentance, Faith, Justification, Resurrection, and eternal Life; and these
either presuppose or include the Moral Law: For, they must be such Truths as
are necessary and effectual to Man's Salvation, without the Knowledge and
practice whereof sinful Man cannot attain eternal Life. Further, they are
Doctrines concerning Christ, as already exhibited, glorified, reigning and
officiating in Heaven.

2. The Book or Tables wherein they must be written are the mind and heart of
Man: By Mind, some conceive, is meant the Understanding; and by Heart, the Will
and rational Appetite. But by both words are meant the immortal Soul, endued
with a Power to understand, and will or nill that which is understood. The word
in the Hebrew, turned by the Septuagint [(...)] the Mind and intellective
Faculty, signifies the inward parts: because as the heart and reins are the
inmost parts of the Body, so the mind, thoughts, and rational Appetite, are
[intima Anime] the inmost parts, if we may so speak, of the Soul. They are as
it were the Center of that immortal Substance, where all the active vigor and
powers of the Soul are united; There is the Spring and Original of all rational
and moral Operations, of all thoughts, affections, and inward Motions: There is
the directive Counsel, and imperial commanding Power: There is the prime Mover
of all humane Actions, as such: This is the Subject fit to receive not only
natural but supernatural Truths, and Doctrines, and all Laws: There divine
Characters may be imprinted, and made legible to the Soul it self: This is the
most noble and excellent Book that any can write in. This is an Allusion to the
Tables of Stone, wherein the Law was written; for the Law was not written in
the heart, but in stone; upon Phylacteries, Frontlets, Posts, and Walls of
their Houses. And now the Scriptures and divine Revelations are written in
Books, so as that they are legible by the Eye; they may be spoken and so
uttered by Man as to be perceived by the Ear, and from these be conveyed to the
common sense and fancy, and by degree, be transmitted to the Soul, which by
them receives some imperfect representations, not informations. This immortal
Soul is the Book or Table wherein these Laws and divine Doctrines must be
written.

3. The Scribe or Penman is God; for it is said, I will give or put, I will
write. He that said so, was the Lord; And it must be He, because the Work is so
curious and excellent, that it is far above the Sphere of created activity: He
alone can immediately work upon the immortal Soul, to inform it, move it, alter
it, and mould it anew, so as neither Man or Angel can do: They may by the
outward senses and the fancy come near the Soul; but immediately prepare it,
and make lively Impressions, and write clear Characters of divine Truth upon it
they cannot: They may move it, and affect or disaffect it: yet to take away the
stony heart, and make an heart of Flesh, is far above their Power: Therefore
God does always ascribe this great Work unto himself.

4. The Act and Work of this Penman is, to write, and write these Laws, and
write them in the heart. How he does it we know not; That he does it, is clear
enough. His preparations, illuminations, impulsions, inspirations, are strange
and wonderful, of great and mighty force; For, in this Work, he does not only
represent divine Objects in a clearer light, and propose high Motives to
incline and turn the heart, but also gives a divine perceptive and appetitive
Power, whereby the Soul more easily and clearly apprehends, and more
effectually affects heavenly things. The Effect of this Writing is a divine
Knowledge of God's Laws, and a ready and willing heart to obey them, and
conform unto them, a Power to know and do the Word of God. This is that Work of
the Spirit which is called Vocation, Renovation, Regeneration, Conversion
actively taken, without which Man cannot repent, believe, obey, and turn to
God. It Is said to be a quickening of Man dead in sin, a putting God's fear in
Man's heart, a putting God's Spirit within Man, to cause him to obey his Laws,
a calling out of Darkness into Light, a writing upon the fleshy Tables of Man's
heart. By this writing Man is said to have a new Heart and Spirit; not that God
creates in Man a new Soul, or new Faculties, but because he gives new Power,
new Light, new Life, new Qualifications, so that Man is made partaker of a
divine Nature, and molded anew, with so much alteration that he is another
Man, though not for Substance, yet for Qualities and Operations. All this tends
to an imperfect explication of this Promise, wherein this new Covenant differs
from, and is more excellent, than the former: For, that had no Promise of God's
writing his Laws and Doctrines in Man's heart, or of giving any sanctifying or
renewing Power to enable them to observe and keep his Judgments: Yet lest we
mistake this excellent and most comfortable part of Scripture, many things are
to be observed, 1. Concerning the Laws. 2. Concerning the heart. 3. Concerning
God's writing in the heart.

1. The Laws; the Laws of God are written in the heart, not the inventions,
fancies of men, nor natural, nor mathematical, nor moral Philosophy; much less
the Errors and Blasphemies of Seducers and false Prophets. It Is true, that
humane Learning and Languages are excellent means to find out the sense of the
Scriptures, and are great Blessings ordained of God for that end; and, being
used with Prayer, and sanctified, may do much: Yet we must know, that these
Doctrines are not only those of the Moral Law, but these high Mysteries
concerning Christ, the Redemption, Repentance, Faith, Justification,
Resurrection, and the eternal Punishments and Rewards in the World to come, as
they are revealed in the Gospel: For, the matter and subject of them is God's
Kingdom, and the Government of God-Redeemer, ordering Man to his final and
eternal estate, as I have manifested in another Treatise.

2. The heart of Man is by Nature a very untoward and indisposed Subject, and
not capable of these heavenly Doctrines: It Is blind and perverse, and there is
an Antipathy between it and these Laws. It has some little parcels of the Law
of Nature written in it, but not any thing of these heavenly and evangelical
Truths; it neither knows them, nor can relish them: And when they are
represented unto it, yet it has no intellective Power to understand them, nor
any Will or Desire to seek them, or inclination to obey the Laws of God, which
direct unto everlasting life: It Is not only ignorant, but filthily blotted and
blurred with Errors, both in matters of Religion and humane Conversation. And
this is the condition not only of Heathens, and illiterate People, but also of
all natural men, though of excellent parts, and highly improved, and exquisite
humane Learning, both Arts and Languages. Besides, Ignorance and Error, corrupt
Lusts, inordinate Affections, violent Passions, indispose it very much, and
make it most averse from that which is just and good, and strongly bent upon
that which is evil: As it has no true Notions of the greatest good, so it has
no mind to use the means, which conduce to the attaining thereof. This
defacement of so noble a Substance is the Work of the Devil and Sin.

3. Concerning God's writing his Laws in the heart of Man, you must know, 1.
That they are not written there by Nature, as you heard before: If they were,
what need God write, that which is already written. 2. He writes nothing in
this heart but his Laws and his saving Truths: Therefore that which is not
written without in the Scripture he does not promise to write within the Heart,
and whosoever shall fancy any Doctrine received in his heart to be written by
the hand of Heaven, and yet cannot find it in the Gospel, is deceived and
deluded. 3. Before these divine Doctrines can be written in the heart, all
Errors, Lusts, false Opinions, must be rased and rooted out of the Soul, and it
must be made like blank paper. This is the reason, why we are commanded to
prepare our selves for the hearing and reading of God's Word, to be like good
ground to put away all filthiness and superfluity of naughtiness, all Malice,
all Guile, and Hypocrisies, and Envies, and evil-speaking, and like newborn
Babes desire the sincere Milk of the Word of God. 4. God does not write his
Laws in our heats by Enthusiasm, Rapture, and Inspiration, as he wrote his Word
in the hearts of the Prophets and Apostles; but he makes use of the Word, and
the Ministers of the Gospel, and the Instructions of Man, as also of the
outward senses, as of the Eye and Ear, and also of the inward, and of Reason,
and of all the powers he has given Man to do any thing in this Work. And
whosoever will not use these means, and exercise this Power by Reading,
Hearing, Meditation, Conference, Prayer, let him never expect or think that God
will write these things in his heart. The neglect of these helps is the Cause
why Enthusiasts, who pretend the Spirit, and persons of high seize, as
they boast, as though they were above Ordinances, have so little solid and
saving Knowledge of God's Word, and fall into so many absurd and abominable
Errors. 5. The Effect of this writing of God is not only Knowledge, but also a
Love of the Truth, Light and Integrity, Power and Dominion over Sin, and the
powerful Sanctifications and Consolations of the Spirit. And whosoever does not
find these in his heart, let him not think that God has written his Laws in
his heart; For he writes with Power, and leaves a permanent Tincture of
holiness, and a constant habitual inclination to that which is good, just, and
right. 6. God does not write these Laws perfectly and fully in Man's heart
whilst he is in the Flesh; for he proceeds in this Work by degrees: Therefore
seeing God has ordained means, and commanded them to be used, no Man must
neglect them whilst this mortal life continues; for these Truths are not
written in any of our hearts further than we use these means, which were given
not only for the first inscription of these Laws, but for the increase and
perfection of our divine Knowledge. This was the way which Christ and his
Apostles took for the Conversion, Edification, and Confirmation of their
Disciples: If this were not so, what need was there of so many Epistles, and in
particular of this, to be written to so many Converts and regenerate Saints. 7.
Though God does both begin and increase our Knowledge and Sanctification by
these means, yet this Work of his is immediate upon the Soul, and far more
excellent than these means can reach.

. 11. The end of this Promise made, and the issue of it performed, is, to
acknowledge and receive God as our God in Christ, and to submit unto him with a
real, hearty, and total Submission, as to our only Lord and Redeemer, that so
he may protect and bless us, and we may serve and obey him: And this we cannot
do except God first write his Laws in our hearts; therefore this must needs be
the first Promise upon which the rest do depend, and that whereby he in great
Mercy binds himself to give us his preventing Grace, and the continuance of it:
For such is our Case, that, except he prevent us by granting and vouchsasing
unto us both the means of Conversion, and the Power of his Spirit to make them
effectual upon our immortal Souls, we can never take him to be our God, so as
to become his People and loyal Subjects. And, upon this done, he will be our
God and take us for his People, and so he promises here in this

Ver. 10. And I will be to them a God, and they shall be to me a People.

THis is the second Promise of this new Covenant: Where we must understand what
it is for God to be a God unto any People, and for any Persons to be his
People. This latter is easily known, if we know the former; 1. Therefore it is
not for God to be God absolutely in himself, most perfect, glorious, infinitely
and eternally blessed; for so he was from everlasting: Yet, except he be thus
God in himself, he cannot be a God to any Creature. Neither, 2. Is it to be a
God by Creation, Preservation, and Ordination; for so he is to all Creatures,
and to every one of them whilst they have their Being. Nor, 3. Is it to be a
God in an higher degree to men, as immortal and rational Creatures; for so he
is to all men. Nor, 4. Is it merely to be a God in a peculiar manner to some
certain People, by choosing and singling them from amongst other men, so as to
enter into some special Covenant with them, and to take a special care of them,
and to bless them with some special blessings and deliverances; for so he was a
God to the Jews. But 5. It is to be a God unto any Persons or People, by a new
Covenant of eternal Mercy and Salvation by Jesus Christ exhibited and
glorisied: And to be his People, is, to be his Subjects of his special Kingdom,
so as to receive from him as their Lord-Redeemer, spiritual and eternal
Protection and Blessings: This is the meaning of this Expression in this place.
In a word, it is a Promise of admission into his Kingdom of Grace and Glory. To
know this more distinctly, we must take notice, that to be God in this manner,
is, so to exercise his Wisdom, Power, and Mercy in Christ, as to protect and
deliver us from all evil, and give us all Blessings necessarily required to
make us eternally and fully happy. Thus much is signified by God's Promise to
Abraham, I will be thy shield, and thy exceeding great Reward, Genesis 15. 1. and
that Acknowledgment of the Psalmist, The Lord God is a Sun and a Shield, Psalm.
84. 11. To be a Shield is, to save and protect either by prevention or removal
of all dangers and evils, not only temporal but spiritual and eternal. And to
be a Reward, a great Reward, and an exceeding great Reward, cannot come short
of Heavens Glory, and that eternal Bliss, which is an aggregation of all
Blessings, which shall ever issue from that Sun, which shall in his Meridian
fully and for ever shine upon his Saints: And to be a People to this God is to
be a subject of all Mercies Man can possibly desire. He begins to be our God in
this manner upon our first Connversion, when his Laws are first written in our
hearts; and goes on to bless and save us more and more till we be fully happy;
for the more his Laws are imprinted in our heart, the more he will manifest
himself to be our God, and when he is once engaged he will go on and finish our
felicity till he be all in all. Some make this writing of his Laws to depend
much upon our Free Will, and that by it we may lose our God: But it is certain,
that though by our Free Will we may neglect the means, and so be guilty of not
receiving the Impressions of these heavenly Doctrines; yet by this natural
Freedom, we can do nothing to purpose in this business: we can by it neither
prepare our hearts, nor apprehend nor relish these heavenly Doctrines, which
are above out Sphere: And the beginning and continuance of God being our God,
depends upon an higher, more efficacious and more excellent Cause. This Promise
is most excellent, and a Fountain of unspeakable Comfort; for, happy is that
People who have God to be their God; and miserable are they, who are without
the Covenant of Promises, without hope, without Christ, without God. How vast
is the distance between them and eternal happiness! As they come not near their
God, so God will not come near them.

. 12. After this second Promise it follows,

Ver. 11. And they shall not teach every Man his Neighbor, and every Man his
Brother, saying, Know the Lord; for all shall know me from the least unto the
t^^^reat^st. THese words are not so easily understood, as appears by the many
and different Interpretations of several Expositors, which here I will not
recount. The Subject of them is the Knowledge of the Lord, which shall be far
more excellent, clear, full, and effectual, and generally diffused, then in the
times of the former Covenant. Whether it be a distinct Promise from the former,
or the same; and these words added for the fuller Explanation of the former,
shall be examined hereafter. In themselves, they seem to be an Enthymeme, which
may be supplied and reduced into this Form;

If in the new Covenant all shall know the Lord, from the least to the
greatest, then they shall not teach every man his Neighbor, and every man his
Brother.

But all shall know the Lord, from the least to the greatest:

Therefore, they shall not teach every man his Neighbor, etc.

In the Text there are two Propositions,

1. They shall not teach every man his Neighbor, and every man his Brother. 2.
They shall all know the Lord from the least to the greatest.


The former is inferred from the latter, and the Connection of both as
Conclusion and Premises is expressed by the causal Conjunction [For]. The
Conclusion is negative, and signifies that there shall not be any such teaching
under the new Covenant, as was under the old. In the words we have,

1. The Master. 2. The Scholar. 3. The Lesson taught by the Master to the
Scholar. 4. The teaching of this Lesson.


The Master is every Man, not absolutely, but every man that has the Knowledge
of God, and is able to teach another: For every one that has any Knowledge of
God should teach others that are ignorant; and this is a general Duty of all
knowing men, but most of all of such as, having a more eminent degree of
Wisdom, do take upon them the Charge of others.

The Scholar is every man's Neighbor and Brother; that is, Such as are near
unto them by Co-habitation, or Relation, or both; and are ignorant of God, so
as they need Instruction and Teaching, yet are capable.

The Lesson is, to know God; this is the chief and best Lesson any Man can
learn: The Object to be known is the most excellent, there is none better, not
any so good; the Act is answerable to the Object. For of all Knowledge, the
Knowledge of God, as it is most necessary to Man's Salvation, so it is far above
any other Knowledge. But this Knowledge is not a bare Knowledge, but to know the
Lord is, to fear him, serve him, and obey him: Therefore the Chaldee Paraph^ast
does usually interpret the Knowledge of the Lord to be the Fear of the Lord. And
this is agreeable to that of the Apostle, 1. Hereby we know that we know him,
if we keep his Commandments. He that says, I know him, and keeps not his
Commandments, is a Liar, and the truth is not in him, 1 John 2. 3, 4. Not they
who have some high Notions of God, and can discourse of his eternal Power and
glorious Perfections, and yet are Workers of Iniquity; but they who keep his
Commandments, may be said truly and really to know him.

To teach, in this place is not barely by Instruction to inform the
Understanding, but by exhortation to move the heart, and stir up Man to
Obedience and Practice. To teach this Lesson, and to persuade and exhort men to
know and fear God, is a good Work, and a Moral Duty, and as such of perpetual
and universal Obligation; and therefore must continue in the Church Christian,
as it did in the Jewish. Yet it is said, that they shall not so teach under this
new Covenant; which implies, there was some defect and imperfection, both in
the teaching, and also the Knowledge which did depend upon it, which shall not
be found in the Teaching and Knowledge of the new Covenant: But of this anon.

The second Proposition is, That All shall know the Lord from the least to the
greatest.

Where we have, 1. The party to be known. 2. The Knowledge of him. 3. The
parties that shall know him, and that is, All, from the least to the greatest.
The party to be known, as in the former, so in this part of the Text, is the
Lord: For, they shall know Me, says the Lord; so it is in the Hebrew, Jere^.
31. 34. And this is the fourth time that Expression is taken up in that
Prediction of this Covenant: Yet God is Lord by Creation, by Preservation, by
Redemption, and Regeneration. In this place is meant God, not only Creator and
Preserver, but Redeemer by Jesus Christ exhibited, glorified, manifested and
represented to us in the Gospel. To be Lord in this manner is to manifest
himself in the Excellency of his Wisdom, Power, and Mercy. To know him as such
is not any ways to understand those excellent things testified of him in the
Gospel, but effectually to believe those Truths as revealed from Heaven, and to
rely upon him, and him alone, as our only Savior, renouncing all
Righteousness in our selves, and all Confidence in all other things, and
counting all things loss and dung in comparison of him. This is that which we
call Faith in Christ, whereby we are justified and saved; yet this Knowledge
and Faith was not without teaching: For, how should they believe on him of whom
they have not heard? and how should they hear without a Preacher? And again, So
then Faith is by Hearing, and Hearing by the Word of God, that is taught and
preached, Romans 10. 14, 17. And the Apostles had Commission to go and teach or
disciple all Nations, Mat. 28. 19. and they must teach Repentance, Faith in
Christ, and Remission of sins in his Name. And when Christ ascended into
Heaven, he gave Gifts to men, and sent Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors
and Teachers, Ephesians. 4. 11. Yet this Teaching of Man was not without the Power
of the Spirit, teaching inwardly the same which they taught outwardly, yet in a
more excellent manner, and with far greater efficacy. The Persons who shall
know God were all, from the least to the greatest. 1. The Jew taught but the
Jew or his Proselyte; the Apostles, both Jew and Gentile, of all Nations. 2.
All to whom the Gospel is preached aright know God, or may know him. 3. All may
be restrained to all those who are taught, not only of Man, but of God, who
writes his Laws in their hearts, and gives them one heart and one way, that
they may fear him for ever, and so puts his fear in them that they shall not
depart from him, Jerem. 22. 39, 40. And he had promised to give his People an
heart to know him, that he was the Lord, and they his People, and he their God:
for they shall return unto him with their whole heart, Jer. 24. 7. Where it is
observable, 1. That God will so give them one heart, as that they shall turn
with their whole heart to the Lord. 2. So turned, they shall not only know God
to be the Lord, but to be their God, and they his People. 3. That this place
compared with that of the same Prophet, Chap. 31. 33, 34. alleged in this
place, does signify, that this Knowledge is such, as upon which will follow,
Remission of Sins; and this is justifying Faith.

. 13. Two things remain to be considered: 1. How this Reason infers this
Conclusion, That they shall not under the Gospel, every Man teach his
Neighbor, and every Man his Brother, saying, Know the Lord. 2. How these words
come in upon the former; whether so as to be a distinct and different Promise
from the former, or not. For the first, 1. It Is certain, that in Heaven the
Knowledge of the Lord shall be so perfect, as that there shall be no need of
any teaching of Man, no, nor of Prophets or Apostles; therefore some of the
Ancients understood the place of the perfection of Saints in the state of
Glory. 2. That un^er the Gospel there is need of Man's Teaching, not only for
the first Conversion, but for their further Edification, till the Saints be
perfect in Christ. 3. Yet there is a great difference between the teaching
under the Law, and that under the Gospel; and that in three respects,

1. Of the matter taught. 2. Of the Teachers. 3. Of the manner of Teaching.


1. For the matter taught: For, the matter taught under the Law, was, The Lord
bringing them out of Egypt into the Land of Canaan and giving them Moral,
Judicial, and Ceremonial Laws, and blessing them in that good Land, whilst in
their manner and measure they observed these Laws; Christ also was taught in
Types and Shadows. But the matter taught under the Gospel is God Redeemer by
Christ, exhibited, glorified, reigning at God's right hand, and officiating in
Heaven, as being far more clearly and fully revealed. 2. The Teachers under the
Law, whether Priests, or Levites, or Scribes, or Parents, or Masters, or any
private Persons, were but Ministers of the Letter, not of the Spirit. But under
the Gospel they were Ministers not only of the Letter, but of the Spirit, and
their Knowledge was far greater and clearer than that of the Teachers under the
Law. 3. For the manner of Teaching, it was more clear, more full, more
powerful, as accompanied by the Spirit of Christ, enlightening the
Understanding, and inclining the heart: For in the Law there was no Promise of
the Spirit to take away their stony heart, and give them an heart of Flesh, and
to be put in them, to cause them to walk in his Statutes: As the saying of
Austin is, Lex jubet, non juvat. If the Spirit had been thus given to make the
Doctrine of their Teachers effectual upon the heart of their Disciples, and
imprint the Knowledge of the Lord so deeply in their hearts, as that they should
never depart from him, then the Promises of that Covenant had not been so far
short of the Promises of the new Covenant: But, as the Law could expiate no
Sin, so it could not minister the Spirit. It Is true, that under the Law, they
had Faith in Christ to come, and were enlightened and sanctified by the Spirit,
yet this they had not by virtue of the Law but the Promise, by Christ to come
and not by Moses. And they who had it were few in number, and their Knowledge
of Christ was but implicit, and the Power of the Spirit far less. But under the
Gospel they were many in number, not only Jews and Proselytes, but Gentiles of
all Nations; their Faith was far more explicit, and the Power of the Spirit far
greater: So that the force of the Reason is, That if the Teaching under the
Gospel ^e so far more excellent in respect of the matter taught, the Teachers,
and manner of Teaching, which is such, as that they all, from the least to the
greatest, shall know the Lord, so clearly, fully, and powerfully; then there
shall be no such Teaching as under the Law: For, seeing there is no distinct
actual Knowledge, without some kind of Disciplination and Instruction;
therefore, where any Knowledge of the Lord is, whether under the Law or the
Gospel, there must be some kind of Disciplination under both. And here the
Disciplination and Teaching of the Law and the Gospel are compared together:
And that of the Law was so weak and imperfect in respect of the Knowledge of the
Lord, which it did produce, and that of the Gospel so powerful and also so
perfect in respect of the Knowledge of the Lord, the Effect thereof; that there
was great Reason that the former should cease as needless, useless, and
imperfect. For, as the Apostle says in another Case, When that which is
perfect is come, then that which is in part shall be done away, 1 Cor. 13 10.
Both Law and Gospel have their Teachers, Teaching, and the matter taught, which
is the Knowledge of the Lord, and both agree thus far: Yet they differ in the
Quality, Power, and Manner; in which respects the former shall cease, and the
latter continue. There shall be no such Teaching under the Gospel as under the
Law, because there shall be a far better.

The second Enquiry is, Whether these words are added to the former only for
Explication, or for to inform us of another distinct Promise. Upon due
consideration they may be found so to explicate the former, as to add another
Promise: For they signify, 1. That the end and issue of God's putting his Laws
in their mind, and writing them in their hearts, is to know God, the only true
God, and Jesus Christ whom he has sent. 2. To know God and Jesus Christ far
more perfectly than ever they could do under the Law. 3. To know him so, as
never to depart from him, as their Fathers did. 4. To know him so, as that God
should be their God for ever, and bind himself in an everlasting Covenant unto
them. And this effect it should have, not in a few, but in very many of all
sorts, of all Nations: And all and every one in whom he would thus write his
Doctrines, should thus know him, fear him, love him, and obey him constantly
and cheerfully, so as they should not need either so much teaching,
admonishing, threatening, correcting, punishing, as they did under the Law; nor
be in such danger of departing and revolting from their God, as their Fathers
were: For, our God does so deeply imprint his heavenly saving Truth in our
hearts, as that we shall be enamoured with Christ; and so firmly adhere unto
him, as never to be separated from him. This Effect, it is not only able to
produce, but has actually produced it in thousands and millions. This may be a
new Promise, whereby God does engage himself not only to be our God, and take
us for his People for a time, but for ever: For, after once he becomes our God,
as here is meant, he not only rewards us, but amongst other things does
continually minister unto us the sanctifying Power of his Spirit, to enable us
more and more to keep his Covenant, that so in the end, we may obtain the final
and eternal Reward; for he first writes his Laws in our hearts, that upon our
first Faith and Conversion he may first become our God, and after he once is
our God, he writes them more and more, that he may continue to be our God for
evermore. He will not only begin, but finish the great Work of Salvation.

. 14. There is another Promise of unspeakable comfort expressed,

Ver. 12. For I will be merciful to their Unrighteousness, and their Sins and
their Iniquities will I remember no more. THis is a Mercy of that concernment
and necessity to sinful Man, that all the rest without it are nothing. The
thing promised is eternal Remission of all sins. Where we have

1. Sins. 2. Remission of Sins. 3. Remission for ever. 4. The Person remitting.
5. The Persons to whom they are remitted.


1. For Sin we have three words, 1. Unrighteousness. 2. Sins. 3. Iniquities.
Two of these are only named in the Prophet, and the Apostle adds the third,
according to that of Exodus 34. 7. where we find three Hebrew words, as we do
Psalm. 32. 12. And the Septuagint translate the three Original words by these
three Greek words which are here used by the Apostle: And here it is implied,
That the People with whom God makes this Covenant, have their Unrighteousness,
Sins, and Iniquities; and some of them not only many, but very heinous. What
Sin is I need not here define, because I have done it more at large in my
Theopolitica, where I explain the meaning of the Apostle's definition, 1 John
3. 4. Sin presupposes a Lawgiver, one Subject and under his Power; a Law, and
the Obligation of the party subject. And it is a disobedience to the Law. Here
God's the Lawgiver, Man's the Subject, Commandments the Laws; and when Man
acts, moves, or is inclined, contrary unto these Laws, then he sins. The
Commands of God are his Rule, and he ought to follow it, and his heart ought to
be conformable unto it, and that freely, and upon Knowledge: For, Man is bound
to know the Law, and to observe it. And when Man s^vervs from this Rule, he
forsakes the Wisdom and Righteousness of God, and follows his own Imagination
and the Suggestion of the Devil, and is carried away from his God by his base
and ill-disposed Will and Lusts. And though all Sin is base, yet some sins are
more heinous than others: Amongst other Consequents of Sin, Guilt and
Punishment are most remarkable; and there can be no Sin which makes not Man
guilty, and liable to Punishment, though the Punishment may be removed, or the
Suffering of it prevented. And because God in his Law promises not only
temporal but eternal Rewards, and threatens not only temporal but eternal
Punishments, therefore the condition of the guilty is very miserable; and the
more guilty, the more miserable. And if once we see our condition, and be
sensible of it, our Souls are troubled and fearfully tormented, and the
thoughts and remembrance of Judgment are very terrible, not only because we
are in danger to lose the eternal Rewards, but to suffer eternal Punishments.

2. Though there be Sins, and the Guilt after the Sin is past remains; yet
there is Remission. This Remission is a kind of loosing and dissolving an
Obligation: This Obligation here to be loosed is Guilt, which is not Obligation
to Obedience, which is the Act of a Law, but unto Punishment which follows upon
the transgression of the Law, by virtue of the Law and the Commination: Pardon
therefore and Remission is a freedom from the Guilt, and so from the Punishment
by necessary Consequence. This Remission in this place is expressed by two
words; the first is, I will be merciful: the second, I will not remember their
Sins and Iniquities. The first implies, that Remission is an Act of Mercy, pure
and free Mercy; for he that is guilty is in the hands of the Judge, to punish
or spare him; and if he spare, it is a favor, and an undeserved kindness: Yet
the word [(...)] merciful, does sometime imply such a Mercy as presupposes
some satisfaction and propitiation made, without which Mercy and Pardon will
not be granted; and so it is taken in this place: For, though God be merciful
and inclined to pardon, yet he will be just, and Justice requires some
expiation to be made by Blood, or some other way, and this to manifest his
purest holiness and hatred of Sin, and that he will not suffer his just Laws to
be violated, and yet let the party violating go free, without any satisfaction
made: Neither is it cruelty, but Justice, to require explation to be made, and
to accept it for a guilty Person, and so upon the same to remit him is a great
Mercy. The second word is, Not to remember: To remember Sin in this place is an
Act of a Judge, taking notice of Sin so as to punish the Sinner. Not to
remember, is, not to charge the Sin upon the Sinner, and so punish him; but to
free him from the Punishment and the Guilt too; so that he shall neither be
punished, nor be liable to Punishment. And it is observable, 1. That he will not
only be merciful, but he will not remember. 2. That though in the Hebrew there
be but one Negative [(...)], yet in the Septuagint, and the Apostle, we find
[(...)] a double Negative; where by the Multitude of words is signified, that
God's Mercy will be very great, and by the Negatives, that it will be very
certain, and the Sinner shall have no cause to doubt: And both the words and
the Negatives imply, that God will certainly and abundantly pardon, and he will
in no wise punish.

3. This Remission is eternal, and takes away the Guilt of Sin for ever, and
puts the sinful guilty wretch once pardoned, in a condition of eternal safety.
In the Law, notwithstanding their Sacrifices for Sin, and Burnt-Offerings and
Expiations, there was a yearly remembrance of Sin upon the day of Expiation;
and their many Sacrifices offered by many Priests often, could not take away
Sin. But Christ, by one Offering, consecrated the sanctified for ever, and by
his Blood entering into the Holy place obtained eternal Remission, and made Sin
eternally pardonable. And upon Repentance and Faith follows actual and eternal
Remission, and freedom from all Guilt and Punishment for evermore: So that the
pardon here promised is plenary; for it is total of all sins, and perpetual,
and an Act of eternal Amnesty or Oblivion will be passed in the supreme Court
of Heaven: No sin, not any, shall in any wise be remembered any more.

4. The party pardoning is God, who makes the Covenant, and in the Covenant
this Promise: For it is said, I will be merciful, and, I will not remember. He
is the supreme Lawgiver, and the supreme Judge; and if he once justify, none
can condemn: His Sentence cannot be revoked and nulled; there lies no Appeal
from his Tribunal; his Decrees once passed stand firm for ever. Yet God pardons
as propi^^ated by the Blood of Christ, and ^s there upon freely and abundantly
merciful: For, to pardon one, whom he may justly punish is Mercy, and to pardon
many and grievous sins is abundant Mercy, and to pardon for ever is eternal
Mercy. It is the Lord, the Lord God, merciful, and gracious ^^ng-suffering, and
abundant in goodness and truth, Keeping Mercy for thousands, forgiving
Iniquity, and Transgression, and Sin, Exodus 34. 6. 7. Where we may observe,
that Mercy goes before Remission. He loved and pi^yed us, when we were sinful
and Enemies, and gave his only begotten Son for us, that by his Blood he might
make way for his Mercy, and make our Sins pa^^^onable, and when the Sinner once
repetus and believes, and the Blood of Christ is once pleaded, then he actually,
freely, abundantly, eternally, pardons. How are God's justified Ones bound to
praise him with all their heart for evermore!

5. The Persons pardoned are not all Sinners, and every Transgressout: For,
though God's Mercy ^e, as he himself is, infinite, yet it is by his Wisdom and
Justice limited to certain Persons: For, though Christ has merited pardon by
his death, yet no Sinner as a Sinner is capable of it; his Death makes Sin, and
Faith makes the Sinner; pardonable God must write his Laws in Man's heart, and
Man must know his God and Savior, and believe in him, and Christ must make
Intercession, before Man can be actually justified. Therefore this Promise
follows all the rest. Except Man receive God for his God, and God become his
God, no pardon can be expected: God, received as our God, and engaging himself
to be our God in Christ, does justify. And this is great Mercy of God, that
seeing Man is by Nature incapable of Remission, because senseless of his Sin,
and ignorant of his Savior, he writes his Laws in his heart, to take away the
stony and senseless quality thereof, and makes it tender and sensible; and so
Man sees his Sin, hates it, is humbled and grieved for it, willing to turn unto
his God. He enlightens him; and, lest he should despair, he manifests unto him
his Savior, and his infinite Mercy in him; promises pardon, invites and calls
him, and lets him know there is plentiful Redemption: Upon all this Man is
willing to submit himself, and take God to be his God in Christ, and now he is
in a capacity of pardon, and justifiable. Thus Man by God's Grace, and
performance of his Duty by the power of that Grace, is prepared for this great
Mercy of Remission and Justification; And they who through neglect of hearing
God's Word, and Prayer, continue in their Sin, and harden their hearts, can
have no hope of this great benefit, which God is so willing to give, and sinful
Man unwilling upon God's terms to receive. These words, thus explained, contain
this Promise, That God will forgive Man his Sin, and justify him; and the words
are brought in upon the former, by the Particle (...) in the Hebrew, and (...)
in the Greek, turned by our Translators, For. And, as I have observed before,
it is sometimes expletive, sometimes illative for therefore, sometimes causal,
and accordingly is rendered; Sometimes the Hebrew Particle signifies When. If it
be expletive, it is used only to bring in this last Promise, and join it with
the rest: But if it be not such, but used here as a rational Conjunction, the
Connection of these words with the former is very doubtful.

Some make Remission to be the ground of all the other Privileges which God
does promise, because he will forgive their Sins; Thus Dr. Gouge seems to
understand it. Yes this seems to give a Reason why God will write his Laws in
their hearts, be their God, and so teach them, as that they shall know him; and
it is this, That he may make them capable of Remission, and, being made such, he
may remit them: This is certain, that this is a distinct Promise of the
Covenant, different from the rest; and it is such a Promise, and of so great a
Blessing, that the Law had none such, neither by the Observation of it could
any Man obtain Pardon and Justification. And it is certain and clear enough,
that one end why God made this Covenant, and in the same promised to write his
Laws in our hearts, was, that by them so written we might repent and believe,
and by them obtain Remission: For, the chief Laws and Commandments of this new
Covenant, are those of Repentance and Belief in Christ; which performed,
Remission, which the Law did neither promise, nor could give, will certainly
follow. And, before I conclude this part, I will inform you, 1. That Remission
of Sins, and Justification, are the same. 2. That there is no Justification but
by the Blood of Christ. 3. That no man is justifiable by the Blood of Christ
but upon his Faith. 4. That this Remission and Justification takes away from
the party justified all the sad and woeful Consequents of Sin. 5. That God never
justifies any, but in justifying he sanctifies him, and does not only free him
from the Guilt of Sin past, but from the Power and Dominion of Sin, so as to
preserve Man from Sin for time to come: The Imperfection and Corruption of Man,
which followed upon the first Sin, is one of the greatest Punishments that Man
can suffer and be liable to; and, to remove this Punishment is one part of our
Justification. 6. In this Remission is included Reconciliation, Adoption, and
all those Blessings which tend to everlasting Salvation. 7. Though upon our
first Conversion, and our first true and lively Faith, we enter into the state
of Justification, which frees us from the eternal penalty; yet we are not
perfect in this state, till all Sins, even the last be pardoned, and all
Punishments fully and for ever prevented and removed, which will not be before
the Resurrection. Thus you have heard the words of the Prophet, alleged by the
Apostle, explained.

Now, we must consider what they prove, and being the words of God, they must
needs prove strongly; and the thing proved is, That the Covenant, whereof
Christ is Mediator is established upon far better Promises, than the former
Covenant with the Fathers was.

. 15. The Apostle by the words of the Prophet has proved, that the Covenant,
whereof Christ was Mediator, was a better Covenant, because established upon
better Promises: Yet, though this was sufficient, he proceeds further out of
the same Text, to prove the abrogation of the former Covenant, whereof the
Levitical Priest was Mediator, and that in this manner,

Ver. 13. In that he says a new Covenant, he has made the first old. Now,
that which decays and waxes old, is ready to vanish away. THE Subject of
these words is the Old Covenant made with the Fathers; and they inform us of
two things; 1. The Abrogation. 2. The total Abolition of it. 1. The Abrogation,
It Is made old. 2. The total Abolition, It being made old is near vanishing and
Abolition. The Abrogation he proves from these words of the Lord by the
Prophet, I will make a new Covenant; If God make a new Covenant, then he
abrogates the old; But he makes a new Covenant; Therefore he abrogates the old.
To understand the force of this Argument, let us enquire into the meaning of the
words: 1. To make old, in this place, must be to abrogate; for, as old things
lose their Power, Strength, and Vigor, so the Covenant being made old loses
it is binding force, which is the very Essence of a Law, from which the vigor
and the virtue of it, as a Law, does issue: Hence that Phrase, to antiquate a
Law, which is the same with [(...)] to take away the Authority of a Law. And
this is the genuine sense of the word in this place. 2. It may be doubted,
whether the making a new Covenant or Law does antiquate the former Law and
Covenant; for the making of a new does not always take away the old, but
sometimes confirm it. Therefore you must know, That for God to make a new
Covenant, is to make such a Covenant as is different from and inconsistent with
the former; ^ay, to make it so as by it to take away the former as useless,
needless, and imperfect. Such, and so made is this new Covenant; and the former
does lose all force two ways, 1. By Expiration; for it was intended to
continue until the latter was made, and upon the making thereof it became out
of Date. 2. By another Law and Covenant which could not stand with it, but must
needs destroy it. These words, thus understood, do necessarily infer the
Antiquation of the former Covenant; and the inference is evident in the light
of Nature, and needs no further Confirmation. The Argument, That God will make
a new Covenant, we find in the express words of the Prophet's Text. This is the
Abrogation; The total Abolition, which follows upon this Abrogation, is
expressed in this Proposition,

[That which decays and waxes old is ready to vanish.] Where, to decay and
wax old are but Synonymal; and signify the utter Abrogation of a Law and
Covenant in general, of this Covenant with the Fathers in particular. That
which is thus antiquated, is said to be nigh or ready to vanish or disappear,
and, as it were to lose its Being. The word (...), turned Vanishing, is used
often by the Sept^^gint as a Verbal, to signify destruction, and desolation, and
the Verb whence it is derived, signifies to ruin, destroy, Persons, Cities,
Countries, so as to take away their Being and Existence. And this Expression
may intimate thus much, that as things, after they become old, and have lost
their strength and vigot, may retain some kind of imperfect Being for a time,
and moulder away by little and little, till they vanish and totally perish; so
the Law once abrogated may continue, though in no force for a while, and by
little and little decay, till it totally cease.

. 16. This is the Explication of the Text, which may be further cleared, and
made more evident, if we examine the time of the Abrogation and Ab^lition. It
was not abrogated in the days of the Prophet J^remiah, by whom God revealed
the making of the new Covenant, and the tenor and substance of it; for it
continued in force for many years after, even until the exhibition of Christ.
Neither was it abrogated upon his Birth, or Baptism, but upon his Death which
unhinged the Law, and so virtually nul'd this Covenant: Yet it was not actually
abrogated, but upon the Promulgation of the Gospel; for then the force of it
was taken away, and no baptized Christian was bound to observe it: yet there
were many attempts made, and that by some who professed Christianity, to
continue i^ in power. Hence that great Controversy raised in the famous Church
of Antioc^ in Syria, which occasioned the great Synod at Jerusalem, mentioned
Act. 15. where it was unanimously determined, that it was abrogated; therefore
they would not impose it upon the Gentiles. And though after that, they
suffered some believing Jews to observe it in some particulars, as a thing
indifferent; yet the Apostle in his Epistle to the Galatians does clearly
demonstrate, that whosoever should observe it as necessary, and so binding as
that Christ could not save them without 'it, they were fallen from Grace, and
went about to make void the Gospel. By all which it is evident, that the new
Covenant of the Gospel was so made as that it abrogated the Law of Moses and
the Legal Covenant: Yet, because the Law was given, and that Covenant made by
God and not by Man, and had continued in force about 1500 years, many could not
be satisfied in the matter of Abrogation, and made scruple of rejecting and
neglecting of it: For that which is confirmed by Law and long Custom, can
hardly be made void. The unbelieving Jew did reject the new Covenant, and
adhere to the old; as instituted from Heaven, and sufficient to justify and
save those who observed it: Some believing Jews feared to neglect it, and
judged Christ insufficient without it, and thought Moses and Christ jointly
must bring them to Heaven; and some of the Gentiles seduced by them were
entangled with the same Error. So that it was observed by some as necessary,
by some as indifferent, till the ruin of Jerusalem, the destruction of the
Temple, and the dispersion of the miserable and captive Jews into all Nations:
And then, when there was no face, either of a Civil or Ecclesiastical Polity
in that Nation, then it vanished and did not appear: It was abrogated therefore
by the Promulgation of the Gospel, decayed by little and little after that
time, and in the end was totally abolished. The Apostle had, in the former
Chapter proved the Change of the Law, and the Abrogation thereof from the
Change and Abolition of the Priesthood; and gives the reason why it was to be
abrogated, to be this, because it could justify and sanctify no Man: And this
he made good out of Psalm. 110. 4. And here he implies, that it must be
abrogated, because it was not faultless but defective, and confirms the repeal
of it, from the words of the Lord by Jeremiah, saying, I will make a new
Covenant; and his chief Scope is to prove, that Christ has obtained a better
Ministry, because he was the Mediator of a better Covenant. And that Covenant
was better, not only because it was established upon better Promises, but in
that it was new, and so made that it abrogated the former, and it self was to
continue for ever: For God never promised to make another after this new one
was once confirmed by the Blood of Christ.

. 17. In all this Discourse, he takes it for granted, and presupposes it as
certain, that Christ was the Mediator of this Covenant; and in this he may seem
to beg, and not to make good the assirmative of the Question. For the Jew might
reply, That suppose it were granted, that there must be a new Covenant, so made
as to take away the old, as God by the Prophet does positively affirm it; yet,
How does it appear that Christ, and not some Levitical High Priest shall be the
Mediator of it? To remove this and the like Scruples, it is to be observed, 1.
That no Levitical Priest could be a Mediator of any Covenant but the former
made with the Fathers, as is evident from the Institution of that Priesthood,
and the Rules of Legal Ministration, Therefore he was clearly excluded from
this Mediation of this new Covenant. 2. That if Jesus of Nazareth was the
Messiah, whom God promised, the Fathers expected, the Prophets foretold; then
it will necessarily follow, that he was the great Prophet above all former
Prophets, above Moses, above Angels, and he must be the great and eternal
High Priest, according to the Order of Melchizedee, a Minister of the heavenly
Sanctuary, and a Mediator of this far better Covenant. But the reason why he
takes it for granted, and goes not about to prove, that Jesus of Nazareth was
the Messiah, was, because that was done unto his hands, and made evident many
ways: For, the fulfilling of so many Prophecies of the Old Testament, and that
so fully, even to particular Circumstances, in him who was called Jesus of
Nazareth, the Angel's Testimony who certified his Mother of his Conception, the
Testimony of an Angel, with a Multitude of the heavenly host, at his Birth,
did signify this; So did the words of his Father, at his Baptism and
Transfiguration, his glorious Works, his heavenly Wisdom, Knowledge, and
Doctrine; besides the Testimony of John the Baptist, his prodigious and
stupendous Death and Resurrection, Ascension, the coming down of the Holy
Ghost upon the Apostles, the Revelation of the Gospel, the rare and excellent
gifts of this heavenly Spirit, received by such as believed on him, and the
wonderful works done in his Name, did sufficiently and superabundantly prove
him to be the Messiah.

. 18. From all this, the intelligent Reader may easily understand the Subject,
Scope, and Method of the Apostle in this Chapter. The Subject is, the Ministry
of Christ, constituted a Priest for ever after the Order of Melchizedec: The
Scope is to manifest, that Christ is a far more excellent Priest than that of
Aaron's Order, in respect of his Ministry: The Method is, to set forth his
superexcellent Ministry, in respect of the Tabernacle, the Service, and the
Covenant whereof he was Minister; for, the more excellent the Sanctuary, the
Service, the Covenant, the more excellent the Priest. The Sanctuary whereof
Christ is Minister is heavenly; his Service and Offering not ^arnal, but
supernatural and divine; the Blessings promised in the Covenant, whereof he is
Minister, and which by his Ministry he procures, are spiritual and eternal, and
such as once obtained make sinful Man fully and for ever happy: And, because
the Covenant is so excellent and so effectual by his Ministration, it is of
eternal continuance. The Application of all this to our selves is of
Information, Exhortation, Consolation; for, by this Doctrine we 1. Understand
how excellent and effectual Christ's Priesthood is, in respect of his
Ministration in the best Sanctuary, by his best Service, making effectual the
best Covenant that ever was made.

2. It stirs us up to admire the wonderful Wisdom of God, which contrived such
an excellent Priesthood and Ministry; and his infinite Mercy in ordering both
for our eternal Salvation: For, Who are we, that the Son of God should be our
eternal Priest, offer up himself a Sacrifice to confirm his Covenant which he
has made with us? and that God should appoint him to minister in the heavenly
Sanctaary, and by his Ministry there obtain for us the excellent Blessings,
which he has merited, and God has promised? That he should deal thus with us,
and do thus for us, may be matter of amazement to the very Angels of Heaven.
How often should we think and seriously meditate on these things, and magnify
his Wisdom, and be eternally thankful for his unspeakable Mercy, and engage our
selves to his Service for evermore. 3. It Is matter of sweetest Comfort, that
there is so excellent an High Priest; that he is our High Priest; that after he
had sacrificed himself on Earth, he should minister for us in Heaven; that God
should make so excellent a Covenant with us, promise Power to keep it, and bind
himself upon the keeping of it to be our God for ever, and eternally to blot
out all our Sins, and never remember them, never charge them upon us; that
Christ should be the Mediator of this Covenant, and never cease his Mediation
till he has fully sanctified, justified, and blessed us for ever. What can Man
desire which he shall not have? What can he want which God has not provided
for him? Does he desire an High Priest? He is ready, and he is the best in the
World. Does he desire his Ministry in Heaven? He shall be sure of it. Does he
desire a Covenant? Here is a Covenant, a new Covenant, a Covenant of the best
and sweetest Promises that ever were. Does he desire a Mediator of this
Covenant? A Mediator is at the right hand of God, who ever lives there, and as
an Advocate pleads his Cause, and will not rest Day or Night, until he has
made us capable of Pardon, and procured Remission of all our Sins for ever. The
remembrance of these things must needs be sweet, and wonderfully revive and
refresh a bruised Spirit, and a broken heart sensible of Sin, hungring and
thirsting after Righteousness and Salvation. But, how great is our Ignorance of
these things? how weak our Faith? how languishing our Hopes? Our eternal
happiness depends upon this Covenant, this Priest, this Mediation and Ministry;
and issues from God the Father, and from this High Priest, and from pure Mercy:
And, how happy we, if we had but a true and living Faith, effectually to
believe these things, and totally to rely upon God's pure, free, and abundant
Mercy in Jesus Christ; for, they who believe in him shall not perish, but have
everlasting life; and he that has the Son has Life, and Life for evermore.
Many and grievous are our Sins, great is our danger, and none can help us but
this great Mediator of this blessed Covenant; yet we are senseless of our Sins,
and do not seek unto our Savior: We are secure, and do not understand, that
without his help and Ministry we must unavoidably perish. God has done much to
save us, and has brought eternal life near unto us, but we regard it not: We
continue in our Sins, and will not believe on Christ, and therefore are we
condemned already, because we have not believed in the Name of the only
begotten Son of God: And this will be our Condemnation, that Light is come unto
us, and yet we love Darkness rather than the Light; therefore Salvation is far
from us; Christ will not be our Savior, nor make Intercession for us. O Lord,
put thy Laws in our minds, and write them in our hearts, that we may see our
Sins, and be sensible of them, and seek our Savior, that thou may be our
God, and we thy People, and know thee, all of us, from the least unto the
greatest, that so thou may mercifully pardon our Unrighteousness, and
remember our Sins and Iniquities no more.

Amen, Amen.
CHAP. IX.
Of the Sacrifice of Christ, and the excellent virtue thereof.. 1. THE Apostle
here does enlarge upon, and more particularly and distinctly explain, those
things which in the former Chapter he had only in general and briefly
mentioned: For he employed there, that a Priest once made and consecrated must
have a Sanctuary, must minister in it, and be the Mediator of a Covenant; and,
that the more excellent the Sanctuary, the Service, and the Covenant, the more
excellent the Priest that is Minister of these: And did affirm, that Christ, in
respect of all these, was more excellent than the Levitical Priest. But in this
Chapter he speaks more at large of the earthly and the heavenly Sanctuary, of
the Service performed in both; but especially of the great Sacrifice and
Expiation made by both the Priests, and most of all of Christ's
Expiation-Offering, of the rare virtue and the excellent Effects thereof, and
how by it he was the Mediator of the new Covenant, and made it effectual unto
Remission, and the eternal Salvation of Man. This is some kind of co-herence,
whereby this part is joined to the former: But there is another; for the
Apostle having proved Christ more excellent than the Levitical High Priest, 1.
In respect of his Constitution, Chap. 5. 6. and especially in the 7th. 2. In
respect of his Ministration, in the 8th. In this 9th. he proceeds to speak of
his Ministration in particular, and of his excellent Service in Offering
himself a Sacrifice without spot to God.

. 2. The Subject of this whole Chapter, and part of the tenth, is the Sacrifice
of the Cross. The Scope is to manifest how excellent this piece of Service is.
The Method upon consideration of the whole is this; He informs us

1. Of the Typical Tabernacle, and the Service, especially the great Expiatory
Sacrifice performed therein; and this by way of Introduction to the 11th. Verse.

2. Of the Anti-Typical Sanctuary and Sacrifice, and teaches us,

1. The Nature and Quality of both, especially of the Sacrifice. 2. The Virtue
of this Sacrifice manifested in the Effects thereof, from Ver. 11. to the end.


And this he does,

1. Both absolutely, and sometimes comparatively, in this Chapter. 2. More
comparatively in the Chapter following.


This is the general Analysis; the particular you may expect both in and after
the Explication. The Substance of the whole is this,

He that, being a Minister of a better Sanctuary does offer a far more
excellent Sacrifice, must needs be a more excellent Priest than the Levitical.

But Christ being Minister of a better Tabernacle, offered a more excellent
Sacrifice.

Therefore he is a more excellent Priest.

The Proposition he takes for granted: The Assumption he proves at large, and
very effectually, and this is his Design and Work in this Chapter, and part of
the 10th.

. 3. To begin with the Introduction,

Ver. 1. Then verily the first Covenant had also Ordinances of Divine Service,
and a worldly Sanctuary. Where we may observe,

1. The Connection. 2. The Matter.


The Connection is signified by these words Then verily, or, according to the
Original, Therefore verily; and so Vatablus, Beza, Junius, translate. By which
the words following seem to contain a Conclusion deduced from the former
Chapter Ver. 2. 3, 4, 5. and especially from the 5th. where it is employed that
there must be a Tabernacle, and the Priests must serve and officiate in it,
according to the Example and Shadow of heavenly things, and there were certain
Rules given to Moses according to which both he must make the Tabernacle, and
the Priests must serve therein. This briefly for the Connection. It follows,

2. The former had Ordinances of Divine Service, etc.

Where we have, 1. The Subject. 2. The Predicate. The Subject [the first], the
Original expresses no more, not informing us, whether the first Priesthood,
or the first Tabernacle, or the first Covenant, be meant: Some Copies expressly
read the first Tabernacle, and so some understand the place; but most reject
that, and supply the Ellipsis by the word Covenant, and so much the rather,
because in the last Verse of the former Chapter we have the same word [(...)]
first, and Covenant understood; Few or none make any mention of Priesthood.

The Predicate, and that which is affirmed of this Covenant, is, That it had
Ordinances of Divine Service, and a worldly Sanctuary: The meaning is, that in
the time of the Law, the Levitical Priesthood, and the Tabernacle, there were
such Ordinances, and a Sanctuary belonging to the Covenant. In the words we
have the Sum and Abridgment of the nine following Verses, which describe unto
us both the Ordinances of Service, and the Sanctuary. In the words therefore we
have two things:

1. The Ordinances. 2. A Sanctuary.


The Ordinances of Divine Service imply, That there was under the Law, the Work
of Service and the Ordinances of this Service: And, because there is Service
due to Man, and Service due to God, and Latreia signifies both; therefore the
Translators for difference sake, and to signify what Service is here meant, do
add the word Divine: For Divine and Religious Service is due only unto God, and
is to be performed to him as Supreme Lord, and it cannot without injury be
given to any other: And when it is so given to any but the true and living God,
it is called Idolatry, and is against the first Commandment. Some distinguish
between Service and Worship, and it is true, they differ much, if Worship be
taken for Adoration, which is terminated upon the divine Excellency and
Dignity, and not upon his Power; yet the words are used indifferently. But
whereas the Socinian Expositor says, that Latreia properly signifies Worship,
he is much deceived, as will be evident if we examine the places of the Old
Testament, where the Septuagint turn (...) to serve, [(...)] and that so often.
This Service of God is twofold, 1. Positive. 2. Moral. The Moral is the
principal, as being spiritual, and performed by a Spirit unto a spiritual and
eternal Substance which is God. Positive and Ceremonial is far inferior, and
is here meant: This Ceremonial Service, which never should be performed without
the Moral, had Ordinances as a Rule to direct both Priest and People in the
performance of it, and these Ordinances were given by God, and were part of the
Ceremonial Law, determing what religious Rites and Ceremonies must be used
especially by the Priests: For the Service here meant is chiefly that which was
proper to the Priests; for as we now serve God by the Ministers in public, so
they then by their Priests. The word turned Ordinances is (...), used above 60
times by the Septuagint to interpret the words (...) and (...) and though it
often signifies Ceremonials, yet not always. Men, ever depending upon God as
upon their Supreme Lord, are ever bound to serve him, that they may receive
Protection and Happiness from him. He that will not serve a God is a profane
Atheist, he that servs any but the true God is an Idolater; he that servs the
true God after his own fancies and the inventions of Man, is a superstitious
fool; he that inventeth Rites and Ceremonies, and Modes of serving God, and
imposes them on others, is a presumptuous Wretch. For, as God alone does know
what kind of Worship and Service is fittest to be performed unto him, so he
only has Power to impose it. The highest degree of Service is due unto him
alone, and he alone has Power to make Ordinances for it. This is the Service
and the Ordinances of God, which must be performed in some place of his special
presence: Therefore there was then a worldly Sanctuary. A Sanctuary is an holy
place consecrated to God, and sanctified by his presence: There is a bodily and
earthly, and also a spiritual Sanctuary. This was a bodily earthly Sanctuary, a
Type of a far better; and, to difference it from a fat better, it is called a
worldly Sanctuary, though the word may signify a beautiful, decent, and
glorious place: And in respect of outward earthly decency, beauty, and glory it
did excel. It was made, not according to the fancy of Man, but according to a
pattern given from Heaven; and every thing in it was Mystical, and the greatest
Glory of it was God's special presence. This Sanctuary was said to be the
Throne and Palace of God, residing as a glorious Being in the midst of his
People: It may be considered mystically, as shadowing a far more excellent
Throne and Palace, which may be Heaven the Humanity of Christ, and the Souls
and Bodies of sanctified Persons; or it may be considered as a convenient place
for God's People to assemble there for public Worship: In the former
consideration it is abolished, in the latter it may continue; for, if all things
in the Worship of God must be done decently and orderly, then surely it is
decent and orderly according to the Law of Nature, and the Law of God, to have
convenient places for Religious Assemblies, and Public and Divine Worship. To
think there is any holiness in these places as places, is the superstitious
conceit of some; to think they may not be called Churches is the superstitious
fancy of others: For a Church or Kirk is but a convenient place where
Christians ordinarily assemble to perform Divine Service, and God's presence is
not tied to the place, but to God's People, observing God's Ordinances in this
place; neither is he tied to any special presence in such place, but by virtue
of his gracious Promise; neither is there in these places any divine, special,
effectual, and spiritual presence there, but to such as there worship him in
Spirit. We are not so bound to these places, as though God would not accept our
Service elsewhere, or more in such a place than in another, but only in
respect of convenience, and the testification of our Union with God's People in
the Christian Religion.

. 4. After that the Subject and Heads of his following discourse were
determined and named, he proceeds to discourse of them more particularly,

1. Of the Sanctuary. 2. Of the Service and Ordinances.


So that we may in the following nine Verses observe a Description,

1. Of the Sanctuary or Tabernacle, Ver. 2, 3, 4, 5. 2. Of the Service from
Ver. 6. to the 10.


1. This Sanctuary, leaving out the Court where they sacrificed, is divided
into two parts: The first is the Holy place; The second, the Holiest of all.
The holy place divided from the Court by the first Veil or Hanging, is
described from the sacted things and Utensils therein, which are here said to
be, the Candlestick, the Table, the Shewbread; and this was called the
Sanctuary: Both the place and Utensils of the place had their mystical
Representations, though not so well known to us. The second part, divided from
the Sanctuary by the second Veil, and called the Holy of Holies; that is, the
Holiest of all, is set forth from the things therein: As, 1. The Golden Censer.
2. The Ark, wherein are said to be the Golden Pot of Manna, Aaron's Rod that
budded, and the Tables of the Covenant. 3. The Cherubims over-shadowing the
Mercy-Seat; and all and every one of these had their Mysteries, which the
Apostle forbears to speak of here. He could have spoken much of every
particular, but he does not, because it was not necessary to the principal end,
which here he intended; and where he says nothing, it is fit we should be
silent. Yet two things in this place should be considered, 1. How it may be
reconciled with other Texts of Scripture which seem to differ from it. 2. How
and in what respect this Sanctuary may be said to excel others. 1. It seems to
differ from some other parts of Scripture, 1. In placing the Golden Censer. 2.
In saying, That, besides the Table of the Covenant, Aaron's Rod, and the Pot of
Manna, were in the Ark. For the first, Some say the Golden Censer was the Altar
of Incense, and it stood so near and close unto the Veil, that the smoke of the
Incense did enter into the Holiest of all; yet this is not so probable. We read
Levit. 16. 12, 13. of a Censer, which with Coals from the Altar and Incense,
the High Priest must take, and enter within the Veil upon the day of Expiation,
and burn the Incense in the Holiest place, so that the smoke may cover the
Mercy-Seat; and why might not this Censer be kept in that place? For the
second, Aaron's Rod and the Pot of Manna may be said to be in the Ark, when
they were in the side of the Ark. In this manner the Reconciliation may be
made, yet so that upon further search the Truth may be more clearly discovered:
what others have said in this particular I pass. But, 2. How may this twofold
Sanctuary be said to be more excellent than others; for there have been rich
and glorious Temples with their inward Sacraries rarely beautified? It Is true,
in respect of the Materials and outward Order, some Temples might be as rich
and glorious, if not more; for the matter, Gold, and other things, with the Art
of Man, might be the same: But the Excellency of this consisted in two things;
1. In that all things were made in this twofold Sanctuary, by the Direction
and Command of God. 2. Besides outward decency, beauty, and glory, every thing
was Mystical, and represented some heavenly and excellent thing, and that
according to God's Institution. And, in the time of this Legal Dispensation,
the Saints enlightened by Faith looked at far higher things: They did not look
for Sanctification and Happiness from an earthly Sanctuary, but from their God,
who was present in the midst of them, and from their Messiah (promised to
Abraham), in whom all Nations should be blessed. Abraham sought a more
excellent Country than Canaan; for he aimed at an heavenly and eternal City,
which God had prepared for him.

. 5. This is the Description of the Sanctuary, and the two principal parts
thereof. The Service follows,

Ver. 6. Now, when these things were thus ordained, the Priests went always
into the first Tabernacle, accomplishing the Service of God. Where we must
observe, That all the Service of God is not here described, but only that
which was accomplished within the first and second Veil; neither is every
particular of these here set down. So that the Subject of the ^ following
Verses is the Service of God in the two Sanctuaries: And we are informed,

1. What it is. 2. How imperfect it is.


In this sixth Verse we have the Service in the first Sanctuary described in
general. In the Text we have three things:

1. The Ordination of the former things. 2. The constant Entrance of the
Priests into the first Sanctuary. 3. The performance of the Service therein.


The performance of the Service presupposes the Entrance; the Entrance, the
Preparation of the former things. The Propositions are three, according to the
things, or rather Acts: The first is,

That these things were thus ordained. Where, by these things, are meant the
two Sanctuaries, with the things contained in them: For these to be ordained,
is for the Sanctuaries to be made, built, and ordered: To be thus ordained, is
to be so made, placed, and every thing therein set in that Order, as God
prescribed. The second Proposition is,

That these things thus ordained, the Priests went always into the first
Tabernacle. Where, by Tabernacle, is meant the Sanctuary within the first Veil:
Into this the Priests did enter; not only the High Priest, but the other
Priests might go into this place; but none but Priests had this Privilege
granted. They entered always, that is, every day; and that several times. They
entered after the Sanctuaries were made, and all things therein orderly placed
and disposed; for, before they were made they could not enter; before all
things in them were prepared and orderly disposed, they could not officiate and
serve. The third Proposition is,

The Priests being entered accomplish the Service of God. This Service was
chiefly to burn Incense, and to pray: This Sanctuary may signify the Mis^tant
Church on Earth, which is the Society of Saints sanctified, and made Priests by
the Blood of Christ; for none but Priests and real Saints are admitted as
living Members of this Sanctuary, which is next unto the Heaven of Heavens. In
this, Prayer is continually made in the Name of Christ, and Service continually
performed to God; and they enjoy the Light of the Gospel, and partake of the
Bread of Life, which came down from Heaven; both which were signified by the
Golden Candlestick and the Shewbread. These things, thus understood, signify
unto us, That Christ must first redeem us, and God by his Word and Spirit
convert us, and so make a Church, before any Service acceptable can be
performed to him; and, after we are converted, sanctified, made Priests, then
we may serve and receive Mercy: For we must first serve him, before we can
receive benefit from him; and by continual Service and Prayer we obtain
continually the Light of Grace and the Bread of Life, till we be made perfect,
and admitted into the inward Sacrary of Glory.

. 6. After this Service accomplished in the first Sanctuary, follows that which
is to be performed in the second,

Ver. 7. But into the second went the High Priest alone, once every Year, not
without Blood, which he offered for himself, and for the Errors of the People.
THese words determine,

1. The principal Service to be performed in this inner Sacrary. 2. The Person
by whom it was to be performed. 3. The Time when, and how often.


The Service is that of Expiation by Blood: The Person expiating by Blood was
the High Priest alone: The Time was, once a Year. This was the highest piece of
Service that was prescribed by God, or performed by Man, under the Law; and
therefore it was to be performed by the most eminent Person, and but seldom,
even once a Year. And the Apostle singles this out from amongst the rest, to
prove, that if Christ performed a far more excellent Service, then he must
needs be far more excellent than the Levitical High Priest, in respect of his
Ministration, and the Execution of his Sacerdotal Office. This Service was, the
Offering of an expiatory and propitiatory Sacrifice, first for himself, then
for the People; And he must enter with the Blood thereof into the Holiest place
within the second Veil; and, after he had offered Incense there, he must
sptinkle the Blood upon the Mercy-Seat, and before the Mercy-Seat. The Time of
this solemn Service was the tenth Day of the seventh Month every Year, which
was an holy time of Humiliation and Expiation: Of this, which is briefly
touched here, you may read more at large, Lev. 16.

. 7. The Imperfection of this Service is declared in the three following
Verses, and its threefold, 1. By this Service the way into the Holiest of all
was not made manifest. 2. Being but Figures and Shadows they could not sanctify
any Man that observed them. 3. They were but of short continuance; for upon the
time of Reformation they must cease. That the way into Holiest of all was not
then made manifest, we learn from

Ver. 8. The Holy Ghost this signifying, That the way into the Holiest of all
was not yet made manifest, while as the first Tabernacle was yet standing. FOR
the better Explication; the whole may be reduced to two Propositions or divine
Axioms.

1. That the way into the Holiest of all was not made manifest, while as the
first Tabernacle was standing.

2. That the Holy Ghost did signify this.

In the first, we have the way into the Holiest of all; the non-manifestation
of this way; the time of this non-manifestation. The Holiest of all was a Type
of Heaven, and there must be a way into it, or else no man can enter, all men
must be shut out. This way may be taken either for the passage into it, or the
means whereby a passage was made and opened. Here it seems to be taken, not so
much for the passage, as the means whereby this passage was made, and so
opened: Yet the Holiest of all, where the Mercy-Seat was placed, may signify
the Throne of Grace, which, without some Expiation, is not accessible. For,
there is a twofold Throne of God, the one of Grace, the other of Glory; and
the first must be made accessible before the second, and we must have access to
the one in this life, before we can have access to the other in the life to
come. And one and the same cause may open and make way to both: No sinful
Guilty Man, as such, can have access to God, so as to be accepted of him, and
receive spiritual Comfort from him, but as propitiated by the Blood of Christ:
And though, as propitiated by this Blood, he be accessible; yet no man can have
actual access with Hope and Confidence, except he be justified and washed in
the Blood of Christ: And though one may be justified so as to approach the
Throne of Grace, yet no man can immediately approach the Throne of Glory, till
he be fully and perfectly both justified and sanctified. That there was a way
and passage for Man, innocent, righteous, and holy, is signified by this, that
Adam before he sinned had access to the Tree of Life; but after, the way was
barred and guarded by Cherubims and a flaming Sword turning every way: Yet
after, the Saints of God had free access unto the Throne of Grace, and a way
unto the Tree of Life in the heavenly Paradise. But that which made the way and
the passage was the Blood of Christ, promised and believed: Yet, as the
Revelation, so the Faith was implicit and imperfect; and that not only before
the time of Moses, but long after; therefore is it said, the way was not
manifest. There was a way not only for Enoch and Elias, but for many others;
but there might be a way and yet not manifest, as then it was not: This was
possible to all, but passable to few, and perhaps manifest to none; at least
not so manifest as afterward it was to many both Jews and Gentiles. The time
whilst it was not manifest and so open, is here expressed to be the time of
the standing of the first Tabernacle; where, by Tabernacle, we must unstand not
only the Tabernacle of Moses, but the Temple built by Solomon and rebuilt by
Babylon's Captives returned; and by the time of all these, is meant the time of
the Legal dispensation, and of the Levitical Priesthood whilst it was in
Power.

This is said to be signified by the Holy Ghost; for what is signified by Moses
in the Scriptures must needs be signified by the Holy Ghost, who inspired,
moved, and directed Moses and all the Prophets in their writing and penning of
the Scriptures. But how and by what was this signified? Even by this, that the
Spirit did 1. Prohibit any but the High Priest to enter into the Holiest. 2.
Neither must he enter but once a Year. 3. Neither then must he enter but with
Incense and Blood; and not any other, though with these, might enter at any
other time. Therefore the Veil and rich Hanging must hide the Mercy-Seat and
Throne of God from all the People, from all the Priests, and from the
High Priest at all other times but the day of Expiation. That which may be said
to be the way, and to make and open the way, is the Blood of Christ; and the
shedding of this Blood, and Revelation of the Gospel, did manifest the way.
There is no way but by the Blood of Christ, no manifestation of the way, but by
the shedding of this Blood: Therefore upon the shedding of this precious Blood,
and instantly upon the death of Christ, the Veil, the inner Veil, [Catapetasma]
of the Temple was rent, and the way opened to the Holiest of all, and to the
Mercy-Seat. The Saints of old did know and certainly believe, that there was a
way, but that this should be the Blood of Jesus of Nazareth, and made by his
Blood; as it was not so clearly revealed, so it was not so manifestly known.
And this was one Imperfection of the Law, that could not by any Blood make a
way, or manifest a way, to sinful men observing it, or make any man fit to
enter.

. 8. The Reason of this is given in these words,

Ver. 9. Which was a Figure for the time then present, in which were offered
both Gifts and Sacrifices, which could not make him that did the Service
perfect, as pertaining to the Conscience. THE principal thing, and most
observable, in the Text, is, the Imperfection and Inability of the Service
performed in this Tabernacle; for it had no sanctifying power, as to the
Conscience. And the whole may be reduced to three Axioms, or Propositions

1. The Tabernacle was a Figure for the time then present. 2. In it were
offered both Gifts and Sacrifices. 3. These Gifts and Sacrifices offered, could
not make him that did the Service perfect, as pertaining to the Conscience.


The first Proposition is,

It was a Figure for the time then present. By Tabernacle, in this place, may
be understood the whole Building with all the parts, especially the two
Sanctuaries. This was a Figure; the Word in the Original is a Parable, which is
a kind of Figure or Shadow representing by the similitude and resemblance some
other thing, and usually the thing represented and resembled is more excellent
than the thing resembling; as the Body is more excellent than the Shadow, and
the Figure more easily known than the thing figured. Therefore Similitudes and
Parables are usually taken from things easily known and obvious to the senses,
and the end of it is by that which is more easily known to inform us of that
which is more inward and secret. So this Tabernacle, and the parts thereof,
with the things therein contained, are visible and easily perceived and known;
yet so made, as to signify far better things, which were spiritual and divine;
such also were the Services therein performed. And all this did imply the
Imperfection of the Tabernacle, of the things therein contained, and of the
Services accomplished in it; for Types and Shadows are very imperfect things.
It was a Parable or Figure for the time then present, as a time of Infancy and
Nonage, and to continue only till the things figured and represented should be
exhibited, and then to cease and vanish; and this is the reason why they had so
little Power. The second Proposition is,

In this Tabernacle were offered Gifts and Sacrifices. Every religious
Building, and all Sanctuaries and Temples are erected for the Service and
Worship of a God present in them; so was this, and it was so much better than
others, because it was consecrated to the true God, and by his Command and
Direction: And seeing this and others are for the Service of God, therefore
there must be something to be given and offered, as Gifts and Sacrifices: These
must be offered; they must be offered to God; and this Offering of them is the
Service of God, as it was in this Tabernacle. The third Proposition is,

These Gifts and Sacrifices could not perfect them who did the Service, as
appertaining to the Conscience. This does presuppose that the end of God's
Service is the benefit of Man serving: The benefit here is the perfecting of
such as did the Service. To perfect, is to sanctify, free Man from Sin,
reconcile him to God, so he may have some Communion with God, and derive some
Happiness from him: There is an outward, and also an inward, spiritual, and
divine Sanctification. The Service of the Law in the Tabernacle, in offering
Gifts and Sacrifices, might sanctify the outward Man with an inferior kind of
Sanctification, so that both Priest and People might have some outward
Communion with God, prevent, or avert, or remove some temporal Penalties,
obtain some temporal Blessings and Privileges: Yet all this was nothing to
Sanctification of the Conscience, and the immortal Soul, conscious of Sin, so
as to remove the spiritual Guilt, or the eternal Punishment, or obtain
spiritual and eternal Blessings: All the Service of the Law could do no such
thing, it had no such Power and Efficacy. It Is true, that they who, in
performing these Services with an humble and penitent heart looked far beyond
these figures, upon Jesus Christ to come, might obtain the Sanctification of
the Conscience: Yet this they could not do by the figures and shadows, but by
the things signified by them. This was the reason why Paul did so much
dis-esteem all his Privileges and his Righteousness according to the Law, in
respect whereof, he was blameless; and did so much esteem, so highly value, and
so much long after the Righteousness by Faith in Christ. This therefore was one
Imperfection of the Law, that it had not any such sanctifying Power, as
appertaining to the Conscience; and this the Hebrews must take special notice
of, and they must know, the figure and shadow had not the Power of the
Substance.

. 9. The third Imperfection follows,

Ver. 10. Which stood only in Meats and Drinks, und diverse Washings, and carnal
Ordinances imposed on them till the time of Reformation. It Is very difficult to
find the Grammatical Congruity and good Construction in these words, and the
Connection is obscure; The Aethiopick and Arabic have not the word Imposed:
Some Copies read not (...), but (...).
the printed Books differ, and so do the Translations: The Reason of all this
may be from some Error in the Transcription of the Manuscripts. The Syriack is
more plain than the rest, and the whole may be summed up in two Propositions:

1. That the Service of the Law consisted in Gifts and Sacrifices, together
with Meats and Drinks, and diverse Washings, and carnal Ordinances.

2. That these were imposed upon the Jews till the time of Reformation.

In the first Proposition: Meats and Drinks are not ordinary, but religious,
and by them may be intended Meat Offerings and Drink Offerings, and some extend
the sense so far as to include Meats clean and unclean, allowed or forbidden by
God. Baptisms or Washings are here to be understood to be such as were
religious and used in the Service of God, and these were diverse, and of several
sorts; some were by water only; some by Blood; some by other things mixed with
Water; some with sprinkling, some with bathing, some with washing another. The
end of them all was legal Cleansing and Purification: And because there were
other Rites, he sums them up all in one word, Ordinances which were carnal.
The word for Ordinances is [(...)], the same that is used in the first Verse,
and some translate it Justifications, that is, Legal Sanctifications. But it is
taken here for Rites and Ceremonies in this place, as in the Margent is
expressed. These Ordinances, with the Offerings, Meats, Drinks, Washings, are
said to be carnal; that is, outward, sensible, bodily, and such as have their
Effect, in the use of them, upon the Body, the outward Man, and bodily things.
This Epithet [carnal] is thought to be added for to give a Reason why they
cannot perfect and sanctify the Conscience, or have any Effect upon the
immortal Soul; and so this first Proposition belongs unto the former Verse, to
signify the inability of the Legal Service, in perfecting the Conscience, which
is the second Imperfection.

The second ^^oposition: These Rites, and this Ceremonial Service, were imposed
till the time of Reformation. It might be said, If they were so poor,
imperfect, and ineffectual, why were they observed? The Answer is, They were
imposed till a better time, a time of Reformation. To be imposed, is to be
commanded, so that the People of those times were bound to observe them, and
serve God in that Mystical and Ceremonious manner; for the divine Precept made
the Observation necessary. Some so understand the word in the Greek, as to
imply, they were a Yoke or Burden, and so indeed they were. Yet whether this be
here intended may be a Question. The time of Reformation is conceived to be the
time of the Gospel, which took away these Rites, not as sinful, but as
imperfect, and then useless, when a better kind of Service was instituted. The
word here used in the Greek may signify Perfection, Confirmation, and
Establishment; and if we consult the Septuagint, they tu^^ the Verb [(...)]
(...), which signify to perfect, confirm, and establish. That therefore, which
in our Translation, is a time of Reformation, is a time of Perfe^^^^
Confirmation, and Establishment; and this is the time of the Gospel, when the
(...) imperfect is taken away, and that which is firm and stable shall be
brought in and (...) for evermore. By this we may observe. That because the
Ceremonial Law was imposed by God, the Jews were bound to observe it. 2. That
God intended not the Servi^ of the Law, as a means to sanctify the Conscience;
for then it should have continued. 3. It was imposed only for a time until
the Introduction of a better Service, and then it was to cease. And this is the
third Imperfection; it was not perfect, firm, stable, and of perpetual
continuance. And this is to be understood not only of some of these Services,
but of all, even of that which is the principal and more excellent than all the
rest, even the yearly Sacrifice of Expiation.

. 10. Thus far the Typical Tabernacle and Service; the Anti-Typical follows,
and begins in these words,

Ver. 11. But Christ being come an High Priest of good things to come, by a
greater and more perfect Tabernacle, not made with hands; that is to say, not
of this Building:

Ver. 12. Neither by the Blood of Goats and Calvs, but by his own Blood, he
entered in once into the holy place, having obtained eternal Redemption for us.

TO understand this Text the better, it is to be observed,

1. That as in the Type, so here in the Antitype, to make the Comparison
perfect, there are three things: 1. An High Priest. 2. A Tabernacle with two
Sanctuaries. 3. A Service and Sacrifice to be performed by the High Priest in
the inmost Sacrary and Holiest of all, into which he could not enter but by
passing through the Sanctuary within the first Veil.

2. That the words have special Reference to the seventh Verse, which speaks of
the Highest Levitical Service and Sacrifice, which the High Priest alone was to
perform once a Year in the Holiest of all.

3. That the Scope of the Apostle is to set forth the Excellency of Christ's
Priesthood, as far above that of Aaron's in respect of the Service.

4. That seeing this was the highest and most excellent Service, which could
procure the greatest good promised in the former Covenant; therefore the
Apostle singles out this, informing us, that it was but a shadow of a far more
excellent Service, which was of far greater Power and Efficacy, to be performed
by Christ.

5. That the Excellency of this Service and Sacrifice is set forth by rare and
excellent Effects, Consequents, and Benefits, which were such as the best and
greatest Service of the Levitical Priest could not reach.

6. That the first Effect is eternal Redemption, which immediately follows upon
the performance of this Service, and is the principal thing in this Text.

In the Text we have four things:

1. Christ come an High Priest of good things to come. 2. The Tabernacle,
whereof he is Minister. 3. The Service and Sacrifice performed by this
High Priest. 4. The first most excellent Effect thereof, eternal Redemption.


The first Proposition is concerning Christian High Priest; and it is affirmed,
1. That he is come, that is, exhibited, present, and consecrated. 2. That (...)
^onsecrated he is a complete High Priest; both these are demonstratively (...)
in the former part of the Epistle. 3. That he is an High Priest (...). The end
of all Priests, and especially High Priest (...) and Ministry, to procure some
Mercy and Benefit, which the People want, desire, and have need of. Yet they
can pro^^^^ no Mercy, but such as God has promised in that Covenant, where of
they are Priests (...) Mediators; therefore the Legal High Priest could not
obtain any greater Mercy than the Law did promise. But because Christ is the
Mediator of the new Covenant established upon better Promises, he does procure
for his People far greater Mercies, which God has promised in this Covenant.
Therefore, 1. By good things, understand those Mercies, Benefits, and
Blessings, which are promised in the new Covenant, the principal whereof are
Remission of Sin for ever, and eternal life following thereupon. 2. These good
things are said to be future and to come, and that either in respect of the
Law, which went before the Gospel, according to that (...) follows, Chap. 10.
1. For the Law having a Shadow of good things to come: Or (...) of full
enjoyment of them, which is reserved for Heaven, and that World (...) is yet to
come: For there is a World to come, a Life to come, an abidi^^ (...) me, a
Glory to come, which shall be revealed upon the Sons of God, (...) long after
and wait for this Life, this City, this Glory to come. Again, the time of the
Gospel is said to be the World (...), Chap. 2. 5, and 6. 5. The sense therefore
may be this, That Christ was an High Priest effectually procuring these good
things, which were shadowed out and typified in the Law; and were then to come,
but present, and exhibited in the times of the Gospel.

The second Proposition, which is concerning the Tabernacle, does affirm, That
Christ's Tabernacle, wherein he must minister, is greater and better than the
Legal, as not being of that Building. To be greater, may be understood of
quantity or quality; i^ of quantity, then it is signified that it is far larger;
and so Heaven, where Christ does minister, is: if of quality, then the latter
word explains the former, and so greater is (...); and both together inform us,
that it is far more glorious and excellent. And that it ^^ so, it is evident,
because it is not of this Building, but of a far better: The former was made
(...) pitched by the Art and Industry of Man; yet so, that the pattern and
direction was from Heaven. The Workman and Builder was not Man, but God: and is
the Wisdom skill, and Hand of God, is infinitely above the Wisdom, Skill, and
Power of Man, so his Building must needs be far more excellent. Therefore the
Apostle told us before, Chap. (...). That Christ was the Minister of
High Priest of the Sanctuary, and of the true Tabernacle, which the Lord
pitched, not Man. The former was but a Shadow, and di^ but imperfectly
represent this which was the Substance: The Holiest of all; though the most
sacted and glorious place of the former Tabernacle and Temple, was nothing to
this. Yet it is much doubted, 1. What this Tabernacle is. 2. Whitherto these
words are to (...) referred. First, Some think this Tabernacle to be the Body
of Christ, yet this was the thing to be sacrificed and offered. Others
conceive, it was the Church Militant. Oth^^ imagine, it was the whole World,
which, with the parts thereof, both the Tabernacle and Temple did represent:
wherein the Heaven of Heavens is the Sanctum Sanctor^n; the Holiest of all; and
the Sanctuary through which the High Priest passed into the Holiest place, the
Aethercal part of the World, where the Sun and Moon and Stars, represented by
the Lights in the Golden Candlestick, do ever shine. Others determine it to
(...) the Heaven of Heavens, whereof they make some different parts; as, one to
be the place of Angels and Saints, and another far more glorious, which was the
place of God's most blessed and special presence. That Christ entered the Heaven
of Heavens, and that (...) he ever ministers and makes Intercession there, is
express Scripture; what difference and degrees of places be there, we do not
certainly know. But let the Tabernacle ^e his Body, or the Church Militant, or
the World, or the Heaven of Heavens; the second doubt is, Whither these words
concerning this Tabernacle are to be referred. If to the former words, which
say, that Christ being rome an High Priest of good things to come, then it is
nothing but this, That Christ is the Minister and High Priest of a far more
glorious Sanctuary. But some refer them to the word entered, and make the sense
to be, that as the High Priest under the Law passes through the first
Sanctuary to enter into the second, which is the Holiest of all: so Christ
passed through the Militant into the Church Triumphant. And it is very true,
that Christ has his Sanctuary and Temple here on Earth, and that is his Church
wherein God dwells in a special manner, and he passed through and from this into
the Church Triumphant of Saints and Angels, where God is more gloriously
present and powerful; nay, he entered through the Aetherdal part of the World
into the highest Heavens, and through the Heaven of Angels and Saints unto the
highest and most glorious place, and Throne of God. But the former sense, that
Christ is come an High Priest and Minister of a far more glorious and excellent
Sanctuary, seems to be more genuine, and confirmed by Chap. 8. 2.

. 11. The third Proposition is concerning Christ's Service and Sacrifice
offered in this Temple: For Christ, not by the Blood of Goats and Calves, but
by his own Blood, i^^red in once into the holy place. Where, 1. We have the
Holy place. 2. Christ's Entrance into it. 3. His Entrance once. 4. His Entrance
once by Blood, not of Goats and Calvs but by his own Blood. 1. The Holy place
is the Heaven of Heavens, signified by the Holiest of all in the Tabernacle and
in the Temple; for that was the place into which the High Priest with Blood
entered in once every Year, so that there is no difficulty in this particular.
And that Christ entered into Heaven is clear enough; For Christ is not entered
into the holy places made with hands, which are the Figures of the true, but
into Heaven it self, there to appear before God for us, Ver. 24. of this
Chapter. 2. Christ entered into this Holy place. But there is a Question made of
the time when he entered.

That he entered forty days after the Resurrection, it is clear and express: For
he was taken up into Heaven, Acts 1. 11. He was carried up into Heaven, Luke
24. 71. And, He that descended, is the same also that ascended far above all
Heavens to fulfill all things, Ephesians. 4. 10.

But there seems to be another entrance before this; and that was immediately
upon his Death. For when he had given up the Ghost, immediately the Vail of the
Temple was rent in the midst from the top to the bottom; and his Soul,
separated from his Body, and commended into his Fathers hands, entered into
Paradise. That he entered at that time into Heaven with his Soul separated from
his Body, the Text does seem to affirm: And what should the renting of the
Catapetasm and the Inner-Vail immediately upon his Death signify, but that the
great High Priest was ready to enter Heaven? Again, it may be said more
properly, that he entered Heaven with or by his Blood, when his Soul was
separated from his Body, than when his Body was risen, and made immortal, and
both Soul and Body jointly ascended. For it was the custom of the High Priest,
according to God's Institution, upon the slaying of the Sacrifice, and taking
of the Blood, to enter the holy, Place; and the Type and Antitype should
agree, especially in this particular. Further, the expiatory Offering was not
complete, till the Blood was presented before the Throne of God in the inner
Sacrary; and it was suitable to the Type, that the great High Priest should,
after he was slain on Earth, present himself as slain in Heaven before the
Supreme Judge, as having suffered Death, and satisfied Justice for the sin of
man. But all this I leave to the judgment of Learned men, who shall seriously
search the Book of God, and impartially examine whether God does not speak this
in Scripture. And howsoever it is certain, that, whether he entered thus and
then, yet he so entered at one time or other, that he obtained eternal
Redemption. 3. He entered once: This informs us, that though the High Priest
entered once every year, and so might enter above a thousand times; yet Christ
entered thus but once. For, as we shall read, both in the latter end of this,
and also in the beginning of the next Chapter, once to enter, or one entrance
in this manner was sufficient; because one Death, one Offering was able to do
that which all the Offerings of all the Highpriests under the Law could not
do; neither was any more Offering needful, seeing this had done all that was
requisite for satisfaction and merit. 4. This entrance was by or with Blood;
and this is set down negatively and affirmatively. Negatively this was not
blood of Goats and Calves, and that with which the Legal Highpriests did enter
within the Vail. For, as we may read, Levit. 16. upon the day of expiation a
Bullock and a Goat must be slain, and with the Blood of these he must enter the
holy Place. The reason of this is, because the blood of Beasts could not
satisfy divine justice, expiate the sin of man, and purge his conscience and
immortal Soul, and so make the eternal penalty removable. Therefore it must be
a far more excellent blood, the blood of the Son of God, his own blood; which
was pare, unspotted, and most precious. The reason, 1. Why it must be by blood,
is, because as without blood under the Law, there was no Legal Remission or
Expiation; so it was the Will of God, that without blood there should be no
eternal Remission. For though God was merciful, and sat in the Throne of Grace
and Mercy, yet his Justice did require that satisfaction should be made: and
seeing sin was committed, and punishment was deserved, and due by his Law
violated; therefore sin must be punished, before it could be pardonable; and
seeing the punishment was Death, Death must first be suffered. This was thus
appointed and done, to signify his purest holiness, his hatred and detestation
of sin, his love of Justice, and his respect unto the Law, which bound to
obedience, or upon disobedience to punishment. By this he signified, and all
men must know it, that it is a dangerous thing to transgress his Laws, and this
must hear and fear. But then, 2. Why by his own blood? The reason, in general,
is the will of God, which did determine upon this blood; and the wisdom of God,
which knew that it was the fittest of all other. But more particularly, the
blood of Goats and Calves was no ways convenient: For it is not possible, that
the blood of Bulls and of Goats should take away sins, Hebr. 10. 4. Nor the
blood of man, of the best man, though far above the blood of Bullocks and
Goats was fit; for all men are guilty, and their blood is stained. Neither was
the life of Angels fit; for though it might be precious, yet God did not think
it sufficiently satisfactory and meritorious for sinful man. And suppose an
High Priest should offer his own blood, yet that would not serve: Therefore it
must be Christ's blood, his own blood, which was pure and without spot, and
most precious; not only because it was the blood of God, that eternal Word made
Flesh, which was God, but because it was shed with greatest pain, and most
willingly out of love to sinful man, whose Flesh and Blood he had assumed; and
in obedience to his heavenly Father, who had made him the great High Priest,
appointed him to be the Head Surety and Hostage of sinful man, and commanded
him to lay down his life, and do this great Service. And without the blood of
this Sacrifice he could not have entered into the holy place, and obtained
eternal Redemption.

This is the fourth thing observed in the Text, and the Subject of the fourth
Proposition concerning one immediate effect of his blood. For he entering by his
own blood once, obtained eternal Redemption.

Where we must enquire,

1. What Redemption is. 2. Why this Redemption is said to be eternal. 3. How it
was obtained by the blood of Christ entering into Heaven, or by Christ entering
Heaven once with his own blood.


1. The word (...) and so [(...)] comes of [(...)] which is the same with (...)
Copher in Hebrew, which signifies a price or gift offered to a Judge or an
Enemy to deliver one from Death, or some other evil or punishment, and it is
called a Ransom; in this respect Christ is said to give himself [(...)]
[Lytron] a Ransom, 1 Timothy 2. 6. and Matthew. 20. 28. In that place it is such a
price as is given to a Judge, who has power of Life and Death for to save the
life of one capitally guilty, and by Law bound to suffer Death. The effect of
this price is, 1. To propitiate the Judge. 2. Upon this propitiation made to
save the lise of the party guilty. In this place [(...)] is the effect of this
price, and is turned Redemption, Expiation, Remission, Propitiation. It Is true,
that the word may signify many other things, and any kind of deliverance from
evil. But, in this place, it is evident, that it signifies the deliverance of
guilty persons from Death upon a price given and accepted. The party to whom
this price was given, is God, as Supreme Judge, before whose Tribunal man
stands guilty and liable to Death. The effect of it is propitiation, which
includes satisfaction of divine Justice, and merit of his favor and love: Upon
this propitiation, sin becomes remissible and pardonable; therefore Redemption
and Propitiation are sometimes by a Metonymy taken for Remission, according to
that of the Apostle, In whom we have Redemption through his blood, the
forgiveness of sins, Ephesians. 1. 7. Col. 1. 14. In both which places the latter
word seems to explain the former: Yet Redemption is not Remission properly and
actually, but [efficienter], as the effect is said to be in the cause before it
exist, because of the virtue and power, which abiding in the cause, is
sufficient to produce the effect; and Christ must make sin by this Redemption
remissible, before it can be actually remitted.

2. This Redemption and Propitiation is said to be eternal, not because Christ
is always redeeming and propitiating; for that work was performed speedily and
in a short time: But it is such, because the virtue of it is of perpetual
continuance in respect of all Sinners capable; of all sins according to the
Laws of God-Redeemer remissible; and of the remission it self, which frees the
Sinner from all his sins, from the eternal guilt and all penalties for ever.
Upon this Redemption is grounded that comfortable promise of the New Covenant
formerly mentioned, Chap. 8. 12. where God binds himself to remember our
iniquities no more, that is, to give eternal pardon. This adjunct of perpetuity
is added to difference this Redemption and Expiation from that of the Law,
which must be made atleast every year. It did but extend backward to sins of
one year, and the force of it presently expires.

3. This was found and obtained by Christ, as by his own blood entering once
into the holy place. None could make this propitiation but Christ, neither
could he do it, except he enter the holy place; Neither by that, except he
enter with blood, his own blood. But if he enter with that blood but once, then
the work is done for ever. Why this Expiation and Propitiation should be made
by blood, and Christ's blood, you have heard already: But why with his blood
must he enter the holy place? and how, being entered by and with this blood,
propitiation should be made [for us], as Translators by adding these words
understand and supply the place, though more difficult, yet is to be cleared.
1. Some tell us that, because [(...)] is the Aorist tense, consignifying time
past, eternal Redemption and Propitiation was found and obtained first, and
then afterward he entered the holy place. And it is true, that when Christ had
suffered Death, the principal work was done, and the foundation of eternal
Remission was laid: Yet if Death, and shedding of his blood, obtained eternal
Redemption before he entered Heaven, at lest in his Soul separated from his
Body; then the Type and Antitype did not agree. For the legal Redemption and
Expiation was not made instantly upon the slaying of the Coats and Bullocks:
but before the work could be finished, and sin expiated, the High Priest must
take the Blood and Incense and enter the Holy of Holies; and first burn the
Incense, and then sprinkle the blood upon, and before, the Mercy-seat: without
both which done, neither his own sins, nor the sins of the People could be
expiated. In all bloody and propitiatory Sacrifices were required [Mactatio and
Oblatio] the death of the thing Sacrificed, and the offering of it to God; and
the blood must not only be shed, but in the Law it must be sprinkled either
upon the horns of the Altar without, or upon and before the Mercy-seat within
the second Vail. The blood being shed, was the death of the thing Sacrificed;
and the sprinkling of it upon the Altar or the Mercy-seat, was the presenting
it to God. These both did signify, that life must go for life, and the blood
wherein is the life must be presented to God as Supreme Judge, and accepted of
him before the work of Sacrificing could be finished and made efficacious.
Therefore Christ's Sacrifice could not be completed, except he be not only
slain on Earth, but present himself as slain before the Mercy-seat of God in
Heaven, and both the suffering and offering must be with Incense and Prayer
requesting eternal Redemption. Whether he did miraculously take some or all his
blood shed, as some conceit, into Heaven; is not necessary to be believed,
except it be evident out of Scripture unto us, that he did so. Some Socinians
affirm and infer from hence, that Christ was not a Priest till he entered
Heaven; because though his Suffering was on Earth, yet his Offering was in
Heaven. But this is ridiculous, and not worth the answering. For though this
work of Sacrificing was not finished before he entered Heaven; yet it does not
follow, that he was no Priest before that time, because this great Sacrifice
was not finished. For Aarou must be a Priest, before he can minister in the
Tabernacle, much more before he enter into the inner Sanctuary with the
expiatory blood. The Socinian does not assert any entrance of Christ into
Heaven, but that only one by and upon his Ascension; yet Christ was made a
complete Priest instantly upon his Resurrection. For from these words, [This
Day (which was the day of Resurrection) have I begotten thee,] the Apostle
proves Christ to be made a Priest, and that by those words. This is point-black
against his assertion; Christ may be, and was a Priest by Designation,
Consecration, Constitution, Confirmation. He was designed from his Birth, yet
more solemnly upon his Baptism; he was consecrated by his great Sacrifice, he
was fully constituted and made a complete Priest upon his Resurrection; he was
confirmed Priest by Oath upon his Ascension and Session at the right hand of
God. He must needs therefore be very ignorant that shall think, that he was no
Priest before this confirmation in Heaven.

But, 2. How was this propitiation made, and this eternal Redemption obtained
[for us.] It Is said he gave himself a Ransom for all, 1 Timothy 2. 6. That he
gave his life a Ranson^^ for many, Matthew. 20. 28. That he was delivered for our
Offenses, Romans 4. 25. That he is the propitiation for our sins; and not for
ours only, but also for the sins of the whole World, 1 John 2. 2. And more
fully in the Prophet, All we like Sheep have gone astray, we have turned every
one to his own way, and the Lord has laid on him the iniquities of us all,
Esaias 53. 6. Out of all which places, especially the last, we may observe, 1.
That Christ suffered, and by his blood entered Heaven for man. 2. For man as
sinful. 3. To make God propitious to us for ever. 4. God in this is to be
considered as a Judge punishing us in him, and by laying the iniquities, that
is, the punishments of the iniquities of us all upon him. 5. He did not suffer
not offer for his own sins; for God made him, who knew no sin, sin (that is, a
suffering or propitiatory and redemptory Sacrifice) for us, so that the benefit
redounds to us. 6. Seeing he suffered for sin, though not for his own, his
Death was a punishment in proper sense. 7. The blood of Christ shed and offered
to God as Supreme Judge, was the price of our Redemption, and the immediate
effect thereof was eternal propitiation. 8. In this work, Christ by God's
appointment, and his own voluntary submission, became our Surety and Hostage,
and so liable to Death. That God did punish sin in him, was justice; that he
did punish our sins in him, was mercy unto us: It Is true, that God considered
as a private person, and as the party offended was merciful, and pityed Man;
but as supreme Lawgiver and Judge of Mankind, he must be just, and punish Sin;
that, his Justice being satisfied, he might have free and full power to pardon
Sin, and that without any breach of Justice.

The Intention of the Apostle in this Text is, to prove and make it evident,
That this Service and Sacrifice was far more excellent than the greatest
Service the Levitical High Priest could or did perform: This super-excellency
is set forth in respect 1. Of the Blood, which was not that of Goats or Calvs,
but his own Blood. 2. In respect of the place into which he entered, which was
not an earthly Sanctuary, but the Holy place of Heaven. 3. And most of all in
respect of the Effect, which was not a yearly Expiation, but an eternal
Redemption. In Form he argues thus,

That Service wherein by his own Blood he enters Heaven but once, and obtains
eternal Redemption, is more excellent than the Service of that Priest, who
enters often with the Blood only of Calvs and Goats into an earthly Sacrary,
and obtains but a yearly Remission.

But Christ's is such, and the Levitical High-Priest's Service but such as is
formerly described.

Therefore Christ's Service is more excellent.

. 12. The Apostle goes on, and proves by a second Argument, that the Service
and Ministry of Christ is far more excellent, and that in respect of the Effect
which it has virtue to produce. The former Effect was Propitiation or
Expiation; this latter and second is cleansing or Purification: This, as the
former, is delivered by way of Comparison, and the Comparison is in Quantity,
yet presupposing another in Quality. The whole may be reduced to Propositions
in this manner,

1. The Blood of Bulls and Goats, and the Ashes of an Heifer, sprinkling the
unclean, sanctify to the purifying of the Flesh.

2. The Blood of Christ, who, through the eternal Spirit, offered himself
without Spot to God, purges the Conscience from dea^d Works to serve the
Living God.

3. If the Blood of Bulls and Goats, and the Ashes of an Heifer, sprinkling the
unclean, sanctifies to the purifying of the Flesh; then much more does the
Blood of Christ, who, through the eternal Spirit, offered himself without spot
unto God, to purge the Conscience to serve the Living God.

The Comparison in quality is between the Blood of Bulls and Goats; the thing
wherein they are compared and do agree, is purging and sanctifying. The
Comparison in quantity, presupposing also a dissimilitude in this, that one
does sanctify the Flesh, the other the Conscience, is this, That if the one
has power to purge and cleanse the Flesh, the other has much more power to
purge the Conscience. To proceed unto particulars, the parts of the Comparison
are two: 1. The Proposition. 2. The Reddition; The first Ver. 13, the second,
Ver. 14.

In the first, we have the Cause, the Blood of Bulls and Goats, and the Ashes
of an Heifer; then the Effect, sanctifying, to the purifying of the Flesh. Of
the Blood of Bulls and Goats, which is the same with the Blood of Goats and
Calvs, Ver. 12. you have heard before; for that was the Expiatory Blood,
wherewith the Priest, entering the most Holy place, did sprinkle the Mercy-Seat;
and the Effect of this was the Expiation of the Sins of the Priest and the
People, whereby they were freed from such penalties as the Law imposed upon
persons for some Legal and Ceremonial Offenses.

The second purifying was by the Ashes of a red Heifer, mixed with running
Water, and sprinkled upon Persons or things polluted by touching or being near
the dead: Of this you may read at large Numb. 19. The Effect of both was
sanctifying, by cleansing from some Legal pollution and Guilt; but neither of
these could free any person from the Obligation to eternal penalties, nor
spiritually purify and make holy the Spirit and Soul of Man. Some think that
the Blood did signify the Death and bloody Sacrifice of Christ, the Water the
sanctifying Spirit: Yet both are here compared with the Blood of Christ as
Shadows of it. This is the Proposition.

. 13. The Reddition follows, Ver. 14. Where we have two absolute
Propositions, and part of the Comparison.

1. That Christ offered himself through the eternal Spirit without Spot unto
God.

2. That the Blood of Christ, who thus offered himself, does purge the
Conscience from dead Works, to serve the Living God.

3. The Comparative part is, that it has much more Power, or does much more
purge the Conscience.

The first Proposition is,

Christ, through the eternal Spirit, offered himself without Spot unto God.
Where we may consider, 1. The Priest. 2. The thing offered. 3. The manner how.
4. The thing by which. 5. The Person to whom the Offering was made. 1. The
Priest was Christ, the Word made Flesh, and the Son of God, designed a Priest
by God. 2. The thing offered by this Priest was Himself; that is, his own Life,
his own Body, and some add, his own Soul. This was spoken in opposition to such
things as the Levitical Highpriests offered, as Bulls and Goats; for none of
them offered either other men or themselves. 3. The manner how this was offered
is this, that it was offered without Spot: The thing offered, and the Offering,
and the manner of offering, were all pure. 4. That, by or through which he made
this Offering, was the eternal Spirit. By Spirit, some understand the Soul,
which is said to be eternal, because it is immortal. And certainly, in respect
of his Body, he may rather be said to be the thing offered, and in respect of
his Soul, the Priest offering: For this offering is said to be the doing of
God's Will, and an Act of Obedience unto death, the death of the Cross; and
this is a proper Act of his immortal Soul and Spirit: Yet this Soul and Body
too were united to the Word, which as God was an eternal Spirit; in which
respect, some understand by eternal Spirit, the Word and Divine Nature of
Christ: And both Soul and Body were in the highest degree sanctified and
supported, especially in suffering death, by the Holy Ghost, which some think
is here meant. It Is certain, he did offer himself by his immortal Spirit,
sanctified and supported by the Holy Spirit, and united to the Word, which with
the Father and the Holy Ghost are one God and eternal spiritual Substance. 5.
The party to whom he offered himself was God, as supreme Lord of Life and
Death, Lawgiver and Judge of Mankind: For he alone had power to appoint him to
be Priest, to be Offering, and to offer; and also to accept this Offering in
behalf of sinful Man, and thereupon to justify him believing, and reward him
with eternal Life. All these are expressed and joined together, to set forth
the Excellency and the immanent and internal Virtue of Christ's Blood: For, How
excellent, and of what rare virtue and causality, must that Blood, Death,
Sacrifice, be which was the Blood of Christ, who was by God's own immediate
Commission and Designment made the highest and the greatest Priest, and offered
Himself, the best Sacrifice that ever was, and that through the eternal Spirit,
purely spiritual, and most holy, and impolluted, and that unto God the supreme
Lord and Judge: and in that manner, that the very Act of offering, from first to
last, was most exactly conformable to his Will? It had all the perfections of a
Sacrifice, and in the highest degree. The Levitical High Priest was a Priest,
but far inferior to Christ; he offered Goats and Calvs, but not himself, and
if he had offered himself, yet the thing offered had been nothing to this; he
offered indeed to God, yet he had not that near Relation unto, Agreement with,
and Interest in God, as this Priest had: He offered by or through his own
Spirit, which was very imperfect, and the imperfections of his very Act of
Offering were very many and great. Therefore it was no wonder, that it should
not have the like rare efficiency with this.

The second Proposition in this Verse is,

That Christ's Blood does purge the Conscience, etc. This is the outward
Efficacy and Working of this Blood upon a certain Subject rightly disposed. In
the words we may observe,

1. The Conscience, which is the Subject. 2. The pollution of the Conscience.
3. The purging and cleansing of it. 4. The ^ind and Consequent of this
cleansing.


1. The Conscience is the Spirit and immortal Soul of Man, which is [Intimum
Hominis] the in most and most excellent part; yet this is not here considered
merely as a spiritual, immortal, intellective, and free Substance, created and
preserved by God, but as subject unto his Power, bound by his Laws, conscious
to it is own Disobedience, and sensible of it: For the Blood of Christ does
actually purge no other Soul, nor any Soul, but thus qualified; neither without
this Qualification is the Soul immediately capable of this Purgation.

2. The Pollution of the Soul is from dead Works, where, by dead Works, it is
generally granted are meant Sins, and that not only of Commission but Omission.
All the Works of Man should be living Works, and issue from a Soul endued with
a spiritual and supernatural Life, have a spiritual and supernatural Form,
which is Conformity to Divine Law, and should tend unto a supernatural and
spiritual end. When they either issue from a Soul destitute of this heavenly
Life, or want this Conformity, they are dead Works, base, and such as becomes
not so excellent a Creature. The ordinary Reasons given by Authors, why Sins
are called dead Works, are, because they are the Works of men dead in sin, want
the Life and Form of Holiness, and merit death and Punishment; or because men
are dead and senseless of them, and so continue in them: Yet the Apostle seems
to allude in this to the Pollutions by the dead, whereof we read Number. 19. 18.
For he that touched a Bone, or one slain, or one dead, or a Grave, was legally
unclean and polluted. In every sin we commit, our Soul does come too near unto,
or morally and spiritually does touch, something that is base, vile, and far
below it self, and so debaseth and defiles it self, and makes it self not only
guilty, but unholy and unfit for having any Communion with God.

3. To purge this Conscience is, to free this Soul thus conscious of sin from
the Guilt and the Impurity, and other sad Consequents of Sin, so that thereupon
the Sinner is neither liable to Punishment, or debarred from Communion with
God. This purging is not only Justification, but that which is called
Sanctification and inherent Holiness, without which no Man shall see God; the
want whereof, if we consider it as following upon a former demerit, is the
greatest Punishment of all other: For, if we could imagine a Man pardoned and
freed from the Guilt of former sin, and left inherently polluted and
unsanctified, he must needs remain in a sad condition. But we cannot truly thus
imagine, if want of the sanctifying Spirit be a Punishment for former Sin: If
we be once thus purged, there is no more Conscience of Sin once pardoned, no
fear of God's wrath, nor of the eternal penalty; for we, being once purged,
have peace with God, quiet of Conscience, and hope of Glory.

4. To serve the true and living God, following upon the purging of the
Conscience, is a special privilege. To understand this more distinctly, we must
know, that under the Law, whosoever was polluted by the presence or touch of
the dead could not enter into the Congregation, with the rest of God's
sanctified People, for to worship, or have any Communion with, God. If he
should dare and presume to enter before he was purged or purified, he defiled
the Tabernacle and Sanctuary of God, and that Soul must be cut off, Numb. 19.
13, 20. That which answers unto this Privilege is, the liberty of free access
with boldness and confidence unto the Throne of Grace, to offer up our Prayers,
Thanksgiving, and other Services unto God propitiated and reconciled, so as to
be accepted, and receive Mercies and Blessings from him: For, being justified
and sanctified, we do not fear God as a severe Judge, we do not stand at a
distance or fly from him, but come near unto him as Children to a loving
Father. This same Service of the true and living God, who is Light most pure
and holy, does presuppose us justified, sanctified, reconciled, adopted. There
are degrees, as of this cleansing, so of this serving God; for we are not
cleansed fully from all Sin in this Life, but we shall be in the Life to come,
and then we shall have full Communion with our God, and serve him far more
perfectly in the glorious Temple and Sacrary of Heaven.

This is the purging of the Conscience in it self: Now we must consider it, as
an Effect predicated of the Blood of Christ the Cause; for it being so noble
and excellent an Effect, must have some rare and noble Cause. The Cause
therefore must be Blood; yet no Blood, but this Blood of Christ, with which he
entered into the Holy place of Heaven, after it was shed, will serve the turn,
or reach this Effect; yet this is not an immediate but a mediate Effect of this
Blood thus shed and presented to God: For, one immediate effect, antecedent to
this is expiation and satisfaction of God's Justice, whereby Sin became
pardonable. And if Christ had not obtained and found eternal Expiation by this
blood, he could never by it have purged the Conscience. Yet this blood has
this power first, and then does exercise it, when he finds a Subject rightly
disposed; which is a Conscience sensible of sin, and appealing to the Throne of
Grace, where it pledges this blood of Christ. So that this purging actually
considered, presupposes the blood of Christ shed, offered, accepted as a
sufficient propitiation, and the Sinner to be purged, penitent, and believing.
This seems to be signified by that Ceremony of purification described and
prescribed, Numb. 19. For he that was once polluted and unclean, must be
willing, desirous, and careful to be cleansed, with the ashes mixed with water
sprinkled upon him. The blood of some Sacrifice did expiate, the ashes with
water sprinkled did cleanse. So the blood of Christ shed and offered, does
expiate sin so far as to make it remissible, and the sprinkling of that by the
Spirit upon the penitent and believing does purge.

The third Proposition in this verse is, that much more does the blood of
Christ purge the conscience; that is, 1. It purges the conscience. 2. It
purges it effectually and fully. But join this with the former, and then we
have the substance of the whole in one proposition, which you heard before; and
the Apostle in the words argues to this purpose,

If the blood of Bulls and Goats, etc. had power of sanctifying the Flesh,
then much more the blood of Christ does purge the Conscience:

But the blood of Bulls and Goats, etc. did sanctify the Flesh.

Therefore much more the blood of Christ, etc. does purge the Conscience, etc.

This place implies, that the expiations by Blood, and purifications of the Law
could neither satisfy God's Justice, nor purge the Conscience from spiritual
filth and guilt of sin; yet the blood of Christ could do both. And here we must
seriously consider the excellency of the blood of Christ, the wonderful purging
efficacy thereof, and the unspeakable mercy of God in providing this remedy,
and setting open this fountain to wash and cleanse away our sin. O blessed
blood! O happy man! O come to this Fountain, wash and bathe thy self here every
day. Here the wrath of God is quenched, the tormenting conscience quieted, the
filthy Soul washed, and prepared for the communion with her God. But we are
ignorant of the virtue of this blood, senseless of our sins, careless of our
purification, and so presume to enter into God's presence, and defile his
Tabernacle, and bring his wrath upon us. But before I leave this Text,
something further must be said concerning the efficacy of the blood of Bulls and
Goats, and the ashes of an Heifer; also of the efficacy of the blood of
Christ. For it must be enquired, whether the efficacy of both depend merely
upon divine Institution, o^ upon the nature of the Causes. 1. That neither is
Physical will be granted. 2. That the purifying efficacy of the blood of Goats
and Bulls, and the ashes of an Heifer sprinkling the unclean, did depend merely
upon the will and positive Institution of God will not be denied. For neither
the blood, nor ashes, nor sprinkling had any moral, spiritual, intrinsecal
virtue: They were all, in themselves considered, indifferent things, and a fit
matter and subject of some positive Law. 3. The offering, and also the shedding
of the blood of Christ were, in respect of Christ acting and officiating in
both, purely moral, and divine in the highest degree of Service. For, his
suffering of Death for the sin of man, at the Command of his heavenly Father,
was the highest degree of obedience that ever was performed to God. There was
in it so much love to God, so much love of Man, so much self denial, so much
humility and patience, and such a resignation of himself to God, as never could
be paralleled. It was so excellently qualified, that it was, in a moral sense,
most powerful to move God to mercy, who is so mightily inclined to mercy of
his own accord. It was most pleasing unto God, and most highly accepted of God
considered in it self. But seeing it was the suffering of a party different
from man guilty, (who was bound himself to make satisfaction, or to suffer
according to the Law transgressed); that it should be so far accepted of God,
as to make the Sinner pardonable, and that certain pardon should follow upon
Repentance and Faith, depended upon the free will of God, who, in strict
justice, might have refused any satisfaction offered him in behalf of man, who
deserved to dye, and might justly have been condemned to eternal Death. It was
one thing to accept the service and obedience in it self, and another thing to
accept it so for sinful man, as to determine such inestimable benefits should
follow thereupon, and accrue to the sinful guilty Wretch. The Socinian upon the
Text is very muddy and obscure; And, 1. Though he deny Christ's satisfaction
and merit, yet he confesses that the shedding of the blood of Christ, even of
its own nature, had force and power to procure unto Christ all power in Heaven
and Earth, and all judgment and arbitrament of our Salvation, and to produce in
us the cleansing of Conscience. This is not only obscure, but, if well
examined, false: For what is it [of its own nature to procure?] For if he mean
by the word [procure] merit upon satisfaction, it is true, that by his blood he
satisfied and merited; but both these he denies. If he understand that, of it
own nature, it did so procure this power and this effect, so as it did solely
or principally depend upon the will of Christ as Man (for he denies him to be
God), and not principally and solely upon the will of God, it is false. Here I
must demand, What difference he makes between procuring and meriting, and also
take occasion to show the nature of meriting, which is a moral act, upon which
some good or reward does follow, not necessarily, and [exnatura rei], but
voluntarily, according to the will of him in whose power the reward is: but of
this elsewhere.

2. He puts a difference between Christ's Priesthood and his Mediatourship,
and makes his Mediatourship to end with his Death, and his Priesthood there to
begin. But the Apostle makes no such difference, but in this Epistle he takes
Mediator and Priest for the same. That his Mediatourship should end, and his
Priesthood should begin with and upon his Death, I will believe, when he can
prove it, which he can never do; for there is not the least ground for it in
the Word of God; and it must needs be false upon this account, that both are
the same.

3. He affirms, that the blood of Christ takes efficacy and force to purge fin,
from the subsequent oblation of Christ in offering himself in Heaven; and this
he not only here, but elsewhere does often assert. But, 1. It Is very clear and
certain, that the total resignation of himself unto the will of his heavenly
Father, and his willing suffering of Death, the voluntary laying down of his
life, the making himself a whole Burnt-offering, was properly the oblation of
himself. This was on Earth, this was the great act of Obedience, the great
Service that was so acceptable to God, wherein Christ showed himself a mirror
of so many heavenly virtues. The representing of himself slaln in Heaven was
not this offering, nor the appearing before his Fathers Throne upon his
Ascension: The Scripture no where affirms it, he cannot instance in one place
for this. And though God did require it, yet it was not the meritorious act;
therefore never let him, or any of that party, delude us with his false and
groundless notion of offering himself in Heaven. By his Death Christ did
satisfy and merit; by his Resurrection and Ascension he makes his Death
effectual unto us, both by revealing the Gospel, and sending the Spirit to work
Faith in us, and make us capable of remission and eternal life; and by his
Intercession and pleading his blood, he obtains actual pardon, and in the end
full fruition of eternal life. This is the meaning of those words, [Who was
delivered for our Offenses, and rose again for our Justification,] Romans 4. 25.

4. He tells us, that Christ was filled with the eternal Spirit; that is, with
the power of God, which clarified him from all mortality, and made him eternal,
subject to no destruction.] This is a strange fancy of his own, and invented
because he is so great an Adversary to Satisfaction. And, 1. He says, that
eternal Spirit is the power of God, which he so understands, as that he denies
him to be God. 2. The power is either God himself, or some active power,
whether natural or supernatural created by God in some of his Creatures, or an
act of God extrinsecally supporting and preserving something creued. Now that
which made Christ's Sacrifice and Suffering so acceptable to God, and so
efficacions, was the sanctifying power of the Spirit, enduing him with such
heavenly virtues, and supporting him in this great Service of sacrificing
himself. For if he had not received a divine and supernatural active power of
holiness and righteousness inherent in his Soul, which so strongly inclined and
moved him to obedience in greatest temptations, and had been extrinsecally
supported by him; this Offering had never been so acceptable to God, nor
efficacious to purge the Conscience. And this was a far more glorious effect of
the Spirit then to make him immortal, and bring him into Heaven. For this
immortality and entrance into Heaven were Rewards, not Virtues; and only made
way for the exercise of his Regal and Sacerdotal Power, in the Palace and
Temple of Heaven.

5. He says, that by the Offering of Christ is signified his singular and only
care for the Expiation of our Sins, and for our Salvation. Where it is to be
observed, 1. That he understands this of Christ, as entered by his Ascension
into Heaven. 2. That by Expiation, he means Remission and Sanctification,
without any respect unto Propitiation and Satisfaction by blood antecedent. 3.
Christ's offering of himself is a religious Service performed unto God, as
Supreme Lord and Judge offended with sinful man, yet willing upon certain terms
to be merciful unto him; And one condition, which performed, he will accept,
is, that Christ as Surety for man, should suffer Death for man, to satisfy
divine Justice. In this respect is he said to give himself a Ransom or Price:
How far different this is from the offering here described, is easy to
understand. The word [(...)] is used about sixteen times in this Epistle, but
never taken in his sense; which is so absurd and unworthy, that no rational
man, as rational, much less a Christian and a Scholar can any ways approve,
but reject with scorn. The rest of his discourse upon this Text is like his
description of Christ's offering; and by it he seeks to cast a mist upon the
divine Doctrine of the Apostle, lest he should confound himself, and suffer his
Reader to see the truth.

Dr. Gouge, upon this Text, affirms Christ to be a Priest in both natures,
which cannot be true; for though he that is Priest be God, yet, as God, he is
not, he cannot be, a Priest. For a Priest is an Officer, and all Officers, as
Officers, are made such by Commission from the Supreme Power, from whom they
derive their Office, whom they represent, and are Servants under them to serve
them. There are two prime and proper acts of Christ as a Priest, to Sacrifice
and offer himself to God as Supreme Lord, and to make Intercession to him. To
attribute either of these to God as God, and affirm them of him in proper
sense, is plainly blasphemous, and inexcusable; it turns the Lord into the
Servant, and God into Man.

. 14. Hitherto the excellency of Christ's Sacrifice and Service has been
manifested by two glorious and excellent effects; the one immediate, which is
Expiation; the other mediate, which is purging the Conscience from Dead Works.
The former made Sin pardonable, and the Consequents thereof removable; the
latter actually takes away Sin, and the Consequents thereof in him who
believes. Besides these two, there is a third effect showing it to be yet more
excellent, and that is confirmation of the New Covenant: for thus he writes,

Ver. 15. And for this cause is he the Mediator of the New Covenant, that by
means of Death for the Redemption of Transgressions under the first Test ament,
they which are called might receive the promise of eternal Inheritance.] THe
subject of this Verse is the confirmation of the New Covenant, by the Death and
Sacrifice of Christ; which is affirmed here, and illustrated from ver. 16. to
the 23. afterward. And here the Coherence is, 1. To be examined, 2. The Text
in it self to be considered. The coherence with the former, is in these words,
[And for this cause]. The Copulative [and] may be, as in other places,
expletive; or it may be used to signify, that the Death and bloody Sacrifice of
Christ, as it was ordained for another end, besides the two former of
Propitiation, and purging the Conscience; so it has another and a third
effect, which is, The confirmation of the New Covenant. For this is to
observed, that he speaks and still continues his discourse of the Death and
Blood of Christ. The words, [(...)], for this cause, which are turned by some
[therefore], may referr either to that which goes before, or that which
follows. If to that which goes before, then they inform us, that because Christ
by his Blood entering the holy place of Heaven, obtained eternal Remission, and
by it offering himself through the eternal Spirit without spot, does purge the
Conscience to serve the living God; therefore, and for this cause, and in
respect of these two effects, is he the Mediator of the New Covenant. If they
relate to that which follows, they are to be understood in this manner, That
because by the Death of Christ the Called receive the promise of eternal
Inheritance, therefore he is the Mediator of the New Covenant. This is the
Coherence; The absolute consideration of the Text follows, wherein we have
two principal express Axioms or Propositions;

1. Christ is the Mediator of the New Covenant.

2. By means of Death for the Redemption of Transgressions under the first
Covenant, the Called might receive the promise of eternal Inheritance.

3. Christ is a Mediator of the New Covenant, that by means of Death for
Redemption, etc. the Called may receive the promise, etc.

In the first we have,

1. A New Covenant. 2. A Mediator of this New Covenant. 3. Christ the
Mediator.


1. The New Covenant is that of the Gospel, whereof you have heard in the
former Chapter, where it was opposed unto, and compared with, the Old Covenant
made with the Fathers in the Wilderness, Exodus 19. as established upon better
promises. And that word which was there turned Covenant, is turned Testament;
not that there is any necessity, but a conceived congruity. For because here is
mention of an Inheritance, which is usually conveyed by the Will and Testament
of man, which Will is then firm and unalterable, when the Testatour dies;
therefore it was conceived by some, that in this place, that which formerly was
called a Covenant, should be called here a Testament: yet notwithstanding it
agrees with a Testament, and may by a Metaphor be so termed; yet it is more
properly a Covenant.

2. We have a Mediator of this Covenant; and what a Mediator is, you have
heard before, as also the distinctions of Mediators. Some tell us, that a
Mediator is [aut ^untius, aut sequester pacis, aut arbiter, aut sponsor]: yet
we need not insist upon these terms, for the Mediator of this Covenant is a
Priest and a Minister of it, as the High Priest was of the former Covenant.

3. This Mediator is Christ, who may be said to be Nuntius a D^o, Intercessor
pro h^mine, Arbiter inter utrumque, Sponsor pro utroque: and he is a Messenger
declaring the Covenant as a Prophet, an Arbitratour between God and Man as a
King, a Surety and Intercessour as a Priest. Yet though all this said, may be
in some respect true; yet it is neither accurate, nor pertinent in this place.
Christ as a Priest, and as a Priest officiating and offering himself a
Sacrifice to propitiate God, and purge the conscience of sinful Man, is the
Mediator of this Covenant. For as such and in this respect he mediates between
God and Man, to propitiate God, and to make man fit for the receiving of the
eternal Reward promised; and both these he does by his Blood and Death; without
which offered and applied, the promise would be void, and never take effect.
It Is true, that Christ does procure the Covenant, declares it, confirms it, and
makes it effectual; and in all these respects he may be said to be a Mediator.
Yet here he is made such principally and most properly as confirming and making
it effectual. Moses, and not Aaron, was the Mediator in the making and
confirming the Old Covenant. For he dealt between God and the People as a third
part; 1. In making the Covenant, in signifying God's Will unto the People, and
returning the People's Answer unto God, Exodus 19. 2. 2. In confirming it by
Blood, as an indifferent distinct person, Exodus 24. To which place the Apostle
does allude, as we shall understand hereafter in the illustration. This is the
meaning of the first Proposition,

The second may be divided for explication, and made two.

1. Christ by means of Death expiated Transgressions under the former Covenant.
2. By means of this Death the Called receive the promise of eternal
Inheritance.


The first implies,

1. That there were Transgressions under the former Covenant. 2. That there was
a Redemption of these Transgressions. 3. This Redemption was by the Death of
Christ.


The first is clear enough; for Moses, Aaron, David, and the Saints of God from
the times of Moses till the exhibition of Christ had their sins, much more
others not sanctified.

The second cannot be doubted of; for if there was no Redemption of those Sins
and Transgressions, then they could not be saved, they must suffer eternal
punishments, as they did temporal. By Redemption here is meant Expiation and
Propitiation, whereby their sins were made remissible, and, upon certain terms
and conditions performed, actually to be remitted.

The third will be granted in general, that the Expiation was by Death and
Blood; but that they were expiated by the Blood of Christ, many of the Jews
denied. Yet if they had understood the Books of Moses, they might have known
that the Blood of Bulls and Goats could not expiate the Sin of Man, a rational
and immortal Creature, not free from the eternal Punishment: Some Legal
frailties and infirmities they might expiate, and avert some temporal
penalties. Therefore there must of necessity be some other Death and Blood that
must do it: And this was the Blood of Christ, which all their Ilastical
Sacrifices and Lustrations did typify: Yet this is not so to be understood, as
though their Sins were not remissible and remitted, till Christ dyed and
offered his Sacrifice; for by virtue of this Death foreseen and fore-accepted,
they were in their Lifetime, upon their Repentance, Faith in Christ to come,
and their fervent Prayers pardoned. They did not rely upon their Legal
Sacrifices, nor expected Remission from them, but relied upon this Death of
Christ to come, according to the Promise, That in him all Nations should be
blessed. This Proposition is not to be understood exclusively, (as though
Christ's Death did expiate no Sin but that, which was committed under the first
Covenant,) but emphatically, to singnify, 1. That there was no Expiation for
Transgressions under the Law. 2. That if Christ's Death expiate former
Transgressions under the Law, much more will it expiate such as are committed
under the Gospel. 3. That there was no reason, as some observe, why they should
be offended with the Death of Christ, seeing without his Death and Blood,
neither they, nor their Fathers, could be saved, but must suffer eternal
penalties.

The second part of this second Proposition informs us, that

1. There is an eternal Inheritance. 2. There is a Promise of it. 3. The called
receive this Promise. 4. By means of Christ's Death they receive this Promise.


For, in the words we have an Inheritance, the Heirs, the Conveyance, the
Purchase, or rather the price whereby it is purchased. The Inheritance is
eternal Happiness, the Heirs are the called, the Conveyance is by Promise and
Covenant, the price of the purchase is Christ's Death and Blood.

1. The Inheritance is that blessed and glorious Estate, which is to be enjoyed
upon the Resurrection; for the full possession and enjoyment is reserved for
Heaven, where it is said to be laid up and reserved. It Is said to be eternal in
opposition to the Land of Canaan, which was the temporal Inheritance of them
and their Fathers, and to be enjoyed with the Blessings thereof so long as they
kept the Covenant of their God; and this was the Inheritance promised in the
former Covenant, and to this which formerly was called God's Rest, the Apostle
seems to allude, as a Type of this which was far more excellent and glorious,
of eternal continuance, in respect of the Inheritance it self, the parties
enjoying it, and the enjoyment thereof.

2. This eternal Inheritance was promised, there was a Promise of it: It was
God's, and the disposal of it was at his Will. Man for his sin was cast out of
Paradise, and forfeited Heaven, with the eternal Bliss thereof; yet it was in
his mind to give it sinful Man, who deserved it not, so great was his mercy and
bounty; and Man must know this: For this end he promised it, and by his Promise
bound himself to give it, and in it did signify his Will. The Effect of this
Promise was Obligation on God's part, and a Right unto it on Man's part, and an
Hope to obtain it, and a Comfort upon this Hope. And here it is to be observed,
that our Title to eternal life depends immediately upon the Promise, and is
derived from it; for, as the Israelites had the Land of Canaan, and held it by
Covenant and Promise, so do all the Children of God expect the heavenly Canaan,
and hope to have it by Promise of the new Covenant. Some do 'understand by the
Promise of eternal Inheritance, this Inheritance promised; yet there must be a
Promise received, before we receive the thing promised.

3. After the Inheritance, and the Promise, and Conveyance, follows the Heirs,
which are here said to be the called. Some are not called at all; these have no
Promise of the Inheritance: Such were the Gentiles before the Gospel was
preached unto them; they were Strangers from the Covenants of Promise, having
no Hope, and without God in the World, Ephesians. 2. 12. Some are called, and have
the means of Conversion, but reject the terms of the Covenant, and refuse to
enter into it, and engage themselves; such were the unbelieving Jews, and many
others. Some are called, enter the Covenant, and solemnly bind themselves to the
observation of it, yet do not observe it. In respect of these two last it is
that Christ says, Many are called, but few are chosen, Matthew. 22. 14. None of
these are Heirs. Some are called, and are obedient to the heavenly Call, and
keep the Covenant; these receive the eternal Inheritance promised, and first
acquire the Title, and after that the Possession. Some were called before the
Exhibition of Christ, some after; the former are here principally meant, though
the latter with them receive the Inheritance.

4. These called Ones of former times, with us, receive this Promise by virtue
of Christ's Death expiating their sins, and of his Blood purging their
Conscience. To understand this, you must consider, that none, but such whose
Sins are expiated, and their Consciences purged, can be Heirs; for they must be
regenerated, and acted by the Spirit, and adopted Sons, before they can be
Heirs. For, as the Apostle argues, If Sons, then Heirs, Romans 8. 17. so may we
likewise say, If no Sons, then no Heirs. None can be Sons that are not
justified; none can be justified which believe not in the Death and Blood of
Christ; there can be no Belief in this Blood, if not shed. This Death and Blood
of Christ, 1. Expiates sin, and makes it remissible. 2. Merits the eternal
Inheritance promised, and the Promise too. 3. It merits the Spirit, to enable
Man to keep the Covenant, so as to obtain and receive the Inheritance. 4. It
merits a Power in Christ, 1. To reveal the Gospel, and give the Spirit to work
Repentance and Faith in sinful Man's heart. 2. Upon Repentance, and Faith, and
his Intercession, a Power to give Remission, and the eternal Inheritance. Take
away this Death, this Blood, there is no Expiation of Sin, no Inheritance, no
Covenant; and suppose a Covenant and a Promise, yet it is ineffectual, and
invalid, without this Blood, this Death: For, all the heavenly Promises are
made for and in consideration of this Blood satisfying his Justice and meriting
his Favor; so that without it they are all nothing to purpose, neither without
it can the called, though obedient to the heavenly Call, ever have any Right
unto, or Possession of, eternal Life: So that the whole strength and efficacy
of the Covenant does depend upon this Blood; for by it our Sins are expiated,
and our Consciences purged, so as to be capable of the Inheritance. This is a
most clear Text, to prove that the Saints, even under the Law, were called and
saved, and that not by the Ministry and Sacrifice of the Levitical Priests, but
by the Blood of Christ, the virtue whereof extended to former times, even the
times of Adam. Neither did they trust in their Sacrifices, and their Priests,
and the Blood of Bulls and Goats, and their Water of separation, but in the
Blood of Christ; yet their Faith was very implicit.

The third Proposition is, Christ is the Mediator of the new Covenant, for this
Reason and for this End. An excellent Covenant must have an excellent Priest
and Mediator; and seeing this Covenant does promise eternal Remission, and an
eternal Inheritance, it requires such a Priest as shall be able by his Ministry
and Service to obtain this Remission and Inheritance: This no Priests, by their
Sacrifices or any other Service, could do, but Christ could; and therefore not
they, but He, and He alone, was made the Mediator of this new Covenant: For, by
his Death he expiates sin, and purges the Conscience, so that the called
receive the Promise of eternal Inheritance, and the virtue of this Death is
universal in respect of time and persons called. The Sum of all this, is, That
Christ, by reason of his Death and Blood, expiating Sin, and purging the
Conscience, is the Mediator of the new Testament or Covenant, to confirm and
make it effectual to the Heirs of the Promise.

. 15. This Confirmation of the new Covenant is illustrated from a twofold
Similitude; the one is taken a Jure Naturali, the other a Jure Ceremoniali. The
first is taken from the Law of Nature, (for to it the Civilians refer the Rules
of Testaments and Wills,) and is delivered

Ver. 16. For where a Testament is, there must also of necessity be the death
of the Testator.

Ver. 17. For a Testament is of force after men are dead; otherwise it is of no
strength at all, whilst the Testator lives.

THis is an imperfect and contract Similitude; for the parts thereof, as of all
Comparisons, are two: 1. The Proposition. 2. The Reddition. And yet the
Proposition is only expressed, and the Reddition is only employed, and to be
supplied from the antecedent Context. In the Proposition we may observe two
things: 1. The necessity of the Death of the Testator barely asserted, Ver. 16.
2. The Reason thereof rendered, Ver. 17. The Argument in Form may be this, That
which is not of force whilst the Testator lives, that necessarily requires
the Death of the Testator to make it of force: But a Testament is not of force
whilst the Testator lives. Therefore it requires, to make it of force, the
Death of the Testator. The Assumption is expressed, 1. Affirmatively, A
Testament is of force after men who are Testators are dead. 2. Negatively, It Is
of no strength whilst the Testator lives. The Comparison at large is this: As
the Death of the Testator is necessary to make the Testament of force, so the
Death of Christ is necessary for to make the new Covenant of force: For, though
Christ might in some respect be a Mediator of the new Covenant, yet he could
not make it valid, firm, and effectual, without his death; neither we under the
Gospel, nor the Fathers under the Law, could without this Death be saved by it.
And as the death of the Testator gives full force and efficacy to the
Testament, and this Confirmation is an Effect of his Death; so the Death of
Christ gives full force to the new Covenant, and makes ^^ effectual; and this
validity and efficacy is an Effect of this Death of Christ, and manifests the
excellency of this Sacrifice, and of Christ the Priest who offered it.

The things compared as like, are, the Death of Christ, and the Death of a
Testator: The things wherein they agree are, 1. The like Effect of both, which
is, to confirm and make effectual some Instrument. 2. The necessity of both for
that end, to confirm and make effectual.

. 16. The Propositions in the first part of the Comparison are these,

1. There are Testaments of men. 2. These are not of force whilst the
Testators live. 3. They are of force upon the Death of the Testators. 4. The
Death of the Testators is necessary to make them of force.


1. The matter of all Testaments is a temporal estate, of these earthly Goods,
which God has given Man to preserve this temporal Life. The Testator is one
that has a just Title unto these Goods, so that he has power to dispose of
them: The Testament it self is the manner of disposing these Goods, so as to
give the same Right which he had in them unto other Persons after his Death;
and therefore it must signify his Will concerning these Goods, and nominate the
Persons who must succeed him, so as to have them. And because it is an Act of
Reason so to do, therefore the Testator (when he makes his Will) must be Compos
mentis, and have the Use of his Reason, and also sui Juris, and not under the
power of another. The end of it, is, to prevent future suits and dissensions
and Injustice about his Estate: The Light of Nature does teach men thus to
dispose of their temporal Goods, and therefore they are of ancient and
universal Use.

2. These are not in force whilst the Testators live; and the Reason of this
is, not only because whilst they are living they have need of, or do use,
their Goods; and though they make their Will in their lifetime, yet they have
power to change and alter them, Voluntas est ambulatoria.
but chiefly, because in a Will the Inheritance is so alienated and transmitted
to others, as that they can have no Right unto it but upon the Death of the
Testators, who signify in their Wills what their Heirs shall have, not whilst
themselves are living, but only when they are dead. If any alter these after
they are dead, the alteration is void, because it signifies not the Will of him
that is dead.

3. They are in force only upon the death of the Testators: This is that
wherein the death of Christ and of a Testator do agree, and for which the
Author made this Comparison, for Illustration of his former Doctrine. To be of
force, is, to be valid and firm, so as to give an immediate Title unto the
right Heirs, upon whom the Testator's Right actually descends. The Reason of
this legal force and validity is, not only because there is no possibility of
Alteration, but also because the Testator being by Death disseised of all Right
and Possession of any temporal estate in this Life, the time signified in the
Testament is come, wherein the Heir may challenge his Right, and the Will may
be put in execution.

4. The necessity of this Death to make the Testament valid, is evident from
what has formerly been said: The Reddition of this Comparison has been
already made; and from all this we learn, that though a Testament and the new
Covenant are like in this, that as there must be the Death of the Testator for
to make the Testament valid, and the Death of Christ to make the new Covenant
of force, yet they are unlike and different in many other things: For the Death
of the Testator does not purchase the Inheritance, norexpiate the Offenses of
the Heir, yet Christ's Death does both. Therefore the new Covenant is not a
Testament in proper sense, but is so called metaphorically. A L^pide and others
labor to make it a Testament, but all they can say is to little purpose:
Others again endeavor to prove a Testament to be a Covenant, and from hence
infer, that the new Covenant is a Testament; yet this is vain and needless.
For, all that can be said in this Point, if we will follow the Apostle and the
Scriptures, is, that for matter of Confirmation, the new Covenant and a
Testament agree in this, that both are confirmed by Death and Blood: For, as
the Testator has no intention to give his Inheritance, and part with the Title
or Possession, before he die; so, God did never intend to give Remission and
eternal Life, which he promises in the new Covenant, but for, and in the
consideration of, Christ's Death, by which they were purchased and merited; and
if Christ had not dyed, the Promises had been in vain, and of no force.
Therefore the Death of Christ is the Foundation, Life, and Soul of the new
Covenant; not only unto those who were called after his Death, but also unto
those who believed before his Death and Exhibition: Yet this Comparison may be
made, and so intended by the Author, as to signify, that Christ's Blood is of
far greater force to confirm the new Covenant, then the death of the Testator
to confirm a Testament made by him; for the former is of divine, the latter but
of humane constitution; and the former can no ways be violated, the latter may
be many ways made void.

. 17. The second Illustration is a Jure Ceremoniali, from the positive
Ceremonial Law of Moses, instituted by God, and that for several Ends, and
amongst the rest,

for Confirmation of the Covenant. Purification of things and persons.

The Apostle instanceth in both, and first in the Blood of Confirmation, Ver.
18, 19, 20. Where we must consider,

1. The Conneion. 2. The words themselves.


The Connection we have in the word (...), turned unde, itaque, propterea, in
Latin, and in English, Whereupon. The sense is this, Seeing the best way of
Confirmation and firmest Sanction of Laws, Covenants, Testaments, is by Death
and Blood, and judged so to be by God himself; therefore it seemed good to him
to confirm the first Covenant by Blood, and by that did even then intimate,
that the far better Covenant to succeed should be confirmed by far better
Blood. And therefore none should think it strange, that the new Covenant should
be confirmed by the Death and Blood of Christ, seeing it was the usual and
only way of confirming Testaments, according to the Custom of the Eastern
Nations; and besides, the first Covenant was so confirmed. That it was so, the
Apostle

1. Affirms. 2. Proves.


He affirms it

Ver. 18. Whereupon, neither was the first dedicated without Blood. Where we
have

1. The first. 2. The Dedication of the first. 3. The Dedication of it by
Blood.


2. By first, we must understand the first Covenant which God made with Israel
in Mount Horeb.

2. By Dedication is meant, the Confirmation and the solemn Sanction of the
same: For it was 1. Made between God and Israel, Exodus 19. 2. Then Laws given
as certain Articles and Conditions to be observed by the Peeople, were
revealed, and afterward written. 3. Both Laws and Promises were read and
assented unto. 4. The whole Covenant thus completed, was confirmed Exodus 24.
That which is dedicated unto God, by virtue of the Dedication becomes sacred
and inviolable, and so this Covenant upon the Confirmation was. In this
respect, that which is Dedication in respect of persons or things, is
Confirmation in in respect of the Covenant.

3. This Dedication was by Blood; for that way of Dedication or Confirmation is
the highest, most solemn, serious, and firm; for stronger cannot be. For using
of Blood, for sanction of Leagues and Covenants, seems to signify that the
parties confederating engage Blood and Life for the observation of them.
Whereas it is said, That [neither without Blood], which may seem to be Negative;
It Is the same with this, [and with or by Blood], which is Affirmative; and the
Copulative signifies, that not only Testaments of Men, but the first Covenant
of God was thus confirmed.

. 18. That which he affirmed, he proves

Ver. 19. For when Moses had spoken every Precept to the People, according to
the Law, he took the Blood of Bulls and Goats, with Water and scarlet Wool,
and Hysop^, and sprinkled both the Book and all the People.

Ver. 20. Saying, This is the Blood of the Covenant, which God has enjoined
you.

THe substance of this we find, Exodus 24. And we need not trouble our selves
either in the Omissions or Additions of the Apostle; for the Omissions may be
easily supplied from the place of Moses, and the Additions are there employed,
and here expressed for explication. In the words themselves, we may observe,

1. The action of Confirmation. 2. The words

1. The Action is sprinkling of Blood: The Sprinkler was of Scarlet Wool, and
Hysope; for the Sprinkler used in the Passover was a bunch of Hysope, Exodus 12.
20. The blood was the blood of Calves and Goats with water; for such were
Sacrificed for Burnt-Offerings and Peace Offerings. The things sprinkled with
blood, were the Book, wherein the Covenant was written, and out of which it was
read; and the People who engaged themselves in the Covenant. The time was, when
Moses had spoken every Precept to all the People, according to the Law: For the
Covenant must first be made, before it could be confirmed. And this sprinkling
upon the People, was the confirmation of the Covenant on the People's part, as
the sprinkling of it upon the Altar was the confirmation on God's part. This
was the action, described more fully then we find it in Exodus 24.

2. The words are added to the action, to signify the use and end of that
sprinkling, which is to ratify the League and Covenant. For in these words we
have,

1. A Covenant enjoined by God. 2. The Blood of this Covenant.


The History informs, 1. Of a Covenant made. 2. This Covenant enjoined by God
unto Israel: It Is said to be enjoined both because God having made and
instimted it, by Moses commanded it to be entered into, and confirmed by the
People; but also because in this Covenant there were certain Precepts, which
were Articles and Conditions, the observation whereof God did stipulate and
require at their hands. In Moses Exodus 24. 8. it is said to be the Covenant
which God had made with them; and he is said to make it not only because he was
the Author of it, but also because in it he was the principal party
covenanting and binding himself unto the People by his promises, which are so
made, that they prerequire the performance of the Precepts from them, if they
will either avoid the penalties threatened, orattain the Blessings and Rewards
promised. 3. This Covenant once made must be confirmed by Blood, and this Blood
sprinkled. For the meaning of the words, [This is the Blood of the Covenant],
is this, That this is the Blood by which this Covenant is confirmed and made
inviolable. And as this, so the New Covenant is confirmed by Blood; as is
evident from the words of our blessed Savior, in the Institution of the
Eucharist, saying, This Cup is the New Covenant in my Blood; which is shed for
you, Luke 22. 20. 1 Cor. 11. 25. Or, This is my Blood of the New Testament,
which is shed for the Remission of the Sins of many, Matthew. 26. 28. Mark 14.
24. Where we have, 1. A Now Covenant. 2. The Blood of this New Covenant, or the
New Covenant in this Blood, that is, this New Covenant confirmed by Blood, or
Blood confirming this New Covenant. 3. This Blood is the Blood of Christ shed
for Remission of Sins. This Remission of Sins is one principal Blessing
promised in this New Covenant; yet this promise had been in vain, and to no
purpose, if Christ's Blood had not been shed to satisfy divine Justice, and
make Sin remissible. For though Man should repent and believe, yet his Sin
could never have been actually remitted, if not by this Blood made remissible.
So that this Blood of Christ is the firm and immovable basis, upon which the
Covenant is fixed. Both these Covenants agree in this, that they were confirmed
by Blood, and to manifest this is the intention of the Apostle; and though the
confirmation of both be the same in general, yet as the Blood, so the manner of
confirmation was very different.

. 19. As there were several Ceremonials instituted by God for confirmation, so
there were some ordianed for purification; therefore it follows,

Ver. 21. Moreover he sprinkled with Blood both the Tabernacle, and all the
Vessels of the Ministry.

Ver. 22. And almost all things by the Law are purged with Blood: and without
sh^dding of Blood is no Remission.

IN these words, with those that follow in the next Verse, we have an explicate
and full comparison in quality; and both the parts are expressed. For we find,
1. The Proposition in these words. 2. The Reddition, ver. 23. In the
Proposition we may observe,

1. The sprinkling of several things with Blood. 2. The effect of this
sprinkling, which was purification. 3. The necessity of this sprinkling for
Remission.


1. Several things were sprinkled with Blood, the things thus sprinkled are
either named in particular, as the Tabernacle and the Vessels of the Ministry,
or signified by a more general term; yet with some diminution and abatement.
The general term is [all things], the abating Particle is almost; which
signifies, that many and the greatest part of them by far were sprinkled with
Blood; yet not all, but some were excepted, and were sprinkled and cleansed
with water.

2. The end of this was purging: We do not read of the sprinkling of the
Tabernacle with Blood in the Books of Moses; we find, that Aaron and his Sons,
with their Garments and the Altar were sanctified by Oil and Blood, Lev. 8. 38.
Neither do we find there signified, or here expressed by the Apostle what kind
of purging or sanctification this here mentioned is; There is a purging of
Consecration, of Sanctification or Explation. Consecration is a separation from
common use; Sanctification is a purging from pollution; Expiation is a freeing
from guilt. These two last seem here to be understood, at least principally;
yet we may distinguish between the cleansing of things and persons. Things may
be considered as common or polluted; as common, they are purged by
Consecration; as polluted, by re-consecration. Persons are impure, and as such,
they must be sanctified; or guilty, and as such they must be restored by
expiating Blood sprinkled. Some give the reason, why things, as the Tabernacle
and Vessels and other things must be purged by by Blood to be this, because man
being himself polluted, polluteth those things which he uses; and this is
something, though not all that may be said in this particular.

3. The necessity of this sprinkling is, because [without Blood there is no
Remission.] Where we have,

1. Blood shed. 2. Remission. 3. No Blood shed, no Remission.


1. By Blood shed, we must understand the Blood of some living thing to be
Sacrificed, and this Blood shed upon the slaying of the Sacrifice, and not only
shed, but usually sprinkled before it could purge. 2. Remission may be
Consecration in respect of things, and Expiation and Sanctification from
pollution in respect of persons. For Remission is not here to be taken
strictly, for freeing a person from guilt and obligation to punishment: Neither
is it in this place any cleansing from spiritual pollution of the Conscience,
or freedom from the spiritual and eternal penalties; but it is only a Legal
Remission of Legal guilt and impurity. 3. If where there is no Blood shed,
there is no Remission; then it follows, that unto Remission Blood shed is
necessary, not only as an antecedent to a consequent, but as a cause to the
production of an effect. It Is true, that the causality is not natural, but
moral: By this God even then did signify that Blood was necessary, not only
for confirmation of the New Covenant, but also for the purification of the
Called Covenanteers. And therefore there could be no reason why these Hebrews
of the Jews should be offended with the Death of Christ, seeing it was so
useful and so necessary, not only for Expiation, but for purging the Conscience
from dead Works, and confirming the New Covenant and Testament. And here two
things are observable, 1. That if this Blood should not expiate Sin, and purge
the Conscience, the Covenant could not be firm to the Called, so as to receive
the eternal Inheritance. For if the Inheritance be not purchased and me^ted,
and the Called justified from sin, they can have no title or right unto it; and
if not sanctified and cleansed from the pollution of sin, they cannot be
capable of it, so as to enjoy it. 2. This Blood was necessary for the Expiation
of the sins, not only of them who live after it was shed, but also of those who
lived under the Law. For under it there was no Blood of any Sacrifice that
could expiate sin as polluting the Conscience, and making the Sinners liable to
eternal punishments; and as it could not expiate, so it could not purge the
Conscience, though sprinkled with it.

. 20. The Reddition or Application follows,

Ver. 23. It was therefore necessary, that the paterns of things in the Heavens
should be purified with these, but the heavenly things themselves with better
Sacrifices then these. THe sum of these words is this, That as it was
necessary, that earthly and carnal things and shadows should be purified by the
blood of these carnal Sacrifices, for the confirmation of the first Covenant;
so it is necessary, that spiritual and heavenly things should be purified with
the blood of better Sacrifices then these, for the confirmation of the New
Covenant. This Reddition is made by a repetition, in brief, of the former
proposition and protasis of the Comparison. So that in these few words we have
the full Similitude: whereof there be two parts;

The first, Is the necessity of purging the Types and Shadows. The second, Is
the necessity of purging the Anti-types.


Both agree in this,

1. That they must be purged. 2. They must be purged with the blood of
Sacrifices. 3. There is a necessity of purging, both with the blood of
Sacrifices.


Yet they differ,

1. In that the one are earthly and carnal Types. 2. In the purging, as well in
the things purged.


For the first are purged with earthly carnal Sacrifices, suitable to their
nature; the second with far better Sacrifices. The whole may be reduced to two
Axioms or Propositions.

1. It Is necessary, that the paterns of heavenly things should be purified with
these. 2. It Is necessary, that the heavenly things should be purified with
better Sacrifices then these.


Yet there is a third employed, and that is,

As it is necessary for the one to be purged with these, so it is necessary the
other should be purged with better.

The disposition of the Text seems to be Diano^tical, and the argumentation in
form to be this;

If it was necessary, that the paterns of things in Heaven should be purified
with these; then it is necessary, that the heavenly things should be purified
with better Sacrifices then these. But the first was necessary.

Therefore the second is so too.

From all this we understand, that the Apostle inferrs the necessity of purging
heavenly things, from the necessity of purging earthly; and further, that if
the purification of the Types was necessary, then the purification of the
Anti-types, with better Sacrifices, was much more necessary. This is the reason
why the Apostle brings in this Text by the illanve [Therefore]: which is to be
understood, to follow the proposition, and to go before and bring in the
Reddition.

In the first Proposition we have,

1. Things in Heaven. 2. Paterns of things in Heaven. 3. The purifying of the
Paterns. 4. The purifying of them with these. 5. The necessity of purifying
them with these.


1. By things in Heaven, are meant heavenly things, as appears in the latter
part of the Text, and by heavenly are meant spiritual and more excellent
things. We read of Jerusalem above, Gal. 4. 26. and of the heavenly Jerusalem,
Chap. 12. 22. of this Epistle. And this is the Church, which is first Militant,
and then Triumphant; which is first from Heaven, then in Heaven.

2. The patterns of the things in Heaven are such things as were Signs, Images,
Shadows, and imperfect Representations of things in Heaven: For [(...)] the
word in the Original signifies Signs and Images, which represent, though but
darkly, other things. These are not Patterns in proper sense, but things that
do sub-demonstrate or obscurely signify some other things: They are called
Examples and Shadows, Examples and Shadows of heavenly things Chap. 8. 5. where
it is observable, that the very word which is there turned Example, is here
turned Pattern. And Chap. 10. 1. it is said, The Law had a Shadow of good things
to come. These Shadows, Signs, and Figures were the Tabernacle, the Vessels,
with many other things, which under the Law were purified with Blood.

3. What the purifying of these was, you have heard before; for it was
Consecration, Expiation, Sanctification, whereby the things purified, of unholy
were made holy.

4. These were purified with these; that is, with Scarlet Wool, Hyssop, Water,
Blood, Ashes; and the principal of these was Blood; and this Blood was the
Blood usually of Bullocks and Goats, which was ordained by God to be the Blood
of Expiation and Sanctication. So, outward and carnal things were purged with
outward and carnal Blood, and both the things, the Blood, and the Purification
were Mystical, and did signify some spiritual and more excellent things, Blood,
Purification.

5. There was a necessity why these things should be so purified; Where we may
consider, that not only the Purification, but this purification by these was
necessary. The necessity did arise from God's Institution and Command, that
these things and shadows should be purified, and purified by these things: And
if these things must signify persons and things guilty and polluted by Sins,
which God would have purified, then in this respect also there was a necessity,
because otherwise there had been no Agreement between the Types and Anti-Types.

. 21. The second Proposition is, That it is necessary the heavenly things
themselves be purified by better Sacrifices than these: Where we must examine,

1. What these heavenly things be. 2. What these better Sacrifices are. 3. What
it is to be purified by these. 4. How this is necessary.


The heavenly things themselves are some better and more excellent things; for
as Heaven is far above the Earth, and more glorious, so heavenly things must be
some better and more glorious than earthly. The one are bodily and corruptible,
and the other spiritual, incorruptible, and immortal, in comparison whereof the
best things under the Law were but Shadows. These spiritual and heavenly things
principally intended, are the Consciences, and immortal Souls of men, which
being purged make up the Body of the Church, which is Militant first on Earth,
and after that to be Triumphant in Heaven.

2. The better Sacrifice, above the former, is the Sacrifice of Christ, and the
pure unsported Blood of him, who offered himself by the eternal Spirit to God.
The purifying virtue of this Sacrifice was in this, that Christ the Son of God,
innocent, holy, righteous, as Surety and Hostage of Man-king appointed to be so
by God, did deny himself, took up the Cross, shed his Blood for to expiate the
Sin of Man, and was obedient unto death, the death of the Cross: For him, so
excellent, to suffer death so willingly, for so glorious an end, and that at
the Command of God, was the highest and purest degree of Obedience that ever
was performed unto God, and was highly accepted, and did fully satisfy divine
Justice, so far as was required. In the offering of this Sacrifice, he gave
himself wholly to his heavenly Father, and became, as it were, a whole
Burnt-Offering, being wholly consumed with the Zeal of his Father's Glory, and
the Love of Mankind. And here it is to be noted, upon the By, That though in
the Text we read Sacrifices, in the plural number, yet this one Sacrifice of
Christ is only meant. Estius thinks it is an Enallage of number, the Plural for
the Singular; for the Sacrifice whereby heavenly things are purified, is but
only one, once offered: Yet it may be called Sacrifices, because it had more
virtue than all other purifying Sacrifices, and also because it was one of
those expiating Sacrifices, which were offered unto God, yet more excellent
than all the rest. It Is like that expression of J^phtah's Butial; for it is
said, he was buried in the Cities of G^lead, that is, one of the Cities of that
Country which was Mizpeh, as some think, Judge. 12. 7.

3. For the heavenly things, and the Consciences of men to be purified, is, to
be freed from Sin, that is, from the Guilt and Dominion of Sin, which is to be
justified and sanctified, as these words are usually taken. This Purification
is vertual or actual; for when the Blood of Christ was shed, offered, and
accepted, for the Sins of men, then they may be said to be purified virtually,
as upon the death of Christ we are said to be reconciled, because made
reconcilable.

And when by Faith this Blood is sprinkled upon our Consciences, and pardon
obtained by Christ's Intercession for peni^ent and believing Sinners, then they
are said to be actually purified, and when they are wholly freed from all the
Guilt and Power of Sin, then they are perfectly purified.

4. This Purification by this Sacrifice was necessary; for supposing God's Will
and Decree concerning the eternal Happiness of sinful Man in Communion with his
God, it was necessary Man should be purified; for otherwise he could have no
fellowship with God, so as to derive eternal Happiness from him: For, as God is
Light, and just, and holy; so they must be Light, just, and holy, who shall see
and enjoy him. And because no Sacrifice but this of Christ could thus qualify
him, therefore it was necessary both that he should be purified, and purified
with this Sacrifice.

. 22. Thus far you have heard of the necessity of the death of Christ, for the
Confirmation of the Covenant, illustrated by Similitudes, taken from the Law of
Nature, and the Ceremonial Law of Moses: Therefore the Jews, except they were
very ignorant, could have no cause to be offended with this death upon the
Cross, seeing it was so necessary to the purchasing of the eternal Inheritance,
and the purging of men's Consciences, that they might be capable of the
Possession, and have a Title unto it; for the ground of the Promise from whence
the Title is immediately derived; is this Sacrifice, without which the Promise
was never made; neither, if it had been made, could it without this have been
valid. But let us consider what follows; for he says,

Ver. 24. For, Christ is not entered into the Holy places made with hands, which
are Figures of the true, but into Heaven it self, now to appear before God for
us. THese words, considered absolutely in themselves, seem to be plain and
easily understood; but the coherence is doubtful. Some, and amongst the rest
Es^ius, takes little notice of it, as not much material. Many others, finding
the causal Conjunction [For], do agree, that in these words the Apostle gives a
Reason of something that went before; but they differ much in the particular
Explication of the Reason. Dr. Gouge conceivs, that the Apostle's intention is
to prove, that the Sacrifice of Christ is more excellent than the Sacrifices of
the Law; and this is true, but yet imperfect. Beza thinks, that the Author in
this Text begins another, and a new Collation or Comparison to prove the
excellency of this Offering; and this cannot be denied. Dr. Lushington, who is
said to be the Translator of Crellius, tells us, that here is proved, That the
Heavenly places are purified by better Sacrifices; and that because Christ
entered not into the earthly Sanctuary, but into Heaven it self. This does
presuppose, that Heaven it self is purified by the Blood of Christ, and that
Christ entered thereinto for that end: But this is difficult to understand, and
supposes that which few will grant him. A Lapide differs from all these, and
says, that the Apostle gives in this Text a Reason, why he called the Church
heavenly, or heavenly things; and that is, because Christ entered into Heaven to
unlock the Gates and open the Doors thereof, that the faithful might enter
thereinto: This is not so clear and satisfactory, though it has something of
Truth. To find out the Connection, we must observe, 1. That the Conjunction for,
or (...), is sometimes expletive and redundant. 2. Sometimes the same that but
or moreover is. 3. That though it be called by the Grammarians a Causal, yet it
does not always imply a Cause, but it is used to bring in any other Reason or
Argument; and therefore might be called a rational Conjunction: Yet Whittington
in his Grammar says, that a Causal Conjunction signifies the Cause or Order of
that which goe^ before; where he implies, that it does not always join the
Cause and the Effect. 4. Let it be taken for a Conjunction, which joins these
words to the former so as to contain a Reason; we must consider what was
formerly ^ffi^med, and how it is here proved. To this end, let us remember, that
the Subject of the former discourse was Purification or Expiation of things by
Blood of Sacrifices; and these things are earthly and carnal, or spiritual and
heavenly: Of these latter he affirmed, that it was necessary they should be
purified with better Sacrifices. The manner how he proves this is this; He,
presupposing that these heavenly things must be purified, proves, 1. That they
were purified by better Sacrifices, because they were purified by the Sacrifice
of Christ. This Reason 1. Presupposes and takes for granted, that Christ's
Sacrifice is better than those of the Law; but not content to suppose, he
proves it to be better, because Christ by it entered Heaven, and it once offered
was of eternal virtue. 2. He proves the necessity implicitly; for here it is
employed, that no other Sacrifice in the World could purify them: For earthly
Sacrifices could not purify spiritual and heavenly Persons. Or, more briefly
thus; It was necessary that the heavenly things should be purified by the
Sacrifice of Christ, but that was better than all the Levitical Sacrifice. It
was better, because by the Blood thereof Christ entered Heaven, and it once
offered had virtue to purify not here expressed for ever: This Reason implies
several things, as 1. That it was the Will of God, that the Types and
Anti-Types should be purified. 2. That though the Types and Figures might be
sufficiently purified by the Blood and Sacrifice of Bulls and Goats, yet
heavenly things which were the Anti-Types could not. 3. That only the Sacrifice
of Christ was sufficient and fit to purify these heavenly things. 4. That it
was God's Will that this, and this alone should purify them. From all this,
it is evident how these words come in upon the former, and also what they add
unto them: For formerly the Author had made a Comparison whereof there were two
parts, 1. The Proposition. 2. The Reddition. The Proposition was this, That
under the Law there was no Purification and Expiation of the Types and Figures
without the Blood of Legal Sacrifices. The Reddition this, So there is no
Purification and Expiation of the Anti-Types of heavenly things, without the
Blood of some better Sacrifice, which is the Sacrifice of Christ. So that these
words belong unto the Reddition, which formerly affirmed only in general, That
the heavenly things must be purified with some better Sacrifice; and here it is
added, that the only better Sacrifice, was the Sacrifice of Christ; to which
the Author, by virtue of the Comparison, must needs be understood to add a
singular virtue of purifying heavenly things.

. 23. But to enter upon the Text, absolutely considered in it self, the Subject
whereof is Christ and his Sacrifice; we find in it

1. An Act of Christ, which is entrance into a Sanctuary. 2. The end of that
Act, which is, to appear before God for us.


To understand this, we must note, 1. That what is here done by Christ, was
done in Figure by the Levitical High Priest. 2. That this High Priest, after he
had slain and taken the Blood of Bulls and Goats, enters into the Sanctuary,
within the second Veil. 3. That b^i ge^tred he appears before God for the
People. 4. That, appearing before the Mercy-Seat, which was said to be the
Throne of God, he sprinkles the Blood upon the Ark and the Mercy-Seat. 5. That
by this and Prayer he expiates the Sins of the People, and procures a Legal
Remission. These things give Light to the Text: For here 1. Christ must be
considered as a High Priest. 2. To be slainand crucified upon the Cross. 3.
Having shed his Blood, to enter into Heaven. 4. Being entered, to appear before
the Throne of God, the Supreme Judge. 5. By his Blood and Death presented to
God, to expiate our sins and procure Remission. But here it may be doubted,
Whether the first or second Entrance and Appearance be intended, or rather
both. For Christ first entered and appeared with his Soul separated from his
Body, when the Veil of the Temple was rent, to signify the Entrance of the
great High Priest, having sacrificed himself, into Heaven: Of this you heard
before. He entered the second time, when risen again and made immortal he
ascended into the Heaven of Heavens; where as a King he fits and reign; at his
Father's right hand, and as a Priest appears as an Advocate before his Father's
Tribunal, and pleads his Blood for all his penitent Clients on Earth. Both may
be meant, both purify, and the latter presupposes the former: The former
purifieth vertually, and by way of Merit; the latter actually, by obtaining
actual Remission. So that in these words we have

1. A Sanctuary. 2. An Entrance into it. 3. An Appearance before God. 4. An
Appearance for certain Persons.


1. The Sanctuary is described negatively, affirmatively: Negatively, It was
not any Holy place, or places made with hands, which are the Figures of the
true: For the Levitical Holy places were made by the Art and hands of men, and
were true Sanctuaries; but they were not the true, but the Figures of them.
They were ^laces, Holy places, and Figures, (for so the word Anti-Types does
sometime signify,) of far more holy and glorious places, where God did manifest
his presence in a far more glorious manner. Affirmatively, It was Heaven it
self, the highest and most holy and glorious place of all, sanctified by the
special presence of God. Therefore this Sanctuary is not earthly but heavenly;
not the Figure, but the place figured; the supernatural, celestial and eternal
Bethe^. 2. Christ entered not into the figured Sacrary, but into Heaven it self,
both the first and second time; and it was expedient, that so he should do: For
that was the place where God had appointed a special piece of Service to be
done, even there and no where else. 3. He did not only enter, but being entered
did appear, and appear as a Priest, having offered his great Sacrifice, and now
presenting himself as slain for the Sin of Man; and after this appears again as
immortal, and as a Priest to plead his Sacrifice for his People. And he, as a
Priest, must appear, first as Mortal, secondly as Immortal; and present himself
before the Supreme Lord and Judge, or else his Sacrifice is not complete and
actually effectual. 4. He dyed, he entered, he appeared, for us, sinful men and
guilty: First, that Sin, our Sin, might be remissible; and then the second time
for us, though sinful yet penitent, that our Sins might be actually remitted,
and both Souls and Bodies sanctified.

. 24. But it might be said, If Christ must expiate Sin by Sacrifice, as the
High Priest did; he must often offer, often enter, as he did: For every Year,
once at least, he entered and appeared with Blood before the Mercy-Seat. To this
the Apostle answers, by way of Anticipation, That as Christ entered not into the
earthly Sanctuary, so neither had he need, as the Levitical High Priest, to
offer himself, and often to enter into Heaven; for one Offering in the end of
the World, and one Entrance upon that Offering, with his Blood, was sufficient
to take away Sin. The Apostle's words are these,

Ver. 25. Nor yet that He should offer Himself often, as the High Priest
enters into the Holy place every Year with Blood of others.

Ver. 26. For then He must have often suffered since the Foundation of the
World; but now once, in the end of the World, has He appeared, to put away Sin
by the Sacrifice of Himself.

THE Subject of these words, is, the Sacrifice of Christ whereby he entered
Heaven it self; and of this, it is affirmed, That it was but once offered, and
that by the one Offering of this one Sacrifice, the heavenly things were
purified by taking away Sin for ever.

This single Offering of this single Sacrifice is set forth by way of
Dissimilitude and Opposition to the Levitical Sacrifices, and that 1.
Negatively. 2. Affirmatively. Negatively, Ver. 25. wherein we have two
Propositions, the one concerning the Levitical, the other concerning Christ's
Sacrifice. The first, concerning the former, is, That the Levitical High Priest
enters into the Holy place every Year, with the Blood of others: This is meant
of the great Anniversary Sacrifice of Expiation, which in the beginning of this
Chapter the Author singled out, as the greatest and highest piece of Service
that was performed under the Law, with this design, to prove the Sacrifice of
Christ to be far more excellent in many things, especially in the virtue and
effects thereof. In this we have

1. The entrance of the Priest into the holy place. 2. This entrance made with
the blood of others. 3. This entrance yearly, or every year.


1. The holy place was that within the second Veil, the holiest of all; for
into that the High Priest alone might enter, and that but once every year. 2.
Yet he might not enter without blood; and this blood was the blood, not of the
High Priest himself, but of others, that is, the blood of Bulls and Goats. 3.
The principal thing in the Proposition to be noted, is the frequency of his
entrance and offering, for he entered and offered every year; God thereby
signifying, that it was not of eternal virtue.

The second Proposition is, That Christ did not offer himself often: He must
offer, and offer himself, and by his own Blood enter Heaven: yet he must not do
this often, his offering must be single and individual, both in respect of the
Sacrifice and the oblation thereof. He must not, once entered, come out again,
and offer a new and another Sacrifice, or the same again. So that the thing
that is denied of this Sacrifice, is frequency of offering.

. 25. In the latter part of the Text, ver. 26. we may observe,

1. The reason why this Sacrifice must not be reiterated. 2. The affirmative
part of the principal point.


Yet the whole verse may be said to give a reason of the former Negative
proposition, and the same is twofold: The first is, [ab absurdo.] The second,
[ab inntili and ^^^-necessario.] For Christ's offering must not be reiterated,
1. Because it was inconvenient and absurd. 2. Because it was no ways
profitable or necessary. I will sum up the whole in two Propositions.

The first, If Christ should offer himself often, then must he often have
suffered since ^^^^ the foundation of the World.

The second, But now once in the end of the World has he appeared to put away
sin o^ ^^^^ by the Sacrifice of himself.

The first Proposition implies, 1. That where there is offering, there must be
suffering; for in sacrificing living Creatures, the thing sacrificed must be
sl^in, as well as offered: For, mactation and oblation are essential to such as
Sacrifice. 2. That seeing there was Sin since the beginning of the World, and
Sacrifice for Sin appointed by God, there must be suffering and offering from
the beginning of the World; or at least some Sacrifice offered; which once
presented to God, should be of eternal Virtue. 3. Because the offering of
Christ requires necessarily his suffering; therefore, if Christ's own offering
of himself once could not expiate Sin for ever, then he must suffer often. The
absurdity and inconvenience of Christ's frequent offering of himself was this,
that if he must often offer, he must often suffer; and this was thought
unreasonable to divine wisdom, to put his Son so often to such a cruel Death.
For by Suffering, is meant suffering of Death in that manner as Christ
Suffered. Yet it seemed good unto God to appoint the Levitical High Priest
often to offer, and often with blood to enter into the holy place, to signify
the imperfection of the Legal Expiation, that the People might expect a far
more excellent sacrifice.

In the second Proposition, concerning Christ's once offering, we may observe,

1. Christ's appearing. 2. The time of his appearance. 3. The end.


1. Christ's appearance is, 1. His Incarnation. 2. The manifestation of him
incarnate. 3. The presenting of himself as a Priest, having Sacrificed himself
unto his heavenly Father, without which his Incarnation and Manifestation had
been to no purpose. He appeared from the foundation of the World, in the Word
of the promise, and in Types and Figures; yet this was but obscure. At length
he appeared really, and far more clearly, when the Word was made Flesh, dwelt
and lived amongst men, dyed, and, as a Priest, offered himself unto God the
Supreme Judge, for the Sin of Man.

2. The time of his appearance, was the end of the World, which is opposed to
the foundation of the World. Yet as this end is not the last, so the foundation
is not the first day of the World; therefore end and foundation must be taken
with a Latitude. Christ appeared to Suffer a thousand six hundred years ago and
upward, and yet the World is not ended; therefore End signifies the last times
of the World, which may be many years yet to come, as many years of these last
^in^es, as parts thereof, are past already. And so the foundation of the World
may be the beginning thereof, and this beginning may be so far extended, as to
comprehend many hundred, and (...) thousands of years. This end of the World is
called the fullness of the time, Gal. 44. because, as some tell us, the time
appointed by God was fully come; all things, which were decreed to be before
his coming, were fully accomplished. And though we understand not the reasons,
yet the end of the World was the fi^^ell of all others for this appearance; and
though the last times seem to have the greatest benefit of his Exhibition, yet
the first times were not without it: for the virtue of this Sacrifice extended
to all times.

3. The end of this appearance, was to put away sin by the Sacrifice of
himself; Where we have two ends, the one subordinate to the other: The first
was the Sacrificing of himself: The second by this Sacrifice to put away Sin.
Christ was the Priest, and the thing Sacrificed was himself; and the blood, by
which he entered Heaven was his own blood, and he himself was slain and
suffered, and he himself did offer himself slain. The end, and so the effect of
this Sacrifice once offered, was the putting away of sin. This putting away was
not the abrogation of the Law transgressed, but a taking away the moral effects
and consequents of Sin committed against that Law, and principally of guilt.
For one certain and perpetual effect of Sin in respect of the prohibition and
commination of the Law, is guilt, and rendering of the Sinner obnoxi^us unto
vindicative Justice of the Lawgiver and Judge. This guilt can no way he taken
away, but either by suffering, or pardon, or both, as here it is put away by
Christ's suffering, and God's pardon: for, Christ suffers for Sin, God pardons
it so Christ's sake, and in consideration of his suffering and offering. The
effect of Sin is to render the party sinning obnoxious and liable to
punishment, and God's vindicative Justice, and by this virtue of the
commination of the Law. God to make way for pardon, by a trans^endent
extraordinary power, makes Christ man's Surety, and Christ voluntarily submits
himself, out of love to his Brethren, to God's will, so far as to suffer Death
for man's Sin, and offers himself as being ^lain to the Supreme Judge. Upon his
submission he becomes one person with sinful man, as a Surety with the
principal, and so is liable to that punishment, which sinful man should have
suffered, as a Surety becomes liable to pay the debt of the principal. From all
this it is evident, that Sin is an efficient moral cause of Christ's suffering,
and Christ's suffering is a punishment in proper sense; though both these be
denied without any reason by the Socinian. By this Legal substitution of
Christ, and the offering of himself, Sin is made remissible, and the way is
made open to pardon, and upon the penitency and faith of the Sinner actual
pardon follows. That Sin is pardonable and pardoned, is the end and effect of
Christ's Suffering: To put away Sin, is first to make Sin pardonable, and the
consequents of Sin removable. For this is the work and immediate effect of
Christ's Sacrifice of himself, and the same not often but once offered in the
end of the World. In all this we may observe the difference between Christ and
the Levitical High Priest: Christ suffers and offers himself, and enters Heaven
with his own Blood; but the Levitical High Priest offers often, and enters with
the blood of Bulls and Goats. The virtue of the High-Priest's offering was but
for a little time, but the virtue of Christ's extends to all time: In these
respects, Christ's Sacrifice is far more excellent, and more purifying.

. 25. This discourse of Christ's once offering, and once suffering, is
continued and enlarged; for the Apostle informs us, that the reason why Christ
suffered but once in the end of the World, was the Decree of God, which had
determined of Christ as he had done of other men; and this decree was regulated
by Divine Wisdom, which always dictates that which shall be best and fittest.
This Decree is twofold, 1. Concerning other men. 2. Concerning Christ. And
because there is some agreement between the lot of Christ and other Men, in
respect of Death, and that which follows Death; therefore the singularity of
Christ's Death is set forth comparatively: And of the comparison we have, 1.
The Proposition.

Verse 27. And as it was appointed unto Men once to dye, but after that the
Judgment.] IN which words we have,

1. Somethings ordained. 2. The ordination.


The things ordained are two, 1. That men once die. 2. Come to Judgment. The
words absolutely considered, may be reduced to two Propositions.

1. That it is appointed unto men, once to dye. 2. But after Death, follows
Judgment.


The first tells us, 1. That men dye, and this we certainly know. 2. That they
dye but once. 3. That this is appointed; yet though men must dye, and it is so
certain, and so evident and easily known; yet men little consider it, but their
hearts are strangely taken up with the things of this life, and they admire the
vanities of this World, and promise unto themselves long life, and certain
enjoyment of these earthly things. They do not remember, that they are mortal,
and that there is no assurance, that they shall live one hour, before Death
arrest them, and seize upon their estates, and all earthly comforts: in that
day their thoughts perish, and their pride and glory are laid in the dust. Oh
inconsiderate Wretches! are ye able to conquer Death, turn Mortality into
Eternity, and Earth into Heaven? Be wise, and never forget that you must dye.
2. Men dye but once; there is no return into this World again, neither any
recovery of what man once dead has lost. As no man can keep alive his Soul; so
no man can raise his Body, and reunite the Soul unto it. This is a work proper
to God, who made us; and far above the power of any Creature. When it is said,
That men must dye, it is to be understood of the generality of mankind, that all
must dye; because all are obnoxious to Death and Mortal, even Enoch and Elias,
and all those who shall be found alive, when Christ shall come to Judge the
World. And though the two Prophets did not, and they who remain till Christ's
coming shall not, dye as others do; yet the former suffered, and the latter
shall suffer a change equivalent to Death, though in both there seems to be
some exception from the general rule. So to dye but once, is the general rule,
and the ordinary fate; yet Lazarus, and others may dye twice, because God
reserved an arbitrary power to himself, to raise some unto a mortal life, so
that they became obnoxious to a double Death, and he did exercise this power to
manifest his Glory in some particular persons. Yet this was an extraordinary
case; and this reservation did not take away the general and ordinary rule,
according to which the Apostle is to be understood. 3. This is appointed; for
so the word [(...)] is understood and translated, and it is capable of that
signification by a Trope. The party, who appointed, decreed, and ordained, both
that all men shall dye, and dye once, and but once is not expressed, but it is
easily understood. For the Supreme Lord of Life and Death, who has an
Universal Power over all Men is God, and none else; and therefore this must be
a Decree of God as Supreme Lord, and a Sentence of him as Judge, and the same
irrevocable; yet dispensable in some particular and extraordinary Cases, as
should seem good unto him. Death is a punishment, and therefore men being
obnoxious unto it, must be guilty of some Crime, and condemned thereunto for
some Offense against some Law threatening Death. And that was the positive Law,
which God gave to Adam saying, But of the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil,
thou shall not eat of it; for in the Day thou eatest thereof, thou shall surely
dye, Genesis 2. 17. This Law was transgressed, and the Sentence followed in these
words, Dust thou art, and to dust thou shall return, Genesis 3. 19. Whereas the
Socinian says, That Death is natural, and not from any Decree of God; his
Opinion is not reconcilable with that of the Apostle, As by one man Sin entered
into the World, and by Sin Death; and Sin reigned from Adam to Moses, Romans 5.
12, 14. And the wages of Sin is Death, Romans 6. 23. Besides it is said, That in
Adam all dye; that is, in Adam sinning; (for he was that one man by whom Sin
entered into the World), 1 Cor. 15. 22. So that God appointed Man to dye, and to
dye but once.

The second Proposition is, That after Death, follows Judgment. This is the
second thing: For Death is first, Judgment the second; and the word [after]
signifies the order of time; For Death goes before, and Judgment follows after.
The party Judged is Man, the Judge is God, whose Judgment is particular or
general; particular of every particular individual person, general or universal
of all. For there is the Judgment of the great Day, when all shall appear
before the Judgment Seat of Christ; and this Judgment is appointed of God, and
appointed to follow after Death, after which follows the final and eternal
estate of man, which shall be unalterable; and by Judgment may be meant, not
only the Sentence of the Judge, but the estate of the parties judged, which
follows thereupon, whether it be an estate of misery or of felicity. We live
here, that we may prepare for this Judgment; and we ought so to live, as that
we may be happy for ever hereafter, and prevent the suffering of eternal
punishments. Yet men do not believe that God will Judge us, and that Judgment
will follow, and that unavoidably after Death; or, if they do not believe this,
yet they do not seriously consider it. This is the reason why they live secure
in their Sins, and extreme danger; and this is the cause of their eternal
ruin. It Is not material to enquire, whether the act of the Judge, or the
estate of the parties judged; or whether particular or universal Judgment be
here meant or no. It Is certain, that this is a Judgment, which follows after
Death, and the final and universal Doom seems to be here intended, when both
Soul and Body, the whole man, and all men that dye shall be judged: This is the
proposition.

. 26. The Reddition follows in these words,

Ver. 28. So Christ was once offered to bear the Sins of many; and unto them
that look for him shall he appear the second time without sin, unto Salvation.]
THis Text informs us of the appearance of Christ, for that is the subject of it.
This appearance is twofold, the first and the second; and both these differ
much, not only for the manner, but the end. The first was in Humility, and the
end was to suffer, and by suffering to expiate Sin. The second shall be in
Glory, and the end of it to give eternal Salvation to such as look for him. The
first was to suffer and save, the second to judge and reward his faithful and
obedient Servants. The propositions therefore are two:

1. Christ was once offered to bear the Sins of many. 2. Unto them that look
for him shall he appear the second time without Sin, unto Salvation.


The first is the same with that in ver. 26. But now once in the end of the
World, has he appeared to put away Sin by the Sacrifice of himself. The words
differ, the matter is the same. For as there, so here two things are
observable; 1. The Sacrifice, the single Sacrifice of Christ. 2. The end of it.
The single Sacrifice; for Christ was once offered: the end, for he was once
offered to bear the Sins of many. First he offered himself, this was an act of
him as a Priest; and, as he was the best Priest that ever lived, so he himself
was the best Sacrifice, that ever was offered. The end was also excellent; for
he bare the sins of many, that is, the punishment due for the sins of many, and
he bare this punishment to satisfy divine Justice, and procure God's favor to
sinful man: We deserved the punishment, and he suffers it; he is punished, that
we may be spared. It was tender compassion in him to offer himself for us, and
it was exceeding love in God to send and give him for to suffer, and so be the
propitiation for our Sins. He bare the sins of all to make them pardonable, and
the sins of many, even of all sincere Believers, that they may be actually
pardoned for ever: possibility of pardon is the benefit of all, actual pardon
of many, yet not of all. For Christ had no absolute intention to procure the
Salvation of all, but of such as believe in him: yet the reason why all are not
pardoned, is not from Christ's Death, which made the Sins of all pardonable,
but from some other cause. And this is the condemnation of all those to whom
the Gospel is preached, That Light comes unto them, and they love Darkness
rather then Light. God has given his only begotten Son, and his Son has
offered himself, and made the way to Heaven passible; and remission of Sins and
eternal Life are offered unto u; upon fair and reasonable terms and conditions;
and though to corrupt Flesh and Blood they be difficult, yet they are made easy
by the power of the Spirit; yet we love our Sins more then our Savior, and
continue in them to our eternal condemnation.

. 27. The second Proposition is concerning his second appearance: For he shall
appear the second time, where, as before, we have the manner and the end. The
manner is Glorious, for he shall appear without Sin; yet he never had any Sin,
and in his first appearance he was without Sin. For Sin of his own he had not,
yet he bare Sins, the Sins of others, the Sins of many: Yet these Sins were not
his by Commission, but by Imputation so far as to be liable to Death; For God
laid on him the Iniquities of us all. So that [without Sin] is without
suffering for the Sins of others; He shall not come the second time to dye for
our Sins, as he did the first: this is the genuine sense. When he came to
Sacrifice for Sin, he came in great Humility, and took upon him the form of a
Servant, and was obedient unto Death, the Death of the Cross; this low
condition was suitable to the work he then undertook. But now he comes as King
and Lord to judge the World and therefore he comes in Glory: The end of his
coming is to reward, and the reward is Salvation, and the parties to be
rewarded are such as look for him. By Salvation, is meant eternal Life and full
Happiness, which he purchased by his precious Blood; and it is so called,
because man in danger of eternal Death, shall then be fully saved and delivered
from all Sin, and all the sad and woeful Consequents of Sin, and that for ever;
for then Death, man's last Enemy, shall be destroyed. Yet this immunity from
all evil cannot consist without the enjoyment of those glorious and eternal
Blessings which God has promised; this is the great reward, which Believers do
expect: and because they know they shall not fully enjoy it till his second
appearance, therefore they look and wait for his coming from Heaven, that then
their joy may be full. Some think the Apostle does here allude to the manner
and order of the Levitical Service; which was this, The High Priest enters the
Sanctuary to pray and expiate Sin, and the People stay without, and wait for
his coming out to bless them: So Christ enters Heaven, that glorious and
eternal Sanctuary, there appears before God, and stays a while, and all his
Saints do wait and look for his return and coming out from thence, that they
may by him be eternally Blessed. These Lookers for him are they, who shall be
rewarded: For though Christ came the first time to dye for all, so far as to
make their Sins remissible; yet he comes the second time to conferr the
ultimate benefit of his Redemption only upon them that look for him. To look
for Christ from Heaven, does presuppose the parties regenerate and renewed from
Heaven, justified, and in the estate of justification, and as having a title
unto eternal Glory, with a certain belief that Christ will come from Heaven and
appear in Glory, and that then they shall be glorified with him. And this
looking for Christ is their hope, with a longing desire, expressed sometimes by
groans, and yet a patient waiting God's leisure, out of an assurance that he
that shall come will come, and will not tarry. All this is signified by that of
the Apostle, And not only they, but our selves also, who have the first Fruits
of the Spirit, even we our selves groan within our selves, waiting for the
Adoption, to wit, the Redemption of our Body, Romans 8. 13. Where we have, 1.
The persons waiting, or the expectants. 2. The thing waited for. 3. The act and
manner of waiting. 1. The persons waiting are such as have the first Fruits of
the Spirit, which is a certain measure of Sanctification and consolation; for
these are the beginnings of Heaven, where our holiness and comfort shall be
perfect and full; and these being but a little which bear the like proportion
with eternal Glory, as the first Fruits do with the Harvest, do assure us, as
an Earnest, of the full possession. 2. Adoption is said to be the Redemption of
our Bodies, that is, the Resurrection, when our Adoption shall be complete; for
then our minority being past, and the time appointed by our heavenly Father
come, we shall be put into full possession of the Inheritance and glorious
eternal estate, which God has prepared for those that love him; and this is
that, which is called Salvation in this place. 3. The act of waiting is an act
of hope, which resting upon the promise is assured and fully persuaded of the
fruition of Glory in God's time, and looks often toward it, as our own. The
manner of this waiting is with vehement desires, and longings, and g^oans; and
yet with patience. For because this blessed estate is so full of happiness, and
yet to come, and only present in the first Fruits, therefore we earnestly
desire and long for Christ's coming, saying, Come Lord Jesu, come quickly. And
because for the present we are pressed with the remainders of sin and
corruption within us, and with temptations and persecutions without, and the
distance between Heaven and Us is great; therefore we groan, and sigh, and say,
Oh when will that time come when I shall be rid, and fully freed from Sin and
sorrow for ever! I see the place of mine eternal Rest afar off, when shall I
come near and enter and enjoy my God for ever? Yet because we have God's Word
to assure us of possession, we therefore are patient, and content our selves in
God's Will. For if it be his will and pleasure, that we must stay a while
longer, and suffer more, we desire his will may be done, and we submit unto it;
and there is great reason we should so do. For we are unworthy of the least
mercy, and he might require a thousand years trial and suffering; and to give
us so great and glorious reward, and that within so short a time after our
first regeneration, is an act of greatest love and bounty.

. 28. Thus far the words have been absolutely handled, now it is time to
consider them comparatively. The notes of Similitude (for it is a comparison in
quality) are [As] and [So]. For as man dies, so Christ dies: As man dies once,
So Christ dies once; and no more. And as man is appointed by God to dye but
once, so Christ was appointed by God to dye but once. And as man, after Death,
comes to Judgment, so Christ, after he died once, will not dye again, but come
to Judgment: Yet as in all things that are like there is some dissimilitude and
difference, so there is in Man and Christ. Man dies for his own Sin, Christ for
the Sins of others: Man's Death does not satisfy for Sin, Christ's Death
satisfies divine Justice, and his Sacrifice does expiate the Sins of many for
ever. Upon man's Death follows Judgment, and he himself is judged; but after
once suffering and offering, Christ appears and comes to Judge, and not to be
judged; to reward such as believe in him, but not to be rewarded. And here it is
to be noted, 1. That as Christ died to make man savable, so he appears before
God actually to save, and comes to Judgment to make man fully happy. As by his
Death he merited Remission and Glorification, inestimable Benefits; so he
appears before God for us now, and in the end will come to Judgment, that he
may communicate these Benefits, and make men actually partakers of them. 2.
That remission of Sins, and the enjoyment of Salvation, and full happiness do
depend upon Christ's Sacrifice once offered, as the effect depends upon the
cause. To sum up the Chapter, we must observe, 1. That the Subject of it, is
the Sacrifice of Christ. 2. That in it the scope of the Author is to prove the
excellency of the same above all Levitical Services. 3. That his method is
this, 1. He describes the Tabernacle and the parts thereof, and the Services
performed therein; and singles out the greatest Service performed by the
greatest Priest in the most holy place, which was the yearly Sacrifice of
Expiation. 2. He proves the Sacrifice of Christ to be far more excellent then
this in many respects, but chiefly in respect of the effects thereof The first
effect is eternal Expiation, ver. 12. The second, purification of the
Conscience from dead Works, to serve the living God; in which respect it did
excel all Legal purifications, ver. 14. The third is the confirmation of the
New Covenant, by virtue of this Expiation and Purification, ver. 15. The
fourth, lest they should think it strange, that the Death and Bloodshed of
their Messiah should be any ways conducing or necessary to these effects of
Confirmation, Expiation, and Purification, he lets them know: First, That for
confirmation of the New Covenant, it was very conducing and necessary; 1. By a
Similitude taken from a Testament and last Will: For as the Death of the
Testatour is necessary for to make his Testament of force and effectual, so the
Death of Christ was for the making effectual the Covenant of Grace, ver. 16,
17. 2. From the manner of the Sanction and confirmation of the first Covenant,
which was solemnly confirmed by Blood; God even then signifying, That the
better Covenant must be established by Blood; yet by better blood, ver. 18, 19,
20. Secondly, He manifests, that it was as necessary for purification and
expiation of the parties in Covenant, and this also by a Similitude from the
Law Ceremonial, whereof we may observe two parts: 1. The proposition concerning
Expiation and Purification under the Law: For then the Tabernacle and Vessels,
and almost all things were purified by Blood; and without Blood there was no
Legal Expiation and Remission, ver. 21, 22, 23. The Reddition follows, and
therein is signified, That if it was necessary, that these shadows should be
purified with the blood of Sacrifice, men certainly it was necessary, that the
heavenly things shadowed should be purified, and that with the blood of some
better Sacrifice; and this Sacrifice was that of Christ himself, by the blood
whereof he enters Heaven, and there appears before God for us, ver. 23, 24.
Yet, lest they should think, that as the High Priest entered often, and every
time with blood, therefore Christ must often suffer Death, that he may often
offer; he informs them, that though the High Priest was a Type of Christ, and
was like unto him in many things; yet in these two they did much differ, 1.
Then they entered often. 2. They entered with the blood of Beasts: But Christ, 1.
Offered but once, and entered Heaven. 2. He offered himself, and by his own
Blood entered Heaven, and took away Sin for ever. And in this God made him like
to other men, for whom he suffered: For as he has appointed that they shall
dye once, and after come to Judgment; so he had ordained that Christ should dye
but once, and after that to come in Glory, to reward his Saints with eternal
Salvation.

. 29. Before I proceed unto the next Chapter, it will not be amiss to take
notice of the gloss of the Socinian Expositor upon the former proposition of
this Text. For he would have us to believe that [(...), to bear the Sins], is
to take away Sin by removing it, and sanctifying his People. To this end; he,
1. Observes that the word sometimes so signifies, and argues, that because the
Offering of Christ was performed in Heaven, therefore it cannot here signify to
bear Punishment for Sin. But 1. The word does no where in the New Testament
signify to take away, but either to take or bear up unto an higher place, or to
offer; and suppose it should signify in some few places of the Old Testament to
take away; yet in many and very many places, it has another signification, and
under one word (...) it is used by the Septuagint 80 times for to offer. Neither
are any of the four places cited by him truly and sincerely, but falsely
alleged. But suppose it should signify sometimes, ^ay often, to take away;
does it follow from thence that therefore it must so signify here? 2. Sin may
be and is taken away, 1. By suffering the Punishment, to make it remissible. 2.
By pardon and Remission. 3. By sanctifying and renewing the Sinner. And, To
conclude, that, because it is taken away by Sanctification, therefore it is not
taken away by Suffering and Expiation, is very inconsequent. 3. For Christ's
offering of himself in Heaven, we know that in his sense it cannot be true. For
Christ's willing Suffering for the Sin of Man, is the offering of himself, and
this was done on Earth, as is evident from the Scriptures. And though when he
presenred himself in Heaven, as having suffered, and this before God, yet this
is seldom called offering: Yet if it were, it presupposes another Act
antecedent, which is an offering in proper sense.

CHAP. X
Concerning the Perfection of Christ's Sacrifice, and certain Duties, which we
are bound to performs in respect of his Priesthood.. 1. THE Author continues
his Discourse concerning Christ's Sacrifice; which being finished, he proceeds
to apply the Doctrine of Christ's Priesthood and Sacrifice, and deduce some
practical Conclusions from it. The parts therefore of the Chapter are two,

1. Concerning Christ's Sacrifice. 2. Concerning certain Duties, which he
exhorts these Hebrews to perform.


This is so plain, that there is a general agreement amongst Expositors
concerning the same. Christ's Sacrifice, as in the former Chapter, so here, is
considered and handled comparatively, and with reference to the Levitical
Sacrifices. The intention of the Apostle is, to set forth the Excellency of it,
as far above the other in respect of the Efficacy.

So that we have of this first part of the Chapter two Branches.

1. Concerning the Imperfection and Impotency of the Legal Sacrifices. 2.
Concerning the Perfection and Efficacy of Christ's one Sacrifice.


This takes up the first part of the Chapter unto Ver. 20. where the Apostle
begins the hortatory part, grounded upon the excellency of Christ's
Priesthood, and the Perfection and Efficacy of his Sacrifice.

The Duties exhorted unto principally, are, Faith. Perseverance in Profession.

And both these are urged upon several strong and powerful Reasons: The former
briefly, the latter largely unto the last Chapter.

The principal Arguments in this Chapter are taken,

1. From the Punishment which must be suffered if we fall away; where,
according to the Aggravations of the Sin, the grievousness of the penalty is
set forth.

2. From their former Constancy and Patience, whereof he does remind them.

3. From the glorious Reward which they shall shortly and certainly receive
upon their perseverance.

This is the general Method, and so clear and obvious to the intelligent and
observant Reader, that it is generally agreed upon for the Substance of it. The
particulars shall be more distinctly delivered in the Explication. To enter
upon the words, let us begin with

Ver. 1. For the Law having a Shadow of good things to come, and not the very
Image of the things, can never with those Sacrifices, which they offered year
by year continually, make the Comers thereunto perfect. THese words are in
Effect the same with those of the former Chapter, Ver. 9. and serve to infer
the necessity of that better Sacrifice of Christ. For the Author had said,
That it was necessary that the heavenly things themselves should be purified
with better Sacrifices than these, Ver. 23. These words therefore contain a
Reason, whereby is proved the Imperfection of the Levitical Sacrifices, in
respect of Sanctification. The Argumentation in Form is this,

That which had but a Shadow of good things to come, and not the very Image of
the things themselves, could not, by the yearly Sacrifices continually offered,
perfect the comers.

But the Law had but the Shadow, not the very Image.

Therefore it could not perfect the comers.

To understand this, with that which follows, more fully, we must observe, That
the Question is, Whether the Law, by the Service and Sacrifices prescribed in
it, could perfect or sanctify any man that did use or observe them? The Apostle
denies this, and proves the Negative, and by this Argument; because it had but
the Shadow not the Substance of good things to come.

The Propositions in the Text are two;

1. The Law had a Shadow of good things to come, and not the very Image of the
things. 2. The Law could never with those Sacrifices which they offered year by
year continually, make the comers thereunto perfect.


In the first we have 1. A Shadow of things to come. 2. The very Image of the
things. 3. The Law, which is affirmed to have the Shadow, not the very Image of
good things to come. 1. The good things to come are some great and excellent
Blessings, which issued from the great Love of God to sinful Man, and tended to
his everlasting Salvation and Happiness, and they were to come upon the
Exhibition of Christ, and the Revelation of the Gospel. These were, Christ, the
Work of Redemption, and the benefits of Redemption: Of this Phrase I have
formerly spoken, Chap. 9. 11. where we ^ead, Christ was said to be come an
High Priest of good things to come. The Shadow of these good things, is the
same which was called a Type or Figure, that is, an imperfect and dark
Representation. Christ was represented of old, not only by words in the
Promises, but by things; yet in such a manner, as that the People of former
times had no clear and distinct Knowledge of these things, as under the Gospel
now we have. It was a Mercy of God to give them a Shadow, and by the same
remind them often of their Savior, that they might the more desire him, long
for him, and expect his coming.

2. The very Image of the things themselves, according to some, is a more lively
Representation of them; and these think the Expression to be taken from
Limmers, which first make a rude Draught, and after that finish and perfect it,
so as that the Picture is a more full, distinct, and lively Representation of
the thing to be represented. This they make the difference between a Shadow and
the Image; and this is thus far true, as that they under the Law had but a
rude, imperfect, and dark Representation of these good things, which the Gospel
does reveal and represent to us far more clearly: Their Light might be like
that of the Moon and Stars, ou^'s like that of the Sun already risen. Yet
others do observe, that (...). An Image is twofold, 1. The Pattern or Samplar.
2. That which is conformed to the Pattern; and in this place, the Image may be
the Pattern and Samplar it self, of which the Ceremonies of the Law were
imperfect Figurations. The word in the Syriack signifying Ipse, and turned by
the Syriack Translator Ipsa Substantia, seems to favor this sense. So that the
very Image of the things, is, both the lively Representation of them, and the
things themselves represented.

3. The Law had the one, not the other: Where, by the Law, understand the
Ceremonial Law of Moses, yet so as it was joined with the other Laws. This Law
had a Shadow, that is, did prescribe certain Shadows and imperfect
Representations, that is, Ceremonies, or Ceremonial things; and the People
under the Law were bound to observe them, and did enjoy these Shadows for to
lead them to Christ; and in this they were more happy than other People, though
not so happy as we under the Gospel. And the Reason hereof was, that God
neither gave them the things themselves, nor the clear Representation of them;
both which were reserved to the time of Christ's Exhibition.

. 2. In the second Proposition we have two things,

1. Sacrifices offered year by year continually. 2. Their Impotency to perfect
the comers thereunto.


1. By Sacrifices, are meant Ilastical and propitiatory Sacrifices, such as God
commanded under the Law to be offered for Sin; and the chief of them,
principally intended, were those Anniversary Offerings of Expiation; therefore
it is said, they were offered year by year. And though there was an
Intermission of the space of a Year between every single and individual
Sacrifice, yet they are said to be offered continually. For, as Year succeeded
after Year, from the time of Moses unto the Suffering of Christ, so there was a
continued Succession of these Offerings.

2. These Sacrifices as Causes had their Effects, and such as God intended; for
they did legally expiate and shadow out and continually remind the People of
the necessity of Expiation, to be made by a better Sacrifice for ever: Yet they
could not perfect, that is, consecrate, and sanctify, and free eternally from
the eternal Punishment due to sin. The parties, who might expect Justification
and Sanctification from them, were such as came unto them, and did worship God
by them; that is, the parties for whom they were offered, and did humble and
afflict themselves at the yearly solemnity of Expiation, who are said to be
Worshippers, in the next Verse, and such as did the Service, Chap. 9. 9. And
this was the impotency, imperfection, and insufficiency of them: The Reason of
this impotency is given in the former words, for they were but Shadows; and how
can Shadows have any such causal Power as the Substance has. This Effect was
reserved for that substantial and most noble Sacrifice of Christ himself,
offered by the eternal Spirit without spot unto God. Therefore the Jews did
exceedingly wrong themselves, and prejudice their own Souls, when they rested
in these, and looked not for their Savior. And we Christians are no better,
when we rely upon the outward Service of God, and the Signs of the Sacraments,
and not upon Jesus Christ the Pith and Marrow of all, who can benefit no Man
but such as with a penitent heart rely upon him, and him alone. This impotency
is fully expressed by a peremptory Negation; for they could in no wise perfect:
This Effect was too noble, and far, and very far above the Power and Activity
of Shadows. This is the Apostle's first Reason to prove the insufficiency of
the Sacrifices o^ the Law.

. 3. The second Reason follows,

Ver. 2. For then they would not have ceased to be offered; because that the
Worshippers once purged, should have had no more Conscience of Sins. THis is a
new Argument, taken from the continuance of them, which had been needless if
they could have purged away Sin, so that the Worshippers thereof should have
had no more Conscience of it. So that here we have 1. The continuance of them.
2. The Reason of the continuance employed: For the Apostle argues from the
non-cessation and the re-iteration of them, and thence infers their
Imperfection. But there is some difficulty in the first words of the Text; for
some read them negatively, as our Translation does, For then should they not
have ceased. Some read them Interrogatively, For then should they not have
ceased? Thus Vatablus, and some others. Some omit the negative particle; and
read them thus, For then they should have ceased. Thus the Vulgar, Beza,
Tramelius, Vetesius, Stepha^^s, in his fifth Copy, and the Compl^te^sis; and
this seems to be the true Reading, though the Interrogative has the same
sense. The Apostle seems to argue thus, If the Sacrifices of the Law had
perfected the Comers, or ^urged the Worshippers, then they should have ceased
to be offered. This Consequence is proved, because if they had been once
purged, they should have had no more Conscience of Sin, and so the Offerings
had been needless and useless. It was said before, that they were offered year
by year continually; and here from that continuance of them he infers their
Imperfection: For, as the Sytiack paraphraseth, if they had perfected and
sanctified the Worshippers, they should have ceased. This presupposes, That
when an Agent has produced his Effect, finished his Work, and attained his
end, he cease to work for that end any more, and takes his Rest: Thus God
when he had finished the World, and made all things, then he rested from the
Work of Creation. Now, the End of Sacrifices was to purge and expiate the Sins
of those who offer them; and if once they can do that fully and perfectly,
Reason it self would dictate they may cease. But to proceed unto the Reason,
why they should have ceased if they had p^^ged the Worshippers; which is this,
For then the Worshippers being purged should have no more Conscience of Sin.
Where we have three things observable, 1. The virtue of purging, proper to a
Sacrifice. 2. The Subject purged by them, which is, the Worshippers. 3. The
Effect of this sanctifying Power in this Subject, which is, to take away the
Conscience of Sins. To begin with the last; By Sins are meant 1. Sins past. 2.
Guilt, which necessarily and unavoidably follows upon Sin once committed. By
Conscience of this Sin, is understood, 1. The Knowledge of this Guilt; as we use
to say of a Delinquent, that he is conscious to himself that he has offended.
2. Some Effects consequent, which either are apt to follow, or do follow
thereupon, as Sorrow, Fear, Accusation; therefore Tremelius turns it, Sin
wounding the Conscience, though it is the Knowledge of Sin, as our Sin, as
rendering us guilty and liable to Punishment, that does torment and wound: For,
by Conscience is meant, the Soul conscious and privy to it is own Sin; and the
Acts of this, the Soul thus conscious and knowing, are, to accuse, threaten,
and condemn it self; and from hence it is, that the guilty Soul is such a
Tormentor of it self. By having no Conscience of Sin, is meant 1. To be freed
from the Guilt of Sin. 2. A Knowledge thereof, grounded upon certain Rules. The
Subject of this benefit are Worshippers; for these are not only guilty, but
know it, and are sensible of it; and therefore come to God, and use some means
to propitiate him, that being propitiated he may pardon them: For, it is pardon,
that actually frees from Guilt, and the Conscience of Sin. Those who are
guilty, and yet senseless, and so no Worshippers, continue guilty still. Yet
these Worshippers, as purged only, are free from Guilt; and this purging is
twofold, 1. By Sacrifice, as propitiating and making Sin pardonable. 2. By
God's Sentence, upon Repentance and Faith, pleading the Sacrifice as offered
and accepted. And without both, Guilt is not actually taken away.

Thus far these words have been explained, as considered absolutely in
themselves: yet we must further examine them as referring to the Antecedent part
of the Text, and containing a Reason, why the Legal Sacrifices should have
ceased if they had perfected the Worshippers. And, for the clearing of this, I
must resume the former distinction of purging, as it is an immediate Effect of
a Sacrifice, or an Effect of the Sacrifice upon God's Sentence of Absolution.
The former purging is here principally meant, yet so as not to exclude the
latter: Yet this purging by Sacrifice offered may be an Expiation of some-Sins
for a time, as making liable to some certain Punishment, or as an Expiation of
all sins expiable, and making the Sinner liable to all Punishments, not only
temporal but spiritual and eternal. Now, if there had been any such expiatory
Sacrifice under the Law, that could have made God propitious for ever, and all
sin remissible for ever, and so have made not only temporal but spiritual and
eternal penalties eternally removable; then, if that had been once offered and
accepted, there had been no need of offering that Sacrifice again, or any
other: For this would have purged the Worshipper so, as to free him from the
Guilt and Conscience of Sin, without any other, or without any Re-iteration of
it at all. But there was no such Sacrifice, therefore the Worshippers, upon new
sins, had recourse to a new and to another Sacrifice, and these Sacrifices did
not cease but continue; and hence the Author proves their Imperfection. Under
the Gospel we commit new Sins, contract new Guilt, and have Conscience of Sin,
and so do often re-iterate the Offering of a broken Spirit, renew our
Repentance and our Faith; yet we plead no new Sacrifice Expiatory, but rely
only upon one Sacrifice once offered till such time as by virtue of it we be so
purged as never to be guilty again, or have Conscience of Sin any more; and
when upon our final Repentance, and Faith in this Sacrifice, we receive a full
and final Absolution, then by virtue of this Sacrifice we have no Conscience of
Sin for ever.

. 4. The Apostle goes on, and further informs thus,

Ver. 3. But in those Sacrifices there is a Remembrance again made of Sins
every Year. THESE words seem to produce a third Argument, to prove the
insufficiency of the Legal Sacrifices, as to perfecting and purging the
Worshippers. In Form he argues thus,

If in those Sacrifices there was a Remembrance of Sins every Year, then they
did not purge and perfect the Worshippers.

But in them there was a Remembrance again of Sins every Year:

Therefore they did not perfect and purge the Worshippers.

In the Text we have,

1. A yearly offering of Sacrifices. 2. In these Sacrifices a Remembrance of
Sin every Year.


1. There was a yearly Offering, and this seems to be that great and solemn
Sacrifice of Explation, offered the tenth day of the seventh Month every Year.
It Is true that there were many other propitiatory and Ilastical Sacrifices
besides this offered every Year; yet this was the general and public
Sacrifice, offered for the Universality and whole Body of the People, and
therefore vas the principal. This does prove that they ceased not because they
took not away the G^ilt and Conscience of sin: Therefore some think these words
to be an Assumption to sone former Proposition.

2. There was in these yearly Scrifices a Remembrance of Sin; for when this
great Sacrifice was to be offered, God d^ command, That Aaron the High Priest
should lay both his hands upon the Head of the Scapegoat, and confess over him
all the Iniquities of the Children of Israel, and all their Transgressions in
all their Sins, Levit. 16. 21. Where we learn what Remembrance of Sin is, it is
the Confession of Sins. Now, Confession presupposes Remembrance, and is ^n
outward Expression and Declaration of the sins remembered. To confess sins, is,
to aknowledg the Confessors guilty, notwithstanding Sacrifices had been
offered, and Expia^on made; and from hence it follows, that those Sacrifices
had no virtue to take away sin. Some virtue they had, and some Legal Expiation
was made; yet the Offering was ^ sooner made, but the expiating virtue
vanished, and their new sins must have a new C^nfession and a new Sacrifice,
which had been needless if the former Sacrifices had been sufficient. And
whereas it may be said, that although many Sacrifices severally could (...),
yet all jointly might purge the Worshippers: The Answer is, they could not; ^o
not any, nor all, had Power to purge the Conscience; that must be purged by
some bette Sacrifice, whereof they were but Types and Shadows: This is the
third Argument.

. 5. The fourth we find

Ver. 4. For it is not pssible that he Blood of Bulls and Goats should take
aw^y Sins. THE force of the Reasons in this, That seeing the Effect is to take
away sin, it must have a Cause sufficent to produce it; but the Blood of Bulls
and Goats, which was the princi^l thing in the Legal Annual Sacrifices, was no
such Cause, it had no such virtue; the Effet was so far above it, that there
was no possibility that such a Cause should reach it: For ^ery Cause does work
according to it is Power, as it is greater or less; but if there (...) power at
all in respect of any particular Effect, in respect of that it can do nothing^
all. The Blood of Bulls and Goats might be a sign of that Blood that could take
away sin but take it away, or any ways actively concur to the taking away
thereof, it could ^o

In the words we have

1. An Effect. 2. The Impotency of Legal Sacrifices in respect of this Effect.


1. The Effect is taking away of sin. Where, by Sins, we must understand sins
as past, yet remaining in their Guilt: For, though the sins be past, and not in
being, yet the Effect abides; for the party that has sinned is liable to
Punishment, and must suffer it, if it be not prevented. Therefore, to take away
Sin, is, to make it remissible, and that by some Sacrifice and Satisfaction:
This is to make the Guilt removable, which yet is not actually removed, but by
the Sentence of the Judge passed upon the Sinner, rightly disposed and qualified
by Faith in a right Sacrifice. And here you must observe, that the Guilt is an
Obligation not only to some temporal but also to spiritual Punishment; because
sin is from the Soul an immortal substance, and against a Law of God which
binds the Conscience and immortal Soul, and promises Rewards and threatens
Punishments, not only temporal, but spiritual and eternal: And the taking away
sins in this place is a freeing of the party from this Obligation.

2. Such an Effect, so great and glorious, and so beneficial to sinful Man,
must have some excellent and powerful Cause; such the Blood of Bulls and Goats
cannot be. Where we must know that the things sacrificed on the great day of
Expiation were Bulls or Bullocks, and Goats, and with the Blood of these shed,
and taken, and sprinkled in the Holy place within the second Veil, the Legal
Expiation was made. As the Beasts so the Blood was morally neither bad nor
good, but indifferent. And though offering and sprinkling of this Blood was a
rational Act in the High Priest, yet it could give no moral, spiritual, or
supernatural Power to the Blood: Neither could the Priest have had any warrant
to have made this use of this Blood, if God hadnot commanded him, and that to
signify some better and far more excellent Blood. Therefore, if we look upon
the Blood, and consider what it was, we cannot rationally inagine any Power in
it, either placare or piacere, either to satisfy divine Justice, or to merit
any Acceptance for that end from the supreme Judge: Therefore, well might the
Apstle say, That it was not possible for the Blood of Bulls and Goats to take
away Sins, and thence conclude that the Legal Sacrifices could not perfect or
purge the Worshippers.

. 6. Hitherto the Apostle has proved the insuiclency and impotency of the
chiefest Legal Sacrifices for to take away sins, and this he^ath done by
Artificial Arguments, taken from the Nature of the Sacrifices themselves, ad the
Reiteration of them; and now he goes further to manifest, that they could not
perect any, and that by an inartificial Argument; and a Testimony. The
Testimony is ^ivine, and of infallible Authority, and such in the Judgment of
these Hebrews, so that the could not deny it. The End of it is, to prove, that
they could not purge or perfect th Worshippers, because God never intended to
do any such thing by them: He argueso this purpose, That if God intended to
expiate Sin and perfect sinful Man, by anothe and a more excellent Sacrifice,
even the Sacrifice of Christ, and by that alone, then they old not expiate and
take away Sin, and so purge the Worshippers: But he intended to ^ this great
Work by another more excellent, which was the Sacrifice of Christ and thaalone:
Therefore they could not do that great Work of Expiation. This was so strong a
Proof that it did evince, that though the Legal Sacrifices might have had some
expiatig Power; yet they could never expiate Sin, because that Effect was, and
that by God's ntention, reserved for another and a better Cause. And this may
be said to be a fifth argument, ^istinct from all the former: Seeing this is an
inartificial Argument, we must consider the Nature of the Testimony it self,
and the matter or thing testified. The Testmony, as yo heard before, is divine;
for it is taken out of the Old Testament, and out of that part whih is called
The Book of Psalms, and out of one of those Psalms which by the Title is said o
be David's. The Penmen of the whole were Prophets, and inspired from Heaven,
ad, amongst the rest, David, of whom it is said, The Spirit of the Lord spoke by
me, and his Vord was in my Tongue, 2 Samuel 23. 2. And not only he but all the
men of God spoke assey were moved by the Holy Ghost, 2 Pet. 1. 21. As they
spoke so they wrote, thefore their Writings are called The Scriptures by way of
Eminency, and The Holy Scripres; and the words written therein are all the
words of God, who spoke in them anoy them, and so he wrote by them: From hence
it follows, that the Authority of this Tstimony is divine and infallibly true,
and acknowledged so to be by them; and it is of^ much the more force, because it
was written in the time of the Law, whilst it was in force. Yet before I enter
upon the matter, we must consider of their connection and bringing the words in.
Where three things are observable, 1. The connection with the former by the
particle illative [therefore]. 2. A [Prosopopaeia], whereby he brings in Christ
speaking, and makes the words his. 3. The time when he speaks, them. 1. The
illative particle signifies thus much, That because the former Sacrifices were
so unfit, and so insufficient, therefore, for that cause, God did even then by
the Prophet David signify, That he would reject them, and pitch upon a better,
and that he had no intention to make use of them for to perfect and purge, but
from the beginning designed Christ's Sacrifice to that end, and for that
purpose. 2. They are brought in Rhetorically, as the words of Christ directing
his Speech to God his heavenly Father: The praediction that Christ would use
these words, is David's; but the words must be Christ's. 3. The time when Christ
should use these words, was the time of his coming into the World; which was
then to come, and now is past. But the controversy is, What should be meant by
his coming into the World, which most understand of his Incarnation, and more
particularly his inauguration and entrance upon his public Ministry. It Is
certain, they must be the words of Christ Incarnate, after that God had
signified his Will and Pleasure that he should sacrifice himself unto him for
the Sin of Man. The Socinian will have it to be his coming into the future
World, and entrance into Heaven; and the reason of this opinion is his false
conceit of Christ's Offering, which is contrary to express Scripture, as has
been formerly showed. But to come unto the matter contained in the words;
first, as we find them in the Psalm; secondly, as they are understood and
explained, and so applied by him to the point in hand.

. 7. The words of the Psalmist may be considered Grammatically or
Theologically. In them Grammatically considered, we find a difference between
the Hebrew and the Translation of the Septuagint, which the Apostle follows,
and it is in one Clause. For the Hebrew words translated, as they seem properly
to signify, [Mine ears have thou opened]; the Septuagaint turn, [A body have
thou fitted me, or, prepared for me.] Here the Hebrew Text and the Greek
Translation seem so much to differ, as though they were not reconcilable. A
Greek Scholiast tells us, that Paul understood and knew the Hebrew well enough,
yet he makes use of the word [body] used in the Septuagint as most subservient
to his purpose. And here I will not mention either what Nobitius observes upon
the words of the Psalm, or how several Authors translate the words; or how a
Lapide, and many others, seek to reconcile the Hebrew and the Septuagint.
Genebrard, upon the Psalm, by a tropical Explication endeavors the
reconciliation. The Tropes are, 1. A metaphor in the Hebrew Verb, and a
Synechdoche in the Nown: For as by Digging, Hewing, Cutting, Lapidaries shape
and fashion stones into the form of a Body, so God created and framed Christ a
Body; this is Metaphorical. And as many times a part is taken for the whole, so
Ear, which is a part, is taken for the whole Body; this is Synechdochical: Yet
this will not satisfy; therefore it is to be observed, That the Septuagint's
Translation, being not wording, as formerly has been noted, but many times
paraphrastical, does often leave the words, and give the sense, which here they
seem to do. For, 1. To bore or digg the Ear, is to addict one that is willing
to perpetual Service. This was the Ceremony prescribed by God, Exodus 21. 6.
This was in the Servant a denying himself, a renouncing of his Liberty, and a
free, voluntary, total submission of his own will unto the will of his Master.
In the Master, it was a Solemn engagement of the person willing to his
perpetual Service: According to this, Christ, the Lord of all, made himself of
no Reputation, took upon him the form of a Servant, and addicted himself wholly
to his heavenly Father's Will. 2. Yet Christ, as the Word, whereby the World
was made, could not be a Servant; therefore the Word was made Flesh, and God
prepared him a Body, a Flesh, that in that Flesh he might be his Servant. 3.
Because the chiefest piece of Service was in offering up his Body and his Life
for the Sin of Man; which to perform, was the Will and Command of his Father;
therefore the Interpretation of the Septuagint was most excellent. Further it is
observable, That [(...)] sometimes signifies a Servant; and then the sense is,
That God made him his Servant, and fitted him for the hardest Service that ever
was, even the Service of Sacrificing himself, and of being obedient unto Death,
the Death of the Cross. Thus far the words have been Grammatically examined. If
we consider them Theologically, we may observe in them two things;

1. The Will of God concerning Christ. 2. The Coming of Christ to do the Will
of God.


For God had determined, that the Sin of Man should be expiated by some
offering; and this Will and Determination is expressed in the Text,

1. Negatively. 2. Affirmatively.


For thus it is written,

Ver. 5. Wherefore when he comes into the World, he says, Sacrifice and
Offering thou would not, but a body thou have prepared me.

Ver. 6. In Burnt-Offering and Sacrifices for Sin thou have had no pleasure.

Where we have, 1. Sacrifices, Offerings, Burnt-Offerings, Offerings for Sin;
by all which is signified all the Levitical Offerings for Expiation prescribed
by God.

2. The rejection of these; for God would not have them, he desired them not,
he took no pleasure in them. This is the Negative Will of God in respect of
these Offerings; For he never intended them, for to perfect and sanctify
Worshippers, because he knew them unfit for any such purpose. Therefore all
these were but shadows of a far better Offering.

3. The Body of Christ, different from and opposed to all the Legal Offerings
as far more excellent.

4. God's acceptance of this Body, which God prepared for him, that he might
offer it; for it was designed for that purpose, and was far more fit for to
expiate the Sin of Man.

This is God's Will; Christ's will and readiness to perform God's Will follows.
For,

1. Christ does the Will of God. 2. He came to do it. 3. This was written in
the Volume of God's Book.


1. Christ's doing of God's Will is not that which we call his active Obedience
unto the moral Law, but his suffering Death willingly upon the Cross, and
offering his Body and Flesh for the life of the World. For this was the Will
and great Command of God, which can never be found in the Moral Law, That
Christ should suffer and offer himself to expiate the Sin of Man. This Law is
said to be in his heart, and he delighted to do it: For, if he had not done it
willingly, it never had been accepted or effectual. These words are left out in
the Apostles allegation, not only because he would have them understood, but
also because the Text of the Psalmist without them was sufficient for his
purpose. Though it is very true, that in the New Testament several times a few
words of the Text cited out of the Old are expressed, and the Reader referred
to the Book, where they are written at large.

2. He came to do his Will, that is, to dye for the Sin of Man; and to do this
Will, and offer himself a Sacrifice for the Expiation of our Sins, was the end
of his coming. For as that was the great Command of his Father, so it was the
great Work he had to do. Not long before his Death, he said, Now my Soul is
troubled, and what shall I say? Father, save me from this hour; but for this
cause came I unto this hour, Joh. 12. 27. And in his Agony he prays, That the
bitter Cup of his Passion, if it were possible, might pass from him: yet
concludes, Thy will not mine be done. Where it is employed, That it was his
Father's Will he should suffer and offer himself; and he was resolved to do it,
and to deny his own Will, and submit unto his heavenly Father. And again, The
Cup which my Father has give^ me, shall I not drink it? Joh. 18. 11. He could
have prayed to his Father, and have obtained twelve Legions of Angels; a Power
sufficient to have rescued him from all his Enemies, yet would not do it. For,
says he, How then shall the Scriptures be fulfilled, that thus it must be?
Matthew. 26. 54. Where we must observe, 1. That the Father had by the Prophets of
Old signified, That it was his Will that Christ should suffer. 2. That he come
into the World to fulfill this Will, and to present himself before his Father,
when the time came, and said, Lo I come.

3. This was written in the Volume of God's Book: This Book is the Book of the
Old Testament; and it is called a Volume, because it was not bound up as now
Books are, but rouled up into a Scroul or Volume, as the Hebrew word does
signify, and, as some say, The Jews do fold up the Book they read in their
Synagogues: Therefore is it said, That when the Book of the Prophet Esaias was
delivered to Christ, he [unfolded it]; and when he had read a part of it, he
folded it up again, as the word in the Original signifies, Luke 4. 17, 20. The
word [(...)] is turned by Aquila [(...)], by Symmachus [(...)]; by Hierom,
Pagnine, Pratensis, Tremelius and Junius, Volumen; by the Septuagint [(...)],
and by the Vulgar [Caput], and so in this place Tremelius and Beza translate
it. Schindler thinks the Septuagint took [ For we find the word [Megillah]
taken for a Roll. Ezra 6. 2. Ezekiel. 2. 9, and 3, 1, 2, 3.
Megittah] for [Gilgoleth], which signifies the Scul or the Head. But this is
not likely; We need not much trouble our selves about the Word: For as
Genebrard observes, the meaning is, That it was written of him in the whole
body of the Scriptures, and the sum of them; for the sum of The Psalmist seems
chiefly to intend the Books of Moses, which were written before his time.
Moses and the Prophets is Christ. And it is certain, That Christ was the
principal Subject of all their Writings, which Christ read, and perfectly knew
his Fathers Will revealed in them, that men might believe in him, and expect
Salvation from him. This Will, so perfectly known to Christ, was in his heart,
which he delighted to do, and was resolved upon it. Thus must we deny our own
natural Desires to suffer loss of life and cruel pains to do the Will of God,
if we will be Christ's Disciples, and receive benefit by him.

. 8. Thus far the words of the Psalmist; the Apostle's Application follows,
which will be the more perspicuous, if we consider the Subject of his
discourse, and the scope whereat he aims. His Subject is the sanctification and
perfection of such a^ Worship God by Sacrifices and Offerings, and his scope is
this, to prove that the Legal Sacrifices and Offerings could not expiate Sin,
and perfect the Worshippers, because that effect was reserved for an higher
Cause, and for a more excellent Sacrifice. Thus much premised, the Apostle,
having recited the words of the Psalm, observes three things in them. 1. The
rejection of the Legal Offerings, and that in these two words, [Thou would
not, and thou had no pleasure therein. 2. The acceptance of the Sacrifice of
Christ, the Offering whereof was the doing God's Will. 3. The reason, why he
rejected, and took away the former was, that he might establish the latter. And
seeing these were the words of God, spoken by the Prophet David, and that in
time of the Law, and that they plainly signify the Will of God in the matter of
Sacrifices; therefore the argument was strong and evincing, and did clearly
prove, that the Legal Offerings could not take away sin, but Christ's could.

. 9. That Christ's Offering could do this, he affirms, saying,

Ver. 10. By which Will we are sanctified by the Offering of the Body of Jesus
Christ once for all.] HEre the Apostle returns again unto the Sacrifice of
Christ, and proves it far more excellent then those of the Law, and that
especially in two things: 1. In that it could sanctify, which they could not.
2. It did sanctify being but one and once offered, whereas they were many, and
often offered. This excellency, virtue, and efficacy is set forth two ways:

1. Absolutely, ver. 10. 2. Comparatively, ver. 11, 12, 13, 14.


In these words, where we have the virtue of this Sacrifice asserted
absolutely, we have two things:

1. An Effect, our Sanctification. 2. The Cause, the Will of God through the
once offering of the Body of Christ.


Where, 1. We must not understand by Sanctification only a communication of
inherent Righteousness, in renewing the Image of God in us; but also
Justification and a freedom from all Sin, and all the consequents thereof, so
that we shall never Sin, or be guilty of Sin any more. This is a rare and noble
Effect, and such as upon the same we shall be fully and for ever blessed.

2. The Cause of this is God's Will through Christ's Body once offered: And
here, by Will is meant the Will and Command of God signified to Christ, that he
should offer his Body once, with his promise to accept it. Yet this Will may be
considered, 1. As a Law or Command given and signified to Christ. 2. As
performed by Christ; in which latter sense, it is here taken principally: For
it is not this Will or Command, but this Will done, that does sanctify. If God
had given this Command, and Christ had never obeyed it; how could it have
sanctified us? But Christ came to do this Will, and did it: And he did it by
offering of his Body once for all. Where we may take notice of

1. The Body of Christ. 2. The Offering of it. 3. The Offering of it once.


1. The Body of Christ was the thing to be slain and sacrificed: For he had
said before, [A Body have thou prepared me]; and here we understand, why God
did prepare him a Body, and that is, that it might be Sacrificed. So that the
matter of this Sacrifice was a Body; yet not any Body, but the Body of Christ,
which was the Body of the Son of God, and so of God in a singular manner.

2. This Body of Jesus Christ must be offered; this was the form of the
Sacrifice: And here we might enquire and search out a reason why it is said,
That [the Body] of Christ was offered; And to discover this, we must know, That
the Godhead could not be offered: For who can offer himself, or any other
thing to himself. Neither could the Soul of Christ be offered, because it was
immortal: For when it is said, That God made his Soul an offering for Sin, Esaias
53. 10. yet there by Soul is meant the Life of Christ. For the thing to be
sacrificed must be slain, the Blood shed, and it must be offered to God. But
Christ's Soul, though obedient unto Death, was not slain, had no Blood to be
shed, could not be sacrified to God: Yet his Body might be slain, the Blood
thereof shed, and both tendered unto God. In this respect, it is said by Christ
himself, The Bread that I will give is my Flesh, which I give for the Life of
the World. And when he instituted the Eucharist in memory of this great
Sacrifice, he mentions his Body broken and given, and his Blood shed. This Body
must be offered and resigned up to God, and willingly yielded unto Death out of
obedience to God's Command, and love to sinful Man, with an intention to
propitiate God offended, and to expiate the Sin of Man. For otherwise, if it
had been crucified and separated from the Body, and not out of this obedience
and love, and for this end, it could never have sanctified us. For it must be
offered; yet though offered, if not accepted of God as a Ransom for Man's Sin,
it could not have had this effect. For, as it was God's free love to give his
only begotten Son, so it was his free love to accept this Offering in the
behalf of sinful Man; the rare and excellent effects thereof depended upon his
Will. It Is true, that this Offering, in it self, was very acceptable; yet that
thereupon so incomparable a benefit should redound unto Man, was from his Will
and good Pleasure, For though, in it self, it was far above all Offerings of
the Law, and the dignity of the person was great; yet to sanctify Man, and free
him from eternal penalty, did depend upon God's acceptance.

3. This Body was but offered once; for that once was sufficient, and so much
accepted of God, that a second Offering of the same Body, or any other thing
was needless. And that cause which by one efficiency can reach the effect, must
not act again for a new production of it. Neither did it seem good to the
infinite Wisdom of God to require any offering of this Sacrifice but this one.

. 10. Thus far the excellency of this Offering considered absolutely in it
self, has been declared; the comparative excellency is set forth in the words
following to ver. 15. Where we have,

1. The Proposition concering the Legal Offering, ver. 11. 2. The Reddition,
ver. 12, 13, 14.


The Proposition we find,

Ver. 11. And every Priest stands daily Ministering and Offering oftentimes
the same Sacrifices, which can never take away Sins. IN which Text, we may take
notice of,

1. The Minstration of the Legal Priests. 2. The inefficacy or weakness of
their Ministration.


The Priests are of the Order of Aaron, and are here implied to be many in
opposition to Christ which was but one; for it is said Every Priest. These
Priests were ordained of God to minister before him, and especially the
Highpriests, which are here principally intended, whose principal Work it was,
by the yearly Sacrifice offered on the tenth day of the seventh Month, to
expiate the Sins of Israel.

1. In the Ministration of those Priests, which was principally to offer, we
may consider,

1. The Sacrifices offered. 2. The frequency of their Offering. 3. Their
continual attendance at the Altar for that purpose.


1. That which they offered was Sacrifice; yet the Sacrifices were many
individually, yet the same in kind; for the same kind of Sacrifice was offered
several times. And hence,

2. The frequency of offering, and the manifold Re-iteration of the Act; for
they offered the same Sacrifices often, and many several times.

3. Lest this Work and Service should at any time be neglected, every Priest
stands daily ready to offer such Sacrifices as God had instituted and commanded
to be offered, at set and determinate times. The Sum is, that 1. Many Priests,
2. Offered many Sacrifices individual of the same kind. 3. Offered the same
Sacrifice oftentimes.

2. Though these many were many times offered by many Priests, and often by the
same individual Priest, yet they could never take away Sin. This was their
impotency and ineffectual Causality in respect of Expiation spiritual and
eternal. Where it is to be noted, 1. That to perfect, to sanctify, to take away
Sin, is the same. 2. That there is a Legal carnal Expiation, and a spiritual
and eternal, and this latter is here to be understood, as denied of the Legal
Sacrifices, which could not expiate Sin in this manner. 3. Whereas it sometimes
falls out, that that, which one Cause cannot, many may effect, and that Cause
which may be deficient at one time may be efficacious at another; yet here it
is said, that not all these, nor any of these, could take away Sin at any time;
They could never take it away. 4. Whereas Sin may be expiated and made
remissible for ever in respect of the Sacrifice, yet not actually taken away or
remitted, by reason of the indisposition of the Subject, and impenitency of the
Sinner; in this place you must know, that these Sacrifices were deficient, not
only in respect of the indisposition of the Subject, but also in respect of the
active expiating power of the Cause: For they never made any Sin spiritually
remissible, or the spiritual and eternal Punishment removable. For otherwise,
that Blood of Christ which obtained eternal Remission has no Effect of
Justification upon impenitent Unbelievers; for, before Sin can be actually
taken away from any Person, there must be 1. A propitiatory Sacrifice, and such
as God will accept, as a full satisfaction for Sin. 2. The party sinful must
repent, believe, pray. 3. Christ, the great High Priest, since his Ascension,
must make Intercession and plead. 4. God, the Supreme Judge, must pass the
Sentence, and execute the same. The Sacrifice of a broken and penitent heart,
and of Prayer, may be offered often; but the propitiatory Sacrifice need not
often to be offered, one Offering will serve the turn.

. 11. Thus far the Proposition, the Reddition follows,

Ver. 12. But this Man, after he had offered one Sacrifice for Sins for ever,
sat down at the right hand of God:

Ver. 13. From henceforth expecting till his Enemies be made his Foo^-(...).

Ver. 14. For by one Offering he has perfected the sanctified for ever.

Where we have,

1. The offering of Christ's one Sacrifice. 2. The Reason why it was but once
offered.


In the former we are informed,

1. Of the Dissimilitude between the Legal Sacrifices, and that Sacrifice of
Christ, and this is expressed. 2. Of their Imparity, which is implied.


1. The Dissimilitude we find in several things, 1. There under the Law were
many Priests, yea the Legal Highpriests were many; this Priest Christ is but
one. 2. Their Sacrifices were many; Christ's but one. 3. There the same
Sacrifices were offered often; Christ's one Sacrifice was offered but once. 4.
Those Priests, after they had offered the same Sacrifice stood ready to offer
them again at set times: Christ, when he had offered once, never offered again;
but sat down at the right hand of God. 5. They had no Power to take away Sin;
Christ by this one Sacrifice once offered takes away Sin for ever.

2. The Imparity, which is great, is employed in the Dissimilitude; for that
Sacrifice, which being but one, and but once offered by one Priest, took away
Sin for ever, is incomparably more excellent than those Sacrifices, which being
many, and offered many times by many Priests, could never take away Sin. But
such is Christ's Sacrifice, and such were theirs: therefore it is incomparably
more excellent. The Text may be reduced to three Propositions:

1. This Man offered one Sacrifice for Sins for ever. 2. Having offered it, he
sat down at the right hand of God. 3. Being set there, he expects his Enemies
to be made his Footstool.


In all which we have the Humiliation and Exaltation of the Son of God: In the
first Proposition there is little or no difficulty: Yet 1. The Connection of it
with the former part of the Comparison is made by the Conjunction But (for so
they turn the Greek Particle (...) in this place), which implies the difference
and dissimilitude. 2. The Subject of it, according to our Translation, is, This
Man; but in some Copies the word is (...), in others (...), as here it is read;
and whereas they supply the Substantive by the word. Man [this Man], yet it may
be turned this Priest, or, this High Priest, as some Manuscripts in the former
Verse read every High Priest. 3. When it is said He had offered one Sacrifice,
it must be understood not only of one Sacrifice, but of one single Offering. 4.
This is said to be offered for Sins; this puts us in mind of our misery, God's
Mercy, and Christ's merit: For, we have our Sins, whereby we are liable to
death; yet God was so merciful as to give Christ for our Sins, and Christ's
offering was so acceptable and meritorious, that it obtained eternal Remission,
in respect of which eternal efficacy some think it is said Christ offered this
one Sacrifice for ever, never to be offered again because of eternal virtue:
Yet several Copies join the word [(...)] for ever with the latter Proposition,
which is,

2. That Christ, having offered one Sacrifice for Sin, sat down at the right
hand of God for ever. So the Vulgar, Vatablus, Beza, Tremelius out of the
Syriack, and diverse other Greek Copies, read it. This sitting at the right hand
of God does presuppose Christ's Offering, and deep Humiliation, his
Resurrection, and Ascension into Heaven. 2. It is the highest degree of Glory
and Power to that which is infinite, which is the Power of God as God. 3. This
Power, which under God is supreme and universal, is perpetually continued to
him; and his Kingdom is an everlasting Kingdom. Some think this sitting is
opposed to the standing of the Levitical Priests, which may be so; and so it
may signify, that his Ministration in the Form of a Servant on Earth was ended,
and did cease for ever. 4. This Session and Exaltation is to be considered, not
only as a Reward of his Humiliation unto death, whereby he merited Remission
and Salvation; but also as a means whereby he might apply his merits, and
confer the Mercies which by his Sacrifice he had procured for us. For, as King,
he sends down the Holy Ghost, and reveals his Gospel; by the Word and Spirit
works Faith in us, and converts us, and so makes us Subjects capable of the
benefits of his Redemption; and as a Priest pleads his bloody Sacrifice, and by
his Intercession for us converted, obtains our actual Remission and Salvation.
He need not offer any more, but plead his one Offering till all his Saints be
fully justified.

The third Proposition is concerning his expectation of a final Victory over
all his Enemies, by the Exercise of his transcendent Power at the right hand of
God: For so God had said and promised, when he first invested him with supreme
Power, For the Lord said to my Lord, Sit thou at my right hand till I make
thine Enemies thy Footstool. Where we must observe, 1. That in respect of
himself, all his Enemies are conquered; they have not the least Power to molest
him: Yet 2. In respect of his Reign and Government they oppose his Power
continually. 3. These Enemies are Sin, Satan, the World, and Death, all which
must be destroyed in his Church and Saints; yet this Destruction goes on by
degrees, and shall be finished in the end, when the Saints shall rise and be
immortal, and freed from all Sin, Sorrow, Misery, Enemies, and Death it self.

4. This is expectation of their final ruin is not doubtful and uncertain, but
most certain. And this estate of Glory is opposed to his Death and Humiliation,
and both his Regal and Sacerdotal Power are subservient to this total final
Victory.

. 12. But here it may be enquired, what should be the Reason, why Christ's
Sacrifice should not be iterated, but that one single Offering should be
sufficient? To satisfy us in this particular, the Apostle gives the Reason thus:

Ver. 14. For by one Offering he has perfected for ever them that are
sanctified. THE Conjunction For does signify, that in these words is given a
Reason of something antecedent, and that is, why the offering of Christ was but
one; and this it is, Because by that one, Christ did more than all the Legal
Priests, by all their many frequent Offerings could do. And not only so, but
also it did enough to consecrate all true Believers for ever, and proved to be
of eternal virtue in all such as were capable of it. In the words themselves we
may observe,

1. An Effect, To perfect the sanctified for ever. 2. A Cause of that Effect,
Christ's one Offering.


I will begin for Explication's sake with the Effect, though it be after the
Cause in the Order of Nature: In it we may consider,

1. An Act. 2. A Subject. 3. The Perpetuity of the force of this Act in the
Subject.


1. The Act is to perfect, which may be to consummate or make a thing perfect;
and seeing the end of Christ's Sacrifice is Man's full Happiness, therefore to
perfect is to make us perfectly and fully happy, and this certainly is intended
in this place: Yet we must further examine the force of the Greek Verb, as it
is used in this Epistle and other places of the Holy Scriptures; and we find it
signifies, To consecrate and make one a perfect and complete Priest, so as that
he may minister before God: And though some understand the perfecting of the
sanctified to be nothing else but to sanctify perfectly, yet we find in several
places of this Epistle, that it signifies to make a Priest, and is applied by
the Septuagint to the Consecration of Aaron and his Sons: For, though they were
chosen and designed formerly to be Priests, yet they could not act as Priests,
minister in the Tabernacle, offer Sacrifice, and officiate, before they were
consecrated; and, upon their Consecration finished, they were actually
constituted Priests, and might perform any Acts of Service essential and proper
to a Priest so as to please God and be accepted. This Work of Consecration was
finished in seven days; and one Sacrifice used in this Consecsation was that
of a Ram, which was called [(...)] The Ram of Consecration: And, as they, so we
must be consecrated and made Priests to God, and that by the Blood of Christ;
and this life is the time of our Consecration, which goes on by degrees, and
will be made complete for Body and Soul upon the Resurrection, when we shall be
fit to approach the Throne of Glory, and serve our God in a perfect manner in
the eternal Temple of Heaven. That Christ does consecrate and make us Kings and
Priests, is express Scripture, He has made us Kings and Priests unto God and
his Father, Rev. 1. 6. And this is the acknowledgment of all his redeemed
Saints, Thou have made us to our God Kings and Priests, Rev. 5. 10. In this
respect we are said to be a Royal Priesthood, an Holy Nation, 1 Pet. 2. 9.
There, in this life, though our Consecration be not finished, we are styled, An
holy Priesthood to offer up spiritual Sacrifices acceptable unto God by Jesus
Christ, ibid. 5. This perfection and Consecration we find attributed to his
Blood and Offering.

2. The Subject of this Consecration are the Sanctified; for Sanctification
must go before Consecration, and the more sanctified the more consecrated, and
when our Sanctification is finished, then our Consecration is consummate. By
Sanctification, some understand Baptism, as it is a solemn Rite of our
Initiation: Others say, it is Election, whereby we are separated and set apart
to this Perfection: Yet it is that whereby we are freed not only from
Infirmities, Defects, Depravations, Inclinations to evil, and so made
inherently holy and righteous; but also from the guilt of Sin. The former is an
act of the Spirit regenerating us, and renewing the Image of God in us; the
other is the work of the same Spirit, sprinkling our Consciences with the Blood
of Christ, and by the same frees us from God's vindicative Justice, and the
punishments due unto us for our Sins. The former is usually called
Sanctification, the latter Justification: That only the sanctified can be thus
consecrated, and come so near to God, it is plain out of the former places, as
Revel. 1. 5, 6. we are said first to be washed from our Sins in Christ's Blood,
which is Sanctification, before we are be made Kings and Priests: And Chap. 5.
9, 10. to be redeemed with his Blood, before we are Crowned and Consecrated.
And the persecuted Saints who came out of great Tribulation, had their Garments
first washed in the Blood of the Lamb before they were admitted to be as
Priests before the Throne of God, to serve him Day and Night in his Temple,
Chap. 7. 14, 15. Where we learn, that upon this Sanctification and Consecration
we have near access to the Throne of Glory, full communion with our God, a
clear vision of his eternal beauty, and as great a fiuition of his Godhead, as
we shall be capable thereof. And upon all this follows our eternal bliss, joy,
and full content, when we shall be freed from all evil, and enjoy the fountain
of eternal life. This Sanctification and Consecration is said in the third
place to be for ever, because they are perpetually continued, of endless date,
and of everlasting continuance.

. 13. This effect is glorious and most excellent, and includes Regeneration,
Justification, Reconciliation, Adoption with the inferior degrees of them all,
and also the Resurrection and eternal Glorification. And surely so rare an
effect must have some excellent cause; and so it has, and that is, that one
offering of Christ: For Christ is the cause, and he isthe cause as offering
himself; not often, but only once. For by one Offering, he consecrated the
sanctified for ever. Mere Man or Angel, though most excellent, was
insufficient, had no power to undertake and finish this glorious Work. For,
man's Salvation, and his eternal bliss must needs be ascribed to the highest,
first and universal cause; and issuing from the fountain of eternal Love, was
contrived by infinite Wisdom, and effected by Almighty Power; and no way was
thought so fit to accomplish it, as this one Offering of this one Priest. For
this end the eternal Word of God, which was God, must be made Flesh: But
neither God, as God, nor the Word, nor Flesh severally were the cause; but God
by the Word made Flesh: yet this is not all, this Word made Flesh must be a
Priest, and as a Priest, he must suffer, dye, and offer himself for the Sin of
Man. He must be the Priest and Sacrifice too, and offer himself without spot
unto God, the Supreme and Universal Lord and Judge, that so his Justice being
satisfied, his mercy might freely and abundantly issue out upon sinful Man, as
it did, when once this Sacrifice was offered and accepted; and being offered
once, it was so accepted, that a second offering was needless. For this was of
eternal virtue in respect of all Sins and Sinners, and was the most noble and
highest piece of Service, that ever was performed by Men or Angels, in Heaven
or Earth; and was an Ilastical and propitiatory Sacrifice. The Priest offering,
it was the the Head and Representative of Mankind, and the second Adam; and was
made such by God and his own voluntary submission, as willing to suffer Death
for those whom he did represent. By this representation and substitution, he
became the Surety and Hostage of Mankind, so far as was necessary for their
deliverance, and became liable to the penalty, which was due to Man for his
Sin. That which moved God to send and give his Son, was his mere mercy, and
free love to miserable Sinners: That which moved God to punish him once
substituted, was his vindicative Justice looking upon our Sins. It is not
proper to say, That our Sins were a cause either intrinsecally or
extrinsecally, impelling God to put Christ to Death, and to lay upon him the
iniquities of us all. Though Sin is the formal object of punitive justice, and
does deserve punishment; yet God as Supreme Lord and Judge, and above his own
Law, had power to pardon Sin, or punish it, and punish it either in the party
offending, or in Christman's voluntary Hostage, and in what measure he pleased;
and to accept this punishment willingly suffered for what ends, and in what
degree he pleased. For to inflict the penalty upon the party delinquent, or
upon another, or in this or that degree, or for this or that end, which shall
be agreeable to Justice, and pleasing to Mercy, is accidental and not essential
to it. And because this Death of Christ was suffered for Sin, and so intended
by the Supreme Judge; it was not only an affliction, but properly a punishment.
That which moved Christ to offer himself, was his love unto his heavenly
Father; a resolution to obey his Command, and a desire to be beneficial to
mankind: and the offering was an act of Charity, Obedience, and properly a
Sacrifice; which did so please God, that he, in consideration of the same, was
willing to grant unto Man many glorious and incomparable Blessings. And to
substitute Christ, to Command him to offer himself, to make him Sin for us, to
accept his Sacrifice for (...) and, in consideration of the same, to promise
Remission of Sins, and eternal life to sinful man believing, was not merely or
properly a dispensation, but an abrogation of the Law of Works. In this
offering God did manifest his Wisdom, his Power, his Holiness, and hatred of
Sin; his love of Righteousness, his vindicative Justice, his supreme Dominion,
and his infinite Mercy. In it Christ was a pattern and lively mirror of
Humility, Patience, Fortitude, Faith, Hope, Charity, Self-denial, and Obedience
unto Death, the Death of the Cross. The effects of this one offering are here
said to be Sanctification and Consecration; yet it was not an absolute and
immediate cause of these: Therefore we must observe, That the effects of this
cause may be said to be immediate or mediate, though this is no formal
distinction of a cause as a Cause. The immediate effects which are antecedent
to application, are of three sorts: 1. Such as respect God, to whom the
Sacrifice was offered; or Christ, who offered it; or Man, for whom it was
offered. Such as respect God, respect him either as Lord, or Lawgiver, or
Judge. As Lord, by this Sacrifice, redeeming man, he acquired a new power over
Man; as he was Lawgiver, the Law of Works was made rel^xible or repealable; as
he was Judge, his vindicative power in respect of the sin of man was suspended,
or inhibited upon a satisfaction or compensation made, so that his mercy might
freely issue out to save man without any breach or violation of Justice, or
derogation from the Authority of his Law: All these may be reduced to
propitiation and reconciliation. In respect of Christ, the person offering, by
this he acquired power over all Flesh, and all that happiness and glory which
his Father promised to conferr upon him, upon the performance of this Service.
In respect of man, for whom Christ offered; he, by this became savable upon a
new Covenant, and new terms; for the performance of which Covenant, and
attaining of which Salvation, all means and power necessary were merited. These
effects followed immediately in respect of the offering; the mediate effects
are such as followed upon this offering applied, yet are the immediate effects
of it as applied. For upon the same received by Faith, followed Justification,
Reconciliation, Adoption, Resurrection, and eternal Salvation; and all these
are reduced by the Apostle to Sanctification and Consecration. So that the
Salvation of Man from first to last, is wholly from this offering; yet this
offering was not the first Spring and Fountain of our Happiness, for that was
the love of God, giving Christ to offer himself. It Is a vain and loose
assertion of the Socinian to s^y or argue, That because God loved Man so as to
give Christ for him; therefore there was no need of any Propitiation, or
Reconciliation, or Aversion of his Wrath by Blood. For he might easily
distinguish between a general indefinite, and a particular love; and between a
love of good will, and of friendship. The love of God is best known by the acts
and effects thereof: For we find three degrees and effects of his love to
sinful man; The first is, the giving of Christ to offer himself for him; and
thus he loved him, when he was an Enemy, and ungodly; for we may love Enemies,
though not as Friends. The second is, the giving the means of Conversion, that
he may believe: and when God loves him thus, and first calls him, he finds him
still an Enemy. The third degree and effect of his love is, to justify and
glorify him; and when God loves him thus, he finds him converted, and looks
upon him as a Friend. From these degrees of love, the Apostle argues, That if
when we were Enemies, we were reconciled to God by the Death of his Son; how
much more being reconciled, shall we be saved by his life, Romans 5. 10. And
though Christ has offered himself for Sinners, and this was an act of
exceeding love: yet he that believes not on the Son offering himself has no
life in him, but the Wrath of God abides on him, Joh. 3. 36. And no man can
have peace with God by Jesus Christ, before he be justified by Faith in Christ.
For being justified by Faith, we have peace with God, through our Lord Jesus
Christ, Romans 5. 16. Where to have peace with God, and be the determinate object
of God's special love, does presuppose and necessarily prerequire both Faith
and Justification.

. 14. The Apostle having proved formerly out of Psalm 40. the excellency of
Christ's Sacrifice, and the virtue of it, in the next words adds another proof
out of Jeremy 31. 33; 34. The same Text of the Prophet was alleged, Chap. 8.
and there handled; and therefore here I need not enlarge, but contract my
Explication. But let us hear the words of the Allegation,

Ver. 15. Whereof the Holy Ghost is a witness to us: For after he had said
before,

Ver. 16. This is the Covenant that I will make with them; After those days,
says the Lord: I will put m^ Laws in their hearts, and in their minds will I
write them;

Ver. 17. And their Sins and Iniquities will I remember no more.

Ver. 18. Now where Remission of these is, there is no more offering for Sin.]

IN all which we may observe,

1. The Apostle's manner of Allegation, ver. 15. 2. The Text alleged, ver. 16,
17. 3. The Aoostle's Application of the Text to the point in hand, ver. 18.


1. The manner of Allegation, we have in these words, [Whereof the Holy Ghost
is a witness to us: For after he had said before.] The principal things here
considerable are, 1. The thing testified. 2. The Witness testifying. The thing
testified, is employed in the word [Whereof], and it is the excellency of
Christ's Sacrifice, in respect of the virtue thereof in taking away Sin; for
this is the principal Subject of his present Discourse, and the demonstration
of this Virtue is chiefly intended. The witness testifying this, is the Holy
Ghost; a greater, a better Witness we cannot have. This Testimony we find in
the Scriptures, which signify, That all Scripture is given by inspiration from
God: we read it in the Prophet Joremiah; therefore he spoke and wrote this as
moved by the Holy Ghost Jeremy so speaks and writes them as the words of God;
for [saith the Lord], is his Style: from whence we observe, That the Holy Ghost
is the eternal Jehovah: For that which Jehovah says there, The Spirit is s^d
to witness or testify here. Therefore, seeing it is the Spirit that testifies,
and upon Record; the thing testified must needs be of infallible and undeniable
Truth.

2. The matter of the Text alleged, is a Promise, and it is twofold; 1. Of
putting God's Laws in our hearts, that we may believe and be converted. 2. The
Remission of our Sins upon our Faith and Conversion. The first is done by
illumination and inspiration, whereby that word, concerning Christ and
Salvation, which we hear, is made effectual, and the power of the Spirit is
added to work Faith by that word in our hearts, to make us capable of
Remission. The second is done by the Sentence of the Supreme Judge absolving
us. The first is referred to Vocation; The second to Justification. And here we
must observe what the Apostle's intention is, which will appear in

The third thing, which is the Apostle's Application in ver. 18. 1. The
difference between the second Allegation of the same Text here and in Chapter
8th, is, That there he proves the excellency of the Covenant above the former
Covenant, from the excellency of the promises; but here he proves the
excellency of Christ's one offering above all the offerings of the Law, because
by virtue of it Sins are taken away; which implies, that the mercies promised
in the New Covenant were merited by this Sacrifice, and that in respect of this
Sacrifice offered, he was the Mediator of this Covenant; so that, without it,
those promises had been never made, or, if they had been made, they never had
beeneffectual and beneficial unto sinful Man. For in consideration of this
offering, God made these promises, and for Christ's sake offering himself once,
he gives the things promised to such as are capable of them, according to the
Tenor of the Covenant. 2. He singles out the latter promise of Remission, as
most pertinent to the point in hand; for though the former promise be
excellent, and the thing promised necessary for to enable Man to keep the
Covenant; yet it is but subordinate to this second promise, because if the
Covenant be not kept, there can be no remission: neither is there any keeping
of the Covenant, except God's Laws be written in man's heart, as well as in the
Scripture outwardly. 3. He puts an Emphasis upon the Hebrew word [(...)] used
in the Hebrew Text, and the double negative in the Greek; which imports, That
he will in no wise remember out Sins any more, he will forgive them for ever.
4. From hence he draws this conclusion, there is no more offering for Sin. 5.
And from thence, that Christ's Sacrifice was of that excellent virtue, that by
one offering it took away Sin, all Sin, and made it eternally Remissible, and
upon Faith eternally to be remitted. So that the substance of the Doctrinal
part of this Chapter is to demonstrate the inefficacy of the many Legal
Offerings, and the Efficacy of Christ's one Offering. And all this tends to
this end, to inform us, 1. That Legal Offerings cannot help and save us. 2.
That Christ's can. 3. That Christ's is far more excellent and absolutely
necessary. And the Comparison therefore is in respect of the expiating power
and virtue of both; which, of the one, is little or none; of the other, is very
great and sufficient for our Salvation and eternal happiness. And this
Doctrine is full of heavenly Comfort to humble, penitent, and believing
Sinners; for by this Offering, though our Sins be many and heinous, yet they
are all eternally pardone^, and we for ever consecrated.

. 15. The Apostle having finished his Doctrine of Christ's Priesthood begins
here to apply the same, and that by way of Exhortation to certain Duties, which
they were bound to perform by virtue of God's Command and that Faith in Christ
they did profess. The former Doctrine did serve to inform their Understanding
more fully, and to improve and confirm their Faith, the Exhortations following
tended to stir up the heart, informed by the Understanding, and directed by
Faith, to the performance of other Duties necessary to the attainment of that
eternal life which Christ had merited for them. This is the second part of this
Chapter, and almost of the whole Epistle; for the Connection will make it appear
to be so, if we either consider the matter or manner: For the matter, we find,
that these words are joined with the antecedent Doctrine concerning the
Excellency of Christ both as Prophet and Priest; and so it is the second part of
the whole, which is, 1. Doctrinal. 2. Practical. For, the former part is
didascalical, this latter protreptical and more practical. But if we consider
the immediate Connection, then it will appear, that it is in a more special
manner joined with the Doctrine of Christ's Priesthood, continued from the
fifth Chapter to this place; and the first Application following, as the last
Chap. 13. does more especially respect Christ's Priesthood. The manner of the
Connection is evident from the Illative Therefore, which signifies that the
Exhortations are so many Conclusions deduced from the former Doctrine,
especially that of Christ's Priesthood. The principal Duty exhorted unto and
urged by many and powerful Arguments, is, Perseverance in the Christian Faith,
which they did profess. Yet he exhorts unto many other, which should always
accompany sincere Faith, and are not separable from it. These things premised,
it is time to enter upon the Text as delivered

Ver. 19. Having therefore, Brethren, boldness to enter into the Holiest by the
Blood of Christ,

Ver. 20. By a new and living way, which he has consecrated for us through the
Veil; that is to say, his Flesh:

Ver. 21. And having an High Priest over the House of God.

THE Method of the Apostle in this latter part of this Chapter is obvious: For,

1. He lays the ground of his Exhortation. 2. Exhorts to several Duties. 3.
Urges the performance of these Duties by several Arguments to the end of the
Chapter.


The ground is laid in these three Verses, by Repetition or rather
Recapitulation of something formerly delivered, either explicitly or
implicitly; and in this ground we have several particulars, which may seem to
be Motives to excite unto the performance of the several Duties exhorted unto,
and especially of the first: In these words of the ground, we have three things,

1. A new and living way unto the Holiest, made and consecrated by the Body and
Blood of Christ. 2. A Liberty to enter by this way into the Holiest. 3. An
High Priest set over the House of God.


And all these are expressed in Metaphorical terms alluding to the Legal
dispensation, wherein the High Priest had a way to pass through the Veil with
Blood into the Holiest, to expiate the People's Sins, and obtain Mercy for
them. That we may understand the words both in themselves and in their several
respects both to that which goes before, and that which follows. I will 1.
Explain them. 2. Enquire how they are a Recapitulation of the Doctrine
antecedent. 3. Examine how they are a ground of the Exhortation following: For
the way, which is the first thing in the Text, according to the Order of the
matter though not of the words,

1. It Is new and living; these are the qualities of it. 2. It Is consecrated or
dedicated. 3. It Is consecrated through the Veil.


This is the Sum of the 20th Verse, the second part of the Text; the Subject
whereof is a Way, which is nothing but a certain space through which we pass
from one place to another; and if that space be not passable, it is not properly
or actually a Way. The word in this place is Metaphorical; for there is no
distance of space through which we pass by bodily motion to our God: Yet there
may be a spiritual distance between him and us, and such as that he may be
inaccessible unto us; and we cannot come near him, so as to receive spiritual
Comfort from him, except a spiritual way be made. So that a way in this place
is something whereby we come near unto our God as to a gracious Father. 1. This
way is said to be new; the word in the Original is (...), which is turned
usually new, and so we find it used by the Septuagint, Eccles. 1. 9. There is
nothing new under the Sun: and Deuteronomy. 32. 17. New Gods, newly come up. In this
sense they use the Adverb (...): Yet the word in this place may signify a known
and manifest way; So the Vulgar Latin turns it, Viam notam. And this may seem
to be more probable by these words, The Holy Ghost this signifying, that the
way into the Holiest of all was not yet made manifest, whilst the first
Tabernacle was yet standing, Chap. 9. 8. Yet put both new and manifest
together, you have the full sense; it was a Way newly made manifest. From this
quality we may observe, that though from the first Promise of Christ, there was
always a way for true Believers to come to God; yet it was not so manifest as
it was after Christ's Death, Ascension, and Revelation of the Gospel.

1. This way, as it is newly opened and made manifest, so it is said to be a
living Way; which some, according to the Syriack Translator, understand to be a
way of Life, which leads to Life. And it is so called in respect of the Terminus
ad quem, that Life wherein it ends* And though it is true, that this way does
lead unto and ends in Life; yet ^ way of Life may be nothing but a living Way,
as a man of same or name is a famous man; an Expression usual in many
Languages, when the latter Substantive signifies the Adjunct, as the former
does the Subject: For this is a certain Rule not only in the Latin, but in the
Greek and Hebrew, That Substantivum Adjuncti regit Genitivum Subjecti, and
Substantivum Subjecti Genitivum Adjuncti. Some therefore think it is called a
living, that is, a constant, permanent, and perpetual Way. So the word which
signifies living is used by the Septuagint, and turned [(...)] aternus, Job.
19. 25. He is eternal who shall dissolve me; for so they translate the place:
And a living Fountain or Spring is such as continually springs. This way may be
thus called in opposition to the Typical way into the Holiest of all, which was
a dead way to all but the High Priest; none but he might enter into it, not he
himself but once a Year, and then not without Blood; and that is a dead way
through which no man passes. That way was but of short continuance; for after
Christ was once entered with his own Blood into Heaven, it ceased, and is now
ceased for ever: Again, it is a living Way, in opposition not only unto this
which led into the Sacrary and the most holy place, but unto that into
Paradise: For this is a living safe way, and one may pass through it and live;
both the other were dangerous and mortal. That in the Tabernacle and Temple was
so; it was mortal to any but the High Priest, and to him too at all times but
once in the Year; and then too, if he presumed to enter without Blood. The
other passage into Paradise was obstructed with a flaming Sword, and no man
could have access to the Tree of Life, but must be slain and burnt to Ashes: So
that this is a way of Life, permanent and safe.

2. This way is consecrated or dedicated, new made, or newly made. The word we
had in the former Chapter, it signifies to initiate, to dedicate, to
consecrate; and this is to give a kind of moral Being and Complement to a
thing, so as to make it differ from what it was, and applicable to another and
a better end and use: For an House dedicated is fit to be used for habitation;
the Temple once dedicated, fit for God's Service; a Priest consecrated, fit to
minister and officiate in the Temple. This way may be said to be initiated and
consecrated, when it was once made passable for sinful Man, so that he might
pass freely and safely to his God made accessible: And this is an Act of God's
Will separating and appointing it for that end, and thereby giving Man access
unto him.

3. This way consecrated was through the Veil: Where the Apostle informs us
what is meant by the Veil; that is, the Flesh of Christ. Whereby we understand,
that the inner Veil did signify the Flesh of Christ. The High Priest could not
enter into the inner Sacrary, to approach the Mercy-Seat, which was the Throne
of God, but through the Veil divided or lift up, or drawn aside. Therefore when
Christ dyed, and his Soul was separated from his Body, the Veil of the Temple
was rent from the Top to the bottom, to signify that Christ, the great
High Priest, was ready by his own Blood being shed, to enter the Holy place of
Heaven, to procure eternal Redemption or Remission for sinful Man, and by this
means divine Justice being satisfied God was made accessible: And no Man now
can have actual access into his presence but by this Blood and through this
Veil of the Flesh, by him who was crucified, and whose Body was separate from
his Soul.

. 16. Thus the Way is made and consecrated: The next thing is, the Liberty
which we have to enter into the Holiest, through this way, by the Blood of
Christ; where three things are to be observed,

1. The place into which this way does lead us. 2. The Liberty to enter through
this Way into this place. 3. The means whereby we obtain this Liberty.


1. The place is, the Holiest; for into that the High Priest entered once a Year
with the Blood of Expiation. There was the Mercy-Seat, which must be sprinkled
with Blood: We need not here enquire, Whether that Holiest place on Earth
signify Heaven, or some other thing? for it is certain, the Mercy-Seat did
signify that which this Apostle calls The Throne of Grace, Chap. 4. 16. The
Throne of Grace is the Throne of God, propitiated by the Blood of Christ; so
that to enter into the Holiest, is, to come to God as Supreme Lord, first
offended by the Sin of Man, and then made propitious by the Death and Sacrifice
of Christ, which was so acceptable unto him, that for and in consideration of
the same, he is willing to admit Man into his presence, graciously to receive
his Petitions and bless him. The Throne of God might be said to be threefold,
1. Of Justice. 2. Of Grace. 3. Of Glory. To the Throne of Justice, strict
Justice, no sinful guilty Man can approach. To the Throne of Grace every
penitent Sinner may have access. The Throne of Glory is inaccessible to mortal
Man. We need not locally ascend into Heaven for to come unto the Throne of
Grace, it stands in the midst of God's People, as the Tabernacle did in the
midst of Israel: For God is always, in all places, nigh to such as call upon
him in truth. Christ stood before the Throne of Justice when he suffered for
our Sins: Penitent Sinners stand before the Throne of Grace, when they worship
him in Faith. And after the Resurrection, we shall all stand before the Throne
of Glory, and ever abide in his presence: Yet this way lies by the Throne of
Grace, and we pass by it to the Throne of Glory. There is one way to both.

2. We have Liberty to enter into the Holiest. The word (...), as you have
heard, signifies Freedom and Boldness of Speech, it signifies also Liberty. The
Vulgar and the Sy^iack turn the word Confidence, which is the same with
Boldness, though some what more. The Arabic, and Arias Mortan^^, Liberty. The
Aethiopick, Grace or License. All agree; for they signify, 1. That we have a
License and Liberty graciously granted unto us. 2. A Right. 3. This Liberty and
Right is so full that we may come with Boldness and Confidence to be admitted
and accepted. This is a great Privilege and Favor which God does graciously
vouchsafe unto Believers and denies to all others, which are not admitted to
come so near him.

3. We have this Right, Liberty, and Confidence, by the Blood of Christ; for
the Blood and Death of Christ satisfied God's Justice, and merited his Favor,
and made him accessible, and upon the same he promised to admit penitent
Believers: And upon our Repentance and Faith, we have actual Right and Liberty;
so that we, who could not come near him for our sins, may come near him by
Faith in his Blood. This Privilege is more fully expressed in these words of
the Apostle, In whom we have boldness, and access with Confidence, by Faith of
him, Ephesians. 3. 12. Where, 1. We have access, and may enter into God's blessed
presence: Yet, 2. Because one may come with fear and doubt, here we may come
with boldness and confidence. 3. There is no such access, but by Christ, the
Blood of Christ. 4. Neither is there any such access granted, but by Faith in
that Blood; that is, to such as believe. The sum of all is, That Sin had made
God as the fountain of goodness inaccessible to Sinners as Sinners; Christ, by
his Death, had made him accessible to Sinners as believing.

. 17. We have, 1. A way. 2. A liberty to enter into the Holiest. And 3. We have
an High Priest over the House of God. Where, by the House of God, we must
understand the Church, which is the Society and Corporation of Believers; and
by this High Priest, Christ Jesus, as exalted at the right hand of God. No man
under the Law could come to God without the High Priest; he must present their
Offerings, their Incense, their Prayers, and the Blood of Expiation unto God,
and make Intercession for them. So Christ is ever ready before his Fathers
Throne, to bring us into his presence, as the Admissional of Heaven, to make
Intercession for us, and as our Advocate to plead our Cause by his Blood, and
make all our Services acceptable and effectual; without all which, neither way
nor liberty to enter could be beneficial, and to purpose.

. 18. Thus the words are explained, and inform us of a way made through the
Veil, of liberty to enter, of Christ set over the House of God, as an
High Priest to bring us unto God, to make our prayers effectual, and to procure
for us all things necessary to make us happy. Now it remains, we consider the
words, 1. As a recapitulation of some former Doctrine. 2. As a ground of the
consequent exhortations: and both these I will make clear in a few words. 1.
They are a brief abridgment of the former Doctrine concerning Christ's
Priesthood. For in the 5th and 7th Chapters he had not only asserted, but
proved, That Christ was an High Priest for ever after the Order of Melchizedec.
That he had made a way to God by his Blood, and procured us liberty to enter
into God's presence before the Throne of Grace, so that we might boldly come
with confidence to obtain all mercies necessary to our everlasting happiness;
he had made evident, by the rare virtue and excellent effects of Christ's
Sacrifice, partly Chapter 9th, partly in the former part of this. For Christ as
a Son, is over his own House, Chap. 3. 6. And this House is the Church: We have
a great High Priest, who is passed into the Heavens, and sensible of our
Condition, Chap. 4. 14, 15. And he is the Minister of the Sanctuary, and the
true Tabernacle which the Lord p^tched, and not Man, Chap. 8. 2. From all this
you easily understand, that the former Doctrine is repeated, and briefly
contracted in these words. 2. As it is a Recapitulation of the former Doctrine,
so it is also a ground of the future Exhortations. For if there had been no way
made; or if there had been a way, and we could have had no liberty of access
unto the Throne of Grace by the Blood of Christ; or if there had been a way and
liberty to enter, and yet no High Priest set over the House of God, it would be
in vain to continue in the profession of Christian Faith, or to perform any of
those Duties exhorted unto in the following part of the Epistle. But seeing we
have all these, and none of them, nor any other thing necessary to Salvation is
wanting; but eternal life is possible, and certainly upon these Reason; to be
obtained: therefore we have a great motive and encouragement to go on and
continue in the performance of the Duties exhorted unto. For the ground of our
hope is the possibility and certainty of attaining eternal Salvation; and the
ground of our practice and perseverance is our Hope, which is the stronger,
because a way is made, a liberty to enter obtained, and a Priest set over God's
House, who will secure us of eternal bliss, if we continue to believe and obey
him to the end. This is so much the more an effectual reason, because none of
these could be had by the Law.

. 19. But what are these Duties exhorted unto? They are several; yet such as
have great affinity one with another, and all tend to one end. The first this
is,

Ver. 22. [Let us draw near, with a true heart, in full assurance of ^aith,
having our hearts sprinkled from an evil Conscience, and our Bodies washed with
pure Water.] THE Apostle in these words, and those which follow, exhorts to
several Duties.

1 To draw near to God, ver. 22. 2. To persevere in their Christian Profession,
ver. 23. 3. To stir up one another to Love and good Works, ver. 24. 4. To
Continue in Christian Communion, ver. 25.


In the first Exhortation, we may observe,

1. The Duty exhorted unto, and to be performed. 2. The manner of performance.
3. The preparation of the persons who must perform it.


For the Duty is to no purpose, no ways profitable, if it be not

1. Performed. 2. Performed in due manner. 3. Performed by persons prepared and
duly qualified.


1. To draw near to God (for so the words are to be understood) is to Worship
God, in general; in particular, to pray and seek Remission and eternal Life
from him. This is to make use of the way Consecrated through Christ's Flesh,
and of our liberty to enter into the Holiest, procured by the Blood of Christ.
It Is the same with coming boldly unto the Throne of Grace, that we may obtain
Mercy, and find Grace for seasonable Help, Chap. 4. 16. It Is the same with
coming to God by Christ to sue for Mercy, Chap. 7. 25. The party therefore to
whom we come, is God; yet considered, as sitting in the Throne of Grace, and
propitiated by the Blood of Christ. The drawing nigh, or coming to God, thus
considered, is a motion, not of the Body, but the Soul; whereby it turns away
both the mind and heart from all other objects, and turns and addresseth it
self unto God, to converse with him for his Favor, Mercy, Blessings; that it
may obtain them from him: And it fixes upon him, and abides with him till the
business with him be finished. This Coming is called Worshipping, as
Worshippers are called Comers, ver. 1.

2. This being the Duty, it must be performed with a pure heart, and in full
assurance of Faith; this is the manner, and the due qualification of the act of
drawing nigh to God: without which, it can neither please God, nor profit Man.
This qualification is twofold, 1. The purity of Heart. 2. The full assurance
of Faith. 1. It must be performed with the Heart: For all serious actions issue
from the Heart; and whatsoever is not done with Knowledge and Will, is not the
action of a Man, as a Man, and a rational Creature. The Worship of God, whereby
we seek eternal happiness, requires both; and in the highest degree of our
activity, because in it we have to do with God concerning the most weighty
business of all others: yet we may Worship with the Heart, and not with a true
Heart, that is, without sincerity. The Heart is then sincere, when, according
to God's Will, it is firmly fixed upon, and aims chiefly at the chief End. God's
Glory, and eternal Happiness, desiring and intending both far above all other
things, and this out of clear Understanding. And here it is to be observed, That
sincerity is required not only in the person Worshipping, but in the action of
Worship. He that is habitually sincere, may so f^^ forget himself, as to
worship without sincerity, and the principal part, essence, power, reality, and
truth of that Worship which God requires. For this truth and sincerity is the
very Life and Soul of acceptable Worship: If we incline, or have secret and
remote thoughts of Vainglory, of falling off from our profession, or returning
to Sin, then our Heart is not perfect, sincere, upright; and our worship must
needs be like our hearts, which ought, in the first place, wholly and folely be
given and offered to God. By this we easily understand and both how few do
Worship God sincerely; and how defective the Worship of the best may often
prove. 2. Besides sincerity, is required a full assurance of Faith: Faith is
both a belief, and a confidence and assurance; full assurance is an higher
degree of both. As a belief, it is grounded on God's Word in general, revealing
the Truths and Propositions to be believed; as a confidence, it is grounded on
the promise, a special part of God's Word. The belief goes before, confidence
follows after, as depending upon the belief: for the promise is first a Truth,
and so to be considered, before it can be conceived under the formal notion of
a Promise. He that comes to God, must believe that he is, and that he is a
Rewarder of them that diligently seek him: That God is a Rewarder of those who
diligently seek him, is a truth, or true proposition, and is to be believed;
and it is a Promise, because therein God signifies, that, as he is able, so he
is willing to reward such; any he has in the Gospel signified, his
unchangeable Will and Decree so to do, and has bound himself both by his
Decree and his Word, which is the signification of the Decree. The full
assurance of this Faith is grounded upon the infallible Truth of his Word, and
the fidelity and immutability of his Promise. And where as this full ssurance
is thought generally an high degree of Faith, yet Faith is no divine Faith
without it. For no man receives the Word and Promise of God, as the Word and
Promise of God, that wants this full assurance. For the firmness of Faith,
should answer the firmness of God's Word. If this full assurance were an
assurance of our particular estate, and of our Title to eternal Life, and of
our perseverance, it might be though an high degree of Faith, and separable
from true and sincere Faith in many; but the object of this full Assurance is
the Word and Promise of God, considered antecedently to the application of
them, to this or that particular Subject, or our selves; and to the conclusion,
we deduce from thence concerning our own particular estate. And it is
necessarily required in every one, who will draw near to God: The confidence
and reliance, which is grounded upon God's Promise, is not an assurance that
God has justified us already, or that he will justify and save us absolutely;
but that he will justify, save, and reward those who by Repentance, and Faith
in Christ diligently seek him, and, by consequence, that he will save us,
seeking him in that manner. For the Promises of God include the Duty of Man,
and bind God only unto such as perform the Duty: And he that comes to the
Throne of Grace without a full assurance of Christ's Merit, and God's Promise,
and the performance of it to them that do their Duty; they come not aright,
their Worship is not acceptable, their Prayers not effectual. Therefore said
the Apostle, If any man lack Wisdom, let him ask it of God, etc. But let him
ask it in Faith, nothing wavering, etc. For let not that man think that he
shall receive any thing of God, Jam. 1. 5, 6, 7. Where by a wavering man, some
understand not only a man not assured of the truth of God's Promises or
doubting of them, but one not resolved to perform the Conditions of the
Covenant. For any such unresolved man to think, that he shall receive the
mercies promised, and prayed for, is plain Presumption. Therefore this full
assurance is necessarily required in every person drawing nigh to God, even
then when he draws nigh, and converseth with his God. We must therefore draw
near to God, and pray every where, lifting up holy hands, without Wrath or
Doubting, 1 Timothy 2. 8. Doubting is as prejudicial to Prayer, as Wrath, or
impure hands. This is the qualisication of actual Worship.

3. The qualification of the Party follows, which is the purification of the
heart and body. For, 1. Our hearts must be sprinkled from an evil Conscience.
2. Our Bodies washed with pure water; and the Apostle seems to presuppose them
thus qualified, because Believers. The expressions are taken out of the Books
of Moses, in which God prescribed a twofold purification, one by bood, which
we have spoken of, another by water. And no person legally impure, might draw
nigh to God to worship him in the Tabernacle or Temple, before he was purified.
And by this was signified, that no man guilty, and conscious of sin, is fit to
draw nigh unto, or to worship God before he be purged from Sin. The Ethiopick
Translation is not here so wording, as many other Translations be, but is a
Paraphrase, and gives the true sense thus, [Our hearts being purged, and our
selves purified from Sin.] The reason hereof is this, [God hears not Sinners,
Joh. 9. 31]. But for the more distinct explication of the words, we must
observe,

1. Our Hearts. 2. The sprinkling of our Hearts. 3. The sprinkling of them from
an evil Conscience. 4. The purifying of our Bodies with pure water.


1. By Hearts are meant, the rational appetite and will, as subject unto the
power of God, and bound by his Laws. This Heart and Will is the principal
efficient of our actual Sins, and proper and primary subject of
Unrighteousness. If this be pure, all is pure; if this be polluted, all that
issues out of it is polluted. For out of the heart proceed evil Thoughts,
Murders, Adulteries, etc. Matthew. 15. 19.

2. If this be unclean, it must be sprinkled, that is, purged and cleansed; for
that is the true meaning of the word. For under the Law, the blood of Bulls and
Goats, and the ashes of an Heifer were sprinkled upon the unclean; and their
Bodies being sprinkled with this Blood, with these ashes, were sanctified to
the purifying of the Flesh, so that the sanctified might be admitted into God's
holy Tabernacle or Temple, to Worship God with the rest of the People which
were clean. So under the Gospel, such as are morally and spiritually unclean,
must be spiritually sprinkled and purged by the Blood of Christ; which does not
only justify, but sanctify the penitent Believer. So that to have our hearts
sprinkled, is to have them justified and sanctified by the Blood of Christ.

3. The thing from which they must be cleansed, is an evil Conscience, which
the Aethiopick Translatour interprets to be an evil Work or Sin. For Evil here,
is Sin; and an evil Conscience is the Sin, whereof we are guilty and conscious.
For nothing does spiritually and morally pollute us but Sin, which makes us not
only guilty and liable to punishment, but also filthy, and unfit for Communion
with God.

4. The Body must be washed with pure water Some understand the Body in proper
sense, as contra-distinct to the Heart and Soul; and this water to be the Yet
in this the Apostle may allude to the purifications under the Law.
water of Baptism, which is sprinkled upon the Body, and, though not
physicially, yet sacramentally and mystically does purge it, and the Soul too
from Sin. This it is said to do by virtue of the Institution, by the merit of
Christ's Blood, and the power of the Spirit: For Baptism is the washing of
Renegeration, by the renewing of the Holy Ghost. Ti^. 3. 5. Yet this purifying
cannot be by washing away the filth of the Flesh, but the answer of a good
conscience toward God, by the Resurrection of Christ, 1 Pet. 3. 21. It Is true,
that not only the Soul, but the Body are polluted with Sin; and both by reason
of Sin, are liable to punishment; and both must be cleansed by the sprinkling
of Christ's Blood, and the Sanctification of the Spirit: and this is the
principal sense of the words. The thing to be observed is, That, 1. No man
unconverted, unregenerate, not sanctified by the Holy Ghost, is fit to draw
nigh to God. 2. The regenerate, who are in the State of justification and
sanctification, if they contract new guilt, must by Repentance, Faith in
Christ's Blood, and Prayer for the Spirit to sanctify them, first cleanse
themselves, before they come to God. The Body is but once washed with water,
and that is in Baptism; but, as it is taken here, it must be often washed and
cleansed, by the renewing of out Repentance and Faith. So that by Heart and
Body is meant the whole man, and by sprinkling and washing is understood
justification and sanctification, not only begun upon our first conversion, but
continued by our Repentance and Faith, continued habitually, and re-iterated
and actually exercised; especially upon our relapfes, and contracting of new
guilt and pollution. David knew this qualification to be necessary, and
therefore said, I will wash my hands in innocence; so will I compass thine
Altar, Psalm. 26, 6. To compass God's Altar, was to draw nigh to God, and to
worship him; to wash his hands in innocence, was to cleanse his Heart and Body
from sin, before he did approach unto that God, who requires holiness in all
them that draw nigh unto him; for they must be holy as he is holy. This seems
to be the reason why in our Liturgy, the Confession of Sin was premised, and
began the Worship of God.

. 20. The second duty exhorted unto, follows in these words

Ver. 23. Let us hold fast the profession of our Faith without wavering, (for
he is faithful that promised).] THe first Exhortation is to the exercise of
Divine and religious Worship, upon which both our perseverance and eternal
happiness depend; and if the parties drawing nigh be prepared, and the Worship
duly performed, there will be greater hope of Salvation. In these words we are
exhorted to perseverance in the profession of our Christian Faith and Hope,
which is necessary to the attainment, and actual enjoyment, of the great
Reward.

In the words, two things are observable,

1. The Duty, Perseverance. 2. The reason why the Duty should be performed.


This is the principal Duty, and both the former and the two latter are means
and helps, which will enable us to perform it. In the Duty we may take notice,

1. Of Faith. 2. Of the Confession of Faith. 3. The holding of this Confession
without wavering.


1. We must have Faith, that divine and fundamental virtue in our hearts. Most
Copies make no mention of Faith, but of Hope, and so do most of the
Translations, so that we may wonder what Copy our Translatours followed. Yet
this does not vary the sense; For where there is Hope, there must be Faith; and
where there is true Faith, there is certainly Hope: for Faith is the ground of
Hope, and Hope depends upon Faith, and these two are inseparable. Besides,
Faith, as a confidence, has great affinity with Hope; and though they may be
distinguished so, as that confidence may look at the party promising, and Hope
at the thing promised, yet both are taken often for the same. I need not here
inform you of the Nature of Hope, for that I have done already, Chap. 3. ver.
6. and 6. 11. Both Faith and Hope, with Charity, are by the Schoolmen called,
Theological virtues.

2. If there be Hope, there must be a Confession of it: Hope is inward and
invisible as Faith is, and must be manifested to others by our Confession. This
Confession may be made by Works or Words: When our Works are holy and just, and
agreeable to our Faith, we thereby signify, that we believe in Christ, and
expect eternal Glory by him: When in Words we signify to men, that we believe
that God raised up Jesus Christ from the dead, and testify our Hope of the
Resurrection unto everlasting Life; then we confess both our Faith and Hope:
This Confession is solemnly made in Baptism, and also in the Eucharist, and by
our Communion with God's People in our public Assemblies. This Confession is
necessary, without it such as are at Age are not capable of Baptism, neither
can they without it be justly admitted to the Lord's Supper. To deny Christ
before men, as Peter did, is contrary to this Confession, and a grievous Sin;
For, with the Heart Man believes unto Righteousness, and with the Mouth
Confession is made unto Salvation, Romans 10. 10. So that as without Faith there
is no Righteousness, so without Confession there is no Salvation.

3. A man may confess his Hope for a time, yet as his mind may alter so his
Confession may waver; therefore the Duty is to hold fast this Confession
without wavering: The more sincere Faith and Hope shall be, and the more deeply
they shall be rooted in the heart, the more likely they are to persevere; yet
perseverance does chiefly depend upon God's support and assistance: For, if
temptation be violent, and he desert us but for a little time, we shall be in
danger to waver, if not to fall; yet this divine assistance cannot be expected
but in the diligent use of the means; therefore says the Apostle, Let us hold
fast. And this will be the more easy in time of Peace, when we shall meet with
no Opposition: But when the subtle Arguments of Seducers shall begin to delude
the Understanding, and the fear of cruel Persecution of bloody Enemies on the
one hand, and the desire of temporal Life, Peace, Happiness, on the other hand,
shall work upon the Will, then it will be a difficult thing to hold fast, and
not be shaken.

. 21. The Reason to persuade, stir up, and encourage, is God's Promise and
Fidelity: For,

1. We have a Promise. 2. It Is God's Promise. 3. God promising is faithful.


1. We have a Promise: We are secure, when one that is able has passed his
word, and by Promise bound himself unto us, then we make sure thus far of the
thing promised. The thing which we desire, and which is promised unto us, is
not only the Reward of eternal Glory, which is the Object of our Hope, but
power and ability with assistance to do all things necessary for the attainment
thereof; for, in the Gospel, not only the Reward, but Power to perform our
Duty, are promised. Therefore Paul prays, that the Ephesians may be
enlightened, that they may more fully know not only the excellency of the Reward
of Glory, but also the exceeding greatness of that Power, which must not only
strengthen, but support and assist them in the seeking of the full possession
and enjoyment, Ephesians. 1. 16, 17, 18, 19.

2. This Promise is not the Promise of any Man or Angel, but of God; this is
more than if all the best men, and all the holy Angels, had bound themselves
unto us, and given us all security, which possibly they could. The Reason
hereof is, that his Power is absolute and almighty, and nothing can resist or
hinder it if once it begin to work. The Power of Men and Angels is great, yet
nothing unto this: Besides, God's Mercy is like his Power, and as he is able so
he is willing to do what he has promised, and he has signified his Will and
Purpose, through Faith, by his Power to preserve us unto Salvation.

3. Yet one may be able, and for a time willing, and yet upon several Reasons
and Motives change his mind; for the Mind and Will of Man or Angel is not
absolutely immutable; and so, though perhaps they will not, yet it is possible
they may fail us. But God will not, God cannot; for God who has promised is
faithful: For as he cannot forget, or be hindered by any contrary Power, so he
cannot change his Will: If he say the word, it must be done; if he pass his
Promise, he will perform. This faithfulness presupposes his Power and his
Promise, and it is the immutability of his Will; for, as he is unchangeable in
his Being; so he is in his Promise, For the strength in Israel will not lie,
nor repent. 1 Samuel 15. 29. And these are his words, I am the Lord, I change
not; therefore the Sons of Jacob are not consumed, Malach. 3. 6. So that all is
sure on God's part, and Man has no cause to waver, except he neglect his Duty;
and if he perish, his destruction must be of himself. O, therefore let us give
all diligence to make our Calling and Election sure, and persevere unto the
end: And shall we, who have so great advantage, so many helps, so blessed an
Opportunity, and the Promise of a faithful God, neglect and injure our selves
so much as to lose this glorious and incomparable prize? Shall we come out of
Egypt, and come so near the borders of the heavenly Canaan, and turn back? or
refuse to go forward? Let us detest and eternally abhor to waver; let us go on
whatsoever it may cost us.

. 22. The third Duty is to further and set forward one another in this blessed
Work: This is the Exhortation of the Apostle,

Ver. 24. Let us consider one another, to provoke unto Love and good Works. THE
first Duty exhorted unto, seems to be principally Faith; in the full assurance
whereof we must draw nigh to God: The second, Hope; in the Profession whereof
we must persevere: The third, Charity; to which we must provoke one another.
The words have little difficulty in them, and so need not much Explication: In
them we are exhorted,

1. To consider one another. 2. To provocation upon consideration. 3. To
provocation unto Love and good Works.


1. This consideration is a Work and Duty of every Christian, as he is a Member
of the Church; and it is universal, all are bound unto it. The Object is every
Christian and Fellow-Member: The thing to be considered is not their temporal
but their spiritual Carriage and Conversation, so far as it shall be manifested
and made intelligible unto us: The immediate End thereof, to know their Life,
Carriage, and Conversation, which cannot be so well done as by a serious view
and animadversion: The Duty is to be performed mutually, so as that every
Christian may be the person considering another, and the person considered by
another. In this Act, though we may make use of our Eyes and outward senses,
yet we most of all must exercise the apprehensive and judicative faculty of our
Understanding.

2. We must consider to Provocation. This word is but used twice in the New
Testament, and the Verb no oftener; yet we find the Verb frequently taken up by
the Septuagint, under several Hebrew words: It may be taken here either
actively, to provoke others; or passively, to be provoked our selves. We
provoke or stir up others, when we see them ignorant, forgetful, negligent,
cold, backward; and that by Information, minding them of their Duty,
persuading, moving, quickening them unto performance: Or if we see our Brethren
persecuted, we stir up such as are able to pity them, and by Works of Mercy to
relieve them.

We are passively provoked our selves, by considering the good Example of
others, to do the like, and follow them.

3. The thing which we must provoke others, or be provoked our selves unto, is,
Charity; for we must be provoked and provoke, 1. To Love. 2. To good Works,
which are the fruits of Love; and amongst these good Works, the principal are
Works of Mercy, whereby God's poor and persecuted Saints are relieved and
comforted: And that is no true real Love which is without good Works, as that
is no true Faith which can be separated either from the Love of Christ, or from
the Love of Christian Brethren. From the words considered in the Context, and
explained in this Latitude, many practical Conclusions are deducible. 1. From
the Context we are informed, that Confession without Practice, Love, and good
Works, is defective, imperfect, and to little purpose: Confession of the Mouth,
Love in the Heart, and Works issuing from Love must go together, and must never
be separated in true and sincere Christians. 2. From the word provoking, taken
passively, we may learn this lesson, to give good Example unto our Brethren;
and so let that heavenly Light which is in us shine forth, that others may see
our good Works, and glorify our Father which is in Heaven: For we should be the
Light of the World, and our Lives should be a Mirror of all divine virtues. 3.
We must consides and take special notice of such as are eminent in Piety,
Righteousness, and true Holness, and follow closely their good Example they
give us, and tread in their paths which lead to the eternal Rest of Heaven. 4.
Take provoking actively, and the Text informs of another Duty; and that is, to
have care not only of our own Souls, but the Souls of others, and to use all
means to promote their Salvation as well as our own. Love teaches us this
Lession; for we must Love our Neighbor as our self; and the greatest Love we
can show unto him, is to endeavor his spiritual and eternal good. And we must
remember, that Love, especially Christian Love, is diffusive and communicative,
and, in imitation of God does good unto many. Non solum nobis nati, a^t
^e^iati, sumus; We are neither born, nor born again, for our selves, The End
both of our natural and spiritual Birth is to benefit others as well as our
selves: we should sharpen, quicken, and mightily stir up others to the best
things, especially to Love and good Works: And this is the Duty not only of
Ministers, in relation to their People; or of Parents, in relation to their
Children; or of Masters, in relation to their Servants: but it is general, and
so extensive, that no Christian is exempted from the performance. And the
neglect of this Duty has been the Cause why there is so little Piety, so much
Iniquity amongst us, and why most men are profane or bare Professor, and so few
are zealous in the best things. 5. From hence we may infer the Excellency of
Christian Society. Civil Society tends much to the temporal good of person
civilly associated, but spiritual Society in Religion and Christianity is far
more excellent and beneficial: Yet this presupposes the Persons associated,
with whom we live and must converse, to be good; for otherwise ill Company is
most pestiferous. Therefore the Apostle commanded the Corinthians to purge out
the old Leaven, and scandalous Persons, which like a contagion infect others:
And this does imply, that Christian Assemblies should be kept pure, and consist
of Orthodox and pious Members; and to live amongst such must needs be a great
advantage unto poor Souls seeking Salvation.

. 23. There was a fourth Duty exhorted unto: For,

Ver. 25. They mustnot not for sake the assembling of themselves together, as
the manner of some was, but they must exhort one another; and so much the more,
as they saw the day approaching. IN which we have,

1. A Duty. 2. A Reason to enforce the performance.


The Duty is expressed,

1. Negatively, They must not for sake the assembling of themselves together,
as the manner of some was. 2. Affirmatively, They must exhort one another.


The Reason is taken from the Cause; where we must consider,

1. The Reason it self, They did see the day approaching nearer and nearer. 2.
The performance pressed by this Reason; and that was, to exhort more and more.


In the Negative part of the Duty, we observe several Propositions,

1. There were Assemblies of Christians. 2. It was the manner of some to
forsake them. 3. They must not follow their Example, or do so.


1. There were Assemblies: Now, Assemblies are of many kinds; amongst the many
differences of them this is one, that some are Civil, for matters of this Life;
some are Religious, for matters spiritual, wherein we do converse with God, and
amongst our selves. These were Assemblies religious, wherein Christians did
meet together for to serve and worship God, and by so doing did mutually
promote their Salvation. There are private Devotions, and religious Duties, to
be performed in our Closets, and also in our Families, and also public Divine
Services. These Assemblies were instituted and observed for public Converse
with God; and these were occasional or more solemn, and observed at set and
determinate times; and in times of Peace and Liberty in certain convenient
places erected or separated for that end and use: Hence Synagogues and Sabbaths
amongst the Jews. The Heathens also had their Temples and sacred places, and
their solemn times; yet abused to Superstition and Idolatry. The Light of
Nature does dictate, that God is to be worshipped not only in private, but in
public; and that this Worship, if orderly performed, requires not only certain
solemn times but also convenient places; yet the times were always more
considerable than the places. To enjoy these Assemblies, and have Liberty in
public to serve their God, both in convenient places and at certain and solemn
times, was a great Mercy of God, and a great benefit to Man: For in these they
restified their Union and Agreement in the same Faith and Worship; they had the
benefit of God's special presence; they jointly both heard God speak unto them
by his Prophets and Messengers; they jointly tendered their Petitions and
Thanksgiving before the Throne of Grace; they had the Covenant confirmed to
them by Sacraments; they comforted and encouraged one another; and as [Vis
unita forti^r] the Service and Worship of many was more powerful, so the
Blessings, Graces, and Gifts of God were more plentifully poured down from
Heaven upon them. And we are very brutish, or very inconsiderate, if we
understand not the Excellency of these religious public Assemblies, and very
unthankful if we acknowledge not the benefit of them. The persecuting Enemies of
the Church knew full well if they could scatter these Meetings and Conventions,
take away their Ministers, demolish their Houses of Worship, and deprive them
of their solemn sacred times, they might do much to destroy Christian Religion.
David did love the place where God's Honor dwelt, ve^emently desired God's
presence in that place, and sadly complained to his God, when he was banished
from these holy and blessed Assemblies; and yet those were far inferior to
these of the Gospel. And doleful was that Lamentation of the Captives of
Jerusalem, when God had taken away his Tabernacle, as if it were a Garden,
destroyed the places of Assemblies, had caused the solemn Feasts and Sabbaths
to be forgotten in Zion, and had despised in the Indignation of his Anger the
King and the Priest, Lament. 2. 6. God grant this prove not to be our Case and
sad Condition, because of our neglect and abuse of these Assemblies and our
Unthankfulness.

2. It was the manner or Custom of some to forsake these Assemblies. This was a
grievous Sin, and of very ill Consequence; for when they forsook these, they
forsook the Church, they forsook Christ; they forsook their God, and deprived
themselves of the incomparable benefits of these sweet and blessed
Associations: And this Sin was the greater, in that they did not sometimes, but
usually, frequently, constantly, forsake them; for it was their Custom. Some
might do this out of negligence, because they had no lively sense of Religion:
Some might do it for fear of Persecution, because they loved their Lives, their
Goods, their Reputation, their Liberty, their Quiet and Peace, more than
Christ, and feared Reproach and Tribulation; yet these were convinced in their
hearts of the truth of Christianity: Yet some cast off their Profession, turned
Jews, and became Apostates. Some might be Seperatists and Schismatics. It Is to
be feared, that most of the Seperatists of these times, if not all, are guilty
of this Sin; for, What Reason can they have to refuse Communion, either in
whole or in part, with any who profess the truth of the Gospel, and worship God
according to his Word?

3. Though this was the Custom of some, yet they must not follow their Example,
for it was evil, and contrary to the Laws of God. And though as yet they did
frequent these sacred Meetings, yet they must consider that there was a
possibility, nay a danger they might offend, as others had done even in this
particular, They had their frailties, and lay open to Temptation. But now being
admonished, they should be the more careful, not only to do their Duty, but
also to avoid the Causes and Occasions of this Sin.

This is the Negative, a Branch of that general, Eschew evil: The Affirmative,
which is brought in by the Particle discretive but, which sometimes is a note
of Opposition, is, To exhort one another, which may be understood two ways, 1.
Privately, to exhort one another to frequent these holy Assemblies, and never
to forsake them: Or, Publicly, to exhort mutually in these public Assemblies;
for so to do was one end ^^y they were ordained, and to be used. Consider this
part of the Duty, in opposition (...) the wicked Custom of some then, and many
now: it is to frequent these Assemblies, and mutually to agree to assemble,
and, being assembled, to exhort one another. The word (...) signifies to
comfort, entreat, encourage, and to exhort: And Exhortation in Scripture,
especially in the New Testament, signifies sometimes strictly to stir up unto
the performance of some Duty commanded by God, as conducing to our Salvation;
and sometimes more largely, for any set and formal Discourse, as that excellent
Sermon which Paul preached in the Synagogue at Antioch in Pisidia, was [(...)]
a word of Exhortation, though it contained many other things. And in this
sense, Exhortation may signify the Sermons made, and Doctrine preached, by the
Ministers of the Church in public Congregations, one head whereof is
Exhortation to continue in the Profession of the truth, and the Observations of
Christ's Commandments: And these Assemblings, if rightly ordered, are
effectually conducing to that end; and where we find them neglected, or turned
into private Conventicles in a time of Peace and Liberty, there Religion does
decay; there is little Unity in the Truth: For, unnecessary private
Conventicles, with the neglect of the public Assemblies, are usually the
Seminaries of Errors and Schisms, and very prejudicial to the public good of
the Church. So that the Duty exhorted unto, is, to frequent constantly these
Assemblies, and make right use of them, to edify, confirm, and encourage one
another to perseverance in the Christian Faith, and to Love and good Works. I
might here take occasion to enlarge, and reckon up all the particular Duties to
be performed in these religious Meetings, and show how subservient they are,
every one severally, and all jointly, to that end whereat the Apostle chiefly
aims, but I proceed to the Reason.

. 24. For it might be said, What Reason, Suasive, Motive, may be given, why we
should be so careful to perform this Duty? Yes, there is a great and powerful
Reason, and that is, Because the day approaches. Where, 1. We must understand
the words of the Reason considered in it self. 2. The force of the Reason, in
respect of the performance of the Duty. In the words of the Reason we have,

1. A Day. 2. The Approach of that Day. 3. The nearer Approach.


1. A Day is a part and the principal part of time, as opposed to the Night;
and in this place it signifies some special and more than ordinary time, as,
the day of death, of the destruction of Jerusalem, of the End of the World. The
day of death every Man must look for; Nothing more certain than death, though
nothing more uncertain than the Hour of death: Every man must die, and then be
brought unto his last Account; and as that shall be made, so shall be the
condition of every Man for ever; for, where the Tree falls there it lies,
and as Death leaves us Judgment finds us. There was a day of Jerusalem's
destruction, and of the ruin of that Nation, appointed, and made known by
Christ and his Apostles; and these Hebrews could not be altogether ignorant of
it. There is another greater day, of the final and universal Judgment, and this
was part of their Creed. All these, and every one of these, are special and
great days: And one, or two, or all these three, may here be meant. Some think
the day of Jerusalem's r^ine was most of all intended by the Apostle, though
that cannot be evidently evinced to be pointed at, so as to exclude the other
two.

2. This day did approach, and was near; for first the day of every Man's death
could not be far off; the day of Jerusalem's destruction was near, and so near,
as many then living might survive not only the Peace and Happiness of that
Nation, but the very Being and Existence of that City and of the Temple; they
might see the ruin and destruction of both; and, for ought they knew, the end
of the World.

3. This day drew nearer and nearer: For, 1. We no sooner begin to live, but we
begin to die; for we are born mortal, and ready we are to return to that dust
from whence we were taken and raised at the first, and the more of our Life is
past, the less is yet to come, and every Day, Hour, Minute of our Life we
approach nearer unto death, and death unto us. 2. As for Jerusalem's
destruction, there were many Signs of that approaching foretold, and then
known to be past: It was fatal and unavoidable, even then when Christ wept over
it, lamenting her Sin and Punishment, which he certainly did foreknow; and
when this Letter was written to these Hebrews, that day of her Calamity was far
nearer. 3. For the day of Judgment; the particular Year, Month, Day, was hid;
yet the times of the Gospel were the last times, and upon us the ends of the
World are come: And that which is always unknown may always be looked for,
seeing it will certainly come, and that suddenly. And, though that day in those
times was far off, yet it is nearer now; and though now it may be many years
before the Son of God shall come from Heaven, and the time to Man may seem
long, yet a thousand years with God is but as one day. Besides that day of
final Judgment, if we consider that the unchangeable condition of every Man
begins immediately upon his death, then the great day of Judgment may in some
sense be said to be as near as death to every particular Person.

This is the meaning of the words, considered in themselves; and now the force
of them as containing a Reason remains to be considered: For this end, we must
take notice of the thing here urged, and it is 1. The performance of a Duty. 2.
The performance of it the rather and the more; for the more the day
approaches, the more we should prepare for it. Not to forsake the assembling
of our selves together, and to exhort one another, and to be careful, very
careful, diligent, and frequent in this Work of Association, and Exhortation,
is a Duty commanded by God, and pressed upon us by the Apostle; to neglect this
Duty is our Sin and Disobedience, to do it constantly is our performance. And
this is that which is intended by this Reason: The force thereof is great. For,
seeing 1. The day of our great Account, God's final Sentence to be passed upon
us, and the Execution thereof is so near; it concerns us much, not only to know
our Duty, but to bestir our selves, and to perform it constantly with all our
Power. Our progress toward Heaven should be like a natural Motion, which is
slow, or not so swift, at the beginning, and is swifter and swifter toward the
end. Upon this performance depends our final and eternal estate: For, if we
neglect, fail, and fall away, then we are undone for ever; if we perform and be
prepared, we are eternally happy. Seeing therefore that day is a day of eternal
Rewards or Punishments, and approaches so near, What should not we do to
provide for our everlasting safety? Yet men think little of these things. If we
under stand the Text of the day of Jerusalem's Calamities and desolation, which
was near at hand, and was a day of death to many thousands, yea to hundreds of
thousands, and a lively resemblance of the final Judgment; this also might
effectually work upon them, and move them to performance and perseverance: For,
then they should see and clearly behold the woeful End of that unbelieving
Nation, and most of all, of all Apostates from Christianity. Then their
seducing Brethren, and their persecuting Enemies should be destroyed, the
Temple burnt and demolished, all their Judaism and Legal Service, wherein they
trusted, for ever abolished; and those which out of fear complied with them, or
of Christians turned Jews, should suffer in the highest degree. Therefore there
was no Reason in the World, they should forsake or deny Christ, and turn from
him to Moses; from the Gospel to the Law; for the day was approaching, when
they should see God's Judgment executed upon the unbelieving, seducing,
persecuting Jew, and the eternal Confusion of Apostates. Therefore, as they
desired God's favor and an happy End, and feared his Indignation and their own
eternal Destruction, let them persevere, and use all means to persuade others
to continue firm and faithful to the end. And here you must observe, that the
principal Duty exhorted unto, is Perseverance, and the rest are subservient
thereunto.

. 25. It follows,

Ver. 26. For, if we sin wilfully after that we have received the Knowledge of
the Truth, there remains no more Sacrifice for Sins. IN these words, 1. We
have a Reason given to persuade unto perseverance. 2. Yet this Reason is
directly and immediately disswasive and dehorrative from Apostasy. 3.
Secondarily, and by Consequence, it exhorts and moves to perseverance: For
whatsoever Reason is against Apostasy, the same is for perseverance. 4. This
Reason does seem to imply, that the forsaking of Christian Assemblies was
Apostasy, or tended to it, and the day approaching to be a day of Judgment, and
in particular of the Punishment of such as fall away. 5. This Reason begins
here, and is continued to the 32d. Verse. 6. It Is taken [a poena] from the
Punishment, which is avoided by perseverance, and is executed upon Apostates.
7. In Form it is this,

If the Sin of Apostasy be unpardonable, and shall be punished with unavoidable
and most grievous Punishment, then we ought to be very careful cop^^severe.

But the Antecedent is true:

Therefore we ought to persevere.

In the words of the Reason we have,

1. The Sin. 2. The Punishment, which is Unavoidable. Grievous.

The Sin is described in the 26. Ver. to be a sinning wilfully after we have
received the Knowledge of the Truth. Where we must consider,

1. What it presupposes; and that is, the Acknowledgment of the Truth. 2. What
it is, upon this presupposed; It Is a wilful sinning.


In the presupposition we have,

1. Truth. 2. The Knowledge of it. 3. The receiving of this Knowledge.


1. By the Truth is meant the true, pure, and most certain Doctrine of the
Gospel concerning Christ already come, Faith, and Salvation: This is called
Truth, because it is true, and most eminently and infallibly true, which is no
ways in any thing false and erroneous, as being at first immediately revealed
from God, the God of Truth, of all Truth, who is not only true but Truth it
self; It Is called also the Truth, by way of eminency, as the most excellent
Truth revealed for Man's eternal Happiness. The Reason of this Truth is the
Perfection of his full and clear Knowledge, and his absolute Integrity and
purest Holiness, which both are such, as that he neither can nor will reveal
any thing but Truth.

2. Truth may be Truth, and yet not known to any Man or Angel; and this Truth
was first known only unto God: Yet it pleased him, out of his great Mercy, to
reveal his mind to Man, and in particular this Truth of the Gospel by Christ
and his Apostle, who made it known unto others, who by that means came to know
it: For, many who heard the Gospel preached, and attended unto it, attained to
the Knowledge of the great Mystery of God's Kingdom, and of those things which
were sufficient and effectual, for Information of the Understanding unto
everlasting Life. This Knowledge was not Mathematical, Physical, Political, or
Metaphysical, as some use to speak; but Theological and Divine, and a Light
above the Light of Nature. The word may signify not only Knowledge, but
Acknowledgment of this Truth, by a full Assent upon Conviction. And this might
be caused, not only by outward Revelation, Information, and Miracles, but also
by the Illumination of the Spirit, and supernatural Gifts: For, God goes far
with Man, and does much to save him; he many times penetrates his inward parts,
and by his divine Light and Power enters into his very heart, and all this to
convert him.

3. They received this Knowledge: God did not only offer it, but give it, which
he might be properly said to do, when they received it. They had it not by
Nature; for it is far above the natural Man: They acquired it, but not by their
own Power and Industry; neither did they merit it. Yet in this receiving they
were not merely passive, yet passive before they could be active: God must do
something without Man, before he can actively receive, he must prevent him by
Revelation and Information without, and by Illumination and Operation within,
and this done, Man may be active. For, to receive it is certainly an Act not
only of the Understanding which assents, but of the Will which approves. So
that he both wittingly and willingly receives, and that with some delight, and
proceeds to Profession, and continues for a while to believe, approve, profess.
Though this receiving of Knowledge may seem only to be Acknowledgment, yet it is
something more. Truth is opposed to Erroar, Knowledge to Ignorance,
Acknowledgment to Dissent, Approbation to Rejection of this Truth.

. 26. This receiving and having is presupposed to Apostasy and sinning
wilfully: For no Man can loose and fall away from that which he never had
either in Title or Possession; so none can fall away from Grace, or any degree
of Grace, which he never had. The Heathens in Scripture were never said to
bre^k the Covenant of God, or forsake God, as their God by Covenant. Therefore
the proper Subject of Apostasy is one in the Church, a member of the visible
Church; and in the times of the Gospel a Christian, who has professes his
Faith in Christ: yet of these Apostates there is a difference, and there are
degrees of this Apostasy. For some receive and profess Christianity by
tradition, and an implicit Faith; yet never have any distinct knowledge of the
Truth to be believed. Some believe and understand more explicitly the Doctrine
of Christianity, and are convinced of the truth of it; yet are never affected
with the matter so, as to forsake their Sins, and reform their Lives, but
continue in their Sin. Some know, believe, are affected with the matter, as so
they begin by the power of the Spirit to escape the corruption that is in the
World through lust, and find some spiritual joy and comfort. To fall away from
any of these is Apostasy, but to fall from the last is the greatest: And there
was something proper to those times, which did aggravate this sin very much.
For the Truth then was confirmed both by Miracles, and Gifts of the Holy Ghost;
this confirmation was clear and extraordinary, and to renounce that Truth so
confirmed must needs be heinous, and of this the Apostle seems to speak.
Christians may fall away three ways, by denying the Truth, 1. In their
Profession. Or, 2. In their practice. Or, 3. In both. And that denial, which we
call Apostasy, is destructive of Christianity, and makes a man of a Christian
no Christian. Yet some may deny Christ, or fall into some grievous Sin, and yet
verily believe in their hearts, and retain the love of Christ, as Peter and
others have done, and yet they remain Christians. This is not strictly
Apostasy: In this number were many of those, who anciently were called [Lapsi],
and upon repenance were readmitted to Christian Communion. Therefore the
Apostasy here, 1. Is not barely to Sin; for who lives, and sins not: Nor, 2. To
Sin willingly; for so every one that Sins, especially such as act against their
knowledge may be said to do: But, 3. It Is to sin willingly after the reception
of the knowledge of the Truth, so as to renounce the Truth, whereof they were
fully convinced; and to reject Christianity, which they had received and
professed. That this was the sin here meant, will fully appear hereafter.

. 26. This is the Sin; The Punishment follows, and it is unavoidable. The
reason hereof is, first because it is unpardonable. This is signified by these
words, --

[There remains no more Sacrifices for Sins.] -- This implies, 1. That the
punishment of Sins unpardonable, is inavoidable: and this is a clear and
certain truth, if we consider the Rules of God's Judgment, and his Practice.
For whom he never pardons, those he always punishes. 2. That no sin is
pardonable without a Sacrifice, he means the Sacrifice of Christ, one
immediate effect whereof once was to make Sin pardonable. The reason why God
required, 1. Sacrifice. 2. This Sacrifice, was, 1. To manifest his hatred of
Sin, and his Justice., 2. To let men know, that no Sacrifice was so fit for
this purpose as that of Christ. These, things employed, he affirms, there
remains no more Sacrifice for Sins: In this he denies not this Sacrifice of
Christ, or the virtue of it, to remain; for both remain: But his meaning is,
that neither this Sacrifice, nor any other, can make the Sins of these
Apostates pardonable. For Sin is pardonable by this Offering, upon condition of
Repentance and Faith; and then actually to be pardoned, when we actually do
repent and believe sincerely. But here we must take notice, that the sins of
many persons are pardonable, and may be pardoned; because though for the
present they do not, yet for the future they may in due time repent: but the
Sins of these Apostates, upon their Apostasy, become unpardonable, so as that
they neither shall not can be pardoned. The reason of this is an eternal decree
of divine Justice whereby he has determined, that the Sacrifice of Christ
shall never benefit any such as fall away after they have received the knowledge
of the Truth; and if this Sacrifice shall never be accepted for them, not any
other ever shall have any force to expiate their Sin.

. 27. Therefore to such there can be no hope of mercy.

Ver. 27. But a fearful looking for of Judgment, and fiery Indignation, which
shall devour the Adversaries.] IN the former words, it is employed, That the
Apostate is liable to an unavoidable punishment of loss, because he has
deprived himself of all hope of pardon or benefit to be received by the
Sacrifice of Christ; and here that he is obnoxious to a positive eternal
penalty, as unavoidable as the former. In the words, we may easily observe,

1. The penalty to be inflicted. 2. The parties who must suffer it. 3. The
certain expectation of it.


1. The penalty may seem to be described.

1. From the Cause, the severe Justice of God. 2. The Effect, which is
devouring or consuming.


The severe Justice of God is signified,

1. More properly by the word Judgment. 2. Improperly or Metaphorically, by
fiery Indignation.


1. The word [Judgment] may inform us, that this Justice is not legislative,
but judicial; and, as judicial, not remunerative, but vindictive, which
presupposes Crime and Guilt in the party to be Judged. The Judge, is God; the
party to be judged, the Apostare; and the word Judgment may signify strictly
the Sentence; more largely, or, the Sentence, and the Execution or the
Punishment to be inferred. This Judgment is the decree of Condemnation, which
determines the penalty: and to signify how dreadful it is, it is said,

2. Metaphorically, to be fiery Indignation. The words may be translated, the
hear, or boiling, or burning of fire; that is, fiery hear. The Phrase is taken
out of the Old Testament, as Ezekiel, 38. 19. Zeph. 1. 18, and 3, 8. In which
places the Septuagint use both these words of the Text, For, 1. The word
[(...)] and [(...)] signifies, 1. Wrath. 2. Indignation, which is an high
degree of Wrath, and sometimes Jealously, which is an implacable anger; and the
word fire is added, to denote the force and vehemence of it. And both words
together signify Wrath, very intensive, and of an high degree: yet God is not
subject to passion, as Man is; but by these terms, the Spirit informs us of
God's high displeasure against, and his great hatred and detestation of
Apostasy, and the severity of his Justice, whereby he is resolved most
fearfully to punish that Sin; which is not barely a disobedience of some
particular Law, but a plain revolt. So that God's severe Justice is the Cause;
the Effect is this, that it will devour or consume; which is no partial, but a
total destruction; not that God will take away the being, but the well-beeing
of the Offender, and will not only totally bereave him of all Comfort, but
torment him with extremity of Pain.

2. The parties that most suffer are Adversaries: Adversaries are Apostates,
who are not merely disobedient Subjects, but Revolters. They violate the
fundamental Law of subjection, and raze the foundation of Obedience; for
subjection unto God-Redeemer by Christ is the first and highest Duty God
requires of sinful Man, and it is the ground of all Obedience, and this Sin of
Apostasy is opposed to this Subjection. Yet it differs from that Rebellion,
which, upon God's Call, refuses to submit, and acknowledge Christ our
Sovereign. For this presupposes, that men have received Christ, promised their
Allegiance, and by their Baptism have engaged themselves to God the Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost, and yet contrary to this engagment, renounce the Supremacy
of this universal Lord, and so of engaged Subjects become Enemies; for such all
Rebels and Revolters are, and shall be so judged by God. Many besides these
shall be condemned and fearfully punished, but these are the Adversaries
intended in this place.

3. There remains a certain fearful looking for of this Judgment, etc. The
meaning is, they cannot look for any other final retribution. This implies, 1.
That though they never fear it, not think of it; yet they are obnoxious to it.
2. That this will certainly be their Doom; and as they are obnoxious by Law,
and the certain and eternal rules of Judgment (for neither Sentence nor
Execution will fail); they shall certainly suffer that which they have
deserved. 3. If they ever seriously reflect upon themselves, and remember what
they have done; as Conscience will now and then lash them, and mind them of
their Crime, they must needs expect it, and their fear will be very great. For
as they apprehend the peril, so will their fear be; and they cannot apprehend
the Judgment, but as very grievous, near at hand, pressing hard upon them, and
unavoidable, and so it will terrify and torment them before the time of
Execution. The sum of this Text is, that as there is no hope of mercy and
pardon, so there remains a fearful expectation of grievous punishment, and the
same unavoidable.

. 28. And lest the Apostate should slatter himself, and promise impunity to his
Soul, the Apostle proceeds to prove it unavoidable and very grievous, according
to the hainousness of the Sin; and this he does in these words,

Ver. 28. He that despised Moses Law, died without mercy, under two or three
Witnesses.

Ver. 29. Of how much sorer punishment, suppose ye, shall he be thought worthy,
who has tr^dden under foot the Son of God, and has counted the Blood of the
Covenant wherewith he was sanctified, an unholy thing, and has done despite to
the Spirit of Grace.]

THese words are a Comparison, and it is twofold, 1. In quality. 2. In
quantity. The first is presupposed and employed. The second intended, and
expressly delivered. The first in quality informs, that as he that transgressed
Moses Law was punished without mercy, so shall he be that Sins wilfully under
the Gospel, after he has received the knowledge of the Truth. In the second in
quantity, we may observe,

1. The Proposition, ver. 28. 2. The Reddition, ver. 29.


In the handling of these, we must consider;

1. The parts absolutely. 2. The whole under the notion of a Comparison. 3. The
force of the Comparison, as it is a reason.


In the Proposition, we may take notice of,

1. The party to be punished. 2. The manner of judicial proceeding. 3. The
punishment it self.


1. The party to be punished, is one that transgressed Moses Law, that is, the
Law of God given to Israel by Moses, where we have the Person, and the Crime or
Cause. The Person is one under the Law of Moses, while it was in force before
the time of the Gospel. The Crime is a transgression of that Law, and this
transgression was not any disobedience, but such as for which there was no
Expiation appointed, no Remission in that Law promised; it was such a Crime as
God determined to be capital, and to be punished with a Capital punishment, and
loss of Life. The word is [(...)], which is the same with [(...)] which the
Septuagint intrepret by the word used in the Text, and both signify to revolt,
and that Revolt from the Law was answerable to Apostasy from the Gospel. This
was a breach of that fundamental Law, [Thou shall have no other Gods but me.]
This was a revolt from the true God, their God, whom they had acknowledged to
be their God, unto Idols: Yet there might be other Crimes, which might so grate
upon the Foundation, as to amount to this heinous sin of Revolt.

2. The manner of proceeding against such a Transgressour, was by information,
and delation of such a Transgressour before a competent Judge, who must proceed
[Secunduns allegata and probata,] and could not justly sentense the party, but
upon evidence. Sometimes the fact might be notorious, or confessed, and
sometimes maintained by the party offending; yet the ordinary way was by
Witnesses, and in case of a man's life he required two witnesses at least; in
which respect, [singular is testis nullus testis.] The end of witnesses was
Evidence, that so the merit or demerit of the Cause might appear to the Judge,
and so the Cause be in an immediate capacity for Sentence.

3. The demerit of the cause once made evident, Judgment passed upon the party,
and he was sentenced to Death without any mercy; and this Judgment must be
executed. So that if the Judge did make the Law of Moses his rule, he could not
acquit or absolve the party, nor impose any other punishment, nor help the
Offender by commutation, nor abate the least of this penalty; for he by his
transgression had made himself incapable of mercy. In this Proposition, two
things are especially to be noted, 1. The Crime, which was heinous. 3. The
Punishment, which was Death without mercy.

. 29. The Reddition follows in the next words, where we must observe, as before,

1. The Sin. 2. The Penalty.


1. The Sin is described, or rather aggravated from three particulars. It Is

1. A creading of the Son of God under foot. 2. A counting the Blood of the
Covenant whereby the Transgressor was sanctified, an unholy thing. 3. A doing
of despite unto the Spirit of Grace.


The Sin is Apostasy, and no man can Apostate from Christianity once received,
but he shall be guilty of the Contempt, 1. Of the Son of God. 2. Of the Blood
of the Covenant. 3. Of the Spirit of Grace. The first aggravation therefore is
from the contempt of the Son of God.

For, 1. The Apostate treads under foot the Son of God; the expression is
metaphorical, and presupposes that Jesus Christ is the Son of God, and
affirms, that he, though the Son of God, is trodden under foot. To tread a
thing under foot, is, 1. To undervalue it, if it be of any worth. 2. To vilify
it. 3. To vilify it very much. 4. To express this contempt by casting it upon
the Ground, and trampling upon it, which is the greatest debasement, and is
sometimes an expression of utter detestation. Thus Jezabel was thrown down upon
the Earth, and trampled upon by Jehu's Horses. To vilify and debase things that
are base, is no fault; and to despise unworthy men, is tolerable: but the
Apostate undervalues, vilifieth (and in an high degree) the Son of God; and the
greater his dignity, the greater the indignity. He is not mere man, though man,
yet as man the best of men; for he is the Son of God, and that not any kind of
Son, but the only begotten, and beloved Son of God, the brightness of his
Fathers Glory, and the express Image of his person; and so the Son of God, that
he is God. Though he did descend so low for a little time, as to be made man,
and humbled himself so far as to take upon him the form of a Servant, and in
that form to be obedient unto Death, the Death of the Cross; yet in this low
estate he was the Son of God. But after his humiliation, even as man he is
advanced to the right hand of God, and is made Lord of Men and Angels, an
everlasting King, an everlasting Priest. Yet this Son of God, the Apostate
Christian so far vilifies, as that he denies him to be God, to be the Son of
God, to be a just Man; nay judges him to be an Impostor, a false Prophet, a
Malefactor, and justly and worthily Crucified; and if he had been living on
Earth, and in the Apostate's power, he would have dealt with him as they did.
Thus neither the Person and Deity of Christ, nor his Natures, nor the personal
Union of them, nor his transcendent Gifts, nor his heavenly Wisdom, nor his
Glorious Work^, nor his rare Virtues, nor his great work of Expiation, nor his
Glory and Power, which he enjoyes at the right hand of God, could any ways
move him; but he vilifies him, and debaseth him that was higher then the
Heavens, as low as the dust and dirt under his feet: yet this debasement was
only an act of his base mind, but could not in the least degree diminish or
obscure the Glory and Excellency of Christ: This is the first aggravation of
Apostasy.

2. He counts the Blood of the Covenant, whereby he was sanctified, an unholy
thing.] Where we have,

1. The Blood of the Covenant. 2. The sanctifying Power of this Blood. 3. The
counting of it unholy.


1. By the Blood, understand the blooddy Sacrifice of Christ, so much magnified
in the former Chapter; for it is that Blood, by which Christ entering the holy
place of Heaven, obtained eternal Redemption; that Blood which purges the
Conscience from dead Works, to serve the living God; that Blood which confirmed
the everlasting Covenant, in which respect it is called the Blood of the
Covenant. This Covenant is called the Conant of Grace, wherein, for, and in
consideration of, the unspotted Blood of Christ once shed, God promises
Remission of Sins, and the eternal Inheritance of Glory, upon condition of
Repentance and Faith in Christ. And it is called the Blood of this Covenant,
because, upon it, the Covenant was grounded, and by virtue of it, all the
Promises thereof are made unalterable, firm, and effectual.

2. This was the Blood, by which this Apostate, upon his receiving the knowledge
of the Truth, was sanctified. For, 1. This Blood, as offered and accepted of
God, made his Sin remissible. 2. Upon the profession of his Faith and his
Baptism, his Sin was, at least conditionally, pardoned and purged. 3. So long
as he continued in his profession, and so far as he proceeded according to
certain degrees in Faith and the profession of it; so far he might be said to
be in a state of Justification, or at least in the way to Justification, and
not only to Justification, but Sanctification, as it is made distinct from
Justification; though Sanctification be taken in this Epistle for
Justification. For this Blood of Christ is more beneficial to those, which
receive the Gospel, are baptized, believe with some degree of Faith, than to
others, who either never heard the Gospel, or; if they heard, did reject it.
And all the power against sin that any professing baptized Christian receives,
all the hope, joy, comfort which follows upon their profession, are from the
Blood of Christ. And how far some men may proceed in Christianity, and what
benefit they may receive by Christ; and yet after fall away, you have heard
something in this sixth Chapter. And such is the benefit which such do receive
by the Blood of Christ, that in a fair sense they may be said to be sanctified,
and have their sins purged by it. Yet the meaning of the Apostle, may be not
only that they were some ways sanctified by it, but that it was the Blood, and
the Blood alone which could sanctify them, and from which alone they could
expect Sanctification.

3. Yet this sanctifying Blood the Apostate counts unholy or common: To be
common Blood, may be understood, 1. Such as has no expiating and purging
power. 2. Such as is no better then the Blood of Bulls and Goats sacrificed. 3.
Such as differs not from the Blood of other men. 4. Such as is the Blood of a
Malefactor, guilty, and vicious person; and that is impure and unholy Blood. So
that the Apostate, though he had received some kind and measure of
Sanctification from it, yet ascribed no more virtue and excellency to it, then
to common Blood; denied the sanctifying power of it; nay did account it unholy
and polluted. Yet you must note, that though it be so vile in his conceit and
judgment, yet it is really in it self the only sanctifying Blood, and
effectually sanctifying, to all such as do sincerely believe. This is the
second aggravation.

3. The Apostate does despite unto the Spirit of Grace], where we must enquire,

1. What this Spirit is. 2. Why he is called the Spirit of Grace. 3. What it is
to do despite unto this Spirit.


1. This Spirit is not the spirit of Man, neither is it any Angel; nor any
created Person or Substance: but it is an uncreated Spirit, the Spirit of God,
so as that it is God; therefore the perfections and operations of God are
predicated of it. It Is that Spirit, which with the Father and the Son, is the
Supreme object of our Faith; that Spirit, by which God made the World,
preserves and governs the same; that Spirit, whereby he regenerates and
sanctifies his People, and animates the whole Body of the Church.

2. This Spirit is said to be the Spirit of Grace.] Thus he may be called in
opposition to the Spirit of bondage and fear, which is the Spirit proper to the
Law. For the Spirit by the Law, which had no Expiation for Sin, no Blood to
purge the Conscience, no promise of power to keep it, nor of pardon if
transgressed, could work nothing but fear, which was a continued slavery and
bondage. The Spirit of the Gospel, which is the Spirit of Christ, promised and
given in the Gospel, is a Spirit of comfort and confidence; a Spirit of
Adoption, which manifests the special love of God in Christ, our Justification,
Reconciliation, and gives us power to keep the Covenant. Some understand it to
be called the Spirit of Grace, because he is given out of Grace and free Mercy.
Others think, that this Name is given to this Spirit, because, by it, God gives
us Grace. For by Grace they understand those spiritual and supernatural Graces,
which sanctify the Soul, and dispose it for communion with God, and all those
supernatural comforts which issue from that Communion. And it is very true, that
as God by this Spirit works all things, so especially by him he produces these
heavenly Virtues which tend so much unto eternal life.

3. They do despite unto this Spirit. In this despite, there are Injury,
Reproach, Contempt; and the greater the Person to whom the despite is done, the
more heinous it is. This here meant is not done to Man, but God; because done
to that Spirit which is so the Spirit of God, that he is God. This is
committed, 1. By resisting the sanctifying Power of God. 2. By undoing all that
God, by his Spirit, had done in him for his Salvation. 3. By accounting the
Gifts, Notions, Motions of this Spirit, the Works, Delusions, and Impulses of
the Devil; and that not only in himself, but in others sanctified by this
Spirit, and endued with his Gifts. This is the more heinous, because done not
out of ignorance or infirmity, but out of pure malignity of the Will, with
malice to Christ, and de^estation of Christian Religion; and all this after,
upon conviction, he received Christianity, and had felt the sanctifying and
comforting power, and divine effects of this Spirit in his own soul. For God,
by his Spirit, had entered into him, and done much toward his Salvation. This
is therefore a Sin against God the Father, who loved us, and sent Christ to
redeem us; against God the Son, who had shed his precious Blood for the
Expiation of our sins; against God the Holy Ghost, who had begun the Work of
Sanctification and Consolation in us.

The penalty of this Sin is signified absolutely to be this, that he is counted
worthy of sore Punishment. Sore Punishment, is, grievous, heavy, bitter
Punishment: To be worthy of it, is, to deserve it by some heinous Sin, and not
only so, but to be liable to it; for, one may be worthy of Punishment, yet not
liable to it, when he is under no Law; yet whosoever is under the Obligation of
a Law, and yet transgresses it, he is not only worthy to suffer, and deserving
of Punishment, but liable and bound to suffer: For the nature of Law is, to
bind either to Obedience or Punishment. But where there is no Law there is no
Wrath, that is, no Punishment due; yet one may be liable to Punishment, which
he has deserved, and yet no Man takes notice to censure or judge him: But the
Apostate from Christianity shall be accounted worthy, and that not only by Man,
but by God, who will not only take notice of the Sin, but sentence him to the
Punishment, the sore Punishment deserved; that is, he will judge him without
Mercy.

. 29. Thus far the parts have been considered and explicated absolutely; the
next thing to be done, is, to examine the whole, under the Notion of a
Comparison in quantity, and it is signified by these words, Of how much sorer
Punishment. The things principally compared, are the Punishments, 1. To be
inflicted upon such as transgress Moses Law. 2. Upon Apostates under the
Gospel. Both are sore and great, but the latter far more grievous than the
former: For, a just Judge will judge according to the Law; and a just Law will
determine and proportion the Punishment according to the Offense. To transgress
Moses Law was a grievous Offense; to sin wilfully against the Gospel, after we
have received the knowledge thereof, is far more heinous: The Punishment of the
former was death without Mercy; the Punishment of the latter, far more
grievous. This presupposes the Gospel to be far above the Law, as being a
Covenant of Grace and greatest Mercy; for in and by it God comes far nearer
unto Man. The Son of God is the Mediator, one far more excellent than any
Levitical High Priest: The Blood of this Son, of God expiating Man's Sin, which
is far more precious than the Blood of Bulls and Goats, does confirm it: The
Spirit of God, which the Law did not minister, is the Spirit of Grace,
enlightening, inspiring, sanctifying Man, and enabling him to keep the
Conditions, and comforming him. To revolt from, and rebel against, God loving
sinful Man, against the Son of God redeeming him, against the
Spirit-sanctifying him, is like the Sin of Devils, and one of the highest Man
can commit; and far more heinous than the Violation of the Covenant made with
Israel: For by this a man wilfully refuses to be saved, and puts himself in a
most desperate Condition, after God had brought him out of the Spiritual
Egypt, and the Kingdom of Darkness, and brought him to the Borders of the
heavenly Canaan. Now, as the Sin is more heinous, far more heinous; so the
Punishment must be grievous, far more grievous. God has no Mercy for such a
Wretch; for the Sin agrees directly with that Blasphemy against the Holy Ghost,
which shall never be forgiven. It remains we consider the whole as a Reason,
that so we may understand the force of it. The Scope of the Apostle is, to
persuade and exhort to perseverance; the Reason is, because, that, if they
persevere not, but fall away, there remains no more Sacrifice for Sin, but a
fearful looking for of Judgment, etc. that is, the Punishment that they must
suffer is grievous and unavoidable. That it is both grievous and unavoidable,
he proves 1. By a Comparison from the Transgressors of the Law: For, if
Apostates under the Law were grievously and certainly punished, then much more
should the Apostates under the Gospel, who have received the Knowledge of the
Truth, be so punished; for, as their Sin is more grievous and provoking, so
their Punishment must be answerable: This is the force of the Reason. This
Argument has some Affinity with that of Chap. 2, Ver. 1, 2, 3, 4, etc. yet
that refers more to the Prophetical, this more to the Sacerdotal Office of
Christ.

. 30. Yet, though the Apostate may be worthy of Punishment; yet it may be be
questioned and demanded, 1. Who the Judge is. And 2. Whether he will proceed to
Judgment, and execute it. But both these the Apostle puts out of doubt in the
words following,

Ver. 30. For we know him, that he has said, Vengeance belongs unto me, I,
will recompense says the Lord: And again, The Lord shall judge his People. IN
which words he does inform us,

1. Who the Judge is. 2. That he will certainly punish.


And here he cites a place out of the Old Testament, which affirms, both that
God is Judge, and also will execute Judgment. This is more than if he had barely
affirmed these things; for he produces God as Witness, and so by Scripture
confirms them: The place is Deuteronomy. 32. 35, 36. and he seems to divide it into
two; for, Ver. 35. he says, Vengeance and Recompense belong to me. Ver. 36.
For the Lord will judge his, People. In the Text we have these Propositions,

1. Vengeance belongs to the Lord. 2. He will recompense. 3. He will judge his
People. 4. The Lord himself says so. 5. They knew it was the Lord who said so.


1. Vengeance belongs to the Lord. Where, by the way, observe, that the
Apostle does not follow, as usually he does, the Septuagint according to our
Copies, but the Hebrew Text, which is this, Vengeance is mine, and Retribution:
The Septuagint translates thus, In the day of Vengeance I will recompense. They
seem to follow the Samaritan Hebrew Text in the former, and the Targum in the
^^tter part of the Clause; yet neither the Vulgar, nor the Syriack, nor the
Chaldee Paraphrast, nor the Arabic, follow them in their Translation of the
first words. In this Proposition we have, 1. Vengeance. 2. The party to whom it
belongs. By Vengeance, is meant vindicative Justice punishing Offenders, the
acts whereof are Condemnation and Execution; and it is proper to a Judge, as a
Judge, as it is Power of punishing; as here it may be taken either for the
Power, or the Act and Exercise of the Power. The party to whom it belongs is
the Lord, as he is the supreme and universal Judge; for he that is the supreme
Lawgiver must needs be the supreme Judge. Angels or Men may have the use of it,
but the Propriety is in God: And that you may understand it more fully, you
must know, that this Power of punishing is an universal, a supreme, an original
Power, as it belongs to God and none else. It extends to all Persons, to all
Causes, and to these in all respects: For he has Jurisdiction over Angels, and
the Consciences and immortal Souls of men, and can irrogate spiritual and
eternal Punishments.

2. As Vengeance, so Retribution belongs unto the Lord; and it may be
considered, not only as it is a Power or Right to recompense, but the Act and
Exercise of vindicative Justice; and may include both the Sentence and the
Execution, which is nothing else but a returning evil for evil, the evil of
Punishment for the evil of Sin. The Apostle in this follows the Septuagint,
which turn it I will recompense, which seems to imply, that as he is 1. Just to
punish Sin. 2. Has a power of Retribution. So. 3. He will recompense and
exercise this Power, and that certainly.

3. He will judge his People. This may be understood two ways: 1. That God will
judge the Cause of his oppressed and persecuted People, by punishing and
destroying their Enemies; and this the Context in Denteronomy seems to imply.
2. That he will judge his People, and punish severely all Apostates among them.
So that by People may be meant, all men punishable, either according to the Law
of Nature, or of Moses, or according to the Gospel. Amongst those which are
punishable, such as ^^e in Covenant with God, and by Covenant are his Heople,
if they revolt, are the greatest Offenders; and, amongst the Revolters, such as
fall away from the Truth of the Gospel once received, are the most heinous
Delinquents of all: To judge these is to condemn them, and to inflict the
Punishment to which they are condemned; and when it is said He will judge them,
it signifies he will certainly do it, and they shall not escape. Men may
threaten and never condemn, they may condemn and never execute; but God will
certainly do both.

4. The Lord says so. Man might have said it, and it might have been
otherwise; out of Ignorance he might have been deceived, or out of pravity he
might lie and deceive others; or if any earthly Judge, who knew his own mind and
power, should have said so, yet he might change his mind, or want power; and
so, Recompense might fail. But it is God who is Supreme Judge, who cannot be
deceived, cannot deceive, cannot change his mind; who has almighty Power that
says so, and his Word is his Deed. If therefore he say, I will recompense, I
will judge; Recompense and Judgment will certainly follow, they cannot fail.

5. They knew, it was God who said so; that God who could certainly do as he
had said. If any other had said it, or God himself had said it, and they had
been ignorant of it, their fear had been less, though the danger had been as
great as if they had known it. Seeing therefore, it is the Lord who said it,
and they knew that it was said, and that by him, their fear should be
answerable to the danger, and so much the greater, as their Knowledge was more
clear and certain. They knew this, and that by Scripture, which they believed
to be the Word of God. Ignorance of this Truth makes men secure and
presumptuous, and so does Unbelief: This seems to prove the Punishment to be
unavoidable.

. 31. Yet, though it be certain and unavoidable, yet if it be less, it is less
feared; But

Ver. 31. It Is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the Living God. THis
again does signify how grievous the Punishment of Apostates must needs be; for
they fall into the hands of the Living God. And this is deduced from the former
Text; etc for there it is said, God will recompense, God will judge and take
Vengeance. And if it be the Punishment that the Living God will execute, then
it must needs be most fearful; and unavoidable. To understand the force of the
Text, we must observe in it,

1. The Living God. 2. The hands of the Living God. 3. The falling into his
hands. 4. The fearful Condition of such as fall into his hands.


1. The Living God is here opposed not only to dumb and dead Idols, but to
mortal men; and the word Living is added, to signify not only the eternal
Duration of his Existence; but his active and lively Power and Strength, which
is said to be almighty, and is of himself.

2. The Hands and Arm of God in Scripture does usually signify this Power and
Strength of God; which is exercised sometimes in Mercy, sometimes in severe
Justice: For it is this Almighty Strength of God which does deliver and save
his People, and punish and execute Vengeance on their Enemies. And here it is
taken for his punishing and revenging hand, whereby he executes his Wrath upon
Apostates, and manifests his greatest Indignation against them.

3. To fall into his Hands, is, by Apostasy to make our selves obnoxious to the
sever^ty of his revenging Justice, in that manner, as no ways to escape either
the Sentence or the Execution. For this Sin is the most provoking of all
others, renders the Sinner incapable of any Mercy, makes him liable to the
greatest Punishment Man can suffer, and he shall be no ways able to avoid it,
but must in the end certainly feel it. We are all in God's hands and in his
power, at all times; but the Apostate casts himself into the hands of his
severest Justice, never to be delivered, ever to be tormented.

4. It Is a fearful thing. Where we must note, that to fall into the hands of
the Living God, is the Subject or Antecedent, and a fearful thing is the
Predicate and Consequent of the Proposition, and argues the Antecedent; as an
Adjunct inseparable does it is Subject, yet in this place, to be fearful, is, to
be apt to cause fear. The Object of all fear is some evil approaching; and, the
greater the evil is, the more approaching, and approaching as inevitable, the
greater Cause of fear there is. The Evil is Punishment, the greatest Punishment
Man can suffer, and it is very near; for he is already fallen into the hands of
the Living God, and he can no ways escape. It Is a fearful thing to fall into
the hands of a severe and potent Judge, or of a cruel Enemy, much more into the
hands of this supreme and eternal Judge, who can not only kill the Body, but
cast both Soul and Body into Hell, and eternally and extremely torment both.
The Sum and Substance of this Argument is, that, seeing the Punishment of
Apostates will be most grievous and unavoidable; therefore it concerns them
much to consider seriously of it, and take heed of falling away from their
Profession.

. 32. The Apostle proceeds to another argument.

Ver. 32. But call to remembrance the former days, in which after you were
illuminated, ye endured a great fight of Afflictions.]

THE former reason was from the certain and most grievous punishments of
Apostasy; the reasons following have some respect unto the Reward, and they are
two; one in respect to time past, the other to time to come. The former is
continued from this verse unto the 35. The latter from the 35. unto the end: In
the former, we may consider

1. Their Suffering. 2. The Time when they suffered. 3. An exhortation to
Remembrance of what they then suffered. 4. The End of this remembrance.


1. Their former Suffering is described and represented.

1. In general. 2. In particular.


The general, we have in these words of this Text, [Ye endured a great fight of
Afflictions.] Where we have,

1. Afflictions. 2. A fight of Afflictions. 3. A great Fight. 4. The enduring
of this great Fight.


Christians ought to be endued with all heavenly Virtues, not only such as
incline and enable them to do good, but also such as fit and strengthen them to
endure evil in doing good, and for serving their God. To suffer for doing evil,
is no virtue, but to suffer for Righteousness sake, for Christ's sake, is a
noble and excellent Grace. This is an high degree, and a perfection, of a
Christian: Therefore we are exhorted to let patience have her perfect work,
that we may be perfect and entire, wanting nothing, Jam. 1. 4. For without
patience and fortitude, it is impossible to suffer as we ought, and to attain
this perfection.

1. The thing to be suffered, is Affliction, which is some evil that does vex,
trouble, and ^^reave us of that peace, ease, safety which we might otherwise
enjoy; and here it is not one single affliction, but a multitude of them; for
they endured [Afflictions]. The word here turned by a Metonymy [Afflictions],
signifies properly Sufferings; because when we are afflicted, we are patients,
and the Subject afflicted, not the Agents afflicting; and the evil dothly and
press hard upon us to bruise and break us; and all these tend to our
destruction and misery.

2. Here is a fight and a contest of Afflictions; and the Contention is between
the parties afflicting, and the persons afflicted; the one offending, the other
defending, like two Enemies, wherein the assailant seeks to overcome and subdue
the party assaulted. The great Enemy and Afflicter is the Devil; his Agents and
Instruments are unbelieving and wicked men. His design is to break in pieces
our Faith, which is the strength of our hearts; for Faith strives against fear,
and seeks to overcome those terrors, which Satan would strike into us, that so
we might renounce our profession. This is a spiritual Fight and Battle between
spiritual Enemies; between Faith and Fear, between the Soul and Satan.

3. This fight is great: For the opposition on one side was cruel and violent,
and the resistance was strong and powerful; so that the Enemy was beaten off
and foiled. When Fire and Water meet and encounter, the violence on both sides,
is very great according to the degrees of contrary qualities destructive one of
another. Thus it is in the contest between the seed of the Serpent, and of the
Woman the Church; and according as the emnity and the power of the Contendents
are more intensive, so is the Fight more fierce. And this was a great Fight,
because the Devil does most violently assail new Converts, and the Dragon waits
to devour the Church's newly regenerate Children, so soon as she shall bring
them forth; and would certainly do it, if they were not taken up into Heaven,
and into God's protection.

4. Yet though the Fight was great, yet they endured it; and this they did by
patience and divine fortitude. For they continued firm in their Christian
profession, without doubtings and fears. Their Faith remained firm, and was
like a Shield impenerrable; They bare and put off the blows, and stood their
Ground, kept the Field, and caused the Enemy to retreat and draw off; and
though they suffered temporally, yet spiritually they did not.

33. Thus far of their Sufferings in general; but least this should be
insufficient, he further expresses, what their Sufferings in particular were;
and he seems to reduce these to three heads. 1. Shame. 2. Pain. 3. Loss. For
they were in disgrace, they were scourged, their Goods were taken from them;
they suffered in their Names, in their Persons, in their Goods; and that not
only for their own profession, but their association with others. Their first
particular Sufferings we read,

Ver. 33. Partly while ye are made a gazing stock, both by Reproaches and
Afflictions, and partly whilst ye became Companicus of such as were so used.]

THis Text informs us, both what they suffered, considered in themselves; and
also what as considered jointly with others. The evils which they suffered are
said to be Reproaches and Afflictions; the manner how they suffered these, and
that was by being made a gazing-stock

The words may be reduced to two Propositions:

1. They were made a gazing-stock, both by Reproaches and Afflictions. 2. They
were Companions of such as were so used.


Yet both these have reference to the words going before, and might be
delivered thus;

1. They endured a great sight of Afflictions, partly by being a gazing stock,
both in Reproaches and Afflictions.

2. They endured a great Fight, by being Companions of such as were so used.

In the first, for explication sake, we may observe:

1. That they were Reproached and Afflicted. 2. By these Reproaches and
Afflictions, they were made a gazing-stock. 3. This was part of their great
Fight.


1. They were Reproached], Thus they might be used either by Words or Deeds.
For to speak or do any thing, that tends to our disgrace and infamy, is to
Reproach. Perhaps they called them Sectaries, Heretics, Apostates, Innovators,
seditious Persons; and also did so account them, and in this respect did hate,
despise, and desame them. These Reproaches in themselves were bitter and
grievous, yet they were more grievous, because of Afflictions; for they
afflicted them by scourging, imprisoning, banishing them: these did straiten,
press, vex, torment their Bodies, and deprive them of ease, peace, and liberty.

2. Yet these were made still more grievous, because they did reproach and
afflict them; not so much privately as publicly, in open view, to make their
shame and ignominy the greater. They brought them, as it were, upon a Stage,
and as into a Theater, where multitudes, even thousands, might gaze upon them,
revile them, scourge them, and make a sport of their Sufferings. Every one must
take notice of them, as base persons, troublers of the World, the reffuse and
scum of mankind, and abhor them. And in this they followed Christ, and took up
his Cross, which was a suffering of pain and shame.

3. This was part of their great Fight; and a great Fight it was, because
naturally we much desire to preserve our credit, honor, and reputation, which
to some high Spirits, which the World terms Generous, is dearer then life; for
some men choose rather to dye, then live in disgrace, and lose their Honor. And
as we desire respect in the World, and abhor Ignominy and Contempt; so we love
our liberty, ease, and peace, and are very unwilling to lose them. But to be
reproached and afflicted publicly, and to be made a gazing stock unto the
World, is so harsh and contrary to Flesh and Blood, that he must have some
divine power above nature, that can endure them. And though we be endued with
some competency of supernatural strength, yet without some conflict and contest
with our natural inclination and cormpt appetite, we cannot endure, we cannot
stand; and yet this was but part of the Fight and Battle.

The second Proposition is, That partly they endured a great Fight whilst they
became Companions of such as were so used. This informs us,

1. Some of their Brethren were so used, 2. They became Companions of them. 3.
This was part of their Fight.


1. Some part of the Church does Suffer sometimes, and not another. It Is true,
the Devil is an Enemy to the whole Body; and, if God Suffer him, he would not
only vex, trouble, and destroy some, but all. The storm which fell upon them
was past; yet another falls upon their Brethren; and they are reproached and
afflicted, and made a gazing stock as they had been.

2. They became Companions of these; for they owned them, were grieved inwardly
for their Sufferings, and did relieve and comfort them. By doing thus, they
were exposed to the derision of others: Their former Sufferings might be called
Passion, this Compassion. So near is the Union, and so dear and tender the
Affection of Christian Brethren amongst themselves, that one Member cannot
suffer, but another suffers with it. There is a divine Sympathy and
Fellow-feeling of one another's misery, and in this respect they may suffer in
the Sufferings of others, and participate of their Afflictions; and though this
may be an ease and comfort to the Sufferers themselves, yet Society is no Joy
to the compassionate Brethren, who have more Grief than their own.

3. This also was made a part of the great Fight: For, Satan's Design in this
was, to strike a terror into them, and to let them know what a dangerous and
restless condition they were in, if they should continue to be Christians. And
if he could not daunt and discourage them, yet he would at least grieve and vex
them; for he knew the Passion of their Brethren would be their Compassion, and
that in them suffering they would suffer.

. 34. Yet this was not all their suffering, either in their Brethren or
themselves; for he further says,

Ver. 34. For ye had Compassion on me in my Bonds, and took joyfully the
spoiling of your Goods, knowing in your selves, that ye have in Heaven a better
and an enduring Substance. IN these words we may observe,

1. Their Compassion. 2. Their Passion, and another part of their suffering.


1. Their Compassion: For they had Compassion of the Apostle in his Bonds. This

1. Implies, that the Apostle suffered, and was in Bonds. 2. Signifies, that
they suffered with him.


1. He was in Bonds; that is, a Prisoner and restrained of his Liberty. The
Cause was, the Gospel of Christ; therefore he styles himself a Prisoner of
Christ, that is, for Christ's sake: For, whilst he obeys his Savior's Command
in preaching the Gospel, for the Conversion and Salvation of the Gentiles, and
maintains the Cause of Christ against the unbelieving Jews, he was many times
in danger; sometimes was scourged, sometimes stoned, sometimes imprisoned and
set free again. At length he was taken at Jerusalem, made a Prisoner, sent
bound first unto Cesarea, and thence to Rome.

2. When he was in Bonds, whether at Cesarea, or Rome, or both; they knew it,
and were very sensible of it. And they signified their Love and inward
Compassion unto him several ways, seeking to release him, or relieve him; they
could do neither of theseopenly, but with danger, yet they were true and
faithful to him, and did not like false friends forsake him. Thus we should
honor and esteem God's Children and Ministers in their Afflictions, and own
them most in their lowest condition. This is an Evidence of their sincere
Faith, and Christian Charity, and the Apostle does not forget it. He had said
before, that they became Companions of such as were reproached, and he seems to
prove it by this particular Instance brought in with the Causal for; For, ye
had Compassion on me. This is a rare and excellent Example, and worthy of our
Imitation.

After Compassion follows Passion: They suffered loss of their Goods. Where we
may observe,

1. The spoiling of their Goods. 2. The enduring of this joyfully. 3. The
Reason and Ground of this joyful Suffering.


1. They were spoiled of their Goods. A Man may suffer in his Name, his Place,
his Limbs, his Liberty, his Life, his Estate: This was a suffering in their
Estate; for their Goods, which are called Livelihood, were taken from them, and
that under pretense of Law by Fine or Confiscation. This made so many poor
Saints at Jerusalem, for whose relief so many Collections were made in other
Churches: The end of this was, to make them poor and miserable, and willing to
deny their Christianity.

2. Yet they were so far from being discouraged, that they endured this
spoiling joyfully. This did argue a lively Faith in, and a sincere Love unto,
Christ; for, to be deprived of these necessary and convenient earthly Comforts,
was matter of sorrow, and it goes near unto the hearts of Worldlings to part
with them. But these valued Christ as infinitely more precious than all the
wealth of the World; for they knew, if they could keep Christ, if Christ were
not taken from them, if Christ remained with them, they should certainly be
happy. It were Wisdom in any Man seriously to consider, what that is which he
loves most; for by that he will easily understand whether his heart be upright
or no: For, he will suffer much, and do any thing he can, before he part with
the Darling of his Soul.

1. There was a better and an enduring Substance. 2. This Substance was in
Heaven. 3. They had it. 4. They knew they had it.


1. By Substance, many times, and in several Languages, is meant Wealth, and an
Estate of Goods acquired, possessed, and gathered together: And though
sometimes it is strictly taken for Goods movable, as Cattle, Gold, Silver,
Household Stuff; yet the signification is often extended to any kind of Goods or
Possessions. This Substance is temporal or spiritual; and here it is spiritual,
differing from temporal in two respects: 1. As better. 2. As enduring. It Is
better in respect of Quality, as far more excellent in it self, and more
beneficial to Man. It Is enduring, and will last long, it will not corrupt or
waste and decay; for it is an Estate suitable to the immortal Soul which never
dies: The Substance it self, the Possessour, and the Possession of the
Substance, continue for ever. This is called Treasure, and an Inheritance; but
divine, and far aboe all other Estates, which may decay, or be taken from the
Owners.

2. This Substance is in Heaven, because 1. It Is in God, and in his Power, and
at his disposal. 2. It Is prepared for us in Heaven, and the place of eternal
Glory, mounted far above the Sphere of corruptible things. 3. It Is to be
enjoyed fully and for ever in the Heavens. That it is better, enduring, and in
Heaven, we learn from that Exhortation of our Savior, But lay up for your
selves treasures in Heaven, where neither Moth nor Rust does corrupt, and where
Thievs do not break through and steal, Math. 6. 20. and from the words of the
Apostle Peter, who informs us, that the Regenerate are born to an Inheritance
incorruptible, undefiled, and which fades not away, reserved in the Heavens, 1
Pet. 1. 4. In both these places we find, 1. Treasures and an Inheritance, which
are the same with Substance. 3. These far better and more excellent than any
earthly Substance. 3. Enduring both in themselves and in the Possession. 4. Laid
up and reserved in Heaven.

3. They had this Substance; that is, by virtue of God's Promise they had a
Title and Right unto it, and some security for the full Possession of it in due
time, by the first fruits and earnest of the Spirit: For this Substance was
promised only to them, prepared only for them, secured only unto them. So that
in Hope and Reversion, they were the richest men in the World.

4. They knew this in themselves: That which was the formal Object of this
Knowledge was the Promise; that which was the particular Object was their own
Qualification and fulfilling of the Conditions of the Promise. For, all that
are rightly qualified according to the tenor of the Promise, had certain Right
unto this Substance; and this they knew by Faith. But they were thus qualified,
and did certainly know it: Therefore they might conclude thence that they had
right unto it. Besides, the Spirit did testify to their Spirits, that they were
the Sons of God; and if Sons, then Heirs. And this was the ground on which
their Joy was bottomed: For, to be Sons of God, and Heirs of this Substance and
Inheritance was Matter, and to know this, was an immediate Efficient, of Joy.
This, and this known, did cause them even in tribulation to rejoice; and so
much the rather, because our Savior had pronounced them blessed that suffered
for Righteousness sake, and they might rejoice and be exceedingly glad, because
great was their Reward in Heaven, Mat. 5. 11, 12. And, if we suffer with
Christ, as they did, we shall be glorified with him, Romans 8. 17. The Patience
and Faith of the Thessalonians, in all their Persecutions and Tribulations,
which they endured, were a manifest token of the just Judgment of God, that
they might be counted worthy of the Kingdom of God, for which they did suffer,
2 These. 1. 5, 6.

. 35. These were their Sufferings; it remain we consider the time, the
remembrance of these Sufferings, and the end of this remembrance.

1. The time was after they were enlightened. Some understand enlightening to be
Baptism: And it is true, that some upon their Baptism received a divine Light;
yet the Doctrine of the Gospel is a divine Light, and when the blessed Spirit
with this Light enters the Soul, it gives a divine visive Faculty and Power
unto the Understanding, represents more clearly the Mysteries of God's Kingdom,
and works powerfully upon the heart, and hence follows Conversion. And they
were first enlightened, when they were first converted; they who were first the
Children of Darkness became the Children of Light, and were translated out of
the Kingdom of Darkness into the Kingdom of Light. The Reason of this
Expression is, because Illumination is the beginning of Regeneration: For, as
God first created Light in this visible World, so in this second and more
wonderful Creation, he first makes the Light of the Gospel to shine in the
heart by the Power of the Spirit. The People to whom the Gospel was never
preached are said to sit in Darkness, and when the Gospel comes Light comes
unto them, and when by the Power of the Spirit it enters into our hearts, then
Light is in us; and without this divine Light in us, there is no Regeneration.
The sense is, that they were no sooner enlightened, converted, and born from
Heaven, but they were persecuted, became Soldiers, and were put to fight.

2. They must remember what then they suffered. The Children of God must not
only look forward, and know what they must do, but they must look back and
consider both what they have done, and also what they have suffered. And so
these Hebrews are exhorted to look back, and call to remembrance former times,
especially those which followed upon their Conversion, when they were
reproached, afflicted, and spoiled of their Goods. These Sufferings must be
remembered, yet not only these, but their Patience, their Faith, their Joy,
their Victory, and the foil of their Enemies, and God's Assistance and Support,
the Battle, and the happy Issue must not be forgotten.

3. Yet, to what end must they remember all this? Not to boast and glory in
their own strength, and ascribe this happy issue to their own Wisdom and
Prowess: But they must remember they had been in the Battle, had fought a great
fight, had conquered, 1. That they might give the whole Glory unto God. 2. For
time to come to depend upon him. 3. To be encouraged to go on and improve their
strength more and more. 4. To be ashamed to give back now after their strength
is improved. Did they, when Tyrones, and but newly-listed, endure so great a
fight, keep the field, and beat off the Enemy, and will they now begin to
faint, and after so much experience prove Cowards, and stain their former
Honor? The greatest brunt was past, and the most violent Storm passed over;
the final Victory was almost in their hands, and the great Reward almost
obtained. Therefore the Remembrance of their former Success and God's
Assistance should encourage them much to march on till God had given the
Anakims into their hands, subdued all their Enemies, and attained certain and
eternal Rest on every side.

. 36. After this Motive of encouragement, from Remembrance of what is past,
there is another from the great Reward, which certainly follows upon
Perseverance. And because in the former great fight the Victory was obtained by
Patience and Confidence, he lets them know how needful this Patience and
Confidence was, for the attaining of the Reward: For thus we read,

Ver. 35. Cast not away therefore your Confidence, which has great Recompense
of Reward.

Ver. 36. For you have need of Patience, that after ye have done the Will of
God, you might receive the Promise.

SOme think that the Work of the Apostle in these words, and the rest of this
Chapter, is, to give directions, and prescribe the means, whereby we may
persevere; and do conceive these means to be three, 1. Confidence. 2. Patience.
3. Faith, But upon due consideration it will appear that he urges Perseverance
by a new Argument taken from the Reward. And, as formerly he dehorted from
Apostasy, from the Punishment, which would prove to be very grievous and
unavoidable; so here he exhorts to Perseverance from the Reward, which was very
great and most certain. And whilst he proceeds to this Motive from the
Recompense, he by the way puts them in mind of their former constancy in
Suffering, to encourage them to go on, and by the same makes way for the
pressing further of the Duty from the Reward: So that the former Reason from
Remembrance of Suffering past, is but a branch of this great Motive.

Before I enter upon the words, I must inform you of some things in general;
as, 1. That Confidence, Patience, Faith, are but one and the same thing, which
is Perseverance. 2. That the Motive is from the Reward. 3. That he urges the
Performance of the Duty, both from the excellency and certainty of the Reward:
For, first, He affirms it to be great: Secondly, To be certain unto
Perseverance, and certainly and speedily to be received. 4. He proves it to be
certain. 5. Applies the Proof unto themselves. This is the Sum and Scope of the
Close of this Chapter, from the 35 Ver. unto the End. These things premised, we
may consider, in the words of these two Verses, these two things,

1. The Duty. 2. The Reward.


The Duty is Perseverance, which is expressed by two words,

1. Confidence. 2. Patience.


And the words imply an Exhortation to continuance in and of both. The words
implying this Exhortation are these, Cast not away your Confidence, and You
have need of Patience. For; that which must not be cast away, and whereof they
have need, must be kept, and kept unto the end; and to keep these to the end is
Perseverance. The Reward is said

1. To be great. 2. Certainly to be received when they had done the Will of
God.


And it is to be considered,

1. As a Recompense. 2. As promised.


The Argumentation of the Apostle, reduced to Form, is this;

That Duty, by which we have great Recompense of Reward, and by which, after we
have done the Will of God, we receive the Promise, ought to be performed.

But by Confidence and Patience continued we have great Recompense of Reward,
and after we have done the Will of God, we receive the Promise:

Therefore we ought to continue in both.

In the 35th. Verse we have

1. Confidence. 2. The continuing of this Confidence. 3. The great Recompense
of Reward. 4. The having of this great Recompense.


1. By Confidence, if we consider the word in the Original, it seems to signify
their Boldness in Profession of the Christian Faith: For, they were not ashamed
to confess Christ before men, no, not before their persecuting Enemies, in the
midst of Reproaches and Afflictions. Yet this profession without was grounded
upon, and issued from Faith in Christ, and hope of eternal life within; and
these two were, as the matter, so the Soul and Life of the profession. And to
profess Christ, and their Faith and Hope in him in the midst of persecution,
did argue their undaunted boldness, and divine fortitude and courage.

2. The continuance of this confidence is signified here negatively, [They must
not cast it away.] The expression, some think, is taken from those cowardly
Soldiers, which in a Battle cast away their Shield and Armor, and either
begin to cry for Quarter, or to run away, and turn their backs upon an Enemy.
This is suitable to his former Metaphor, whereby he had expressed their Courage
and Constancy: For [they had endured a great Fight], and here exhorts them to
endure still; which they could not do, if they did cast away their Confidence,
which was like a Shield. These are military terms, and signify that we are
spiritual Soldiers, who will not fear to fight till we have attained a final
Victory, which, without continued and final confidence, we can never do. To
cast this divine Shield from us, is an act of fear and cowardice, and argues a
weakness of our Faith and Hope: Therefore the Duty is to be strong in Faith,
and in the power of God, and not to shrink or give back for any thing man can
do unto us; for it is but little, and if God be for us, who can be against us?

3. If they do not cast away, but hold fast their confidence, there is a great
recompense of Reward. Recompense of reward is one word in the Greek, and is
turned by some [Remuneration]. So that we have, 1. A Reward. 2. A rendering or
returning of the Reward. The word [(...)] signifies Hire or Wages given in
recompense of some Work and Service. The Work or Service being done, the Reward
is due, whether it be given, or not given and rendered: For to be due, is one
thing; to be rendered, another: yet if it be due, it is injustice not to render
it. In strict Justice, the Service and the Hire are equal: yet there is no
necessity of this equality, in respect of the excess; for one may out of his
own goodness give more then is deserved; and this is not injustice, but
liberality. Any blessing, especially that great one of eternal Glory given by
God upon the performance of some Duty by Man, may be called Wages, Hire, or
Reward by a Metaphor. Yet no Man can deserve or merit any thing at God's hands,
but yet the Reward may be due by virtue of the Covenant. The word does
signify, 1. That there is a Reward. 2. That it is due to such as persevere. 3.
That it shall be rendered. Yet a Reward may sometimes be taken Synechdochically
for punishment, and the recompense thereof an actual punishment for Sin. Thus,
as you may read, it is taken, Chap. 2. 2. A reward may be poor or rich, less or
greater; but here it is said to be great, so great indeed it is, that no tongue
of man can express the greatness or excellency of it. For here the Apostle
speaks of the final Reward, which is unspeakable, according to the promise of
God to Abraham, [I am thine exceeding great Reward, Genesis 15. 1.]

4. This continuance [hath] this great Reward. Which informs us, that it will
be not only due, but certainly conferred upon, and rendered to the person
persevering; for, by divine ordination, Perseverance and the Reward are
inseparably joined together, so that the one shall infallibly follow upon the
other.

. 37. Ver. 36. Agrees with the former in substance, though it differ in
expressions, and (as the former) does inform us.

1. Of the Duty. 2. Of the Reward.


The Duty is employed in these words, [Ye have need of patience.] The reward in
those, which follow, [That after ye have done the Will of God, ye may receive
the promise.] The former is the means, the latter is the end. For explication's
sake take notice,

1. Of patience. 2. Of the necessity of it. 3. Of receiving the Promise. 4. Of
receiving it after they had done the Will of God.


1. Patience, opposed to casting away our confidence, is not merely that virtue
which moderates the passions of the mind in affliction, and keeps the Soul
quiet, lest, being much grieved or afflicted, it should be unfit, and unable to
go on with the work of Virtue and Obedience: but according to the Original
Word, it includes Fortitude and Divine Courage, with constancy and perseverance
in the midst of Tribulation and Difficulties. It implies, that our Service and
Obedience requires not only labor and great pains, but courage, patience, and
constancy. Because our Duty is not only to do good, which shall be easy; but,
which shall be difficult, to suffer much: For we shall be much opposed, and
meet with many difficulties; therefore we must adventure upon, and pass through
these Difficulties and Tribulations. This is that which is called patience in
this place, and is turned patient continuance, Romans 2. 7.

2. There is a necessity of this patience; and this a reason, why it must not
be cast away; for that which is not only useful, but necessary, should be kept.
The reason of the necessity of this heavenly Virtue, is, because the will of
God has ordained, That through many Tribulations, we must enter into his
heavenly Kingdom. Israel must march through a Wilderness into Canaan, and so
pass through Fire and Water, into a wealthly place. Christ must first suffer,
and so enter into Glory; and we must follow the Captain of our Salvation, and
take the same way. And if the way be long, and the Difficulties and Sufferings
great and many, there can be no possibility of attaining the glorious prize
without patience, fortitude, and courage, continued to the end. For
perseverance here so much pressed, requires many things: 1. An exercise of all
heavenly Virtues. 2. A continuance in this exercise. 3. A continuance till we
have finished our Work, ended our Warfare, and obtained a full and final
Victory. And seeing they had begun to do, to suffer, to fight, to conquer;
there was a necessity to go on and finish, if they will obtain that glorious
Reward.

3. For Patience was necessary, for this end, that they might recive the
Promise. Here is, 1. A Promise. 2. The receiving of it. The Promise is the
thing promised, this is a Metonymy. The thing promised, is the great Reward,
which was merited by Christ, and promised by God. And by virtue of this
Promise, it is due to such as persevere; and God's faithfulness is the ground of
our hope, and certain expectation. Without this, it could no ways be due, nor
God any ways bound to give it: For though we should do and suffer far more and
longer then any Saint of God ever did, and that by our own strength, without
the help of God; yet we could not deserve any thing, much less so great and
glorious Reward, which God will give, and we shall receive; for such as
persevere shall not only have a right unto it, but a possession of it.

4. Yet we do not receive it at the first, but in the end, when we have done
the Will of God, and not before. The Will of God is the Command of God, wherein
he signifies, what our Duty is, and what we must do, and binds us to Obedience
and performance. And his Will is, not only to begin to do, but to finish; and
therefore we cannot expect to receive the promised Reward, before we have done;
that is, finished to do that which God Commanded. And when the Work is
finished, in the evening of the day God will give, and we shall certainly
receive, and for ever enjoy, that full and everlasting Rest and Bliss which he
has promised. Therefore seeing the Reward is so great, it is promised, and we
shall certainly receive it; let every one of us, who profess the Faith of
Christ, resolve, and that steadfastly, and also endeavor with all diligence to
persevere unto the end.

. 28. Yet if any ask, When shall we receive the Reward? how long will it be
before, our Savior will come to Reward us? The Apostle does answer,

Ver. 37. For yet a little while, and he that shall come will come, and will
not tarry.] THese words seems to be taken out of the Prophet Habakkuk Chap. 2.
3. where we thus read, [If it stay, wait for it; because he that shall come,
will come, and will not tarry.] Where Judah's deliverance from Captivity does
typisy our Redemption and eternal deliverance by Christ. And as then they
thought the time of their Captivity and Suffering to be long, they are exhorted
patiently to wait for it, though it be delayed: and, to comfort and encourage
them, He assures them, that deliverance will certainly come, and that speedily.
Yet because that deliverance was but Temporal, and the eternal was principally
intended; therefore the Apostle understands the words spiritually, and so in
this place does apply them. And whereas our Translators turn the words of the
Prophet, [It will surely come, it will not tarry]; that is, the Vision will
come, and not tarry: yet the Septuagint understand it of some certain person,
and say, that [he] not [it] will come and not tarry. The words are meant of
Christ's Coming, to put an end unto the Sufferings of his People, and to
render unto them an eternal Reward. And of this Coming and receiving this great
Reward, two things are affirmed,

1. The certainty. 2. The Expedition.


In the words therefore we may observe,

1. The certain 2. The speedy coming of Christ.

1. The certainty is expressed in two words, [Shall come, will come]; or,
according to the Hebrew, [coming will come], that is, as there translated, will
surely come. Yet the Participle [(...)] in other places is turned, [He that is
to come.] So that the words imply, 1. That there is a certain time appointed,
and God has decreed that he shall come. 2. That as it is decreed, so the
Decree shall be fulfilled, and he shall actually come. This is the certainty.

2. The speedy coming is expressed, 1. Affirmatively. 2. Negatively.
Affirmatively; yet a little while [(...)], how much, how much, that is, how
little is the time; it is very little, very short, as the Syriack turns it.
Negatively, [He will not ^arry or delay.] The word may signify, that he will
not stay a moment after the time appointed. And this latter part does inform
us, that the time of the Sufferings of God's Saints is but short, very short.
Therefore they are said to be Sufferings of this present time, Romans 8. 18. The
present time is but an instant or moment, and also light affliction for a
moment, 2 Cor. 4. 17. For, 1. They have their Calms as well as their Storms;
their intermissions, and the intermixture of sweet and heavenly comforts. 2.
The end of this Life, is the end of their Afflictions, and this Life is nothing
to Eternity; their Sufferings shall speedily determine, their Joys shall never
end. For when life is ended, all these Conflicts and cruel Fights are ended;
and they are instantly at rest, cease from all their Labors, and are secured
of their eternal full Glory. 3. A thousand years with Man, are but as one day
with God; and in this ^espect his stay till the last Saint shall be perfected
and finally Victorious, is not much. 4. When the day appointed is once come, he
will not stay an hour, no, not a minute; He will rend the Heavens, and come
down, and do glorious things. And is his coming so certain, and so speedy, and
has God said so? why should we be impatient, and complain of delay. The Saints
of God sometimes will cry out, Oh when shall these Labors, these Difficulties,
these Sufferings of ours have an end? How long will my Savior delay his
Coming? When will he come in the Clouds of Heaven, with all his holy Angels?
Shall I never see an end of this Battle, and obtain a final Victory, and so
triumph for ever? And the Church is always praying, Come Lord Jesu, come
quickly. To all this his answer is, Surely I come quickly. And, Behold, I come
quickly, and again, Behold I come quickly, and my Reward is with me, to render
to every one according to his Works, Revel. 22. 7, 12, 20. And if we will not
be patient, strive, suffer, and fight a little while, and that for a great and
glorious Reward, which we shall receive certainly, and without all doubt; we
shall render our selves unworthy altogether of so blessed a Victory, and so
joyful a Triumph as God has of his free and unspeakable mercy promised us.

. 39. Further, to encourage them, he proves the certainty of their Reward, to
such as persevere, and his displeasure against all such as draw, back out of
the next words of the Prophet, which he renders thus,

Ver. 38. [Now the Just shall live by Faith; but if ^^y man draw back, my Soul
shall have no pleasure in him.] IN the handling of these words, we must
consider;

1. How they come in upon the former. 2. To what end the Apostle does allege
them. 3. What the matter therein contained is. 4. For particular, and more
distinct Explication, reduce then to Propositions.


1. They come in upon the former, as agreeing with them in the matter which is
the great Reward. Yet they have more immediate Connection with the words
immediately a^tecedent: 1. As being taking out of the same place of the
Prophets. 2. As signifying that when Christ shall come he will accept and
reward those that persevere, and reject the rest.

2. The End and Scope is, to encourage them, from God's own words and Promise
(for they are the words of God), to persevere and not draw back.

3. The material parts are two:

1. The final Acceptance of such as persevere. 2. The Rejection of such as do
not, but draw back.


The Propositions are two,

1. The just shall live by Faith. 2. If any Man draw back, my Soul shall have
no pleasure in him.


In the first Proposition we have,

1. Faith, 2. Righteousness. 3. Life.


These three are subordinate; for by Faith we attain Righteousness; by
Righteousness, Life; and by what we are justified, by that we live. No Faith,
no Righteousness; no Righteousness, no Life; these three go together. In the
words we have two Propositions at least implied,

1. We are justified or just by Faith. 2. We are glorified and live by Faith.


According to the former Proposition, the Apostle made use of this Text in the
Prophet, Romans 1. 17. Gal. 3. 11. to prove Justification by Faith in Christ
without Works: For, because Man is sinful and guilty, his Justification is
Remission of Sin, which, presupposing the party penitent and believing, depends
upon the Satisfaction, Merits, and Intercession of Christ, and the Mercy of God
expressed in the Promise. As there he makes use of this Text, to prove
gratuitous Justification; so here he takes it up again, to assure them, that if
they continue in this justifying Faith to the End, in the End they shall live
and be glorified; and that Faith which is first justifying shall be Faith
glorifying.

1. We have Faith, which is a divine practical Assent unto the saving Truths of
the Gospel, and a reliance upon the Promises of God: And here it is taken for
this Faith continued to the End, even in the midst of all Persecutions and
Afflictions, and includes the former continued Boldness of Profession with
Patience and other heavenly Virtues, with which it has an inseparable
Connection, and is the foundation of all.

2. Upon Faith follows Righteousness; for the just have Faith, and are just
and justified by Faith: For, by just, are here meant the justified by Faith
according to the Tenor of the new Covenant. For Man being sinful and guilty
cannot be justified by his own Innocence, Purity, inherent Righteousness, and
perfect Obedience: He is condemnable by Reason of his Guilt, and is freed from
Condemnation by deprecating the Wrath of the Supreme Judge, and pleading
Christ's Sacrifice, and God's Promise, according to his penitent Faith. God in
justifying is merciful, because the Person justified is a Sinner; yet just,
because Christ has suffered, God has promised, and Man guilty does believe.
This Justification does not leave a Man under the Power and Dominion of Sin,
but in freeing from Guilt he renews and sanctifies him by his Spirit, so that
he is inherently righteous. So that he is justified and inherently just; yet
the place is to be understood of such as are finally just, as they are finally
believing. For he that has Faith is just; he that continues in Faith,
continues just; and he that is finally believing is finally just.

3. As guilty Man is just by Faith, so being just he shall live by Faith. By
Life in this place is meant a spiritual, happy, and eternal Life; the Life of
Glory, which is the great Reward, which will certainly follow upon final Faith:
For it is Faith, which by virtue of Christ's Merit, and God's Promise, gives a
Right to Life; and upon a final Faith, the Possession and full Enjoyment of
this blessed Life does certainly follow. The Duty therefore which the Apostle
urges, is final Perseverance in Faith; and the Motive whereby he seeks to stir
them up to Performance is the certain full Possession of the great Rewards for
which he alleges God's own Word and Promise recorded in the Prophet. And if
they will hearken unto God speaking by the Prophet, and take his Word and
Promise, there is great Reason why they should persevere.

. 40. As the former Reason is taken from God's Promise of Life, so the latter
is drawn from the Punishment and Displeasure of God; which, if they fall away,
they must suffer, as certainly threatened by God; For if any Man draw back, my
Soul shall have no pleasure in him. The Proposition is hypothetical or compound
and connex, the Nature whereof is to deduce a Consequent from an Antecedent.
And this is a certain Rule, that if the Antecedent be true, the Consequent is
so too. The Connection is not natural, but depends upon divine Ordination, who
has determined in general, that Punishment shall follow upon Sin; and in
particular, that final Perdition shall follow upon Apostasy. This is part of
the Text, which the Apostle alleges out of Habakkuk; and therefore the
Original is Hebrew: And this gives occasion to consider the difference of the
Translations; the Vulgar, Junius, Vatablus, the Divines of Zurick, following
him and our English, differ amongst themselves in translating the Hebrew; and
the Septuagint, which the Apostle follows, seems to differ much from all the
Rest. Besides, the Hebrew Copy, which they turned, did not agree with these of
latter times: This difference will appear in the Explication of particulars,
which are two,

1. Apostasy. 2. God's Displeasure.


1. The Apostasy, which is signified by the word (...) is said to be Pride; so
some, to be Unbelief; so others, to be a Lifting up; so our English, to be a
drawing back; so the Septuagint. These may be reconciled; for (...) is to fear,
and out of fear to hide ones self, and also to remit and abate of our former
Boldness and Courage; this signification agrees well enough with the Arabic
signification of (...) Gafal, which some tells is to hide or neglect: For, all
Apostasy issues from fear, and a Remission of our more intensive Courage in
time of Persecution, so as to yield basely and cowardly unto our Enemy, whom we
might have resisted and overcome. This drawing back is an Unbelief, after
Belief and Profession of our Faith: And it may, and sometimes does, proceed
from Pride, which will not suffer the heart to submit unto the Will of God, and
depend upon that Righteousness which is by Faith; it will scorn to bear the
Cross of Christ, and it will despise the Promises and Comminations of the
Gospel: Yet it may issue from other Causes.

2. The Punishment is expressed in these words, My Soul shall have no pleasure
in him. In our present Hebrew Copies, we read [(...)] his Soul, whereas the
Septuagint read [(...)] My Soul. To change the Affix Jod into Vau was an Error
easily committed in the Transcription. By Soul therefore is not meant the Soul
of the Apostate, but of God; and the Soul of God is God, who is only Soul and
Spirit, and has no Body. Of God it is said, He will have no pleasure in the
Apostate, which is a Meiosis, and signifies, He will be highly displeased with
him. The word (...) which is translated to be upright, does signify also to
please; so the Septuagint diverse time; do turn it, and I know no Reason why the
Translatour should vary from them, especially in Habakkuk. By this Phrase is
declared God's high displeasure against them for their Sin; for as their Sin
was high and heinous, so was his Displeasure; who would punish them severely,
that the penalty might be proportioned and made adequate to their Sin. So in
these words, the words of God, we find the Arguments both a Praemio and Poena
briefly contracted.

. 41. Yet, lest the Hebrews should think, that the Apostle had conceived some
Jealousy and Suspicion of an Inclination in them to Apostasy, he, as in the
sixth Chapter, prevents all such thoughts by these words following,

Ver. 39. But we are not of them which draw back unto Perdition, but of them
that believe to the saving of the Soul. THis is an Application of the former
Doctrine, delivered in general to Paul, and these Hebrews in particular. There
is little need of Explication; for the words are easily understood from that
which went before: For to draw back is Apostasy, and Perdition is utter
Destruction, which issues from the Displeasure and severe Justice of God. To
believe, is the Duty; Salvation of the Soul, the Reward; and to believe unto
the Salvation of the Soul, is, to persevere in Faith unto the End, and the full
Possession of eternal Glory. By these words we learn, 1. To have a charitable
conceit of Professors, when we see and know nothing contrary to sincerity. 2.
To examine and thoroughly search our hearts, that we may more clearly
understand our spiritual condition, Whether it be good or bad? Whether our
Faith be sincere, and our Profession real or no? Whether we tend unto Perdition
or Salvation? 3. They imply a secret Exhortation to Perseverance, and a
Dehortation from Apostasy, upon the two main and principal Reasons of Perdition
and Salvation. 4. They serve for Comfort; for, to have a certain Knowledge of
our Sincerity, Constancy, and Performance of our Duty and the Conditions of the
Covenant, is a Ground of great Joy and Comfort in the midst of our Afflictions
and Tribulations; for upon this Knowledge we are assured; that God does love us,
we are freed from the danger of Damnation, have a firm Title unto everlasting
Glory, and all things shall work together for our good. And happy we, if we can
truly say, as here the Apostle does, We are not of them who draw back unto
Perdition, but of them who believe unto the Salvation of the Soul. The Sum and
Substance of the whole Chapter is, 1. The Doctrine of the Excellency and
Efficacy of Christ's Sacrifice, which once offered does consecrate the
sanctified for ever. 2. Exhortation to several Duties, and especially to the
principal, which is Perseverance, which is urged upon them by several
Arguments, especially that of the fearful Punishment of Apostates, and the
glorius Reward of Perseverance.

CHAP. XI.
Concerning the excellency of Faith, exemplisied in the Saints of former
times.. 1. THE Connection of this Chapter with the former, the Scope, and
Method, are obvious, and easily understood by the observant and considerate
Reader. 1. The Connection is this; the Apostle continues his Discourse
concerning Faith, and Profession, and Perseverance in them unto Life,
Salvation, and the receiving of the great Reward, and his Exhortation unto
Perseverance: So that they agree in the same subject matter. 2. The Scope, is,
by a new Argument to stir them up unto continuance in the Exercise of this
heavenly virtue. 3. The Method is easily perceived by the Disposition of the
parts, which are,

1. A Description of Faith, Ver. 1.

2. An Instance in two general Effects, Ver. 2, 3.

3. An enumeration of many Saints and Worthies of former times, who by this
Faith did suffer grievous Afflictions, did rare Exploits, and obtained many
great Blessings.

These Saints are represented unto us, as marshalled and set in Array,
according to the times wherein they lived, and

1. Some are expressed by Name. 2. Some are not named at all.


Of such as are named,

1. Some are honored with the Testimony of the rare Acts and Effects of their
Faith, related in particular out of the Scriptures.

2. Some are only named, and the Effects of their Faith are reckoned up jointly
with others which are not mentioned by Name.

After the Catalogue of these Worthies is finished, the Argument taken from
their Example is applied: In all this Discourse you must observe, 1. That the
end of the Apostle is to show the Excellency of that Faith and Perseverance,
which was spoken of in the former Chapter. 2. That the Argument or Suasive here
used for to confirm them in the Faith is taken from Example of many of the most
eminent Saints and Servants of God recorded in the Old Testament, and of such
as lived before the Exhibition of Christ. 3. That the force of the Argument is
not only in this, that they believed and persevered in the Faith; but chiefly
from this, that all their rarest and most heroic Acts and Sufferings, whereby
they attained so many and great Blessings, did issue from their Faith, without
which they could have done little or nothing.

. 2. But to enter upon the Chapter and the Text it self, we read

Ver. 1. Now Faith is the Substance of things hoped for, and the Evidence of
things not seen. THis is said to be a Description of Divine Faith; a perfect
Definition it cannot be. That Faith is such a virtue as here is described may
easily be known from the former ter, whence it may be and is deduced. And the
Apostle thought good to premise these words for the better understanding and
application of the following Examples. In the words which speak of Faith, we
have two Propositions,

1. Faith is the Substance of things hoped for. 2. Faith is the Evidence of
things not seen.


In both these we may note,

1. The Object 2. The Act of Faith.

In the first Proposition things hoped for are in the Object, and the Act is
signified by the word [Hypostasis] here turned Substance. The whole Verse may
be understood either of Faith in general, whether Moral or Divine; yet here
it is principally meant of that Divine Faith, whereby we obtain Salvation. To
define what Faith in general is, belongs to Logic, which is the Rule of Man's
Understanding, whereof Faith is an Act, and that Act which we call Assent; and
so it differs from Dissent and Doubting: Yet Assent may be imperfect, and mixed
with some degrees of Doubt, and this is ordinarily called Opinion; and it may
be perfect and certain, and that without Doubt. Yet this Assent may be firm,
and given unto a false Proposition conceived to be true, or to a Proposition
true in it self, either as clear in it is own Light, or upon demonstration and
evident Proof, or at second hand, and represented unto us by some extrinsecal
Lights, as by the Testimony of another, of whose certain Knowledge and Integrity
we make no doubt. This Testimony is humane or divine: The ground of this Faith
and Assent here intended, is the Testimony of God. And here two things are
required,

1. That the thing testified be credible. 2. That we have certain Knowledge,
that the thing to be believed be testified by God. The Tradition of the Church
being but an humane Testimony, cannot fully satisfy us herein, but we must have
other artificial Arguments, to prove that which the Church says is the word of
God indeed: And so far only as we know the things to be believed to be
testified by God, so far only can we believe with a divine and an infallible
Faith: So that the Testimony of God, known certainly to us to be his Testimony,
is the ground of this Faith here intended. One Object of this Faith is, things
hoped for: Things hoped for, in this Text, are, 1. Things and Rewards, promised
by God as to come, and not yet received. 2. The principal of these is eternal
life, and that great and glorious Reward mentioned in the former Chapter, and
to be received upon final Perseverance in Faith. Of these things, or of their
futurition, we can by Nature and the Light of Reason have no intuitive or
demonstrative Knowledge. The Truths concerning them and their fruition are
revealed from Heaven; and as so revealed, they are fit and proper Objects of
our Faith, which is here said to be the Hypostasis of these things. This word
is interpreted several ways; for some will have it to signify the Substance,
Ground, Foundation of things hoped for: Others, a certain persuasion and
expectation of them: Others, the Subsistence or Existence of this great Reward
to come. This variety of Opinions concerning the signification of the word in
this place makes the Proposition doubtful unto many. The Syriack Translator
turns the words in this manner, Faith is the Certainty or certain Persuasion of
these things which are in hope, as though they did actually exist or were in
effect to them that do believe. This Certainty or certain Persuasion, is an act
of the Soul of Man divinely enlightened, whereby it does as firmly believe that
such as persevere in Faith shall as certainly receive the great Reward as
though they did actually enjoy it. This is that we call a firm Assent, grounded
upon the Word and Promise of God; for this Word and Promise is the Hypostasis,
Ground, Foundation, and Basis of this Assent, in respect of things hoped for,
upon which the Soul is firmly fixed; and this Assent is the Principle of all
other heavenly virtues, and in particular, and more immediately, of our Hope.
So that by this Assent, these things hoped for, though in themselves yet to
come, have a kind of mental, ideal, intellectual Existence, as present by Faith
unto him that has Faith, and this is a mighty motive to perseverance. And here
is to be noted,

1. That though things future as hoped for, are here only mentioned as the
object of Faith, yet it is not the adequate object; for Faith extends further,
and moves in a larger Sphere.

2. That this Faith is not only a certain assent, persuasion, and belief of the
Truths and Revelations of God concerning these things, but also a certain
expectation of the things promised, and a firm confidence and reliance upon God
promising, concerning the performance of the promise. Yet neither this
expectation, nor this confidence can be Faith strictly taken; though it is
certain, that in respect of things hoped for, as such, it is often taken in this
large sense. The firm assent is indeed always presupposed as the ground of
both.

. 3. The second Proposition, which is, That [Faith is the evidence of things
not sin.] Where,

1. The Object, is things unseen. 2. The Act, is evidence of those things.


1. The Object, is something not seen. Things unseen are not only such things
as are invisible, and such as cannot be received by the eye, but also such as
are not perceivable by any of our senses. Neither are things insensible meant,
but such as are above the reach of reason. Most of our knowledge is acquired by
our senses, especially of hearing and seeing; according to that Maxim, [Nihil
est in intellect is, quod non prius fuer at in sensu.] Though this be true only
of things sensible; for no sensible thing can be received into the under
standing, but by virtue of our outward and inward senses: yet we have an
intuitive knowledge of many things, as of the inward intellectual and moral acts
of the Soul, without any act or operation of the senses. So that things unseen,
are such as are neither perceivables by the sense nor reason, so as to have
either an intuitive or demonstrative knowledge of them. These are such as are
conveyed to the Soul by divine Revelation, without which, man could not have
known them; and such propositions as the connection of the terms depend upon the
Will of God.

2. Faith is the evidence of these things unseen; because we having a certain
knowledge of God's veracity, and his testimony and revelation of these things,
are as certainly persuaded of the truth of them; and give as firm assent unto
them, as if they were seen and intuitively and demonstratively known unto us.
Yet here you must consider, 1. That though the things and proposition; be above
reason, yet this persuasion or firm assent, and this certain knowledge of the
divine Revelation are acts of reason, and in the Book of Reason are they
written. 2. That this object is of greater latitude then the former. For things
hoped for, which are to come, are not seen; and not only they, but many things
past and present. 3. That the things not seen in this place, are not all things
not seen, but such as God has revealed to be the matter and object of our
Divine Faith. 4. That though substance and evidence may differ, yet both are a
firm assent; but [Hypostasis] in respect of the things hoped for, may include a
firm confidence and a certain expectation: for in respect of that object, that
assent is more practical then this evidence, which respects things unseen: So
that here wants but little of a perfect definition. 5. The Faith here defined
is divine Faith in general, not that which is called justifying as justifying;
for that is but a particular branch of this general, looking at a particular
object, which is Christ's Sacrifice, and his Intercession. Lushington's
Exposition of these words, as it is singular, so it is gross, and not worthy
taking notice of.

. 4. This foundation being laid, the Apostle proceeds not only to prove it to
be true by many instances, but also that this Faith thus described is
excellent, and that by diverse Acts and Effects thereof. And that it is
excellent, it appears; for,

Ver. 2. For by it the Elders obtained a good Report.]

THE meaning of this in brief is, That by-Faith the Elders became famous, and
men of renown, so far as to be commended by God himself. But for the more
particular and distinct understanding hereof, I will devide the whole into two
propositions:

1. The Elders obtained a good Report. 2. They obtained this good Report by
Faith.


Both these jointly taken, prove the excellency of Faith: For that virtue
whereby the Elders became so famous, and were so highly honored both by God
and Men, must needs be rare and excellent. But let us handle them severally.

1. The Elders obtained a good Report. In the Original [were Witnessed]: Where
we may observe,

1. The Elders. 2. The Testimony concerning these Elders.


These Elders were the Saints of God in former times, called so in respect of
these Hebrews, their Posterity, and those who succeeded them in the times of
the Gospel. Yet principally we must understand such as are mentioned
afterward, and such as were upon record in Scripture; as Abel, E^och, Noah,
Abraham, and the rest. The testimony concerning these Elders, is expressed in
the general, [They were witnessed.] Now a Testimony concerning a person is good
or bad, and this concerning them is good; and thus the word in Greek and Latin
is often taken by a Synechdoche, and here its taken for the good Testimony
which God gave of them, for their rare and excellent virtuous acts, which were
such, as that they were not only famous amongst the Saints of their times, but
also commended by God. And many of them and their works he caused to be
Chronicled and written in his own Book of the Sacred Scripture so that their
names are upon divine Record. And this was a rare privilege, and granted unto
few eminent persons; so that their Fame and Glory is of perpetual continuance,
and their names shall never be blotted out, or their virtues ever buried in the
grave of Oblivion.

2. They became thus famous by their Faith, without which their remembrance
could not have been so precious and honorable to succeeding Generations. That
which is matter of praise and honor, is some virtue shining forth in some
excellent deeds: Their excellent deeds are many, and recorded in the Scripture,
and recited in this Chapter. Yet all these rare Gifts and Acts issued from one
Fountain and one particular Faith, without which, they could not have done so
glorious things, so worthy of praise and honor. For as the Apostle shows
afterward; By Faith Abel offered so excellent a Sacrifice, Enoch pleased God,
Noah prepared the Ark, and so of the rest. From all which he intimates, 1. That
without Faith they could not have performed what they did perform. 2. That it
was the Foundation of all their other virtues, and all their virtuous acts. 3.
By Faith is understood that Faith, which was formerly described. 4. This Verse
is an abridgment of the whole Chapter, and of the Old Testament, and signifies
the harmony and agreement thereof with the New. 5. By those words the Apostle
does tacitly exhort them to Faith and Perseverance therein, because, as the
Elders, so they should obtain a good Report.

. 5. The Apostle in the former words made mention of Elders in general; and
because he intended to descend unto particulars, and to inform us who they
were, and some of them lived near the time of the Creation of the World, he
thought good to premise an act of Faith about an object necessarily presupposed
before the particular instances. For seeing he was to begin his enumeration
with some of the Elders, who lived near the beginning, he must say something of
the beginning of the World, which could not be known by sense or reason, but by
Faith. For,

Ver. 3. Through Faith we understand, that the Worlds were framed by the Word
of God; so that the things that are seen, were not made of things that did
appear.]

THis act of Faith, in respect of this object, is not proper to any particular
Elder or, ancient Worthy; but a common act of all, and therefore prefixed
before the Examples and Instances following, and proves in part, That Faith is
the evidence of things not seen, which are hoped for. These words inform us,

Of an Object. Act.

1. The Object is the Creation of the World. 2. The Act is the understanding of
this by Faith, which usually is reduced under the first article of our Creed.
The Proposions are these,

1. The things that are seen, were not made of things that did appear. 2. They
were made or framed by the Word of God. 3. This is understood by Faith.


Or rather thus,

1. The Worlds were framed, so that things seen, were not made of things that
did appear. 2. They were thus framed and made by the Word of God. 3. That they
were thus made, we understand by Faith.


Where we have two Propositions concerning the Object, one concerning the Act.
In the first Proposition we have,

1. The Worlds and Things seen. 2. The Worlds framed, and things seen made. 3.
Things seen, not made of things that did appear.


1. By Worlds, must be understood Heaven and Earth, and all things therein, the
Hosts of them; the reason of the name Worlds, you may read, Chap. 1. 2. --

Things seen may be visible part of the World, which is conspicuous, and may be
seen by bodily Eyes, as the frame of Heaven and Earth, with the Lights of
Heaven, and Creatures upon Earth, and also the Waters and the Seas, and all
things therein, in which respect they are contra-distinct to invisible
Creatures. For all things were made by Christ, and these were either visible or
invisible, other ways things seen may be things existent, and in perfect being.

2. These were framed and made, that is, they received their being and
existence; for the act and work of Creation gave existence to things, that had
no actual being before. Yet the Word framed, is extended by some to signify not
only the work or act of Creation, but also the union, order, and perfection of
the whole and all the parts; but howsoever it may connote these, yet the
intended force of it is to be Created; so as that creation and Making are the
same.

3. The things seen, were of things that did not appear. By things not
appearing, some understand the Samplar and Idea of things in the Mind and
Counsel of God, but this can harldy be the sense. But others say, That things
not appearing, are, things not pre-existent or in being. And this may be taken
two ways, 1. To signify, that the first Creation did presuppose no matter,
stuff, or atoms, or any such thing; because all things were purely and merely
Nothing, had no being, nor principle, nor rudiment, nor part of being at all.
And this does differense the powerful and wonderful active strength, and
productive force of God from the power and active force of all other Agents; in
respect of which, that is true, [Ex nihilo nihil fit.] 2. To signify, that the
things now seen, were made of that Earth, that seminary and imperfect Rudiment,
which Genesis 1. 2. as the Septuagint translate it, was [(...)] invisible, and
darkness was upon the face of it. For out of it God created the Elements and
mixed Creatures, which when Light was made and they finished, did appear, and
most of them were visible. This last sense is good, and so is the former; and
both may agree, because that Earth and imperfect Chaos, concreated with the
Heaven of Heavens, was first nothing, then invisible, and not appearing before
the things made out of it could be seen. Where note, that, not to be made of
things appearing, and, to be made of things not appearing, are the same.

2. The second Proposition is, That these were made by the Word of God. The
Word of God is either the Word which was God, and begotten of the Father from
everlasting; and so it cannot be taken here, or the Word of God expressing
something out of himself. And this is also twofold, 1. That Word whereby he
effects something. 2. That which signifies his mind, and is not effective
and productive further then to make his mind known. But here his effective and
productive Word is meant; For God said, Let there be Light, (this is his Word);
and there was Light, this is the production of his powerful Word. This Word is
called the Will and Command of God, not that it was so, but because it did
signify that it was his Will, that at such a time such or such a thing should
be made or created, and did, as it were, command himself and his almighty power
to effect it. For he spoke unto himself as almighty, and his Word was his Deed:
and as his Wisdom, Word, and Power are not separated in himself; so neither
were they separated in this Work. So that the World was made without any
difficulty, toil, tumult, tools, or other adjuvant ministerial Causes. The
mighty glorious Work was done instantly, and with ease by him, to whom nothing
is impossible.

The third Proposition is, That by Faith, we understand that the World was thus
created. Where three things,

1. The thing understood. 2. The understanding of it. 3. The understanding of
it by Faith.


1. The thing understood, is not this, that the World was made; for that may be
known by Reason. For it is clear enough, that it is an Effect, and must
necessarily have an efficient Cause, which must produce and effect it. And they
which hold, it was [ab eterno] from Eternity, some of them do confess this;
only they affirm that it was meant necessarily by the Supreme Agent, and the
Production of it was like the Production of Light from the Sun, which was no
sooner in Being, but Light did necessarily flow and issue from it, so that
there could be no Priority of time between the Sun and Light, but the Being of
both was simultaneous. But that this World should be made at such a time, and
at first of no pre-existent matter, and in the space of six days, and in that
order one part after another, and by the Word of God as the sole efficient, and
so many years ago, is far above Reason.

2. Yet this is understood, and it is our reason and intellective faculty which
does apprehend and understand it: For without it we can know nothing, by it we
know all things that are known unto us, even the deep things and Counsels of
God revealed. Neither is Reason merely passive, but really active, in this
Work; for it moves, acts, knows this Creation of the World as certainly as it
does things cognoscible by the senses, or those whereof we have intuitive or
demonstrative Knowledge.

3. Yet we know it by Faith, which is a divine and supernatural Light, and
elevates Reason above it is natural Sphere. Faith sometimes by a Trope is taken
for the Rule of Faith, which is the Word and Revelation of God. The proper Act
of this word is to represent, and this Representation may be made either
outwardly or inwardly in the Soul, so as to inform it; and that either
immediately, which is Inspiration; or mediately, which is a more imperfect
Disciplination: When the Soul is once informed, it receives the Impression,
knows the thing represented, and assents unto it; and this assenting Knowledge
is a vital Act. The thing here represented is such as Reason by it is natural
Active Power cannot reach; therefore this divine Representation is necessary as
a supernatural Light, which by the Power of God piercing the Understanding,
enables it to understand and know and believe such things, which otherwise
could not be understood, known, and believed. Yet this Assent may be moral and
probable, or divine; here is meant a divine Assent, which without the Power of
the Spirit cannot be in ^he heart of Man. Thus by Faith and not by Reason we
understand how the World was made, that it was not eternal, that the Wisdom and
Power of God was wonderfully manifested in that glorious Work.

. 6. These things premised, the Apostle enters upon his Argument from Examples,
which are set forth according to the order of time: 1. By a particular
Enumeration. 2. By Accumulation. He might have instanced in far more, but these
were the most eminent, and for number sufficient for his purpose. He begins
with Abel: who

Ver. 4. By Faith offered unto God a more excellent Sacrifice than Kain, by
which he obtained Witness, that he was righteous, God testifying of his Gifts:
And by it he being dead yet speaks. YOU must here observe, that one thing
wherein all these Saints und Worthies do agree was Faith. 2. That this Faith is
the principal thing to be noted in them all. 3. His End is, by a kind of
Induction, to prove the excellency and necessity of Faith. 4. That according to
the History of the Old Testament, which he makes his Rule, Abel is the first
most eminent Person in whom he thought good to instance: For, as Stephen was,
though not the first Sufferer, yet the Proto-Martyr of the New Testament; so
Abel was the Proto-Martyr of the Old, and was the first Man who after the
Creation and the Fall suffered death, and sealed the Truth of God with his
Blood. And though his Father Adam and his Mother Eve had Faith, yet the
Scriptures do not relate unto us any special and eminent Work of their Faith;
so that there was no Example of eminency in Faith before him: For, seeing by
Faith we believe the Creation of the World, and the Fall of the first Man who
was his Father, by whom Sin came into the World, there could not be any before
him so near the beginning of the World so fit for Example. Of this Abel two
things are related,

1. His Virtue. 2. His Reward.


His Virtue in general was Faith, manifesting it self in his excellent
Sacrifice. His Reward, God's Testimony of him, and his perpetual Fame. The
words may be reduced to three Propositions:

1. That Abel by Faith offered a more excellent Sacrifice than ^ain. 2. By this
he obtained Witness that he was righteous, God testifying of his Gifts. 3. By
this he being dead yet speaks, or is spoken of.


In the first Divine Axiom we may observe,

1. That he offered Sacrifice to God. 2. This Sacrifice was more excellent than
that of Kain. 3. That he offered this so excellent a Sacrifice by Faith.


1. To offer Sacrifice was a religious Worship, and may be considered as Moral,
Positive, *Ceremonial. As offered unto God in acknowledgment of his Supreme
Dominion, it is Moral; so is the Gift and Offering of some part of our Goods for
pious Uses and By Ceremonial, understand Typical.
Maintenance of his Worship. As it was a part of God's outward Worship,
depending only upon Divine Institution, it was Positive. As this Sacrifice
signified a far greater Sacrifice to come, it was Ceremonial: For, after Man
had sinned, besides the Confession and Amendment of the Sinner, Satisfaction to
God's Justice by a Sacrifice was required. That this was Typically an explatory
Sacrifice for Sin, seems to be implied by the thing sacrificed, which was of
the Flock, which must be slain, and the Blood shed; as though for compensation
Life was given for Life, and Blood for Blood, so that this was a Shadow of
Christ's Death and Offering. This Sacrifice was offered unto the true and
living God, and not unto Idols, and this according to the first Commandment;
For no Worship or Service Religious is due to any but to God, who alone is
Supreme Lord, and to whom alone the highest degree of honor is to be given.
Yet all these bloody Sacrifices began to be out of date upon the Death and
Resurrection of Christ; and now only the spiritual Sacrifices of an humble
broken Spirit of Praise, of Prayer, of Thanksgiving, and such like, continue in
force.

2. This Sacrifice was more excellent than that of Kain. This Kain was his
Elder Brother; He offered, and Abel offered too: They both offered unto the
same eternal and universal Lord. The marter of his Offering was according to
his outward Profession and Employment, of the fruits of the Earth; and besides
the difference in the matter, there was a great Inequality: For Abel's compared
to his, was far more excellent and acceptable. Here we might take occasion to
consider, 1. Adam's care in the Education of his Children, to fit them not only
for the matters of this Life, but for Religion and the World to come. 2. That
two Persons may worship God with the same kind of Worship, and yet differ very
much in the manner of their Service.

3. This more excellent Sacrifice was offered by Faith, and this Faith did make
it so excellent: For it was not the matter offered, but the Qualification of
the Person, and his manner of Offering, that gave the worth unto the Sacrifice,
and made it more precious. Kain offers without Faith sincere and lively, his
Offering is base: Abel offers with Faith, his Offering is excellent, and of
great value. This Faith is the Soul of all Religious Worship, and here the
principal thing to be observed is, that Faith was the Principle which did
animate and honor this piece of Service.

. 7. The Reward follows, and it is, a good Report, 1. In his lifetime. 2.
After death.

1. In his lifetime: For,

1. It was testified of him, that he was righteous. 2. This was done by God,
testifying of his Gifts.


1. He was righteous; for so our Savior terms him, speaking of the Blood of
righteous Abel, Mat. 23. 35. He was righteous, not without all Sin, for such no
Man after the Fall ever was; yet he was without Wickedness. He was upright, and
his Faith was sincere; and his Worship of God, and his Obedience, were without
Hypocrisy. He was justified and sanctified, and continued in the State of
Justification and Sanctification, and in such a manner, as that he may be said
to be eminently righteous. This Righteousness was not by Nature, but Grace; not
by his deserts, but by the merit of Christ, and the mercy of God. As he was
righteous, so he was manifested to be so; and it was testified to his comfort
and honor.

2. It was God who testified of his Righteousness, by testifying of his Gifts.
His Gifts were his Sacrifices offered to God; these God did accept, and some
ways signified his acceptance, both of the Person and his Offering. In Genesis
4. 45. we read thus, [And the Lord had respect to Abel, and to his Offering:
But unto Cain, and his Offering he had not respect.] The words give occasion of
noting several things* As, 1. That the Word turned by our English [to respect]
in the Hebrew, signifies to behold or look upon with delight, as well pleased
with it. The Chaldee Paraphrast uses a word, which signifies to be well
pleased with, or graciously to accept. Symmachus turns, [The Lord was
delighted.] The Syriack, translates to the same purpose. But Theodotion says,
[(...), inflammavit], He fired, or, consumed with fire. For by fire sent from
Heaven, God did signify his acceptance of Aaron's Sacrifice, Levit. 9. 24. Of
Solomon's, 2 Chronicles. 7. 1. and of Elijah's, 1 King. 18. 38. 2. God had respect
first unto the Person, then unto his Offering; for if the Person be not rightly
qualified, the Sacrifice cannot be pleasing unto God. 3. The thing which
rendered both him and his Offering so acceptable, was Faith. 4. That he did not
thus accept Cain's, because he was not righteous, had no Faith. Some, and
amongst other Cornelius Bertram, think, that by this acceptance of Abel's
Sacrifice, God designed him to the Priesthood, and rejected Cain; and this was
the cause, first of Envy, then of Murder. But whether God did testify of his
Gifts by Fire, and by that testimony design him to be Priest, we need not
trouble our selves. This is certain, he accepted Abel and his Offering, and
that acceptance was some ways signified, and by that signification he
testified of him that he was righteous. All persons, who worship God, are Cains
or Abels, offer with or without Faith: how careful therefore should we be, in
the Service of our God, to come with prepared and disposed hearts. For it is a
blessed thing, and a matter of sweetest comfort to be accepted of our God, and
a sad and woeful Curse, with Cain to be rejected.

The Reward after his Death is expressed in the third Proposition, [And by it,
being dead, yet speaks.] Where it is said,

1. He yet speaks, or, is spoken of. 2. Being dead, he speaks. 3. By it he
speaks.


The Copies and Books differ; for some read he speaks, some he is spoken of:
yet both these may signify his fame and good report continuing in the Church to
this Day. He may be said to be spoken of, because his Name and his Faith are
upon Record in Scripture, where he, though dead, is remembered and commended,
and shall be remembered and commended to the World's end; and no length of time,
which consumes many things, shall ever raze his memory, he shall never be
forgotten. Yet most do read, [he speaketh], and the Translators most do follow
that reading. Now the Question is, what he speaks, and to whom, and what this
speaking is, 1. He speaks Faith, and Righteousness, and Virtue, and the
Reward of Virtue; and calls aloud for imitation of his Faith and Righteousness,
that we may be accepted of God, and rewarded as he was. This is the Voice of
all good Examples made known unto us. There is another thing, which he is said
to speak, of which hereafter. 2. He speaks first to Men; for to whom God in
the Scriptures speaks, to them, the Saints and Martyrs, by their good Example
may be said to speak. Now the Scriptures were written for men living, and God
in them does speak unto us, whilst we living read or hear them. 3. This
speaking is not like the speaking of Abel, when he was living, nor as one man
speaks to another; but this Speech is Metaphorical. For as by Speech we
declare and signify something unto others; so Virtues, Rewards, Crimes,
Punishments, made known unto Mortals by word or writing, declare and signify
that Virtue shall be rewarded, and that Sin shall be punished; and by the
punishments warn us to take heed of Sin, and by the rewards encourage us to
Virtue: This is not a speaking immediate of the person by words, but a speaking
by things. In this respect it may be said, that the dead, whose Voice shall
never be heard on Earth, do speak: But seeing Abel speaks, it is further
inquirable by what he speaks. It Is said, by it he speaks; and by it may be
his Faith, and Sacrifice, or Blood: By the former, he speaks as you heard
before; and the voice of Deeds and good Examples is far more effectual, then
the voice of Words, and continues to sound far longer. For the Voice is but
heard, whilst those who live can speak; but the voice of Deeds is heard after
Death: yet some understand that he spoke by his Blood, and that he might do two
ways: 1. As living, he spoke by his Faith and Offering, but being dead by his
patience and suffering; and by this he exhorts us, not only to live well, but
with patience to suffer Death for Righteousness sake. This is an Alarm to
Martyrdom, the highest pitch of Virtue and of Obedience. 2. As dead, he
speaks by his Blood, not only as famous for his Martyrdom, but as crying for
Vengeance. For so God said to Cain, The Voice of thy Brothers Blood cries unto
me from the Ground, Genesis 4. 10. And in the following Chapter Christ's Blood is
mentioned as speaking better things then the Blood of Abel, Chap. 12. 24.
Abel's Blood cried aloud for Vengeance, but Christ's for Mercy and Pardon.
Abel's Blood, jointly with the Blood of all Martyrs, may call for justice unto
the Supreme Judge; and when the Sufferings of all are finished, then full
Vengance shall be executed upon all bloody Persecutors. Something to this
purpose we may read, Rev. 6. 10, 11. In this sense it may be said, they being
dead, do yet speak, and will speak as dead, and being slain by their cruel
Enemies; And by Faith they speak thus; for without Faith, they might have
suffered justly for their Crimes, and then they could not solicit the Supreme
Judge to revenge their innocent Blood, not expect any Reward and Crown of
Martyrdom.

. 8. After Abel follows Enoch the seventh from Adam, yet the second from Abel
of eminent note in the History of Moses. Of him it is said,

Ver. 5. By Faith Enoch was translated not to see Death, and was not found,
because God had translated him: for before his translation, he had this
Testimony, that he pleased God.] IN this Text, we may observe;

1. The Reward, which was Translation. 2. The Virtue, he was translated by
Faith. 3. The Testimony and good Report of him, he pleased God.


Yet these may be reduced to two:

1. The Reward, he was translated. 2. His Virtue, by Faith he pleased God.


If we take the two Verses together, we may reduce them to two Propositions
thus;

1. Enoch was translated. 2. By Faith Enoch was translated.


And because the latter Proposition is not evident, as not expressed in the
Text, the Apostle, first presupposing this Translation to be a great Reward,
and obtained by Faith, he proves it thus,

He that pleases God, must have Faith;

But Enoch pleased God:

Therefore he had Faith.

That he pleased God, he proves it by Testimony; for that he did so, is express
Scripture. The major [That he that pleases God, must have Faith] is thus made
clear and confirmed,

If it be impossible for any to please God, who does not believe that God is,
and a Rewarder of them, who diligently seek him; then he that pleases God must
believe:

But without believing thus, no man can please God;

Therefore he that pleases God, must thus believe.

Where it is to be noted, That he infers Enoch's Faith, from his pleasing God,
and the inseparable and necessary connection of Faith and pleasing God. For
where there is an Effect, there must necessarily be a Cause, and no Effect can
be without its proper Cause. For Method's sake I will begin,

1. With his Translation. 2. Proceed to the demonstration of his Faith.


1. This Translation was a Reward, and therefore signifies the change was to
the better. 1. He was translated not to see Death, so the Apostle understood
the Text of Moses; not to see Death, is, not to dye or suffer Death. There was
no separation of Soul and Body, they remained, united, the Soul was not
unclothed or divested of the Body; yet it was changed, and made immortal. Of
all the other Patriarchs before the Flood, it is said, [They, even Methuselah
dyed]: To this their Death, this Translation is opposed; for it is not said,
that Enoch the great, and most eminently pious Prophet, dyed. This was a
dispensation with that general Law and Judgment past in Adam upon all mankind,
[Dust thou art, and to dust shall thou return; and it was an act of that power,
which God reserved to himself as above his Law. In the Chaldee it is said, That
God did not slay him; that is, he did not take away his Life; this was a
singular exception from the general rule of his Judgments.

2. In the Hebrew, it is said, [He was not]; In the Chaldee, [He appeared not];
In the Greek, [He was not found. These two latter express the meaning of the
Hebrew Phrase. For this followed upon his Translation, that he did not appear,
nor was found upon Earth amongst mortal men; for he ceased to be in that place
with living mortal men, he changed the place and company.

3. Lest we should be ignorant either of the Place to which he removed, or of
the Person who removed him, it is said, [God took him], so the Hebrew; [God took
him to himself], so the Arabic; [Because God had translated him], so the Text.
The place to which he was removed Physically considered, is not expressed; yet
he after his Translation, must be in some place; this place was not this Earth,
for there he was not found. It was some better place; and seeing there is no
place fit for man's Habitation, better then the Earth, but only Heaven, the
Habitation of Angels, a glorious place of eternal peace, holiness, and
security; therefore most do positively affirm, that, as Elijah, so he, was
taken into Heaven. The Person translating him, was God; for none but he could
make him immortal, and invest him with Glory: This signifies, that he was
brought nearer unto God, and had more full and perfect Communion with him, then
he enjoyed on Earth. So that this Translation was a change of place, of
company, of condition; for he was removed from Earth to Heaven, from Men to
God; from the estate of Mortality and Misery, to an estate of Immortality and
Bliss. This was an anticipation of the great Reward, and it was like the change
of all God's Saints, who shall be found living, when Christ shall come to Judge
the World. This God did to signify his great respect unto eminent Piety, and to
let men know his high and special reserved Power, and that there is a Reward of
Glory after this Life, and such a Reward as shall make men fully happy in Soul
and Body too, and that for ever. This does further inform us, that God can make
the Body Immortal, without any separation of it from the Soul, and also that he
can raise and reunite the Body turned unto Dust, and make it Immortal, and
eternally inseparable.

The second Proposition was, that he obtained this Translation and glorious
Reward by Faith. For [by Faith Enoch was translated]; But because it was not
expressed in the Text of Moses, that he was translated by Faith (for there is
no mention of his Faith); he proves his Faith, the Cause from the Effect [He
pleased God]; and his pleasing of God, from the testimony of God. For before he
was translated, he had this testimony, that he pleased God: And here we may
observe,

3. Propositions,

1. That he pleased God. 2. That he had this testimony. 3. He had this
testimony before he was translated.


1. He pleased God: He walked with God, so the Hebrew; He walked in the fear of
God, so the Chaldee: He walked in the Obedience of God, so the Arabic: He
pleased God, so the Septuagint, whom the Apostle follows. The meaning
therefore is, that he served God, observed his Commands, and was obedient unto
them: The word [walked] used by the Hebrew, Chaldee, Arabic Translatours
signifies, that this was the constant tenor of life; it was a life of
Righteousness and Holiness, and the repetition of this walking in the Text of
Moses, may imply an eminent degree of Holiness in him more then in other men;
for his Conversation was so ordered, that it was very pleasing and acceptable
to God, who delights in sincere and constant Obedience, whereby men do resemble
him as holy and righteous: We must not think that he could have walked thus
with God by the power of Nature, the sanctifying Spirit of Grace was the
principle of this Obedience.

2. It was testified of him, or he had this testimony, That he pleased God.
This was a good Report, and so much the more certain, because God gave it by
his Spirit in the Prophet Moses, who has recorded it to all Generations. And
this is reported of him, not only once, but twice: Therefore there can be no
doubt of it.

3. This was testified of him before he was translated; the sense is not, that
Moses testified this of him before he was translated, but the thing testified
was this, that he had pleased God before he was translated. For the Text does
testify that he was translated, yet it testifies that he pleased God before
this Translation. This is brought to prove, that by Faith he was translated.

. 9. It might be said, that though Enoch pleased God, yet it does not appear
how this pleasing of God will prove and infer his Faith, neither is the
Connection of Faith and walking with God so evident. Therefore to prevent all
doubts in this Point he adds

Ver. 6. But without Faith it is impossible to be please God; for he that
comes unto God must believe that God is, and that he is a Rewarder of them
that diligently seek him. IN these words he proves the impossibility of
separation, and the absolute necessity of the Connection of Faith and pleasing
God; and they must be considered,

1. In themselves. 2. As an Argument to prove something antecedent.


In the first consideration they yield two Propositions,

1. Without Faith it is impossible to please God. 2. He that comes unto God
must believe that God is, and that he is a Rewarder of them that diligently
seek him.


1. Without Faith it is impossible to please God. Where we might observe,

1. The Effect, pleasing God. 2. The Cause, Faith. 3. The inseparable Connection
of both.


When one thing does depend upon another for its being, then it is impossible
for it to exist without that other upon which it does so much depend; as the
Effect depends upon its Cause, as receiving Being from it. Therefore Causes and
Effects are said to be Arguments absolutely consentany, and of inseparable
Connection and impossible Separation. If there be a Cause formally and actually
as a Cause, there must of necessity be an Effect; if there be an Effect there
must needs be the Cause that gave it being. If there be the beams of the Sun,
there must necessarily be the Sun from whence they issue: The World created is
an Effect, and cannot exist without God as creating it. So here, to please God
is an Effect, and Faith is the Cause, without which we cannot possibly please
God. The Sum is, that as it is impossible for an Effect to be without a Cause,
so it is impossible without Faith to please God.

2. This is made more clear from an Act of Faith. Some think that the Text is
dianoetical or discursive; as though the Apostle should argue in this Form,

If he that comes unto God must believe that God is, and that he is a
Rewarder of them that diligently seek him, then without Faith, it is impossible
to please God.

But the Antecedent is true:

Therefore the Consequent.

They are induced thus to think from the Conjunction For. This seems to be an
arguing a definitione ad definitum: For in this latter Proposition we have a
more accurate definition of that Faith, whereby we attain eternal Life, than in
the first Verse. In it we may observe,

1. The Object 2. The Act 3. The Subject of Faith.

1. The Object complex is twofold,

1. God is. 2. He is a Rewarder of them that diligently seek him.


So that the Object of Enoch's Faith, and so of all saving Faith in general, is
God. This most noble Object may be considered,

1. As God. 2. As Rewarder of Man seeking him.


1. God is. This is prima veritas complexa, the first Categorical, Positive,
Affirmative Proposition: For, as God's Being and Existence is first, and before
all other things and existences; so that God is, or does exist, must needs be
the first Truth. The Subject of this Proposition being God, by God we must
understand the most perfect and excellent Being, which is known unto us in some
measure by his Work, but is more fully represented unto us by his Attributes,
and his eternal necessary acting upon himself, as we read in Scripture. Of
these things I have written more at large in my Theo-Politica. This Being and
Existence of God, so far as it cannot be understood by Reason, but by a diviner
Light of Revelation, is the first Object of Faith.

2. The second Object of this Faith is God, as beatificans hominem, rewarding
Man: where we must consider,

1. The party rewarding. 2. The party rewarded.


The party rewarding is God, who first is, and does exist in himself, before he
can be a Rewarder. This Act of Remuneration presupposes the Creation of the
World, especially of Man as a Rational Creature, capable of Laws, Rewards,
Punishments, and God's Supreme Dominion and Laws, and his Judgment according to
the Laws given Man, and Man's Observation of the same, nay, even the
Observation of those Laws, according to which sinful guilty Man is rewardable.

The party rewarded, or to be rewarded and made happy, is 1. Man. 2. Sinful
Man. 3. Sinful Man seeking God. 4. Sinful Man, seeking God with that sincerity
and constancy as to find him. This seeking God in this manner is the
Observation of his Laws.

2. This being the Object, the Act is, to believe: He that comes unto God must
believe. To this Act is required an Object, not only materially but formally
considered; a Rule, and an intellective Faculty. The material Object you have
heard before; the formal Object are these as intelligible and credible, without
which there can be no Act. That which makes them credible is the Rule, which is
the divine Revelation or the Word of God representing the Object as
intelligible and credible. For Reason without Revelation cannot attain any
certain Knowledge and Evidence of these things: Something it may conclude and
determine of God from his Works; something may be taught and testified by Man
without Divine Revelation. But that God will render eternal Rewards unto sinful
Man, to be redeemed by Christ upon condition of Repentance, Faith, and new
Obedience, is far above Reason not elevated above it is Sphere. Therefore the
Rule must be supernatural and divine Revelation and Testimony, which is
infallible because of God^ veracity; and this Revelation must be in the Soul,
and known to be divine, before it can be a Rule to Man. This Faith is a vital
and elicit Act of the Soul as intellective; for without this intellective
active Power, the Soul is not capable of the divine Representation, nor can be
informed by it. The Act therefore is a Belief of these things thus represented;
this Belief is an Assent unto these things revealed as true: This Assent must
be certain, infallible, practical. 1. It must be certain, because the things to
be believed concern Man's everlasting Estate. 2. It must be infallible, for the
same Reason. 3. It must be practical, because it must stir up men effectually
to seek eternal Life, and deliverance from eternal Death: Yet the Cause of the
certainty, infallibility, and practical force, is the Word of God conveyed into
the Soul, and made powerful by the divine Spirit illuminating and inspiring Man
in an ineffable manner; for a divine Faith it a supernatural Gift of God: And
as it is divinely practical and effective, it is inconsistent with any
predominant Lust and Corruption.

3. The Subject of this Faith is one that comes unto God, even every one that
comes unto God. To come to God, is, for Man to turn unto God, and to make him
the chiefest Object of his Understanding and Will, so as to serve him, and walk
with him so as to obtain eternal Life from him. If we reflect upon Enoch, it is
to come to God, for to walk with him; for before Enoch could walk with God, he
must come to God. Therefore this coming may be Conversion, which depends upon
divine Vocation; yet this coming as also this walking, presupposes Faith, and
follows upon it, as an Effect upon the Cause. For Faith is the Principle of
this divine motion, both as first begun and after continued: So that the sense
is, that a man cannot begin to walk with God, without this Faith; for to walk
with God, does presuppose we are with him; and with him we cannot be, except we
first come unto him; and come unto him for to walk with him, we cannot without
this Faith. And here I might take occasion to speak of the distance between God
and Man by Nature, caused by Sin; and also of Man's return and first approach
unto this Fountain of eternal Bliss; but of these things I have spoken in my
Theo-Politica: yet here you must remember, that he that comes unto God is the
Subject of this divine virtue of Faith. This is a definition of Faith in
general, the Object whereof is the whole Scripture, as representing God, the
Cause and Fountain of eternal happiness, whereof justifying Faith as
justifying, is but a Branch.

After the absolute consideration of this Text, in the second place it remains
we examine the words, as they are an Argument or Reason to clear and prove
something that went before. And for this purpose we must remember, that his
intention was to prove that Enoch obtained the great Reward of his blessed
Translation by Faith: This he proves, because he pleased God; the Connection of
Faith and pleasing God is proved, because without Faith it is impossible to
please God; and that it is impossible he makes evident from the definition of
Faith, necessarily required in every one that will come to God: For if a man
believe not that God is, or that there is a God, he can never come unto him;
for no God no Worship of God, no thoughts of the Worship of that which is not
believed to be. Therefore all Atheists are profane Scoffers, and not only
neglect but deride Religion: The belief of a God is the first Ground of all
Religious Service. But let a man believe there is a God, and yet not be
persuaded that this God is a Rewarder of them that diligently seek him, his
Religion will be very cold, if any at all. The mighty Motive to come to God,
and to walk with him, is a certain Belief, not only that God is, but that he is
a Rewarder of them that diligently seek him. Upon this Ground (because upon the
Resurrection we receive this great and glorious Reward,) the Apostle exhorts
the 1 Cor. 15. 18.
Corinthians to be steadfast and immovable in this Faith of the Resurrection,
always abounding ing in the Work of the Lord, in as much as they knew their
Labor in the Lord was not in vain. This presupposes, that the end is the
Principle of Motion in Morals, and this end as known: The End whereat Man
should aim chiefly is eternal happiness in the enjoyment of his God; the
means, to walk with God, and so diligently seek him. These things are known by
Revelation, and if Man upon Revelation do not certainly believe that God is,
and that he will richly reward with eternal Bliss all such as diligently seek
him, he can have no Principle of divine Motion in him, but will think all
Religious Service and Obedience to be in vain. If any therefore ask what Faith,
divine and saving Faith, is, this Text will teach us, that Faith is a Belief
that God is, and that he is a Rewarder of them that diligently seek him. This
definition is an Abridgment of the whole Creed; it begins with Faith in God,
and ends with Life everlasting, which is the great Reward. It Is true that the
Creeds and Confessious of the Ancients were not so full, so clear, so explicit,
as these of the Gospel; yet they included implicitly the great work of
Redemption by Christ as yet to come, and somewhat darkly represented unto them.

. 10. This rare Example of the great Reward obtained by Faith, was a mighty
Motive to persuade them to Perseverance; yet he stays not here, but proceeds
to a third, who also lived before the Flood, and survived the old World, as a
Man of both. This was Noah, of whom it follows,

Ver. 7. By Faith Noah, being warned of God of things not seen as yet, moved
with fear, prepared an Ark for the saving of his House, by the which he
condemned the World, and became Heir of the Righteousness which is by Faith. IN
those words we might observe,

1. Noah's Faith. 2. His Obedience. 3. The Issue of both.


Yet for the better handling of them I will reduce them to three Propositions.

1. By Faith Noah being warned of God of things not seen, was moved with fear.
2. Being moved with fear, he prepared an Ark for the saving of his House. 3. By
this he condemned the World, and became Heir of that Righteousness which is by
Faith.


1. The first informs us,

1. Of the Ground 2. Of the Object 3. Of the Effect in his heart of his Faith.

1. The ground of his Faith, was the Word of God; for he was warned by God:
This we may learn at large, both that God spoke unto him, and what he informed
him of. For these few words of this Text are a pithy abridgment of a larger
History delivered by Moses, Genesis 6. 7, 8. Chapters. And here it is observable,
that the rule of the divine Faith of God's Saints in all Ages, was the
Revelation and the Word: For the matters of their Faith are such, as that
without this word it could not have any certain and firm ground. How God spoke
unto him, whether by Angels, or by audible Voice, or by immediate inspiration,
or some other way, is neither here, nor in Moses his History expressed.

2. The object of this Faith materially considered, were things not seen;
formally, these things not seen as revealed; for he was warned, or rather
informed, by God. For it was God who spoke unto him; and because that
information did represent some danger of a great end yet avoidable, the word,
which has many significations, is turned, [being warned], so warning is
sometimes taken. Those things were then not seen, and so matter of Faith; yet
after they were seen. But first whilst these things were in the mind of God, no
Man nor Angel could know them. After that God had revealed them, they might be
known and seen by Faith, but no ways else.

3. The Effect of this Faith in his heart, was this, That he feared. The object
of fear is some danger apprehended: The danger revealed unto him by God, was an
universal destruction by a deluge, this he understood by Faith. The effectual
belief of this, caused fear; fear made him careful to provide for his safety:
The word in the Original may signify to fear, yet so to fear, as to be cautious
and wary; and by caution to seek for to avoid some danger: and because there
may be some danger of Sin, and punishment for Sin; therefore [(...)] is
sometime taken for a devout and religious fear. So that in this Effect of Faith
may be fear, caution, and a care lest we offend our God.

This was his Faith: his Obedience signified in the second Proposition
follows. For being moved with fear, he prepared an Ark to save his House. As
fear was an Effect of his Faith, so the preparation of the Ark was an Effect of
his Fear. And here we have,

1. A preparation of the Ark. 2. The end of this preparation.


1. This Ark was a kind of Ship, a Building, and Vessel of great receipt and
capacity, sit to store upon, and be carried up by the Water: the materials with
the form thereof are described, Genesis 6. He prepared and built it, so as to be
finished and ready against the time of the Flood. The direction for the
materials, and the fashion and dimensions he received from God; and it was, as
some collect out of Moses, 120 years in Building. And Noah believing that God,
as he had said, intended to drown the World, made this Ark according to God's
prescription, as a means to preserve him. This implies, that he was a man of a
great estate.

2. Therefore the end of this preparation, was to save his House. By House, is
meant his Family, as his Wife, and his three Sons with their Wives: These must
have perished with the rest of the World, if they had not been preserved in
this Ark. And because God intended not to create Mankind a new, he thought good
to save those, that they might be a seminary for the propagation of Mankind, to
people the Earth: Yet not only they, but some of all living Creatures breathing
and living upon the Earth, were preserved with them, that they also might
multiply and replenish the World, and that some of them might be Sacrificed
after the Waters were dried up. With these he also laid up in this great Vessel
Food for his House, and other Creatures, lest they should perish for want. For
the Ark could save them only from the deluge; yet this it could not do, except
God had stored it, and had a special care of it. And it is strange, that by
Virtue of this Ark, that Water which destroyed others, saved them which were in
it. This is the reason why the Apostle comparing the Flood to the Water of
Baptism, says, The like figure whereunto, even Baptism, does also now save us,
1 Pet. 3. 21. As God threatened a fearful Judgment, so he made a gracious
promise of deliverance to Noah, and revealed the means of his safety, and gave
him a Command to use it: And it was Faith which caused him to fear the
Judgment, and to rely upon the Promise, which he believed as certainly, as he
did the Commination.

3. The issue and consequent of this Faith, and Obedience was twofold:

1. He condemned the World. 2. Became the Heir of that Righteousness, which is
by Faith.


For the third Proposition is, That by this he condemned the World, and became
Heir of the Righteousness, which is by Faith.

1. By it he condemned the World. By World, is meant the whole body of Mankind,
besides his Family. The persons were many thousands, and millions dispersed
over the face of the Earth; for it is probable, the World at that time was very
populous; yet very corrupt and wicked, and besides that impenitent and hardened,
though they had sufficient warning, and time to repent. For God had given them
an 120 years, by Repentance to provide for their safety, and prevent their
ruin: This World is said to be condemned by it, that is, by the Ark, or, as
some say, by his Faith; the truth is, he condemned them by both. For by Faith
he made the Ark, and by making the Ark out of Faith, he wamed the World, and
exhorted them to repent. To understand this, we must consider, that Noah was a
kind of Prince and Prophet in those days, and very famous, and his Name known
far and near. A private man, of mean and poor estate, was neither fit to make
the Ark, a Building of so vast Charge, nor to give a general warning to the
World. And perhaps as he was a Preacher of Righteousness, so he sent many into
several parts of the World, to signify the great danger, and to exhort them to
Repentance. And as by his Doctrine and Words; so also visibly, by building the
Ark, he signified to the World the Will of God requiring Repentance, or
resolving to drown and destroy the World. And they, not believing his Doctrine,
not his design in making the Ark, as God had commanded him, not repenting of
their Sins, were condemned. For he testified his Faith by making that great
Vessel, and confirmed his Doctrine by his Example and Righteousness of Life,
and did what in him lay to persuade all others to repent, and by repentance
provide for safety. But they not hearkening unto him, aggravated their sin so
high, as that they made themselves liable to Condemnation unavoidable. There is
a threefold Condemnation, 1. By Law. 2. By Witness. 3. By Judgment. The
condemnation by Law and Witness, are not properly condemnation: For that is in
strict and proper sense a judicial act of the Judge; yet so, that, if a man be
not condemnable by Law, and proved to be so by Witness, or some other way, he
cannot justly be condemned. Jonah preached to Nineveh, Forty days and Nineve
shall be destroyed: So Noah preached to the Old World, An hundred and twenty
years, and the Word shall be destroyed. Nineveh repented, and by repentance
prevented destruction. The Old Word, at the preaching of Noah, repented not,
and so were condemned: The Doctrine and Word of God did virtually and
conditionally condemn them; God's Sentence did absolutely condemn them, because
they repented not. So that Noah by his Faith, and the Ark was not only a
Witness against them, but a Judge, and God by him might be said to give the
Sentence. Again, whosoever or whatsoever actively concurrs to Judgment, by a
Metonymy, may be said to judge; in this sense both Law and Witness may be said
to Condemn; and not only rational, but irrational Creatures may be said to be
Witnesses, and rise up in Judgment against Offenders.

2. The latter Consequent of this Faith, and preparation of the Ark, is, that
by it, that is, his Faith preparing the Ark, He became Heir of that
Righteousness, which is by Faith. To understand this, we must consider, that
the saving of Noah by the Ark from the Flood, was but a Type and Shadow of
eternal Salvation by Christ; and God by saving him from the Flood, which
drowned and destroyed the impenitent World, did justify Noah, and declare
Righteousness by Christ, and his deliverance from eternal Death. And because
the Ark wherein he was saved, was made and prepared by Faith; therefore be
obtained this Righteousness, and became Heir of eternal Salvation by Faith. For
though Noah was a righteous man, and testified so to be, and that by God
himself; yet that righteousness was but the evidence of the sincerity of his
Faith. For without Faith, that Faith, whereby he prepared the Ark, he could not
have been saved either from temporal or eternal destruction. Not so, as though
he had not had faith formerly before he was warned by God (for that he had many
years before); but this was one special act of that Faith, which was from
former days habitual in his Soul, and often exercised, and exerted in the
course of his whole Life. This is an excellent argument to persuade to
perseverance in Faith, because, by it, we may condemn the World, be saved from
the deluge of God's wrath, and be made Heirs of Righteousness, that is,
justified before the Tribunal of God. And whosoever being warned of the eternal
penalties threatened by God, does not repent, shall be condemned. Therefore
seeing we are all warned of God, let us be moved by fear and by faith, to
prepare the Ark of Repentance, that we may be saved from the Streams and Flood
of eternal Fire and Brimstone. And here we must note, that Faith, Repentance,
and Fear are opposed to Unbelief, Impenitency; and security in Sin, and
Condemnation to Justification; for to be Heir of Righteousness, is, to be
justified not by Works, but by Faith. The destruction by the Flood was but part
of that punishment, which the wicked impenitent World did suffer; and
deliverance from the Flood was but part of the great Reward, and that eternal
Salvation, which is obtained by Faith in Christ. All this is plainly signified
by that Doctrine of St. Peter, 1 Pet. 3. 21, 22. Where we have Salvation, and
the Causes of it; as water of Baptism, the answer of a good Conscience (which
is Faith and Repentance), and the Resurrection of Christ. To close up this
Example, let us prepare this Ark, and enter into it be^mes, lest we perish with
the wicked World.

. 11. The former patterns of Faith, were such as lived before the Flood; the
following are such as lived after the Flood; and first, they who lived before
the Law. These are Abraham, Isanc, Jacob, Joseph and Moses: The first is
Abraham, whose Faith was so eminent, that he was called the Father of
Believers; and therefore the Apostle enlarges his Discourse concerning his
Faith, and instanceth in four rare and excellent Works and Effects of the same.
As,

1. His obedience to the heavenly Call. 2. His seeking, as a Pilgrim on Earth,
an heavenly Country. 3. His receiving of Isaac. 4. His offering of Isaac.


The first we thus read,

Ver. 8. By Faith Abram, when he was called to go out to a place, which he
should after receive, for an Inheritance, obeyed; and he went out, not knowing
whether he went.] IN the Text, we may observe;

1. God's Call. 2. His obedience to this Call.


In his Call or Vocation, we have;

1. A Precept. 2. A Promise.


In his Obedience likewise two things are to be noted:

1. His Faith as the principle of his Obedience. 2. The parts of his Obedience:
which are two,


1. His departure out of his own Country. 2. His going toward Canaan.


To begin with his Vocation, which is briefly expressed in this place, but more
largely, Genesis 12. For the Apostle does contract the words of Moses into one
Proposition, concerning his Calling, and into another concerning his Obedience.
So that the Text may be reduced to these two Divine Axioms;

1. Abraham was called to go out into a place, which he should after receive
for an Inheritance. 2. Abraham being called by Faith obeyed, and went out, not
knowing whither he went.


In the first of these we have a Command expressed, and a Promise employed. The
party calling him was God, therefore it is said to be an heavenly Calling: The
party called was Abraham, who thought of no such thing. The condition of this
Worthy, wherein God found him, was a condition of Sin and Misery; for he lived
in an Idolatrous place, and, very likely it is, he was an Idolater himself.
This seems to be employed by those words, Your Fathers dwelt on the other side
of the Flood, in old time, even Terah the Father of Abraham, and the Father of
Nachor; and they served other Gods, Josh. 24. 2. Upon which Masuis observes,
that these words were added to signify God's free mercy toward them, in that
he not only adopted them freely, when they neither deserved nor desired any
such thing, but when they were Enemies. This Vocation therefore must need, at
in act of free mecy, whereby he chooses and singles man out of the World, and
draws him near unto himself, for his eternal Happiness. It Is a gracious
translating of Man out of Darkness into his mavelous Light, and out of the
Kingdom of Satan into the Kingdom of Jesus Christ. And if we would seriously
consider our Unworthiness, and the glorious I state we are called unto, we
might easily understand, that as the giving of his only begotten Son, so this
Vocation, is a Work of stupendous Mercy. The means which God did use in
calling Abraham, and so in calling us, is 1. A Precept. 2. A Promise. The
Precept informs Man of his Duty, and binds him to Obedience; the Promise
informs of God's Will and the great Reward, and so encourages us; and as Man
by the Precept is bound to obey, so by the Promise God is bound to Reward. The
Precept to Abraham was, Get thee out of thy Country, and from thy Kindred, and
from thy Father's House, unto a Land that I will show thee, Genesis 12. 1. This
signifies, that God requires of Man that he should forsake the World, and all
things therein, even Life it self, though never so near and dear unto us; and
because our Sins are most inconsistent with his Commands, we must forsake them.
Therefore Abraham was commanded to renounce Idols and false Gods; we must also
in forsaking these resign up our selves wholly to the Will of our heavenly
Father, and resolve to obey him alone, and follow his directions; we must leave
the World and love our God, and fix our thoughts and affections on Heaven: This
is the Precept, He must go out into a place. The Promise is here employed, that
he should have a full Compensation, and instead of the Country he left he
should have another, and the same more excellent, for an Inheritance. This
Promise is far more largely expressed, Genesis 12. 2, 3. for there the Promise
consists of several Branches, and the last and principal was this, that in him
all the Families of the Earth should be blessed: For, this was a Promise of
Christ and of eternal Life in him; for so afterward it is explained of his Seed,
that is Christ, in whom the Believers of all Nations are made for ever happy.
Yet you must know, that neither Abraham, nor any other Person, can so
understand, believe, and obey this Command, and rely upon this Promise, as to
come to God, except he enlighten and inspire Man by his Spirit, and make him
able to perform this Duty.

Thus Abraham was called: His Obedience follows; for by Faith he obeyed, and
went out, not knowing whither he went.

1. He obeyed. 2. He went out, not knowing whither he went. 3. He obeyed, and
did thus, by Faith.


1. Obedience presupposes a Superior, who has power to command one subject
to that commanding Power, a Command given and made known unto the party
subject, an Acknowledgment of the Power, and the receiving of the Command; and
it is a willing and free Observation of the Command. The Superior here is God,
who is the supreme Lord: Abraham is the Subject; to come out of his Country, is
the Law and Command; Abraham's coming out of his Country, and that willingly,
as bound by God's Command, is his Obedience. And here it is to be observed, that
except Man first submit unfeignedly unto God as his Supreme Lord, renouncing
his own Will, he can never sincerely obey. For this voluntary total Submission
is the ground of all Obedience, and may be said to be the Observation of the
fundamental Law of Allegiance, which is required in the first Commandment upon
which all the rest do depend. Obedience in general is no particular Duty to be
restrained to any particular Command, exclusively; for it extends to all.

2. He went out, not knowing whither he went. In that he knew not whither he
went, it does inform us of the total absolute Resignation of his Will and heart
to God. This high degree of Resignation and Submission is due only unto God, as
absolutely wise, and just, and infinitely merciful. There be two parts of this
Obedience,

1. He went out. 2. He knew not whither he went.


1. He went out: This was a difficult part of Obedience. To forsake his
Country, Kindred, Friends, Inheritance, which his heart did so much affect and
dearly love, and to renounce that Religion which he had learned and observed,
seems to be above natural Power. To part the heart and that which it most
loves, is a Work that cannot be performed without some mighty conflict and
torment of the Soul; to overcome our strongest Affections, and so forsake our
darling-sins, is an Heroic and Divine Victory: Yet this was done by him, and
must be done by us all, if we will be saved. To deny our selves, take up the
Cross, forsake Father, Mother, Wife, Children, Brother, Sister, and Life it
self, was first of all required by Christ, as without which no Man could be his
Disciple. The Promise of eternal Life and Treasure in Heaven, could not part
the young man and his great estate, and therefore he continued incapable of
eternal Bliss.

2. As he came out, so he went he knew not whither; for the Command was, that
he should go unto a Land which God should show him, a Land he never knew; for
he neither knew it, not the way unto it. This made the business more difficult;
for he must depend wholly upon God for his Protection, Assistance, and
Direction. And when we leave our Sin we must come unto our God, and when we
forsake the World we must come unto our Savior; and though the way may be very
rough and troublesome, we must pass through it. We must not take up our Rest
until we come unto our Canaan, whither out God will bring us.

3. This he did by Faith, which without Faith was impossible to be be done;
For, except he had certainly known that it was God who called him, and believed
God's Command and Promises, he could not have obeyed so as to come out and go
toward Canaan. So that this Belief was the very principle of his Obedience;
without this Faith, this Obedience had been not only irrational but impossible.
But God, who was his absolute supreme Lord, did command him, and, as almighty
and most faithful, did promise him a great and glorious Reward, which would
abundantly recompense his Damages, which he should suffer in obeying him; and
these did effectually move him and powerfully incline his heart to Obedience:
For God does know what will work most strongly upon Man's heart, and therefore
by a divine Light and Inspiration penetrateth the heart, and lets him assuredly
know that he calls him to eternal Glory; so that by this divine Vocation, Faith
is produced in the Heart of Man, and by it he most willingly and joyfully comes
unto his God, and continues to obey him. From all this it is evident, that Man's
Conversion is a supernatural Work of God's great Mercy and Power; for that
which is impossible with Man is possible with God. The natural freedom of the
Will is a poor impotent thing; let us therefore pray earnestly to our God, to
give us with his Word, his blessed Spirit.

. 12. This was the first and fundamental Effect of Faith in Abraham, the second
is that whereby he was content to be a Pilgrim and Stranger on Earth, that he
might attain an abiding City in Heaven, which God had promised and prepared for
him: For so it follows,

Ver. 9. By Faith he sojourned in the Land of Promise, as in a strange Country,
dwelling in Tabernacles with Isaac and Jacob, the Heirs with him of the same
Promise.

Ver. 10. For he looked for a City which has Foundations, whose Bu^lder and
Maker is God.

THese words inform us, that after that Abraham was once by Faith converted,
and became obedient to the heavenly Call, he presently changed his Condition,
and was a Stranger in this World and a Citizen or Denison of Heaven: Such are
all the Saints of God upon their Regeneration. In them we may observe two
things,

1. The sojourning of Abraham with Isaac and Jacob in the Land of Canaan, Ver.
9. 2. His Expectation of a better Country, Ver. 10.


In the first we have three Propositions,

1. That Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob were Heirs of the same Promise. 2. That they
sojourned as Strangers, in a strange Land, dwelling in Tabernacles. 3. They
thus sojourned by Faith.


In the first, observe

1. A Promise. 2. Heirs of this Promise. 3. The parties who were Heirs.


1. By Promise, understand the thing promised, which was the Land of Canaan.
This was the Inheritance, yet they had it not by natural Descent, nor by
Purchase, nor by Exchange, but by free Promise. For it was promised, and that
by God, who is the Proprietary of all Land and Coun^reys, and could not only
convey it, but give Possession. This Inheritance was but a Type of a far
better, and this Promise was added to another far greater and more excellent.

2. There were Heirs of this Promise or Land promised; and to be an Heir, in
this place, is, to have a Right unto that Land, and the Title and Ground of
this Right was God's Promise, which was the best and surest Instrument of
conveyance in the World: Before this Promise they could challenge no Right unto
it; after the Promise their Right was firm, good, clear, without any flaw at
all. This is the great Mercy of God, that when upon his Command we part with
any thing, he will give us something better, that will more than countervail
our damage.

3. Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob were the Heirs: For the Indenture and first
Promise was made to Abraham, sealed and confirmed, Genesis 15. and in him it was
made to them, in which respect they were Joynt-Heifs; but the same Promise was
made severally to Isaac, and then after that to Jacob. The parties, who then
possessed this Land were Canaanites; so that they were but Heirs in Reversion:
This seemed good to divine Wisdom, 1. Because the Sins of that People were not
tipe. 2. Abraham's Posterity was not yet sufficiently numerous to take
Possession of that Land, and to husband it.

Abraham, with Isaac and Jacob, though Heirs of this Land, did but sojourn in
it as in a strange Country, dwelling in Tabernacles. This is the second
Proposition, wherein we have

1. The Place or Country. 2. Their Pilgrimage in it.


1. The Place or Country was a certain Land: It was not their native Soil, but
it was to them a strange Country: it was the Land of Promise; that is, that
Land which God had promised them, and whereof by virtue of this Promise they
were Heirs; and it was an excellent Land, far too good for that wicked People
which did inhabit and possess it. It Is said to be a pleasant Land, a Land
flowing with Milk and Honey.

2. Their Pilgrimage in this Land is signified, 1. In this, that the place was
to them a strange Country, in opposition to their native Soil, which was ur of
the Chaldees beyond the River Euphrates, out of which God had called Abraham.
2. In that they had no fixed habitation in that strange place, but dwelt in
Tabernacles or Yents, which were removable. 3. In that they did but sojourn in
this Land, though they were Heirs of it. So that they were not Cives, either
natural or naturalized and incorporated into any State; neither were they
Incolae, because they had no fixed habitation in Canaan: They were only
[Peregrini] Pilgrims, and as such they could have no Privileges as other free
Persons had. Neither did they purchase any hereditary Estates except a burying
place, not did they build any House, Town, or City: They had indeed some
Confederates, and abode in some places longer than in others. Stephen tells us,
that God gave Abraham no Inheritance in that Land, no not so much as to ser his
foot on, Act. 7. 5. This was so ordered by divine special Providence, to teach
them, that though they were in the World, yet they were not of the World; and
that they should remember, that as they were born from Heaven, so their native
and hereditary Country was Heaven: For, when we once return unto our God, we
renounce the World, and account our selves but Strangers in it. But of this more
hereafter.

The next thing is their Faith; for by Faith they thus sojourned, and were
content to be Pilgrims in a strange Land. In this Peregrination of theirs we
have an Act of their Faith, whereby they understood, and did affuredly believe,
that they had no abiding City on Earth, and that they were of no Association in
this World: For they believed the Word of God, which informed them, that as
there was no rest, so there was no content, in this World. It was but a strange
place, where they must stay a little while, pass through it to a better Country;
and that all Inhabitants thereof, not born from Heaven, were Strangers to them,
with whom they must have no spiritual Society. This by Faith they did believe,
and out of this Belief did wean their hearts from this World, as from a place
of vanity, misery, and discomfort. There was another Act of Faith, whereby they
did rely upon God's Promise; and the Effect of this was, a patient waiting for
the Possession of the inheritance.

. 13. The second thing in the Text is, their expectation of a better Country.
The words inform us,

1. Of a City. 2. Of their expectation of it by Faith.


1. The City is described from the stability and the Builder thereof. A City is
sometimes taken for a place of habitation, consisting in the vicinity of many
Houses: For multitude and vicinity of Buildings do commonly make a City in this
sense. Sometimes it is taken for a Political Society and Community, which, if it
be reduced under one Supreme governing Power, is called a Commonwealth.
Sometimes it is taken for the condition and estate of these Societies. In this
place, the word City must be taken spiritually, for such a kind of Habitation,
Society, and Estate, (for all these may be here meant,) as is not found in this
World; for it signifies the Habitation of Heaven, the Society of Saints and
Angels, and the perfect peace and eternal happiness of this Society in that
place. Therefore is it said, 1. To have Foundations, which is the stability
thereof, and to signify the Excellency thereof. 2. It Is said, that God is the
Builder and Maker of it. 1. It has Foundations; for nothing can be firm which
is not firmly fixed upon an immovable Ground: To signify the firmness and
eternal stability of this City, it is said to have Foundations, that is, a most
firm and immovable Foundation. This does difference it from Tabernacles and
Tents, and also from all other Buildings, Habitations, Societies, States,
Kingdoms, and their Prosperity: For they are infirm, movable, obnoxious to
change, decay, and ruin. Experience does sufficiently prove this by the ruin
of so many Castles, Palaces, Cities, Societies, States, and Kingdoms, which
have flourished in great Splendour, Power, and Strength, yet now lie in the Dust
and do not appear. This City is no such thing; but the place of abode, the
persons, and their felicity, endure for ever. 2. The Builder and Maker is God:
All other Cities, Societies, and their Condition is from men, but in this Man
has no hand at all; for God is and Artifex, and Opifex, he contrived it, he
made it according to the Model contrived by himself. These words are added, to
inform us, 1. That it was so far above the Art and Power of Man, that only God
could make it; He was not only the principal but the sole Efficient of it. 2.
That it was most excellent, and far above all other Cities of the World for
firmness, duration, beauty, and felicity; for the peace, pleasures, and
felicity of it are full and everlasting.

2. The next thing is, Abraham's expectation of this City by Faith. This
looking for, or expectation, includes many things; as, 1. He had a Title to it
by virtue of Gods Promise and his Qualification; and this was not a mere Title,
but something more: For, the^e was a time limited in the grant of the full
enjoyment, and he had received the first fruits of Glory. 2. He desired and
longed after the enjoyment of this City far more than for any thing in this
World. 3. These desires were very effectual and working upon his Soul, and
stirred him to seek this City, and constantly to use all means appointed by God
for to attain it; and the whole course of his life was a continued Motion and
an Approach toward this eternal Rest and glorious Estate. 4. The actual
Possession of this blessed Estate was deferred; yet he with Patience did wait
for it, and made no doubt but to (...) that which he so much desired. And here
it is to be observed, 1. That no man can (...) right Sojourner on Earth, who
does not look for a City eternally stable in Heaven: For, that which most
effectually draws the heart of Man off from this World, is, the expectation of
a far better Estate in the World to come. 2. That Believers and Expectants of
Heaven, who are Candidates of Eternity, are of a most noble and divine Spirit.
Amongst men of this World, the Ambitious, who aspire to Crowns and Kingdoms,
and aim at perpetual fame by their heroic Virtues and rare Exploits, are
judged persons of far greater Gallantry than covetous Muck-worms, or brutish
Epicures; yet in their thoughts and highest designs they are very base in
Comparison of these Pilgrims, in whose breast the Sparks of heavenly fire do
ever burn and move, and carry them upward, far above the World. 3. That neither
Abraham, nor any other, without Faith could look for this glorious City: For,
by it they did not only understand how glorious it was, but also were verily
persuaded of God's Promise and fidelity; and without this Faith they could not
possibly hope or look for it: And as by Faith they did sojoum, so by the same
Faith they did look for this City.

. 14. The third Work of Abraham's Faith was, the obtaining of Isaac: For,

Ver. 11. Through Faith Sarah her self received strength to conceive Seed, and
was delivered of a Child, when she was past Age, because she judged him
faithful that had promised. THis is attributed to Sarah's Faith, yet it was a
Blessing obtained also, and that principally, by the Faith of Abraham, of whom
it is thus written, That against hope he believed in hope, that he might become
the Father of many Nations, according to that which was promised, So shall thy
Seed be. And being not weak in Faith, he considered not his own Body now dead,
when he was an hundred years old, nor yet the deadness of Sarah's Womb. He
staggered not at the Promise of God through Unbelief, but was strong in Faith,
giving Glory to God, Romans 4. 18, 19, 20. So that, in this particular, we must
consider the Faith of both, and though Sarah only be expressed, yet Abraham, as
the chief Believer, is to be understood. Upon this Faith it follows, that not
only Isaac, Sarah's immediate Issue by Abraham, but a numerous Posterity was
given upon this Faith: For,

Ver. 12. Therefore sprang there even of one, and him as good as dead, so many
as the Start of the Sky in multitude, and as the Sands of the Seashore
innumerable. IN these Verses taken jointly we may consider,

1. A Promise made by God. 2. The receiving of this Promise by Faith. 3. God's
sidelity in performing this Promise to the parties believing.


1. The Promise is only employed in these words [who promised]; where you must
know that the party promising was God, and the thing promised was, that Abraham
should have a Son by Sarah, and by that Son his Posterity in after times should
be multiplied as the Stars of Heaven, and the Sand upon the Seashore. This
Promise was made to both though not expressed, at several times: 1. Genesis 15. 4,
5. 2. It was renewed to both of them, and that more expressly Genesis 17. 15, 16,
etc. In both these places mention is made not only of one Son, but a of very
numerous Posterity. 3. This Promise was repeated the third and last time, Genesis
18. 10. The parties to whom this Promise was made, were Abraham and Sarah: The
Mercy promised was considerable, not only in this, that they should have a Son
of their own Bodies, to continue their Name and inherit their temporal Estate,
but chiefly because of his Seed Christ should be brought into the World, and
his Posterity should enjoy the means of Salvation, and be included in the
special Covenant of Grace.

2. This Promise was received by Faith: for Sarah counted him faithful that had
promised. She seemed indeed to doubt, till she was reproved, and heard that
nothing was impossible with God, and the Promise was again repeated unto her,
Genesis 18. 14. So Abraham, upon the first Promise of Isaac and a numerous
Posterity, is said to have believed in the Lord, Genesis 15. 6. And the Apostle,
to signify the firmness of his Faith, informs us, as you heard before, 1. That
against hope he believed in (...). 2. He was not weak in Faith. 3. He staggered
not at the Promise. 4. He was strong in Faith. 5. He was fully persuaded, Romans
4. 18, 19, 20, 21. This Faith was grounded upon divine Revelation, and was a
firm and practical Assent unto the Word and Promise of God, which did settle
his mind: For he looked not upon secondary Causes, nor upon the Barrenness of
Sarah, nor their Age, nor the deadness of their Bodies, and Impotency of
Generation by reason of Age; But he considered that it was God who had
promised, that he was Almighty, that he was faithful. This Faith was required
in both, as necessary for to attain this great Blessing, not that it had any
Physical force to enable them for Generation, but that it was a Moral
Qualification required in them. This their Faith is made known unto us for
imitation, that as they did so we should do, rest upon God's Promise in
greatest extremities, perplexities, and seeming impossibilities: We must look
higher and above all created Power, and not measure God's Almighty strength,
according to and within the bounds of created activity.

3. This Promise was fulfilled according to this Faith: For Sarah received
strength to conceive, and in her Old Age, above the Course of Nature became the
Mother of Isaac, which was part of the Promise. And from this one so good as
dead sprang a posterity numerous, and in some sort innumerable, amongst whom
Christ was born, in whom all Nation; were blessed, by whom Abraham became the
Father of a far more numerous spiritual Posterity, which were Believers of all
Nations. So excellent a thing is Faith, and upon Faith so wonderful the Works
of the glorious and almighty God, who begins with small things though unlikely
at the first, and multiplies a few to a vast number, and magnifies small things
to a stupendous greatness.

. 15. After this third Effect the Apostle returns unto the second, concerning
the Pilgrimage of Abraham, Sarah, Isaac, Jacob, and their expectation of that
better and more glorious City, which God had promised to them and their Heirs
upon the condition of their Faith: For thus we read in the words following,

Ver. 13. These all dyed in Faith, not having received the Promises, but having
seen them afar off, and were persuaded of them, and embraced them, and
confessed that they were Strangers and Pilgrims on Earth.

Ver. 14. For they that say such things, declare plainly that they seek a
Country.

THese words, with the two Verses following, are an Amplification of that which
was briefly delivered in the 9, and 10. Verses. They are sitly brought in upon
the former, as presupposing the Birth not only of Isaac, but Jacob; and the
Apostle does not only enlarge, but also polish his Discourse, and excellently
set forth their Faith and the forenamed Effects thereof. The whole is an
excellent Testimony of the three eminent Patriarchs: and therein we have

1. The Duty they performed. 2. God's owning them, and expressing his dear
Affection toward them.


The first of these is continued from the beginning of Ver. 13. to the latter
end of the 16th, in the last words whereof we have the second thing here
observed. Their Duty and the Performance thereof may be reduced to certain
Propositions.

1. These all, not receiving the Promises, dyed in the Faith.

Of which, two parts,

1. Their not receiving the Promises. 2. Their dying in the Faith, though they
received them not.


1. They received not the Promises. Where by Promises, understand the things
promised: For otherwise it cannot be true: because it is certain, that Promises
were made unto them; they knew them, and received them by Faith. But the things
promised were neither given, nor received, till long after; and these are
reduced to four heads, which be these,

1. A numerous Posterity. 2. The Land of Canaan. 3. The Incarnation and
Exhibition of Christ. 4. The Resurrection to eternal Glory.


The parties here meant are Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, not any named before,
nor any mentioned after these Three; for they were the Persons who came from
beyond the River Euphrates, who sojourned in the Land of Canaan, who dwelt in
Tabernacles. Of these it is said, that they received not the things promised:
For neither was their Posterity made as yet so numerous; nor had they any
hereditary Possession of the Land of Canaan; nor did they see Christ in the
Flesh, or hear the Gospel (for that followed about 2000 years after the
Promises were first made); nor did they attain the Resurrection and Immortality.

2. Yet they dyed, even all of them, in the Faith: Which words signify, 1. They
did believe. 2. Continued firm in the Faith unto the end, though they received
not the Promises. The meaning is, they not only lived but dyed Believers; delay
and nonenjoyment did not break their hearts: neither could Death it self, when
they might perhaps be put to the greatest Conflict, separate their Souls and
their Faith, though it separated their Souls and their Bodies: For this divine
virtue was deeply rooted and fastened in them, and was immortal as their better
part was, and followed the Soul into another World. Death might bereave them of
their Friends and their temporal Estates, and all their earthly Comforts, but
of Faith it could not: And it is to be noted, that not only one but all of them
dyed in the Faith. These were rare Patterns of Perseverance in this rare and
incomparable virtue of Faith.

The second Proposition is,

That seeing them afar off, they were persuaded of them, and embraced them.
This should not have been a distinct Proposition, for it is part of the former,
and added to those words, not receiving the Promises. And it is somewhat
observable, that the word persuaded is wanting in several Manuscripts. They
received them not, but 1. Saw them afar off: For they were distant, and to
come, and not to be accomplished or enjoyed in their days; and some of them
were more distant from their times than others, some were nearer. The
principal, which were the Exhibition of Christ, and the universal Resurrection,
stood at the most remote distance of time from them. Yet these they saw; for
divine Revelation, as a celestial Light, did represent them unto them; the
Promise did signify they had a Right unto them, and part in them. And as by
this divine Light they were manifested unto them, so by the Eye of Faith, which
is the spiritual visive Faculty of the Soul, they saw them, as they were
represented, that is, at a distance: For Faith can see beyond and above the
World, and has some glimmering or imperfect sight of Eternity. 2. They were
persuaded of them, and assured, that in God's good time, which was the sit,
they should be fulfilled. The Revelation and Promise was a sure Ground of this
Persuasion, and the Substance of things hoped for, and the Evidence of things
not seen. 3. They embraced them; the word signifies to salute, to draw near, to
rejoice, to embrace; for in saluting dearest friends, we draw near unto them,
embrace them, rejoice to seethem. Some think the word here is Metaphorical, and
the Expression taken from such as after a long and tedious Voyage at Sea come
within ken of Land, and discover their own dearest Country, where they expect
to abide and rest: For so soon as they discover and have sight of their own
dear native Soil, they wonderfully rejoice, and begin with joyful Acclamations,
to say, Land, Land, Land! Haven, Haven, Haven! now Rest and Safety are near. So
it is certain that these Saints and heavenly Worthies drawing near their end,
beheld these excellent Blessings, and especially their Savior and their
heavenly Country, and being sure of the futurition and enjoyment of them
rejoiced with exceeding great Joy. Our Savior says thus, Abraham rejoiced to
see my day, and he saw it, and was glad, Joh. 8. 56. When Abraham lived, the
day of Christ's Incarnation, and the blessed Redemption of sinful Man, was to
come, and afar off: Yet Abraham by Faith saw that day; and seeing it, though
not near, or so clearly, he was glad, and rejoiced wonderfully. And now our
Faith and Hope of eternal Glory though afar off, is a Cause of unspeakable Joy.

The third Proposition.

They confessing themselves Strangers and Pilgrims on Earth, declared plainly
that they sought a Country. Here we may consider,

1. What they did express. 2. What they did imply.


1. The thing expressed is, That they were Pilgrims and Strangers on Earth: For,

1. They were Pilgrims and Strangers on Earth. 2. They did openly confess this.


1. They were Pilgrims and Strangers on Earth. That they did so journ in the
Land of promise, as in a strange Country, you heard before; yet they sojourned
not only there, but in other places, as in Gerar and Egypt; and for the whole
time of their mortal Life, they were Pilgrims and Strangers on Earth, and could
not be said to be Freemen, Denizons, or Members of any Community or
Commonwealth in the World. But they might be such, either Politically or
Spiritually, and they were in both respects such; for Man being immortal should
provide for some place of perpetual Abode; and many thinking only of their
Settlement on Earth, and of perpetuating themselves and their Names in their
Posterity by successive Generations, look no higher than this World. If these
travel out of their native Country, they must needs be Strangers in all
Foreign States, if not naturalized in some of them. As for these Patriarchs,
they had forsaken their own Country, out of which God had called them, and lost
all their native and birthright Privileges; yet they did not seek to settle
themselves in any other part of the Earth, neither did they incorporate with any
other People in the World; in this respect they were Pilgrims and Strangers
politically. Besides, by the Light of Faith, they knew this Earth to be no
place of perpetual abode; but only made and appointed by God as an habitation
for a little time, through which we must only pass, and out of which, after a
little stay, remove into a more certain continuing mansion: From all this we
understand, that on Earth they were Pilgrims and Strangers every way. For many
are either natural or naturalized Subjects of some earthly Commonwealth, and
yet knowing by Faith that this is not their resting place, and continually
expecting a removal, are spiritually considered as Strangers and Pilgrims, and
are such indeed. That these Worthies were such on Earth is evident, and as they
were such, so they openly and plainly professed it, and that by their words:
For Jacob calls the days of his Life, the days of the years of his
Pilgrimage, Genesis 47. 9. So David confesses before God in this manner, We are
Strangers before thee, and Sojourners, as were all our Fathers; and he gives
the Reason to be this, Our days on Earth are as a Shadow, and there is none
abiding, 1 Chronicles. 29. 15. They did profess this not only by their Words, but
their Works, and the whole Course of their lives. For they were men above the
World, who clearly apprehending the Vanity, Uncertainty, and Misery thereof,
did judge it far below them, as base and unworthy the seeking. They knew the End
of their Creation and Regeneration was far more noble: And this should be the
mind of all the Saints of God. Therefore Peter exhorts the Christians to whom
he wrote, as Pilgrims and Strangers to abstain from fleshly Lusts, 1 Pet. 2.
11. For, We must not love the World; nor the things that are in the World, 1 John 2. 15. This is the thing they did express.

2. The thing which by this Confession they did plainly imply, is, That they
sought a Country. There is no man in the World, but if he follow the Light of
Reason, much more if he be guided by the Light of Grace, but will seek a place
and an estate of Rest, wherein he may finally quiet his mind. The Land of
Canaan was called God's Rest, because therein he gave Rest unto Israel. But
this was but a temporal and earthly Rest, as the place of any Man's settled
Inheritance may be: It was a Type of an eternal Rest, as their Sabbath was the
Type of an eternal Sabbath; Such a Country, such a Rest, these Saints did seek.
No man seeks that which he has and enjoys; therefore this word sought
implies, that they were not possessed of this Country; they were as yet only
Seekers. Yet Seekers they were, and aimed at some better thing which they did
most of all desire: And they were resolved to seek till they should find, and
never rest till they attained their final Rest. Such Seekers we should all be,
and continue to be such until we reach our heavenly Mansion. He that takes up
his Rest in the World, or any earthly thing, and seeks no further, is of a base
Spirit, and unworthy of an Immortal Soul.

. 16. If they sought a Country, it must be earthly or heavenly; Earthly it was
not, therefore heavenly it must be: This we learn from

Ver. 15. And truly, if they had been mindful of that Country from whence they
came out, they might have had opportunity to have returned.

Ver. 16. But now they desire a better Country, that is, an heavenly: Wherefore
God is not ashamed to be called their God; for He has prepared for them a City.

IN these words we find two more Propositions concerning the Duty,

1. They sought not an Earthly 2. They desired a Heavenly Country.

The first we may easily understand to be the Substance of Ver. 15. The second
is the express words of the 16.

1. That they sought not an earthly Country, is employed two ways: 1. In that
they sought not that out of which they came. 2. By Opposition, for they sought
an heavenly. If they had sought any earthly Country in the World, surely they
would have sought their own native Soil: And this is very likely. For what
place does take or affect us more than that of our Birth, Inheritance, Kindred?
This Affection is naturally ingrafted in the heart of Man. Yet if it be said,
Perhaps they had no opportunity to return; He answers, They had, and yet never
did return; for they were not so mindful of it, nor so affected with it. This
informs us, that as they voluntarily left their own Country at the first; so
they continued their Absence, and so their Pilgrimage, voluntarily, and they
were constantly obedient to the heavenly Call: From hence we learn, that our
Obedience must be willing, or else it is no Obedience. They were, and we must
be, content to be Pilgrims for a while in this World. To return was God's
Prohibition, implied in God's Command to come out of it; and both the leaving
of it, and the continuance in a strange Country, out of a willing heart; as it
was acceptable to God, so it was part of their Self-denial. We must follow
their Example: God calls us out of the World, as he did Israel out of Egypt,
and Judah out of Babylon; we must not only come out, and that willingly, but we
must willingly resolve never to return again. We must not with Lot's Wife look
back at Sodom, after that God has delivered us out of it, lest God be offended
with us and severely punish us; for if we return again to the World, our latter
end will be worse than the beginning.

2. They desired an heavenly Country. Here you must observe, 1. That this
Country is the same which in Ver. 10. was called a City; and here it is said to
be heavenly, which before was said to have Foundations; and that which here is
affirmed to be prepared by God, is there affirmed to be built and made by God.
So that a City that has Foundations, which is made and built by God, and an
heavenly Country prepared by God, are the same. 2. Strangers, Pilgrims, and
Sojourners, are taken for the same, though by Writers of Politics they may be
distinguished. 3. That which before they looked for, here they are said to seek
and desire; for they desired, hoped for, and sought a stable, firm, heavenly
City and Country, built, made, prepared by God: To do thus was their Obedience
and Performance of that Duty which God required at their hands. This Country or
City is said to be Heavenly, not only to distinguish it from all earthly
Countries, Cities, Societies, Commonwealths, but also to signify the Original
of it, as being from Heaven, and also the Excellency of it; for, as high as
Heaven is above the Earth, so excellent is this Country and City above the most
pleasant Countries and most glorious Cities in the World. By this also we
understand, that it is spiritual and invisible, safe, and of eternal
continuance: Besides, Heaven is the place of our eternal Mansions and Rest,
where our glorious Inheritance is to be fully and for ever enjoyed. And Heaven
is sit for those who were born from Heaven: Therefore our Hope is said to be
laid up in Heaven, our Inheritance to be reserved in Heaven, and our many
Mansions to be prepared in Heaven. This heavenly Country they desire, out of
their Belief of the Excellency thereof, and desired so much as they counted all
earthly Countries base and contemptible in Comparison of the same; and
whosoever does not desire it in this manner and measure, as they did, shall
never enter into that glorious place of eternal Bliss. Some think the
Patriarchs, and the Saints after them, under the Law, neither had any better
Promise, not higher thoughts, than of temporal Felicity; but the contrary is
evident from this place. According to the Covenant made at Sinai with Israel,
as a Civil Society, and a Church under Ceremonies, they could expect no more;
but according to the Promise of Christ in whom all Nations should be blessed,
they looked higher; and as they did believe in Christ, so in him they looked
for the Resurrection unto everlasting Glory.

Thus far we have heard of the Duty which they performed; now follows the
Reward or Consequent of this Performance, and the manner how God was affected
toward them: And this Affection appears in two things,

1. He was not ashamed to be called their God. 2. He prepared for them a City.


In the first we may note,

1. That God was their God. 2. That he was not ashamed to be called their God.


1. God was their God. God may be said to be a God, 1. To all men, as he is
their Creator, Preserver, and Governor. 2. To be such by Covenant, so far as he
promises to protect them and bless them, upon condition that they take him to
be their God. 3. To be such in a special, peculiar, and eminent manner, as he
has bound himself to be the Author of eternal Salvation by Christ, to all such
as sincerely repent, believe, and upon their Belief seek an heavenly Country.
Thus to be a God to any, is to justify, sanctify, adopt, raise up at the last
day, and make them for ever happy. He was called their God, that is, He was
their God; for in the Hebrew sometimes to be called, is to be; yet that is not
all, for to call himself their God, was not only to be their God, but to
signify that he was so; and that not only by Words, but really by Actions. It
was God himself who first promised to be their God, and when they were dead,
said unto Moses I am the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of
Jacob: And again, The Lord God of your Fathers, the God of Abraham, the God of
Isaac, the God of Jacob, -- this is my Name for ever, this is my Memorial to
all Generations, Exodus 3. 6, 15. So that the Apostle might truly say, that He
was not ashamed to be called their God, neither did he think it any Derogation
from his eternal Excellency, to own them. To own base and unworthy Persons is a
Disgrace to any man of Reputation; and to own impenitent Sinners would be a
Dishonor to God: Therefore to Workers of Iniquity Christ will say at the last
Day, Depart from me, I know you not. Therefore we must take special notice of
the Persons whom God did own, and of their Qualification. They were Persons of
a sincere Faith, and an heavenly Conversation; and such we must be, or else
there will be no Hope that God will own us. God will not be ashamed of any man
because he is poor, mean, miserable, blind, deformed, or of no account in the
World; but he will be ashamed of any Person, though never so great, that is not
ashamed of Sin. If we seek not an heavenly Country, and manifest our selves to
be Pilgrims and Strangers in this World, though we be never so rich, wise,
potent, famous, he will not own us, because his Justice and Holiness will not
suffer him to own our Sins. Let us therefore seriously consider, what a Comfort
it is to have God to be our God, and what an Honor it will be for Christ to
confess and acknowledge us before his Father and all his Holy Angels. All this
you may learn from the Illative Particle Wherefore. For, because they desired a
better, that is, an heavenly Country, and that by Faith, therefore God was not
ashamed to be their God. Not that their Faith and Desire of an heavenly Country
was any meritorious Cause of this Honor, Privilege, and near Relation to God;
but that they qualified the Persons so, that without any violation of his
Justice, or any diminution of his Majesty, he might according to his gracious
Promise thus acknowledge them.

2. For he had prepared for them a City. These words may seem to give a Reason,
why they sought a heavenly Country: And why? Because God had prepared it for
them: Or, they may prove that God was their God in that eminent manner, from
this Preparation of a City for them: Or, they may manifest, That God was not
ashamed to be called their God, and he did manifest this in that he had
prepared a City for them. Here we have

1. A City. 2. The Preparation of it. 3. The Preparation of it for them.


1. This City is that which has Foundations, that better and heavenly Country
spoken of before, and it signifies not only a Place but an Estate. The Place is
excellent, and the Estate glorious, and both everlasting.

2. God prepared; For he loved them so much as he decreed to give Christ for
them, that by his precious Blood he might purchase and acquire a Title unto it.
He promised to send him into the World for that end, and sent him. He makes a
Covenant with them; and binds himself upon condition of Faith in his only
begotten, to give them this City. He works Faith in their hearts, gives them a
Title, and by sanctifying them prepares them for the possession and enjoyment.
As for the estate, it was ready in his Power from everlasting; and as for the
place, it was finished and furnished from the Creation. It was God, who
inwardly moved by his own goodness and most free Love, has done all this; for
God has prepared, and made it ready, before they be ready for the Possesssion.

3. He prepared this City for them, not as deserving it, but as through the
Power of his Grace, desiring, seeking, looking for it; for it was never
prepared for Unbelievers, and such as loving the World do not prize it, or long
for it. For though this Preparation be a Work of his free and abundant Mercy,
yet it is tempered and limited by his Justice, which will not suffer him to give
such holy things to Dogs, nor cast such Pearls before Swine; and by this
Preparation of this City for them, and not for others not rightly qualified, he
signifies his Love to heavenly virtues, and his dear Affection to them who are
enriched with them. So that sinful Men may hope for this City; yet upon
condition, that they will be Pilgrims and Strangers in this World, and desire
above all other things this better and heavenly Country.

For to clear this Doctrine more fully, we must observe, That the World morally
and spiritually considered, is divided into two Societies; the one is of the
Devil, the other of God. This distinction the learned Father took notice of,
when he wrote his excellent Treatise De Civitate Dei: For all men either seek
their Rest and Happiness on Earth, or an eternal Peace in Heaven; and by
Nature, till God transplant us, we are not only in, but of, this earthly
Society, and in the Kingdom of Darkness, and under the Power and Dominion of
Satan; and whilst we are in this Kingdom of Satan, we are Strangers to the
Commonwealth and City of God. But when God out of his unspeakable Mercy has
called us, made us meet to be partakers of the Inheritance of the Saints in
Light; and delivered us from the Power of Darkness, and has translated us into
the Kingdom of his dear Son, Colos. 1. 12. 13. Then we are no more Strangers
and Foreigners, but Fellow-Citizens with the Saints, and of the Household of
God, Ephesians. 2. 19. Being once naturalized and made Burgesses of Heaven, we have
our Conversation in Heaven, and carry our selves as Children of a Celestial
extraction, and the Progeny of the eternal King. This Doctrine does not only
inform us of our Duty, but ministers unspeakable Comfort if we do perform it:
For if our Goods and earthly Estates be sequestered, plundered, o^ any ways
taken from us, we have a better Estate in Heaven. If we be disgraced and
reproached in this World, yet we shall be Kings and Priests, and for ever
honored in Heaven. If we be banished and persecuted from place to place, so
that we can find no Rest and Safety, but are wearied out with Removals; yet we
have a place of Rest and Safety and eternal Abode in Heaven, and of this no man
can dispossess and diffeisin us. If our Sufferings be grievous, many, and
continue long; yet we have a City where is no Suffering, Pain, Persecution,
Poverty, Sorrow, where God will wipe away all Tears. In this City are eternal
Riches, Pleasures, Honors, Peace, Safety, and full Joy: there is nothing
wanting which the heart of Man can desire. This is that City, which, as it is
the expectation, so it is the universal Comfort of the Sons of God: And though
the time of our Pilgrimage seem long and tedious, yet it will shortly expire,
and then begins our everlasting Rest; for God has prepared a City for us.

. 17. The Apostle proceeds in proposing Abraham unto us as a Pattern of
Imitation, and instanceth in a fourth Work or Effect of his Faith; for thus we
read,

Ver. 17. By Faith Abraham, when he was tried, offered up Isaac; and he that
had received the Promises offered his only begotten Son.

Ver. 18. Of whom it was said, That in Isaac shall thy Seed be called.

Ver. 19. Accounting that God was able to raise him up, even from the dead;
from whence also he received him in a Figure.

IN these words we may observe,

1. Abraham's Obedience. 2. His Faith, whereby he performed this Obedience.


In this Obedience we have

A Description of the Party obeying. Act of Obedience.

1. The Party obedient, who was Abraham, is described in reference to this Act
of Obedience,

1. As tempted. 2. As having received the Promises. 3. As one to whom it was
said, That in Isaac shall thy Seed be called.


1. He was tempted or tried. The party tempting or trying him was God: not that
God tempts any Man to Sin, but that he would try and manifest unto Abraham
himself his Faith and Love to God, that so he might be a rare Example in both
to all future Generations, who should be informed of it. The means whereby he
tried him was, by giving him this singular and extraordinary Command of
sacrificing his Son Isaac. This Command we read of in the Books of Moses, and
this it is, Take now thy Son, thine only Son Isaac, whom thou love, and go
thou to the Land of Moriah, and offer him there upon one of the Mountains which
I will tell thee of Genesis 22. 2. The End of this Command was, to try whether
Abraham loved God or his Son Isaac more. The Effect of it was an Obligation of
Abra^^ to perform this Service, and to offer his Son: Neither in this was God's
preceptive Will contrary to his decretive Will; for the decretive Will binds
God absolutely to do that which he has decreed, and is indispensable; but the
preceptive Will bound only Abraham to do this, yet so that God reserved a Power
to dispense with him, and to hinder the Performance. And this was fulfilled
instantly upon the signifying of his Will unto Abraham, who instantly upon the
Knowledge thereof was bound, whether he did or did it not: There was no
decretive Will of God, or Intention, that Isaac should be slain and offered.
This Command was just, and no ways contrary to that other Command of God, Thou
shall not kill; for though it is true, that it is unjust and contrary to that
Law for any Man to take away the life of a party innocent, not guilty of any
Capital Crime, which is the thing there forbidden: yet it is just, and God may
justly command Man to take away the Life of such an innocent Person. And the
reason hereof is not only this, that that Law did not bind God, but only Man;
but because he is the Supreme Lord, and has absolute Power of Life and Death,
which no Creature has or can have. Again, he could restore Life taken away,
which Abraham could not do; nay, it was above all created Power: So that the
Reason whereby God in this Command is freed from all Injustice is taken a
Potestate and Potentia Dei; for his Power was absolute and supreme, and his
strength was Almighty.

2. Abraham had received the Promises, of the Land of Canaan, of a numerous
Posterity sufficient to inhabit it, of Christ in whom all Nations should be
blessed.

3. He was fully assured by God, that in Isaac, who was the Son of Promise, all
these Promises should be fulfilled: For God had excluded Ismael, and that
peremptorily; and had several times expressly signified, that in Isaac and his
Posterity, and in none else these Promises should be accomplished. Neither need
we here trouble our selves about the words (...), for it may be turned to whom,
that is, to Abraham: or of whom, that is, of Isaac it was said, etc.

This was the Description of the Party obeying: The Act of Obedience was this,
that he offered up Isaac, he offered up his only begotten Son, that Son of whom
it was said, In Isaac shall thy Seed be called. The Sacrifice commanded, as
commanded, was bloody, and required the Death and Slaughter of the Person to be
sacrificed, and he trust be offered as a burnt Offering upon the Altar. This
Offering once consummate would be the total Destruction of Isaac, as to this
mortal Life, and that before he had any Issue. Abraham is said to have offered
him, though he did not consummate and complete the Oblation: For, 1. In his
heart he had parted with him, and given him wholly unto his God, and was
resolved to slay him, and burn his Body upon the Altar. So that this Oblation
was finished in his heart. 2. He proceeded further, began really to do what he
had resolved, came to the place of Offering, had prepared the Wood, bound
Isaac, laid him upon the Altar, and had lift up his hand to give the fatal
blow, and had done all the rest of his Work, if God by the Voice of his Angel
had not instantly staid his hand. This was a difficult piece of Service, and
the more difficult the more excellent his Obedience: for it was Isaac, his only
begotten of Sarah, whom he was commanded to offer.

. 18. The next thing to be considered, is his Faith; for by Faith he offered
Isaac. This Faith was high and excellent, because having so many difficulty;
to encounter, yet conquered all, and became finally victorious; so that nothing
could stand before it. The difficulties may be reduced to two sorts,

1. Such as seemed to be contrary to Reason. 2. Such as were contrary to dear
and tender Affection.


1. Reason might doubt whether the Revelation was from God, or a delusion of
Satan; and this was the first debate. Yet upon serious consideration, he knew
assuredly that it was from God, and as from him he by Faith receives it. 2. But
suppose it were from God, and as from him he by Faith receivs it. 2. But
suppose it were from God, yet he might scruple whether it was a Command, and of
absolute Obligation. 3. Let it be so, He might question the matter of the
Command, as contrary to an express Law, against the Light of Nature, and
against all Justice and Equity; to slay an innocent Person seemed so to be. 4.
Reason would most of all plead the Promise of God, which was to be fulfilled in
Isaac, and would alledg, that if Isaac be slain, offered, burnt; then the
Performance would be impossible, and God would not prove faithful. But Abraham
in all these particulars wholly resigned up and sacrificed his reason to the
Wisdom of God, and by Faith was persuaded, that the Commandment was from God,
was just, did absolutely bind him; and rested upon God's Almighty Power, as
able to raise him again out of the Ashes, as he created the first man out of
the Dust. And he had an Experiment of this Power, which in his very Generation,
and Conception, and Birth, did, above the Power of Nature, as it were, raise
him from the dead, according to those words, From whence he received him in a
Figure; whereby is signified, that his Generation was a kind of Resurrection
from the dead, and was very like unto it: For his Body when he begot him, and
Sarah's Womb when she conceived him, were, in respect of generative Power, both
dead. So that the Knowledge and Experience of God's Almighty Power, and his full
Assurance of God's fidelity in fulfilling his Promise, did wholly silence and
refuse the debates of Reason, natural and not enlightened.

2. As his Reason, so his dear and tender Affection not only natural but moral,
was hardly and sorely put unto it. For, 1. God did not command him to offer his
Bullocks, Goats, Rams, or Lambs, but his Son; not his Son Ismael, but Isaac the
Son of his Joy, the Son of his Love, whom he loved as his own Son, as his only
Son by Sarah, as a dutiful and pious Son, as a Son given him extraordinarily
from Heaven, as the Son of Promise, and, which is more than all, a Son from
whom he expected Christ, and in whom all the Promises were to be fulfilled. To
part with a Son, with such a Son, to have him slain, to slay him himself, and
embrue his hands in the innocent Blood of so dearly beloved a Child, whom he
prized above any thing in the World, for whose life he would have given his
greatest Estate, in whose Person so many of his Comforts were treasured up; was
grievous to Flesh and Blood, and a Service and Work above the Power of Nature;
yet Faith was strong, and overcame his Affection. By this Act of Obedience we
learn, that Faith is a rare virtue, and a great gift from Heaven, that when God
requires hard and difficult things from us, as, to forsake Father, Mother, all
our dearest Relations, Life it self, and to bear the Cross, we must deny our
Reason, and our Affections, and resign our selves wholly up to God's Wisdom and
Will, and the more we love our God, the more we love our selves in God. This
Isaac, in this particular, was a lively Type of Christ, whom God gave for us:
For Christ was the only begotten, and the dearly beloved Son of God, better
than all the World; yet God, to manifest his Love unto us, sent him into the
World, and made Him a Burnt-Offering for us. And he suffered most cruel pains,
was slain indeed, and suffered a cruel and ignominious death. In this Example
which we are all bound to follow, we may observe God's great Mercy unto
Abraham, in that he put him not to this hard Trial till his Faith was highly
improved, and was taught to love nothing above his God.

. 19. The Apostle observing the Order of time descends from Abraham to Isaac,
of whom it is written thus,

Ver. 20. By Faith Isaac blessed Jacob and Esau, concerning things to come.
BEfore I enter upon the Example, I will put you in mind of some things only
hinted and darkly employed, or not mentioned formerly. As 1. Though God
commanded Isaac to be sacrificed, upon which Sacrifice and burnt-Offering once
consummate, the Performance of God's Promise seemed impossible; yet God did
fulfill in Isaac what he promised, in that manner that the Command was no ways
contrary nor prejudicial to the Performance of the Promise. 2. That though
Abraham thought that the raising of Isaac from the dead might he a way for God
to show his faithfulness, yet that was not God's way but another; for when
Abraham was ready to give the fatal and mortal blow, God stayed his hand,
prevented his death, and saved his Life: Yet this was till that very moment
concealed from Abraham, that he might fully try him and manifest his total
Resignation of himself to God. 3. That though Abraham was willing, yea resolved
and ready to sacrifice his Son, and for this was highly accepted of God, yet
this does no ways warrant or justify such as sacrificed their Children, or
were ready to offer the fruit of their Body for the Sin of their Soul. For, 1.
They had no Commandment or Warrant from God, as Abraham had. 2. They offered
their Children to Idols and Devils. 3. If they had offered them to God, their
Blood could not have expiated their Sins. The Case being so different, though
the Obedience of Abraham was so pleasing to God, yet their sacrificing was
plainly unnatural Murder, and abominable Idolatry. 4. If our Faith be sincere,
we must Sacrifice our Isaac, even what we love most unto our God. The Lord
increase our Faith, that we may do this Service readily.

In the Text two things are observable,

1. Isaac's Blessing, and Effect or Work of his Faith. 2. His Faith, whereby he
blessed his Sons.


In the Blessing we have,

1. The Parties blessed. 2. The Matter of the Blessing. 3. The Blessing it
self.


1. The Parties blessed were Jacob and Esau, these were Twins conceived and
born together: For, as their Birth, so their Conception, were simultaneous in
respect of time. They were both his Children, both Sons, and all the Children
which he had; for we read of none others born unto him. Jacob was the Younger,
because born the l^^ter, yet preferred before the Elder by God's free Election,
and also in this Blessing; for he received the Privileges of the
first-begotten, and in him, not in Esau, he made the Covenant good.

2. The Matter of the Blessing were things to come, hoped for, not seen, and
therefore fit Objects of Faith, as no ways certainly intelligible by the
natural Light of Reason. These things were Blessings, and the same both
temporal and spiritual. Esau's Blessings were only temporal, and not spiritual;
Jacob's both temporal and spiritual: From which dispensation of these Mercies
we may observe, 1. That profane Persons, as Esau, may enjoy temporal Blessings
and Prosperity, and that in a greater measure than God's Children do, and
therefore they are no Argument of God's special Love; for God causes his Rain
to fall, and his Sun to shine, as well upon the unjust as upon the just. 2.
That the godly (such as Jacob was) have the Blessings of this Life, and of that
which is to come. And because they desire heavenly more than earthly Blessings,
therefore God, though sometimes he denies them earthly Prosperity, yet will be
sure to give them heavenly Comforts.

3. The Blessing it self was an Act of Isaac, though God was the principal
Cause. Of blessing others I have spoken, Chap. 7. 6, 7. All Blessings come from
God; for he is the Fountain and first Cause of them, and disposes of them as
he pleases. He sometimes communicates them by Man to Man, as in this
particular Example, and makes Priests, Prophets, Parents, instrumental, and
gives them Power to bless in his Name, and that either in an ordinary or
extraordinary way. This Blessing was extraordinary, wherein God made his words
effectual; for what he said came to pass. The words of Benediction were
Prophetical; yet not merely a Prophecy or Prediction, but a Prediction with
Power: And though he intended to have blessed Esau with the principal Blessing,
yet Jacob obtained it. It was God's Will to order it so, yet his Will gave no
Warrant to Rebeccah or Jacob to use any unlawful means, neither did their
frailties hinder God's Mercy; so gracious he was. When the Blessing of Jacob,
intended for Esau, was once past, it proved irrevocable; though profane Esau
sought it even with tears, yet there was no place found for Repentance.

But how did Isaac thus bless his Sons? The Text informs, that he blessed them
by Faith; and this is evident, because the Benediction was concerning things to
come. This Faith required some divine Revelation and Promise, as a necessary
Ground and Foundation. God had promised before great Blessings to his Father
Abraham, and to him, yet to be fulfilled to their Posterity; by this he
understood, that they should fall upon his Children: but whether the principal
Mercies should be given to Jacob and his Posterity, or to Esau and his
Children, he knew not, that was not revealed unto him, and therefore he was so
much mistaken. Yet, besides the former Revelation and Promise, he had some more
particular Illumination concerning his Sons and their Children for time to
come, and his Faith did believe both, and relied confidently upon the Promises;
and out of this Faith he blessed them really, which without Faith he could not
have done. This shows the excellency of Faith, and may persuade all Parents to
believe, and may encourage them to continue in Faith; forby it they may derive
some Blessings to their Children if they shall prove capable: For some Children
prove to be profane as Esa^, and are not capable of spiritual Blessings.

. 20. Jacob succeeded Isaac, and being blessed by his Father, he blessed
Joseph's Children: For,

Ver. 21. By Faith Jacob, when he was a dying, blessed both the Sons of Joseph,
and worshipped, leaning on his Rod. It Is an happiness to be the Children of
believing Parents, who by their Faith transmit Blessings to Posterity: For
Jacob, the Son of believing Isaac, was blessed, and he by his Faith transmits
God's Blessings to Joseph's Children. In the words we may note,

1. Jacob's Effects or Works of Faith. 2. His Faith.


The Effects are two:

1. His Blessing of Joseph's Children when he was a dying. 2. His Adoration,
leaning upon his Staff.


1. To begin with the Blessing, which was both predictive and effective, as the
former was: we may observe, 1. The Persons blessed. 2. Diverse Circumstances and
Passages of this Act. The Persons were not his own immediate Children, but his
Grandchildren by Joseph [every one of the Sons of Joseph.] These were
Ma^^asseh and Ephrains; and, as we read of no other, so it is likely these two
were all the Sons of Joseph at that time. The Blessings by him solemnly then
declared, were to be expected and received by their Posterity. 2. The
Circumstance of time is expressed to be, when he was a dying, that is, a little
before, and when he was drawing nigh unto death: For then, having some thoughts
and care of his Posterity, and especially of Joseph and his Children whom he
dearly loved, the Spirit of the Almighty came upon him, to inform him of things
to come, especially concerning his Nephews, and moved him to bless them, and
that being done, he leaves the World. The Passages are many. Joseph presents his
two Sons before him, and perhaps by some divine Instinct or Impulse, that he
might bless them before his death; and intended the Privilege of Birthright to
his Elder Son, as Isaac did formerly purpose. Jacob lays his hands upon them,
a Rite used in Benediction. He guided them so, that he laid his right hand upon
Ephraim the Younger, and this was purposely done by divine direction. This
being done, he adopts them, and by Adoption makes them his immediate Children,
and by his Blessing gives them the Portion of two Tribes with the rest of his
Sons, and prefers the Younger before the Elder.

2. The second Effect is his Adoration leaning upon his Staff; where you must
observe that the Apostle follows the Septuagint, as in most part of this
Epistle he does: Whereas others, following the Hebrew Copies we have now,
translate the place thus, And Israel bowed himself upon the Beds-head. To
reconcile these, some tell us of the difference of Mittah and Matteh, the one
signifying a Bed, the other a Staff; and say, that the word being at first
unpointed might be taken to signify the one or the other, or both; so that he
might be at the head of his Bed, leaning upon a Staff. It Is true that the
Chaldee and Samaritan read it [Mittah] a Bed. The Syriack turns the word
Sceptrum: Yet this is clear enough, that the Apostle followed the Greek
Translation, and we may safely follow him being divinely inspired. Upon this
Staff he leaned, and by it supported himself, after that Joseph had sworn to
him that he would bury him in the Land of Canaan in the burying place of his
Fathers. He leaned thus upon his Staff that he might bow and worship. But the
Question is, To whom he bowed? Some think he bowed to Joseph, not looking upon
him now as his Son, but as a Prince and Administrator General of the Kingdom of
Egypt; and this might give occasion to the Syriack Interpreter to think this
Staff was Joseph's Scepter, as though by this Posture he gave not only Honor
but Thanks unto his Son, that he would not only promise, but confirm his
Promise by Oath. Others conceive that he had far higher thoughts, and that with
all humility he adored the divine Majesty, and dd praise his glorious Name,
that he had provided for his Burial in the Land of Promise, where his Posterity
should settle, where his Savior should be born, and where he should rise again
to eternal Glory; and this outward bowing was a Sign of his most humble
Submission and Adoration of the supreme and eternal Lord. This does teach us,
1. That the Object of religious Adoration is God, as Supreme Lord of infinite
and eternal Excellency. 2. That Humility is essential to this Act of Adoration.
3. That by outward Carriage in the Worship of God, we should signify our inward
Humility. 4. That near our End we should think not only of Death, but of the
Resurrection, and with the thoughts thereof support and comfort our hearts.

Thus Jacob blessed, thus he bowed, and both by Faith: For they were Effects of
Faith, without which it was impossible to do either of them, as he did them.
This is the principal thing intended in all the Examples, to show the necessity
and excellency of Faith, and by both to persuade Perseverance therein: And
surely Jacob had some divine Revelation concerning the future Fates of his
Grandchildren, and upon Joseph's Oath of his Burial in the Land of Canaan, and
he did most certainly believe it and rely upon it; and this Belief and Reliance
was the inward Principle of his Benediction and Adoration; otherwise they had
neither been effectual nor acceptable.

. 21. Thus both Joseph's Sons were blessed by the Faith of his Father Jacob;
and Joseph also had his Faith, which was effectual too: For,

Ver. 22. By Faith Joseph when he dyed made mention of the departing of the
Children of Israel, and gave Commandment concerning his Bones. HEre likewise we
have,

1. The Effects of Joseph's Faith. 2. His Faith the ground of these Effects.


The Effects are two,

1. Mention of Israel 's Departure. 2. A Charge or Command concerning his
Bones.


1. Joseph made mention of Israel's Departure. Israel was the divine Name of
Jacob; for it was given him from Heaven, because by his earnest and fervent
Prayers he prevailed with God. This Name was after given to his Posterity
according to the Flesh, and in the New Testament to his Children according to
the Spirit: In this place it signifies those Children, and that Posterity of
his, who were living when God sent Moses to Pharaoh. This Departure here meant,
is their departure out of Egypt, and Freedom from that miserable Bondage they
suffered there. This Deliverance, Joseph being ready to die, and knowing his End
to be near, remembered as a matter of very great moment, and out of this
remembrance puts the Israelites his Brethren, and probably his own Children and
Nephews, in mind of it; and this perhaps also he did with a special Charge,
they should make it known to their Childrens Children, that it might not be
forgotten. Of this we thus read, And Joseph said unto his Brethren, I die; and
God will surely visit you, and bring you out of this Land unto the Land which
he swear to Abraham, to Isaac, to Jacob, Genesis 50. 24. These words do fully
explain this part of the Text. This was the first Effect.

2. The second was, That he gave Commandment concerning his Bones. This is
explained by the words following, Genesis 50. 25. And Joseph took an Oath of the
Children of Israel saying, God will surely visit you, and ye shall carry up my
Bones from hence. These words imply that he had a great desire that his very
Bones, and that part which at the time of their Deliverance remained, might be
buried in Canaan, and so take Possession of that Land, where his Savior should
be born, redeem sinful Man, and rise again to Glory. Out of this desire he
gives a strict Charge unto his surviving Brethren, and their Posterity, to
carry his Bones with them out of Egypt into that Holy Land; and if their Love
to him could not persuade them, as his Father took an Oath of him, so he took
an Oath of them to do this last Service and Office of Love, that so not only
Affection and Respect to him, but the fear of the eternal God by whom they had
sworn, might make them and their Posterity mindful of their Promise. And
according to his Command, their Promise and Oath, the thing was done; For Moses
took the Bones of Joseph with him, for he had straightly sworn the Children of
Israel, saying, God will surely visit you, and ye shall carry up my Bones hence
with you, Exodus 13. 19. And they were buried many years after in Shechem the
Portion of Joseph, Josh. 24. 32. All this was done by Faith, which was grounded
upon that Promise, which was confirmed by an Oath unto Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob, that he would give them the Land of Canaan, and bring their Children out
of Egypt, for to settle them in that Country which was a Type of Heaven, and
in which by Christ they should rise again to everlasting Life. This Revelation
from Heaven he did assuredly believe, and rested upon the Promise. This Example
should teach us to remember, and never to forget, the Promises of God, to mind
others of them, persuade them to rest upon them, and deeply to engage them to
their God, and the Performance of their Duty: This does also inform us of the
Excellency of the Bodies of the Saints, which have been Temples of the Holy
Ghost, and one day shall be made immortal.

. 22. And now we are come to the great Prophet Moses, whose Preservation was
wonderful, and his Works glorious: The Apostle instanceth,

1. In his Preservation, as an Effect of his Parents Faith. 2. In his Works,
which were Effects of his own Faith.


His Preservation is expressed thus,

Ver. 23. By Faith Moses, when he was born, was hid three Months of his
Parents, because they saw he was a proper Child, and they not afraid of the
King's Commandment. IN which words we have,

1. The Work of his Parents. 2. The Intimation of their Faith whereby they did
this Work.


1. The Work of his Parents was, that they hid him three Months: For, 1. Moses
was hid. 2. He was hid three Months. 3. He was hid so long by his Parents. The
hiding of Moses was a concealing of his Birth for to prevent his Ruin, and it
was of great difficulty, and no less danger, and of strange Consequence; for
this hiding was a means of his Preservation, and his Preservation the Ruin of
Egypt and the Deliverance of Israel: Yet unto this concealment we must add the
exposing of him in that manner, as that Pharaoh's Daughter did adopt him, take
care of him, and brought him up like a Prince; so that he was skilful in all
the Learning of the Egyptians. We may read the History at large, Exodus 2.
where we may observe diverse special Passages of God's Providence. The time was
three Months, a thing hard to be done; because, as some relate, and it is very
likely, the King of Egypt had Searchers amongst the Hebrews to find out their
Male-Children as soon as they were born: For, no sooner were they born, but
they were to be destroyed, as designed to destruction before their Entrance
into the World: Thus long he was hid, and no longer could they conceal him, so
the Text says Exodus 2. This is said to be the Work of his Parents: It Is
ascribed only to the Mother in the History, yet no doubt with the consent and
advice of the Father.

2. This was done by Faith; the Faith of his Parents, intimated in two things:

1. In that they saw him to be a proper Child. 2. In that they feared not the
Wrath of the King.


1. They saw him to be a proper Child. 1. He was a proper Child. 2. They saw
it. 3, Because they saw it, therefore hid him three Months. 1. He was a proper
Child; that is, fair, comely, beautiful, and that not in an ordinary but an
eminent measure; God perhaps had imprinted some extraordinary Characters upon
him. 2. This his beauty and comeliness they saw, and as it did appear unto them,
so they took special notice of it, and began to conceive that God had designed
him for some extraordinary Work. 3. Because he was such, and they saw it,
therefore they resolved to hide and conceal him so long as they could, and when
they could no longer do it, they expose him in the wisest way they could unto
divine Providence. It Is true, that natural Affection might incline them much,
and his divine beauty might move them more to use all means to prevent his
Ruin: Yet this could not be all, there was some divine Revelation and Instinct
which was the Ground of their Resolution and their Confidence; and some tell us
that it was so. Out of Confidence and Trust in God's Mercy, they might
earnestly pray, and upon their Prayer God might further manifest his Will
concerning that Child, and so more fully settle their minds.

2. That they had some Faith, it further appears by their boldness, that they
feared not the Commandment of the King. This King was one of the Phara^hs and
Lord of Egypt, who, out of State Policy, fearing the multiplication and
strength of Israel being Strangers, sent out a cruel Edict and Command to
murder all their Males so soon as born. And it is very likely he appointed
certain Persons, as the Mid-wives with some others, for the Execution, with a
strict Charge, upon pain of death if they should not execute his Command, and
either spare them or conceal them. This Command made it so full of danger and
hazard to his Parents to hide and conceal him so long: Yet this Command or
Edict they did not fear, so as to bewray him. No doubt their fear was great,
yet their Faith was greater, and overcame their fear; and this undaunted and
resolved boldness was an Evidence of their Faith. Therefore is it said, that by
Faith they hid him three Months, and so he was preserved; if it was by Faith
formerly described, then there must be some divine Testimony and Promise, which
was both the Ground of their Faith and also of their Hope.

. 23. Thus far his Preservation by the Faith of his Parents: Now follow the
Works and rare Effects of his own Faith; for,

Ver. 24. By Faith Moses, when he was come to years, refused to be called the
Son of Pharaoh 's Daughter.

Ver. 25. Choosing rather to suffer Affliction with the Children of God, than to
enjoy the pleasures of Sin for a season.

Ver. 26. Esteeming the Reproach of Christ greater Riches than the Treasures of
Egypt; for he had respect unto the Recompense of Reward.

THE Apostle does instance in four several Effects of Moses Faith: The first
whereof is the principal, upon which he does most of all enlarge; and in the
same we may observe,

1. His Obedience to the principal Command. 2. His Faith an effectual Principle
of his Obedience.


Of his Obedience we find two parts,

1. His Self-Denial, or his Refusal. 2. His bearing of the Cross, or his
Choice.


1, His Self-Denial was this, That when he come to years, he refused to be
called the Son of Pharaoh 's Daughter. Where I must explain,

1. Who Pharaoh's Daughter was. 2. What it was to be called her Son. 3. What
the Refusal of this was. 4. When he did refuse it.


1. Pharaoh's Daughter was a Lady and great Princess; for she was the Daughter
of a great King. Whether she was the only Daughter, or, if the only Daughter,
the only Child, and Heir Apparent to that rich and potent Kingdom, we know
not; yet howsoever, her place was a place of great Honor, Power, Wealth, and
Delights; and such, as that she might advance Moses very high, not only because
he was her Son by Adoption, but also because he was so goodly a Person, of such
excellent parts, and of so great deserts; for he was skilful in all the
Learning of the Egyptians, and mighty in words and deeds, eminently qualified,
and above the ordinary rank not only of ordinary men but of Princes.

2. He was called the Son of this great Princess. To be called, as I have
formerly observed, is sometimes for to be; therefore in this sense to be called
her Son, was to be her Son: so that this Name was not a mere Title, but a
Reality. Yet to be called, may signify something more; for it is employed here,
as it is expressed in the History, that he was not her natural but her adopted
Son; he was not of her Flesh and Blood, but of her Will and Choice: For
Adoption is a Choice of one that is no Son, to be a Son. So he was called, is,
that he was chosen and adopted; which kind of Filiation is accounted good in
Law, by the Consent of Nations: Yet there is another thing which may be
signified by this word called; that is, he was not only so called by her, but
so accounted, called, honored, by others. God had made her an Instrument not
only of his Preservation, but his excellent Education, Honor, and high
Advancement.

3. Yet he refused to be called her Son. It Is not meant, that he was base and
unthankful, as not acknowledging her tender Compassion toward him, when he was
ready to perish, or her singular Love to him, and special care of him,
manifested in his Education and Advancement. No doubt he did account her as his
best friend under Heaven, and his greatest Benefactrix under God, and he did
give her all Respect and Honor due unto her as his Mother: His own natural
Mother might have been willing, but was no ways able, to do so much for him.
This Refusal therefore was no unworthy Incivility, Disrespect, or base
Ingratitude, but a free and noble Act of his divine and sanctified Soul,
whereby he being illuminated from Heaven did see the baseness, uncertainty, and
danger of that great Estate of Honor, Wealth, Power, and rare Contents of the
World; and did judge the Enjoyment of it, if not inconsistent with, yet
prejudicial to, his spiritual and eternal Happiness: And upon this account he
was willing to part with them for a better end, and a great good. Whilst we
are seeking the eternal Bliss of Heavens Kingdom, we must be willing to part
with and forsake all things, even the most delicious and glorious, though we
affect them much. In this Case, we must not only forsake Sin, but such things,
which at other times, upon other occasions, we may justly love, and lawfully
enjoy. Isaac must be sacrificed, if God command it; and Christ himself for a
time must lay aside his Glory, if it be the Will of God that he should
sacrifice himself upon the Cross: Whosoever loves not Jesus Christ above all,
more than his Life, more than himself, he cannot be Christ's Disciple, nor
expect Salvation and eternal Life by him. This was not the Spirit of the World,
for most men will rather refuse to be called the Sons of God, that they might
be the Sons of Pharoah's Daughter, and advanced in Princes Courts, than refuse
to be called Pharoah's Sons, that they might be the Disciples of Christ and
Sons of God. Man devoid of Grace and heavenly Wisdom is strongly bent and
strongly inclined to the Glory, Honor, Wealth, and Delights of this World;
they seem so glorious, and taste so sweet, that they much take the Soul; they
promise some rare Content and perfect Happiness. Therefore men seek and pursue
them eagerly, hoping and expecting much from them; and if they once are
possessed of them, and enjoy them: Oh! How unwilling are they to part with
them? They prefer them before Heaven, and the eternal felicity thereof. The
young man, who so much desired to enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, and yet
refused to receive it upon our blessed Savior's terms, is an Example
universally to be remembered and considered; for it plainly tells us, that to
part them, and the heart of Man once strongly affected with them, is impossible
to any created Power, and only possible to the Almighty Power of God. Hence it
does appear how highly elevated, and how excellently qualified, the Soul of
Moses was, who could so fully and freely refuse to be called the Son of
Pharoah's Daughter: This perhaps was not done without some great Conflict, the
issue whereof was a clear and glorious Victory.

4. This mighty turn and change was made in Moses, when he came to years of
Age. The distinct and particular Year of his Age, when he made this Refusal, is
not mentioned: As for Instruction or Example for any such heavenly virtue, it
was not likely he should find any such thing in the Court of an Heathen Prince.
It might be that he might have some concealed Converse with his Parents, or his
Brethren, in whom that Heavenly aspiring Spirit which was in Abraham, Isaac,
Jacob, might remain. These might inform him of some divine and saving Truths,
and of that Seed in whom all Nations should be blessed, yet in the midst of so
many Temptations, these could work little upon him. Therefore it is to be
presumed, that as Abraham, so he, was Partaker of the heavenly Call, and this
did enable him to make this noble Resolution. Howsoever it was with him; yet we
are born and bred up in the Church, upon whom the Light of the Gospel does
continuallp shine, and at the door of whose hearts Christ stands continually
knocking, should learn this Lesson betimes. We having so many helps and means
of Conversion should consecrate our tender years, and much more the slower and
time of our riper days, unto God: But woe unto us, because we will not know the
day of Visitation, and the things which belong unto eternal Peace, we are worse
than the Ox that knows his Owner, and the Ass which knows his Master's Crib,
than the Turtle, the Swallow, and the Crane, which know their times; and yet we
do not know our God, we do not know our Savior.

. 24. This was his Self-Denial, after which the Apostle informs us of his
bearing the Cross: Where we must consider,

1. His Choice. 2. The Ground of it.


1. His Choice was rare and wonderful; for he chose the Cross: Two things
indeed were proposed unto him,

1. The Suffering of Affliction with God's People. 2. The Enjoyment of the
pleasures of Sin for a season.


The one was sweet, and in present Possession; the other, bitter: Yet if we
consider the Society and Company with whom he must suffer, they were the People
of God; but the other were cursed profane Wretches. So that if he look at the
Company, the Choice was easily made; yet if he compare Afflictions and present
Sufferings, with present pleasures and the Enjoyment of them, it would prove
very difficult to forsake the sweet, and pitch upon the bitter. And here we
must observe, 1. That Self-Denial and bearing the Cross do go together. 2. That
to refuse to be called the Son of Pharoah's Daughter, and to for sake the
Enjoyment of the pleasures of Sin, and the Riches of Egypt, were the same; and
he that refuses the one must forsake the other.

The matter will be more plain, if we reduce this Text to Propositions in this
manner,

1. God's People suffered Afflictions. 2. He was willing to suffer with them.
3. He was willing rather to suffer with them, than to enjoy the pleasures of
Sin for a season.


1. By People of God in this place, may be understood the Israelites, who at
that time were the only Nation in Covenant with God, and were his People in a
special manner, and then under grievous Afflictions, by reason of the Cruelty
of the Egyptian King: Yet this Title of God's People may be given to the
Church of all times, which began to suffer in Abel, and continued suffering to
our days, and shall do unto the end: For as Affliction is the common Lot of
all Christ's Members, so it is the way of God's training them for an eternal
Crown of Glory.

2. He was willing to suffer with them; for they were his own Brethren, and the
best Society in the World, and had the highest Promises with the greatest
Privileges, and the best Hopes. Yet, though these were in a suffering
condition, he had rather partake with them in their Miseries, than forfeit
their Hopes and Privileges: Though Suffering, as Suffering, was grievous, and
no way desirable or eligible as such; yet, as it was the Lot of God's People,
and tended to a most excellent End, it put on the notion of Good, and might be
willingly accepted, and as the Case then stood not to be refused.

3. When there is no better Condition to be expected, a wise man will make a
virtue of necessity, and make the best use of that which in it self was bad,
and no ways avoidable. But there were pleasures which he either did enjoy or
might have enjoyed: Yet these were pleasures of Sin, and but for a time, and
these abated much; and it was better to suffer a little Misery for an eternal
Reward, than to enjoy a little momentary pleasure, and after that endure
eternal Punishment. As eternal Pleasures do far excel temporal, so Justice is
infinitely better than Sin. Ho^ustum is far above Jucundum, and infinitely more
desirable. To suffer with God's People willingly and patiently, was a rare
virtue; but the Delights of Pharoah's Court, though they should have been
lawful, were no such thing: But they were not lawful, they were Pleasures of
Sin, that is, sinful Pleasures; they could not be enjoyed without Sin. The
matter of them might be base, and no ways allowable; and besides the Use and
Enjoyment of them might be immoderate and inordinate; and with all unsanctified
Persons addicted to them they prove sinful in both respects. These being
carnal, blind the hearts of men, and cause them to forget their God, and
neglect their Souls and eternal Estate: Besides, they were but for a time, a
little season, and vanish suddenly away, a little pleasure leaves a cruel Sting
behind it which will torment for ever. The just and vermous Suffering with
God's People, upon which followed a glorious Estate of Bliss, was far more
eligible than momentary sruful Pleasures: Therefore he did prefer and choose
the one before the other. He saw two ways before him, the one was rough, the
other smooth; yet at the end of one he saw a Paradise, and at the end of the
other a Lake of Fire; he refuses the smooth, to avoid the Lake of Fire, and
takes the rough that he might enter into the Paradise to which it led him. This
was Moses Choice, which few in the World take: Most men look at present
Pleasures, not at future Joys.

. 25. The next thing to be enquired is the Ground of this Choice, and that was
the ultimate Dictate of illuminated and elevated Reasons, whereby he did
believe: For by Faith he made both this Refusal and this Choice, resolved to
deny himself, and to take up the Cross, and actually and constantly did both;
for they were the principal parts of his Obedience: The Objects of this Reason
were three,

1. The Reproach of Christ. 2. The Treasures of Egypt. 3. The Recompense of
Reward.


The divine inspired Truth gave a true Representation of every one of these,
and did so direct him, that he judged aright both of the Reproach of Christ,
and the Treasures of Egypt, and that not only absolutely but comparatively
too^; and did furnish him with a strong Reason taken from the Reward to
determine his Election. The first Object was the Reproach of Christ, that is,
such a Reproach as that of the Cross, which Christ was to suffer, or which he
resolved to suffer for Christ's sake, and by the Dictate of Faith in Christ:
For Moses his Faith was conformable unto that of his Fathers, whereby they
believed in that Seed of theirs in whom all Nations should be blessed, which
was Christ. Some Apprehensions they had of Christ's Sufferings, and his Glory
which should follow after; but whether they had any distinct Notion of the
Cross, which was the Sum of all Afflictions and Sufferings, may be doubted of
us, because we know not what special Revelations they might have. This Cross
was not only a suffering of Pain, but of Reproach; for that kind of death was
both cruel and very ignominious, and therefore much abhorted by Flesh and
Blood, which sometimes fears Reproach more than Pain. This Reproach, if
suffered for our own Crimes, and not for Christ and Righteousness sake, can
minister no Comfort, or be in any wise gainful. Yet it was counted Riches, and
a rare Revenue, an incomparable Treasure, not in respect of it self, but of
that which followed by virtue of God's Promise: Thus it was considered, if
suffered patiently for Christ, out of Faith in Christ and Love to Christ. The
second Object was the Treasures of Egypt: These he considered, and knew to be
great, yet of a finite value, for though men dote upon these earthly Treasures
idolize them, take them for a God; yet the price and worth of them was not very
much, they were like the Pleasures; that is, sinful, and only for a little
season: Thus he considered them absolutely; but not content with that, he
weighs them in a true Balance, and compares them, and finds the Reproach of
Christ greater, the Treasures of Egypt less; the latter base in respect of the
former, which was far more excellent. And if we would compare the Treasures of
the Earth, which men so much affect, with the Treasures of Heaven, which few
seek after, they would appear no better than Trash or Dung. The third Object
was, The Recompense of the Reward: Reward here must be understood of the great
and final Reward of eternal Glory; this Reward, though excellent in it self, is
little worth except it be rendered, that is, given by God, and received and
enjoyed by us. (...) signifies both, that is, the Reward, and the rendering of
it; yet it is given only to such as are willing to bear the Reproach of Christ,
in compensation of our Sufferings for Christ. At this Reward, promised by God,
merited by Christ, and to be rendered unto Man, he looked; he eyed it very much,
and understood, and that most certainly, that it put a very high price upon
suffering the Reproach of Christ, and made it of far greater value than the
Treasures of Egypt, because it was the way and means for to attain eternal
Glory; a Reward, which neither the Treasures of Egypt, nor of all the World,
could purchase or parallel: So that the Reproach of Christ was not so excellent
in it self, but as leading to the Estate of Heaven's Glory; not that it could
merit the Reward, but only qualify him for the Enjoyment, and give a Title to
it by virtue of God's Promise made upon the Merit of Christ, who by the Cross
did merit this Reward for all such as by Faith should bear the Cross and follow
him. This Faith moved him to this Obedience of Self-Denial, and bearing the
Cross, and gave him Power to overcome the World; and that Faith which is not
thus victorious is not justifying and saving. The Philosopher's (...) of
Temperance and Fortitude, seem to have some Affinity with this Doctrine, but
comes far short. And here it is observable, That the Honor to be Pharoah's
Daughter's Son, the temporary Pleasures of Sin, and the Treasures of Egypt go
together; so do Afflictions of God's People, and the Reproach of Christ. The
Reproach of Christ is opposed to Honor, the Afflictions of God's People to the
Pleasures of Sin, the Riches of Reproach for Christ to the Treasures of Egypt.
The Reproaches of Christ and Afflictions are better to Man, as his Case now
stands, not only in this, that they tend to the Reward, but also through
Sanctification of the Spirit they exercise and improve our heavenly virtues,
and prevent many grievous Sins. If we will be happy with Moses, we must make
Moses Choice, and pray for the Power of the Spirit to enable us, not only to
resolve but also perform as he did, and also often to eye the great Reward
which will be a mighty Motive to Obedience. Neither must we think it mercenary
to look at the Reward; for God's Glory and our Happiness are linked together,
so that the Belief and Expectation of the Reward do no ways abate of our Love
to God in Christ.

. 26. The second Work of Moses his Faith, wherein the Apostle instanceth, was
his forfaking of Egypt: For,

Ver. 27. By Faith he for sook Egypt, not fearing the Wrath of the King; for
he endured, as seeing him who was invisible. FOR the better understanding both
of this and the former part of the Example of Moses, we must observe, 1. That
Moses had some divine Information of God's Intention by him to deliver Israel,
as is employed by this, that he visited his Brethren when he was forty years of
Age; for then it came into his heart to do so, and in this Visitation he slew
an Egyptian who wronged and oppressed one of his Brethren. By this Visitation
and Act he supposed his Brethren would have understood how that God by his hand
would deliver them, but they understood not, Acts 7. 23, 24, 25. 2. That if he
would have laid aside all Affection and Care of his Brethren, and all thoughts
of delivering them, he might have still continued to have been called the Son
of Pharoah's Daughter, and to have enjoyed the Pleasures and Treasures of
Egypt. 3. That he was resolved, though with the loss of all, to attempt and
undertake this Work, and began it with this Visitation and Deliverance of one
particular Person; yet this way proved ineffectual, for the time was not yet
come. 4. That in this Visitation it so fell out, through the Folly and Iniquity
of one of his own Brethren, that Pharaoh was incensed against him, and sought
to kill him; and now he begins to suffer Affliction with God's People, and to
bear the Reproach of Christ. And now his Case was this, that he must either fly
and forsake Egypt, or be slain: He cared not so much for the King's Wrath, nor
did he fear. Death so much, as he was grieved for the sad condition of his
Brethren, and troubled that the design of their Deliverance did for the present
fail. But to return unto the words, wherein we may observe these Propositions,

1. Moses for sook Egypt, not fearing the Wrath of the King. 2. In this he
endured, as seeing him who is invisible.


In the former we have,

1. His leaving Egypt. 2. The manner how he left it.


1. He forsook Egypt. Two several times. 1. When he fled into the Land of
Midian, where he was a Stranger and a Shepherd for many years. 2. When he
brought Israel out of Egypt. The great doubt is, Whether of these is here
intended? Some think the former; some, the latter; some, both: Yet, whether it
be one or both, it is certain, both that he did leave Egypt, and that he did
leave it in this manner. In the former Departure, he fled to avoid danger; in
the latter, he marched out like a Prince and General with a mighty Host. The
former was the loss of all his Honor, high and happy. Estate, which he
formerly enjoyed in Pharoah's Court, and the beginning of his suffering
Affliction and Reproach with the People of God. This was from himself, who, out
of Pity and ardent Affection to his Brethren, brought himself into this
Condition. This seemed to be a great Fall, for a great Prince became a poor
Fugitive: yet he was well content, nay judged the Estate of the latter to be
far better than that of the former. For it was far more free from Temptation,
and more calm, so that he might freely give himself to contemplation and
converse with his God. Therefore if we well consider this, the former forsaking
Egypt is rather to be referred and ascribed to that Faith, whereby he denied
himself and took up the Cross looking at the great Reward.

2. In the latter, though the Wrath of the King was great, yet he feared it
not. The last time he was in the King's presence, he did fearfully menace him,
saying, Get that from me, take ^eed to thy self, see my face no more; for in
that day thou see my face, thou shall die, Exodus 10. 28. This signifies that
he was enraged against Moses, and though, upon the last and greatest Execution
upon the Egyptians in the death of the first born, he did for the present remit
his fury, and sending to Moses and Aaron did dismiss them, and all Israel, yet
he suddenly changed his mind, and armed all Egypt to pursue them. This Moses
knew full well, yet he marched with all the Armies of Israel out of that wicked
Country with invincible Boldness, and certain Confidence that God would make
his March good, and their Deliverance full and effectual, against all the fury
and force of that wicked King.

The Reason of this Boldness was his Faith, whereby he endured, as seeing him
who is invisible, which is the second Proposition. Where,

1. The Object of his Faith was, the Invisible. 2. The Act was, he saw him, or
looked upon him. 3. The Effect immediate was, he endured.


1. He that was invisible was God, who is said to be the eternal, immortal,
invisible God, 1 Timothy 1. 17. whom no man has seen nor can see, Cap. 6. 16. and
the invisible God, Colos. 1. 15. To be invisible, as here is meant, must needs
be proper unto God: It Is true that many things, especially spiritual
Substances, as immortal Souls and Angels, are not visible or perceivable by
bodily Eyes, and in that respect invisible; but not in that manner a^ God is.
No Man, not Moses, can see God and live, as Angels and glorified Saints do,
neither can they see him as he sees himself, so that in some respects he is
invisible to all, and only visible to himself.

2. The Act of his Faith, was that whereby he, as it were, and in some manner,
saw this invisible God: He saw him, not by his Senses, nor by the natural Light
of Reason, but by a diviner and more excellent visive faculty, to which he did
represent himself in his Wisdom, almighty Power, Promise, and Fidelity, with
all which he was engaged in this Act. This sight of him made Pharaoh, though a
King of mighty Power, as contemptible in his Eyes: So glorious did he appear,
that all the Power and Princes of the World were nothing to him.

3. The immediate Effect was, that he so seeing him as though he were present,
marching in the Van, bringing up the Rear, and garding Israel on every side,
did endure, not only with a patient but a constant and undaunted mind, the
Wrath of the King, whom he feared. He strengthened and hardened himself, and
resolved to carry Israel out of Egypt, and rescue them from the Egyptian
Bondage and Tyranny. This was an Act of Faith, of strong Faith; and this
Instance does teach to fortify and embolden our hearts by Faith in God, against
all fears of the greatest, most cruel, and enraged Enemies.

. 27. The third Instance is made in that Act of keeping the Passover, and
preserving the firstborn of Israel from the destroying Angel: For,

Ver. 28. Through Faith he kept the Passover, and the sprinkling of Blood, lest
he that destroyed the firstborn should touch them. IN these words we may
observe,

1. A Command. 2. A Promise. 3. Faith, whereby the Command was obeyed, and
whereupon the Promise was performed.


1. The Command, for the matter, was twofold:

1. The Celebration of the Passover. 2. The sprinkling of Blood.


What the Passover was we easily learn from Exodus 12. and most do know it: It
was a Sacrament of the Old Testament, to confirm the Promise of God made to
Israel. The Matter of it was a Lamb without blemish; the Actions were
Separation of the Lamb, preparing and rosting it with fire, and eating of it
with sour Herbs and unleavened Bread, with their Loins girt, and their Staffs
in their hand at the first time of the Institution. Some tell us of a form of
words prescribed, but in this the Scripture is silent: It was the same to them,
that the Eucharist is to us. The use of the Blood at that time, of which we
never after read, was to sprinkle the upper and side posts of their Doors with
it, and for this end, to avert the destroying Angel. In all this, a far greater
thing was mystically infolded, as Christ our Paschal Lamb, whose Blood
sprinkled by Faith upon our Souls, delivers us from the destroying wrath of
God, and the punishments of Hell; of which Blood and Sacrifice of Christ you
have heard much in the former Chapters. That they should thus celebrate this
Sacrament, and thus sprinkle this Blood, was the Command of God to Moses, and
by him declared to Israel.

2. The promise of God was, that if they did celebrate the Passover, and
sprinkle the Blood of the Paschal Lamb, accordingly as God prescribed, he would
bring them out of Egypt, and save their first born in that Night, when he
would destroy all the first born of Man and Beast in the Land of Egypt. The
great mystery was, that whosoever should partake of Christ, the immaculate Lamb
of God which takes away ^he Sin of the World, and have the door of their Souls
sprinkled with his Blood, they should be delivered from the power of Satan,
freed from the wrath of God, and pass on safely toward their heavenly Canaan,
and the place of their eternal Rest.

3. Moses believed the Word of God concerning these particulars, and Israel
believed Moses as speaking to them from God, and both he and they relied upon
the Promise. By this Faith he and they obeyed the Command of God, in
celebrating the Passover, and in sprinkling the Blood of the Paschal Lamb; and
upon this Obedience the Promise of God was performed, their first born was
saved, and all of them that Night brought out of Egypt. Without this Faith,
they neither could have obeyed the Command of God, nor obtained the great
mercies promised. So if we by Faith eat Christ's Flesh, and drink his Blood, we
shall live, and be everlastingly saved. From hence we learn, That Faith enables
and stirrs us up to obey the Commands of God, that so by it we may obtain the
Rewards, which God has promised.

. 28. The fourth instance is of Israel's Faith, whereby they passed through the
Red Sea with safety, when the Egyptians were drowned. For,

Ver. 29. By Faith they passed through the Red Sea, as by dry Land, which the
Egyptians assayling to do, were drowned.] IN these words we have,

1. The safety of Israel. 2. The destruction of the Egyptians. 3. The reason of
the one and of the other.


1. The safety of Israel was, That they passed through the Red Sea, as by dry
Land. To understand this, we must remember and call to mind the History: We
have heard of the bringing of Israel out of Egypt, and the saving of their
first Born. After they were marched on their way toward the Red Sea, according
to God's direction; Pharaoh repented of the dismission of Israel, and by spies,
or some others, informed what way they took, and where they were conceived them
to be in straits, and easy to be reduced or destroyed. Thereupon he arms and
musters up the main strength of Egypt, marches himself in person with his
Potent Armies, and pursues them, and some came near to them. The Angel of God
removes into the rere-ward, and strikes in between Israel and Pharoah's Army,
till they came to the Red Sea, where they were flanked on both sides with
impulsive mountains, the Red Sea was before them, the mighty Army of Egypt
behind them; so that in humane reason, nothing but destruction could be
expected. Israel cries out to Moses, and Moses calls to God: God here commands
Moses to strike the Sea with a Rod, and commands Israel to pass forward, and
expect the Salvation of God promising to deliver them. The Sea was divided, the
Waters stood like walls and mountains, as though they had been congealed and
turned to Ice. The bottom, which never saw the Sun before, appears, is made
firm ground, without deep mud or quicksands; Israel passes on, arrives at the
further shore, and neither Man nor Child is drowned. As the deep and drowning
waters saved Noah by bearing up the Ark, so now the dangerous and threatening
Sea, and tumultuous waters, are a safety to Israel. This was a strange and
glorious work of God's Almighty Power and unspeakable mercy: This is called
often in the Hebrew the Sea of Suph or Bulrushes, which it seems grow upon the
banks; and also the Sea of Edom: and because Edom signifies Red, therefore it is
named the Red Sea, as the Septuagin^turns the proper substantive into an
appellative.

2. Pharaoh and the Egyptians pursue them into the Sea, and so were drowned.
This was ordered by the wisdom of God, and was the execution of his just
Judgment. While way is made for Israel to pass, the inconsistency and fluid
nature of the Waters is suspended, that the Egyptians, following after the
Israelies, might enter into the heart and depth of the Channel. Yet in the mean
time, the Angel of God continues to keep between Israel and Pharoah's Army,
till such time as all the People were safely landed, and, to retard the march
of the Horse, takes off their Chariot Wheels, so that they drove heavily. When
Israel was past all danger, God suffers the Waters to return to their former
Course; and so they overwhelm Pharaoh and all his Host, who sunk like lead into
the bottom of the Sea; and this was done in the sight of Israel, that they
might rejoice and give glory unto God for their Salvation, and the destruction
of their Enemies. This was a wonderful deliverance of God's People, and the end
of a proud and cruel Tyrant.

3. The reason of the one, was Faith; of the other, Unbelief: For by Faith they
found a way through the great deep: And this was not the Faith of Israel alone,
but principally of Moses. For it might truly be said, They passed through the
Sea by his Faith, yet joined with their's: For God commanded Moses with his Rod
to smite the Sea, and Israel to pass on, and promised to divide the Sea, and
save them not only from the Waters, but from their Enemies. This Moses did
believe, and persuades them to do so likewise: and this Faith moved them to
obey God's Command, and upon their Obedience to expect the Mercy promised.
Without this Warrant and Word from Heaven, and their belief of it, and
confidence in it, it had been impossible for them to have escaped destruction.
The Egyptians assaying without this Faith to pass, were drowned: Pride,
cruelty, desire of revenge drove them forward; they had neither Revelation, nor
Command, nor Promise, and therefore they perished, This example informs us, 1.
That there is no danger so great, but God can deliver us out of it; for God
has many ways to deliver us. 2. That when man's danger is the greatest, God's
help is the nearest: For, as the saying is, Man's Extremity is God's
Opportunity. For he is a present help in time of trouble; in the midst of the
Waters, and in the fiery Furnace. 3. Many times the Salvation of God's People
is the destruction of their Enemies; and when he saves the one, he destroys
the other; and there will a day come when all God's People shall see their
desire upon all their Enemies. Yet we must believe and obey, and trust in God;
and have a just Cause, if we will expect deliverance: and he that does not so
believe, as to be ready to do what God Commands, can never attain the benefit
God does promise, which is so limited and consined to the performance of the
Command upon Faith, that, without Performance and Obedience, the Mercy promised
cannot be expected and received. This is the true reason, why justifying Faith
is inconsistent with the predominancy of any Lust and Sin. For true Faith
receives the Promise with the terms and conditions it requires; and whosoever
believes, or is persuaded that he may receive the Blessing promised, without
obedience to the Command annexed, does deceive himself. For he that, continuing
in his sins, not resolving from his heart to forsake them, to renounce all
righteousness in himself, to rely wholly and solely upon the merit of Christ,
and mercy of God, persuades himself of Remission promised, does mistake the
Promise, and shall not obtain that which he desires. For his Faith is not
sincere, his confidence is but presumption, and the issue will be shame and
confusion: This Doctrine also ministers unspeakable comfort to all true
Believers in the midst of their Extremities.

. 29. Joshua succeeded Moses, and he by Faith did many glorious works; one
whereof the Apostle singleth out, and instanceth in, which was the fall of the
walls Jericho. For,

Ver. 30. By Faith the Walls of Jericho fell, after they were compassed about
seven times.] THis work was miraculous, and is ascribed to Faith in God's Word.
The whole History here abridged by the Apostle, we may read at large, Joshua 6.
Upon which, as upon the rest of that Book, Masuis does excellently discourse.
In the words, as in the former examples, we may observe:

1. The Work. 2. The Faith whereby it was done.


In the Work, as it is briefly here expressed, we may consider;

1. What it was, The fall of the Walls of Jericho. 2. The means whereby it was
done, and that was by compassing them about seven times. 3. The time, When they
had seven times compassed them.


But if we consider the History, the principal things remarkable, are;

1. The Command and Instructions of God given to Joshua and the People. 2.
God's Promise. 3. Their Obedience. 4. The Issue or Event.


1. God's Command was signified to Joshua, and by Joshua to Israd; and in
general it was to compass about Jericho, which was the first City of Canaan, on
this West side of Jordan which God gave into their hand; and in such a manner,
as that it might encourage his Pecple, and strike a terror into the rest of
their Enemies, and let them know what to expect. It was not very great, yet
strong. For the manner how often, in what order, with what rites, when to
begin, when to end, they received Instructions and Directions, and they were
bound to follow them. For we must not only do the thing God Commands, but we
must do it in that manner as he shall prescribe.

2. God's Promise was in general to deliver it into their Hands, and in that
manner, as that there should be no formal Siege or effusion of Blood. This was
a miraculous and extraordinary way, which he did prescribe unto them, and in it
self very unlikely to take effect; for there seemed to be no causality in the
means, not any power in them for to produce the effect. Therefore a Promise of
God was necessary, that so they might have a ground of their Faith, an
encouragement to use the means, and, upon the use, a certain expectation of the
event. Neither would the Promise of any other but of God serve the turn; yet
seeing they had had so much experience of his wonderful and almighty power, it
was sufficient, and there was no cause of doubting.

3. Seeing God had promised, and they believed; therefore they obey his
Command, readily and cheerfully use the means, and follow his Directions, and
compass the City in that manner, and so often, as God required. This obedience,
to the Enemies, who were ignorant both of God's Command and Promise, might seem
ridiculous, and a matter of laughter rather then of fears, except they did
suspect some magic Spells, and di^belical power might be used in that formal
procession.

4. The Event was the fall of the Walls of Jericho and the ruin of that City
and the Inhabitants. Some think this fall to be the sinking of the Wall whole
and entire into the ground, so that the highest parts of them lay level with
the surface of the Earth, yet there is no certainty of this. But this is
certain, that they so fell as that Israel might easily enter: This was a work
of almighty power, and by this example we easily understand, that when out of
Faith we obey God's Commands, that which God has promised will be effected.
Therefore when any business is difficult to be done, we must not so much look
at the impotency of natural and secondary Causes, as at the promise of God, and
the performance of our Duty. And though it is true, that the principal, if not
the sole effective cause be the Power of God; yet without the Faith and
Obedience of man, the fulfilling of the Promise cannot be expected. This manner
of giving Jericho into Israel's hand, to humane reason, not acquainted with the
Counsel of God, might seem strange. Yet it was an excellent way to animate
Israel, and terrify the Canaanites: For by this miraculous Event, Israel might
understand how easily, without blow or blood of any man, the strongest City
might be taken and delivered into their hands; and the Enemy might know, that
neither the strongest and highest Walls, nor the power of the most warlike
Soldiers, could be able to stand out. The principal thing here to be observed,
is the excellency of Faith grounded upon the Word and Promise of God.

. 30. In this strange and fearful destruction of Jericho, God remembered mercy,
and saved Rahab and her Family, so that they perished not with the rest. For,

Ver. 31. By Faith the Harlot Rahab perished not with them that believed not,
when she had received the Spies with peace. THis is the last Example of those,
whereupon the Apostle severally and more distinctly insists. In it we may
observe,

1. The Party named and proposed for an Example, which was Rahab the Harlot. 2.
The Work of her Faith, She received the Spies in peace. 3. Her Preservation in
the general ruin of that City. 4. Her Faith, whereby she obtained that Reward.


1. The Party was a Woman, her Name Rahab, a Gentile, a Canaanite, an
Inhabitant and Native of Jericho, an Innkeeper, and an Harlot; for she seems
to be both: Yet this is so far true, that though she had formerly been guilty,
yet now she was a Penitent, and upon her Faith, if not before, reformed. God
had prepared her for his own Design, and made her a sit Instrument to save the
Spies, and the Spies fit Agents to inform Joshua of the Truth, and to encourage
all Israel to go on boldly in the Conquest of all Canaan.

2. Her Work of Faith was, that she received the Spies in peace. These Spies
were Agents sent by Joshua, to discover the Country on the West Side of Jordan
according to his Directions; and his End in sending them was, to receive
Information from them of such things as were convenient to be known, as
Preparative for the future Conquest. As Stratagems, so Spies were useful, as
other Intelligencers are, in a well-ordered State that has to deal with
Enemies; and if the Cause be just, and the Enemies unjust, they are certainly
lawful. These she received, though Enemies to her Country, not only as Guests
but Friends; and, as she received, so she dismissed them in peace, that is, in
safety, and as Friends, and not as Enemies: This she did with so great Care,
Prudence, and Fidelity, that their best Friends in that Case could not have
done more and better for them. The manner how she entertained them, the
Conference she had with them, the Contract made between them, the Act how she
concealed them, the Counsel she gave them, and the Contrivance of their safety,
you may read more at large in the Book of Joshua: Her officious Lie which she
made in their behalf cannot in strict Justice be excused, though in mercy it
may be pardoned. And in this Act and Work of Charity toward them, she was not
guilty of persidious Treachery to her own Country, which she knew to be wicked,
and destined by God himself unto Destruction; and she was bound to love God
more than her Country, and his People more than his Enemies: By her Faith she
had renounced all to serve the true God, and in her heart was become already
one of God's Saints and Servants. Treachery indeed is unjust, and contrary to
the Laws of God, which require fidelity to God first, and then to our Country,
so far as it shall be consistent with Fidelity to the Supreme Lord, and not one
^ote further.

3. Her Reward followed upon this, For she perished not with them that believed
not: Where we have, 1. The Destruction of Unbelievers. 2. Her Preservation. The
first implies, that her Neighbors and Fellow-Citizens were grievous Sinners,
and so hardened in their Sins, that they did not believe, and so were Vessels of
Wrath, and fitted for Destruction. These being such did perish, and suffered
Punishment due unto their Sins, which was a total and final ruin. But she
perished not, but was preserved; and the manner of her Preservation we find
related in the History: For both the Spies and Joshua were faithful to her, and
performed the Promise and the Oath made unto her. By this we learn how easily
God can save us even in the midst of general Calamities.

4. This her Preservation was a Reward of her Faith; not that Faith did merit
it, but made her capable of God's Mercy. This here Faith was wrought in her by
the Fame of God's glorious Works and Counsels which she had heard, and by the
Power of the Holy Ghost; and it was manifested much, and very much, both by her
Words and Deeds, when she received the Spies, and preserved them from Death. It
was so much the more to be admited, seeing she was an Alien, a Gentile, a
Canaa^ute, and dwelt amongst a cursed People, amongst whom she had been a
grievous Sinner: Surely she will rise up in Judgment, against the Unbelievers
of our times.

. 31. The Apostle forbears to insist largely and particularly upon the Faith of
any more of the ancient Worthies, either Men or Women; and draws toward a
Conclusion by Contraction of his Discourse, and in this manner:

Ver. 32. And what shall I more say? For the time would fail me to tell of
Gideon, and of Barac, and of Samson, and of Jeptha; of David also and Samuel,
and of the Prophets. IN these words, and those that follow in this Chapter, we
must consider,

1. The manner how the following Discourse is brought in. 2. The matter of it.


1. The manner is, by a Rhetorical Paraleipsis, signifying 1. There was no
necessity of any more Instances, because the former were sufficient. 2. That to
go on to instance so largely in the rest of the following Ages, would be too
tedious, take up much time, and enlarge his Letter till it swell to a great
Volume. 3. Yet he lets them know, that if need were, and it were requisite, he
could instance in many more; but yet he thought it no Wisdom to do so.

2. In the matter we have,

1. A particular enumeration of certain former Worthies. 2. Their rare
Exploits. 3. Their many Sufferings. 4. Their Deeds and Sufferings issuing from
Faith. 5. The time when they lived, believed, did these Works, and suffered. 6.
God's benignity to us, who in his Wisdom did so order it, that they should not
be perfect without us.


This is the Sum and Substance of the rest of this Chapter, which contracts
much matter into a narrow Compass, and expresses it in a few words. As for the
Persons commended for their Faith, 1. Some of them are signified particularly
by Name, some by a general term expressing their Office. 2. That though he
names but six, yet this was not because there were no more but these, or that
he was ignorant of them, but because it was not needful. 3. Amongst these we
have four Judges, one Prophet, one King; yet so that the Prophet was a Judge,
and the King a Prophet. The Persons not mentioned by Name, but signified by
their Office, were the Prophets; and whereas there were Prophets both ordinary
and extraordinary, the extraordinary are intended. By this passage and
proceeding of the Apostle, we learn, that in our Discourses we should not be
needlessly tedious, and say all that we can, but that only which is sufficient,
most expedient, and conducing to the main Scope. This was a Letter, and he was
not willing to enlarge beyond the bounds of a Letter, which he must needs have
done if he had instanced and amplified in all the particulars which he knew.

. 32. These are the Persons: Their rare Exploits and Works of Faith follow; for
thus we read,

Ver. 33. Who through Faith subdued Kingdoms, wrought Righteousness, obtained
Promises, stopped the Mouths of Lions.

Ver. 34. Quenched the violence of Fire, escaped the Edge of the Sword, out of
Weakness were made strong, waxed strong in Fight, turned to flight the Armies
of the Aliens.

THE Effects of their Faith being, doing great things, obtaining great Mercies,
suffering great Afflictions, are here only touched upon, and briefly related:
Yet this is done without any Attribution of them to the Persons formerly named
and mentioned; for of these Persons those things are to be understood, and they
are all Effects and Consequents of Faith. There is it said, Who by Faith
subdued, etc. And seeing his chief Intention was to show the Excellency of
Faith, and these Effects were rare and excellent, and such as depended upon
Faith as Effects upon the Cause, it was sufficient in this manner to reckon
them up, and to inform these Hebrews of them.

1. They subdued Kingdoms. Though this may agree to, and be affirmed of,
others; yet in this particular, David seems to be most eminent, who subdued the
Philistines, Edomites, Ammonites, and other of the Syrian Kingdoms. For to
understand this, it is to be observed, 1. That the Cause of the Conqueror was
just. 2. That he had Warrant from God, and many times the Warrant was
extraordinary. 3. Sometimes he had Directions from God, who was first
consulted. 4. He depended not upon his own strength and policy but upon his
God. 5. The Victory was given by God, upon the Faith and Prayer of the
victorious Party. 6. The Kingdoms subdued were not only Enemies to God's
People, but to God himself and his Laws; so that both the safety of the People,
and also of Religion, did much depend upon these Victories, which were far more
glorious and excellent, because given upon the Faith of such as trusted in
their God, Others might prove Conquerors, who waged War against others out of
Ambition, Pride, Covetousness, Cruelty, without any just Cause of Commission
from Heaven; and they were rather Executioners of God's just Judgments upon
wicked People and Offenders, whom they cruelly punished without any thoughts of
God or care of Justice, as being wicked Person themselves.

2. They wrought Righteousness. The subduing of Kingdoms was the exercise of
their Military Power, and this may seem to be the Use of the Sword of Justice:
For the Judges and David were Generals in War, and Judges in peace; they went
out before the People, and fought their Battles, and in the time of Peace they
did Justice and Judgments; by reason of their Faith they were victorious in
their Wars, and just in their Judgment: The Duty of a Prince is, to defend his
People from Foreign Enemies, and to protect their just and loyal Subjects, and
punish the Oppressors and Injurious. This Righteousness therefore is judicial
Righteousness, and their doing of Righteousness, their constant Administration
of Justice: For the meaning is not merely that they did some few Acts of
Justice; for so many wicked Princes do: but these did execute Justice and
Judgment constantly, and in an eminent manner: And the more their Faith, the
more their Righteousness; for Faith must needs effectually incline them unto it.

3. By Faith they obtained Promises. By Promises understand things promised,
and these not general, but particular. To the Patriarchs, before Joshua, the
Land of Ca^aan was promised; yet not given, not enjoyed; only their Posterity
under Joshua obtained that Promise. Christ was promised to them all, yet they
obtained not this Promise; for he was not exhibited till many years after:
These were more general Promises. There were besides many eminent Mercies
particular, of Victory, Deliverance, Peace, and other things, which by Faith
they obtained; yet so as that they used the means which God vouchsased unto
them, and these means without Faith had been insufficient. This informs us,
that as great things are done, so great things are obtained by Faith, which
believes the Word of God, and relyeth upon his Promises: For God promised,
they believed, the things promised were performed.

4. By Faith they stopped the Mouths of Lions. This is understood principally
of Daniel, Sampson slew a Lion, and so did David: Daniel was saved from the
hungry fierce Lions, when he was cast into their Den of purpose to be devoured.
This he acknowledged as a great and special Mercy from his God, when he said to
Darius, My God has sent his Angel, and has shut the Lions Mouths, that they
have not hurt me, Dan. 6. 22. This Preservation was miraculous, and a Mercy
obtained by Faith: For his Cause was just, he would not intermit his constant
Devotion and his Supplications unto his God, though he should suffer Death, and
resolved to observe the just Command of God, and refused to obey the unjust
Command of Man, and was persuaded that God was able to deliver him, and
therefore he cast himself wholly upon his Mercy: This he could never have done
without Faith. This place is not to be understood, that he by his own Power did
stop the Lions Mouths, but that God by his Angel did it upon his Faith, whereby
he obtained this Mercy.

5. By Faith some of them quenched the violence of Fire. By this and the former
we understand, that diverse of these particulars are not to be attributed to the
Faith of all and every one, but to some particular Persons of them, as severed
from the rest. The former Worthy intended was one of the Prophets, and these
might be such also, yet not so eminent; for these words are not meant of a
single Person, but of Shadrac, Meshech, and Abcd^ego, three Jews,
fellow-Captives with Daniel: These were cast into a fiery Furnace, so violently
hot, that the very persons, who cast them in, were consumed, Yet these walking
in the midst of this raging heat, were not burned. For upon their Bodies, the
fire had no power, nor was an hair of their head sindged; neither were their
Coats changed, nor the smell of fire had passed upon them, Dan. 3. 27. This
was a wonderful deliverance, and a work of God's almighty hand; and it was
obtained by their Faith, manifested to be sincere by their Obedience. For they
disobeyed the wicked Command of the King, and steadfastly resolved to obey their
God. For so they said unto Nebuchadnezzar, We will not serve thy gods, nor
worship the golden Image which thou have set up. This was their Obedience, They
feared not the wrath of the King, but trusted in their God, that be was able to
deliver them: This was their excellent Faith, upon which followed this
deliverance. By these two last examples, we understand how easily God can, and
how ready he is to deliver his believing Servants out of greatest dangers.

6. By Faith they, that is, some of them; escaped the Sword.] The Sword is a
mortal Instrument, the Prince of Weapons, and used most of all in Wars, when
once the pa^^ies join battle, and come close. It may here be taken
Synechdochically for any kind of destroying Instrument used either in War or
Peace. In War, David and many of the Judges escaped the edge of the Sword, and
were saved from the fury of the Enemy. In Peace, Elijah, Elisha, Jeremy, and
other, were delivered out of the hands of those who intended to murder them.
They were in danger, because they served God, did his Work, and gave no just
cause of offense. They were delivered, because whilst they were obedient to
their God, they trusted in him. Yet here seems to be intended some great
dangers, and signal deliverances upon their eminent Faith. As the former were
delivered from Fire and wild Beasts, so these from the Sword: No dangers can
hurt those whom God will save; they are safe, in the midst of greatest Evils.

7. By Faith, of weak, some became strong,] This, by many, is understood of
recovery from Sickness and Diseases; and the same sometimes mortal, and by man
incurable: and some instance in Ezekiah, whom God upon his prayer of Faith
restored to perfect health; and because his Disease was mortal, therefore the
cure was supernatural and miraculous, and said to be obtained by Faith. Others
understand it of such as were weak in respect of Warlike strength and valor,
and far inferior to their Enemies for multitude, strength, prowess, policy;
yet by Faith and confidence in God, few overcame many; the weak subdued the
strong; the plain unskilful, not only defended themselves, but terrified their
Enemies,; and though at first they were fearful, yet by Faith they strengthened
themselves in God, and upon their prayers were encouraged against potent
Enemies.

8. Waxed valiant in fight,] Many of God's Saints, and some of the forenamed,
were Soldiers, and men of mighty Valor, who through Faith were so encouraged,
that they feared neither the number, nor the strength of their Enemies. Valor
is proper unto a good Soldier, and in War is necessary, as fear and co^ardize
is the ruin of many a goodly Army. War is very dangerous, and full of hazard,
and the event uncertain. The more the danger and the difficulty, the greater
measure of fortitude is requisite: The nature of Valor is not wholly to
contemn dangers, but to foresee and resist them, and no ways yield unto them;
to adventure upon them, and march through them. It Is the strength of the mind,
without which the strength of the Body is to little purpose. This is not a
blind boldness, nor merely moral, and grounded only upon Reason, but it is
divine. For when the Cause was good, and they had a Command with a Promise, and
sometimes with instructions from God, they had great reason to be valiant; they
might say with David, after they had prayed, I will not be afraid of ten
thousands of People, which have set themselves round about me, Psalm. 3. 6. When
the Lord was his Light, and Salvation, and strength of his Life, he had little
cause to fear. For though an Host should encamp against him, his heart was not
afraid; though War did rise against him, yet in that would he be confident,
Psalm. 27. 1, 3. These did not fight only for their Estates, Wives, Children,
and their Country; but for their Religion, the Covenant, and the Cities of
their God. Their valor was grounded upon the goodness of their cause, and the
promise of their God; which firmly supported their Faith, as their Faith did
much increase their Valor.

9. They turned to Flight the Armies of the Aliens,] These Aliens were Heathens
and Idoliters, and so Enemies not only to their Country, but to their Religion
and their God. This made their Cause the better, and more just, and the Enemies
Cause the more unjust. The event of their Wars against these was, that they
routed them, and made them turn their backs and sly: For as they sought for God
out of Faith, so God fought for them according to his Promise, which was the
ground of their Belief and Confidence. Most of these Wars seem to be defensive,
or, if offensive, yet waged against injurious People, who were Enemies not only
to them, but to God; and this Success, and these Victories were extraordinary.
If, in a just War, we have the like Cause, and the like Faith, we may expect
the like Success. But now many Wars are made amongst Christians, and sometimes
in the bowels of the same Nation; and the Cause is not just, but the Quarrel is
begun and continued out of Pride, Malice, Cruelty, Ambition, and desire of
Revenge; and they sight not out of Faith against God's Enemies, but against
God's People.

. 34. The Apostle proceeds in this Rhetorical strain, to enumerate other
effects of their Faith.

Ver. 35. Women received their Dead, raised to life again; and others were
tortured, not accepting deliverance, that they might obtain a better
Resurrection.] IN these words, we may observe two Consequents of Faith.

1. The Resurrection of persons dead. 2. The suffering of cruel torments in
hope of the Resurrection to eternal life.


The first is to referred to the mercies obtained by Faith; the second, to the
sufferings which are to be reduced to the Catalogue of Sufferings, which
follow. In the first, we may observe,

1. What the mercy received was. 2. Who received it. 3. By what they received
it.


1. The mercy received was great, and such as could not have been given, but by
God, and also by his extraordinary power. For it presupposes the parties
raised to be dead, which is the last and greatest of all evils in this Life,
and puts an end to all our earthly Hopes and Comforts, which it wholly takes
away. And though men may strengthen the Weak, heal the Sick relieve the
oppressed, and deliver out of many Troubles and Dangers; yet Death they cannot
prevent, when the fatal hour approaches; nor restore life after it is once
lost. Death is an invincible Enemy, and neither can Man or Angel rescue any out
of Death's power: yet the parties dead, which were Children, were raised, life
restored to them, and Soul and Body separated, were reunited, yet to be
separated again; for the life restored was not immortal.

2. The parties who received this extraordinary Mercy, were both Women and
Mothers, as the parties dead were their Children. The one was the Widow of
Zarepta, 1 King. 17. 19. and he that raised her son, was Elijah. The other was
the Shunamite, whose son being dead, was restored to life by Elisha, 2 King. 4.
21. There was a third person raised from the dead, when he was cast into the
Grave of the Prophet. We do not read of any other dead persons restored to life
in the Old Testament, by these or any other Prophets.

3. By Faith they are said to have received their dead. It Is not written, that
they raised them, but that they received them being raised: The Prophets did
raise them, restore them, and deliver them to their Mothers. Yet neither could
these Prophets, by their own power do any such thing; for it was an effect of
the almighty power of God, who made them his Instruments; and by them, upon
their instant prayers, did this great Work: yet their prayers without Faith,
could not have been so effectual. The Women also did much desire this mercy,
and did believe that God by the Prophets could restore their Children: which
were raised by the Faith of Prophets, and received alive by the Faith of the
Mothers.

The second Effect here mentioned, is Patience in such as suffered cruel
Torments in their Bodies. Here begins the Catalogue of the suffering of the
Saints, which did evidence their Faith; without which we can neither do good,
nor suffer evil, so as God requires. This example is not found in Canonical
Scripture, therefore the Apostle knew it either by Tradition, or some
historical Writing; yet so, that he some ways knew infallibly the truth of the
matter. Some think the Apostle understood Eliazar mentioned, 2 Match. 6. 18, 19,
20, etc. and the Woman and her seven Sons so cruelly tortured, as we read in 2
Maccab. 7. Chapter following, who are related to have suffered constantly in
hope of the Resurrection.

In the words we may observe,

1. Their Suffering. 2. Their non-Acceptance of Deliverance. 3. Their Faith.


1. Their Suffering; they were Tortured. The Sufferings of God's People may be
truly said to be either Trials, or Chastifements, or Punishments, or some or
all of these; and if we consider the Evils which both good and bad are subject
unto in this Life, we must distinguish between the matter and the manner. For
the matter of Sufferings, passively considered, may be the same in all; but the
manner, as also the Causes, are very different: For the Sufferings of God's
Saints are so qualified by Faith, that in them many divine virtues are
manifested; and they tend, though not to the meriting, yet to the attaining of
eternal Glory: For if we suffer with Christ, we shall be glorified with him,
Romans 8. 17. And our leight Affliction, which is but for a moment, works for
us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of Glory, 2 Cor. 4. 17. These
Persons here intended, are said to be Tympanized, which is, to be tormented
several ways; as by beating and fustigation, by racking and extension, by
tearing and excoriation; for the word it self does not determine the manner of
Torment. Therefore it is well turned by this general word Tortured, that is,
they were put to bodily pain: The Torturers were An^^ochus and his cursed
Agents, the Sufferers and Subjects of these Tortures were the Jews, which
refused to obey the Commands of that cruel Tyrant contrary to the Laws of God.

2. The Non-Acceptance of Deliverance does imply, that they might upon certain
Conditions have been freed from these cruel Pains, and so have prevented Death;
and that they rather chose to suffer more and die, than accept of the
Conditions. If we consult the History, we shall understand, 1. That they were
commanded to do some things contrary to the Laws of God. 2. That though they
were in the Power of a cursed, cruel Prince, and persuaded both by Promise and
threatening to obey, yet they refused. 3. That upon the Refusal they were
tortured. 4. In some Intermission of the torture they were advised again to
yield; for their Persecutors thought the bitterness of the pain might prevail
much with them. 5. Yet it did not; for they remained constant, and were ready
to suffer the worst, and to die rather than disobey their God. This was the
Cause of their Suffering, and made it glorious: For they suffered not as
Malefactors for their Crimes, but for Righteousness sake, and did manifest that
they loved God and Righteousness more than their lives.

3. They did thus suffer, thus refuse Deliverance, to obtain a better
Resurrection; this was the End of both, and did manifest both their Faith and
Hope. 1. Their Faith, in that they did believe there was a Resurrection unto
eternal Life, and that God not only could but also would raise them up again;
restore an immortal, glorious, blessed Life, for a miserable, short, and mortal
Breath; and abundantly recompense their cruel Pains suffered in Obedience to
him with eternal Pleasures. They were assured, that God was a Rewarder of those
who diligently seek him by doing Good, and suffering Evil for his sake. 2.
Their Hope grounded upon this Faith was, their constant expectation of this
Resurrection according to God's Promise; For he had promised it to all such as
really love him: and their Suffering was a great Evidence of their Title, and
did assure them of Possession in due time. Here two things are to be noted: 1.
That Resurrection to Immortality is general, and common to all, both good and
bad; for all must rise again to Judgment: Yet some shall rise to Condemnation,
and the Suffering of eternal Shame and Punishment, and others unto everlasting
Life and Glory. This latter Resurrection is here meant, which is said to be
better, because by it they should receive a better Life than could be enjoyed
on Earth. 2. That it is better for any Man to suffer the most cruel Punishments,
and the worst of Tortures, Man can inflict, than lie under extreme and
everlasting Pains, and the loss of Heaven in the Life to come; and this was a
Principle and Ground of their Patience, Constancy, and Fidelity to their God:
Thus they became true Martyrs, proved Victorious, and were crowned in Heaven.

. 35. Besides the former, there were others who suffered other kinds of Evils;
for it follows,

Ver. 36. And others had Trial of cruel Mockings, and Scourgings; yea moreover,
of Bonds and Imprisonment. HEre are three different Evils suffered by the
Saints:

1. Mockings. 2. Scourgings. 3. Bonds and Imprisonments.


So that the parts of the Text are three,

1. The Enumeration of these Evils. 2. Their Suffering of them. 3. Their Faith.


1. The Evils were, 1. Mockings. The Parties mocked were God's Saints and
Prophets; the Parties mocking were their Enemies and Persecutors, which proved
to be sometimes their own Brethren, of the same Nation, Language, Kindred,
Religion; and amongst these, sometimes the basest of the People, sometimes the
Priests, Princes, and Rulers, who should have honored and protected them.
These Mockings issue out of Contempt, and tend unto the Disgrace and Dishonor
of the Party mocked, and makes it a Sport to abuse them, so as to rejoice in
their misery: These Mockings are sometimes in words, sometimes in signs,
sometimes in both. And because to a grave serious Person, of eminent Worth,
some of these Mockings are very bitter, cutting, cruel, not only in respect of
the matter, but also of the Circumstances, this made the Sufferings more
glorious. But why our Translators should add the word Cruel, I know not; the
Septuagint, and other Authors, do not use either the Verb or Noun in that
sense: Yet to proud men that stand upon their Honor, Mocking is far more
grievous than to the lowly and humble. 2. Scourgings. This is a Punishment also
of great disgrace and sometimes of cruel pain, when by Whips, either of Cords or
Wires, not only the Skin is broken, but the very Flesh torn. And this was the
more grievous, because it was an usual Punishment of Slaves, of vilest Persons,
and of such as were of worst behavior, and by it they were not only put to
pain, but to open shame. 3. The third Punishment was of Bonds and
Imprisonnsent: Bonds were Shackles, Fe^^ers, Chains, Manacles, wherewith their
feet or hands or some other parts were bound. Prisons were usually strong
places, and many times nasfy and uncomfortable; and the worst kind of them were
deep, dark, and dirty Dungeons: Both these were restraints of Liberty, which is
so precious and desirable. The End of them was the Reservation of Malefactors
or suspected Persons, till the time of Trial and Judgment; and close
Imprisonment was so much the more grievous, when they were deprived of all
comfortable Society, and no friends suffered to relieve them.

2. These they suffered; some endured one of them, some more, some all: For
they had Trial or Experience of these things; so some understand it, as though
the sense were, that they did not fear them threatened, but feel them inflicted.
Others think that these were called Trials from God, to manifest the sincerity
of their Faith and their heavenly Virtues, that they might certainly know the
happiness of their Condition; or from their Petsecutors, to shake their Faith,
and cause them to renounce their Fidelity to God. But the former sense is more
plain and genuine, as appears by the Septuagint using it so, and also from the
29th. Verse of this Chapter; and it signifies, that they were not only in
danger of, but under the present pressure of these evils. Though their Enemies
did afflict and vex them unjustly and wickedly, yet they suffered them
patiently, and resolved that though God should kill them, yet they would trust
in him.

3. They thus suffered these things by Faith: For they knew the way to Heaven
was rough and troublesome, and that these Sufferings could not separate them
from the Love of God, nor deprive them of the great Reward, but prepare them
for eternal Glory: For they vetily believed that there was eternal Life, that
God had promised it, and that Constancy in the Covenant, and Perseverance in
the way of Righteousness was the only means to attain Possession; and they
knew, that though their Sufferings were grievous, yet the Reward would
infinitely recompense all.

. 36. The Catalogue of the Saints Sufferings is continued and enlarged: For,

Ver. 37. They were stoned, sawen asunder, tempted, slain with the Sword; they
wandered about in Sheepskins, and Goat Skins, destitute, afflicted, tormented.
IN this Text we find several sorts of Sufferers; for some were put to Death,
some banished, or fled, and wandered in great want and misery, seeking to save
their Lives and keep a good Conscience: So that they are of two sorts.

1. Such as were put to Death. 2. Such as wandered and continued a miserable
Life.


1. Those that dyed were,

1. Either stoned, or 2. Sawen asunder, or 3. Tempted, or 4. Slain with the
Sword.


These were the several ways whereby they were put to Death: And those capital
Punishments, which God and just Lawgivers determined for capital Offenders,
were inflicted upon the most innocent and best Persons of the World. The Power
of punishing Offenders is good, and from God, but the abuse of it is most
intolerable; for Persecutors condemn those whom God does justify.

1. Some were stoned. This was a Punishment determined by God in the Judicial
Laws of Moses, to be executed upon several Delinquents and Transgressors: Yet
no Judge had Warrant from God to condemn any innocent Person to this kind of
Death; yet Zacharias, for charging the Jews with their Sins, and denbuncing
God's Judgments against them, was stoned to Death. 2. Some were sawen asunder:
Thus some say Isaiah was slain by Manasses, this was a cruel kind of Execution.
3. Some were tempted, so many printed Books read; yet few can make sense of it:
Others think it should be not (...), but (...) were bu^^t; and this is more
agreeable to the Place and Scope; Others omit it, as the Syriack, the
Aethiopick, the first Greek Manu-script in New-Colledge, Oxford. Neither do
Chrysostom or Theophylact read it, as Grotius informs us; yet a Lapide finds it
in Chrysostom, which seems to imply, that either one of them was mistaken, or
that they followed several Editions. If it should be read, and in this place,
as it is hardly probable, then it signifies, that several were tempted by some
cruel kind of Death to forsake their God, yet they did not. 4. Some were slain
by the Sword, which is used as well by the Magistrate against offending
Subjects, as by the Soldier against Enemies: Martyrs might be thus slain,
either judicially or extrajudicially, without any formal Process of Judgment;
for many times they laid heinous Crimes to their Charge, suborned Witnesses,
and so sentenced them to Death: Sometimes they made Justice Injustice,
Obedience to God Disobedience to Man, and virtuous Acts heinous Crimes; and so
called Good, Evil; and Light, Darkness. Yet these were not all the kinds of
capital Punishments which the Servants of God suffered, but only some few; for
the Cruelty of Persecutors invented others, and made use of them. The whole
signifies, that the Lives of the Saints and Prophets were taken away cruelly
and most unjustly by several kinds of tormenting Deaths.

2. Some were not slain, but lived a miserable Life: For, 1. They wandered. They
might be Wanderers, either by constraint, or voluntarily; by Constraint, as
when they were banished, or forcibly dispossessed of their Houses and dwelling
places; voluntarily, as when for fear of Death, or to enjoy the quiet of
Conscience, they fled out of their Country, or from the places of their
Habitation, so that they had no certain safe place of Rest: They were
continually flitting and removing, as not having where to lay their heads. 1.
In this wandering condition they were destitute of Raiment and Clothes, whereby
they might cover their Shame, and defend their Bodies from the Injuries of
Heaven. They wanted Stuff, or, if they had Stuff, they could not have them
made; and in this Case they used Sheepskins and Goat Skins; which Expression
implies, 1. That their Clothing was very mean and coorse; yea, not so much as
shapen, sewed up, and sitted for their Bodies, but only wrapped about some
principal pa^^s, leaving others naked. These did not deserve the name of
Garments, but were nothing else but Skin upon Skin, the Skin of Beasts upon the
Skin of Man. We use Apparel for necessity, convenience, decency, and pomp:
These were far from pomp, there was neither decency not convenience in them;
they did hardly reach so far as necessity required. Though great is the Pride,
Vanity, and excess in Apparel of many in these times, who little think of this
sad condition of God's Saints; yet they know not how soon they may be stripped of
all. 3. They were destitute, that is, in great want of other Necessaries, and,
as the Word does signify, very poor and indigent: for they had left all their
Substance, or it was taken from them, or they could have no use of it in their
Necessity. And if they wandered amongst strangers, little was to be expected
from them; for strangers are many times used strangely, and few are sensible of
their miseries. Some think the word may be turned [descerti], deserted and
forsaken; for in such a case, few dare own their own Flesh and Blood, and
nearest Relations. Yet the former sense seems to be more genuine; For their
very Habit did signify, that their Penury was very great. 4. They were
afflicted; for in such a case their straits must be many, and the pressures and
perplexities of Body and Mind very great; and such as none, but some, who have
been in their case, can truly apprehend. 5. They were tormented. The word may
signify, they were ill handled, sorely vexed, oppressed, and brought very low.

. 37. Yet these were not all their miseries; for though they were precious men
of worth, and the best in the World, yet they were thrust out of the World. For
so it follows,

Ver. 38. Of whom the World was not worthy; they wandered in Deserts, and in
Mountains, and in Dens and Caves of the Earth.] THe first words seem to be put
in parenthetically, and so the words following agree immediately with the 37
verse. The Propositions are two,

1. The World was not worthy of them. 2. They wandered in Deserts, Mountains,
Dens and Caves of the Earth.


The first stands of it self, and is yet pertinenly interlined. Their
Persecutors did vilify them, and thought them unworthy to live and converse
amongst men, not fit to be suffered in any civil or religious Society. They
counted them the dross, r^feuse, and filth of the World. Therefore they
banished them, expelled them, and, as it were, forced them out of their
Company, to live amongst Beasts; yet they were persons of excellent worth, the
honor and grace of the World, more fit for Heaven then Earth, the only persons
who were able to avert God's wrath, and for whose sake the World did stand, and
by whom the destruction and conslagration of the World was delayed. They were
of high esteem with God and the wicked World was not worthy of their Society.

2. These, put out of the World, were put to wander. Before, it is said, in the
former verse, They went about, for so the word signifies; here it is said, They
wandered. Some think the former word intends, that they went from place to
place, and conversed with men, though strangers, though they had no certain
place of abode amongst them; and this latter denoted a more sad and desolate
condition; for they wandered out of all ways, and in places neither inhabited,
nor well habitable. Yet both words signify, they had no fixed place of
habitation amongst men: But then it might be said, Where did they wander? The
answer, in places inhabited by men, or in places not so inhabited, the latter
is here meant. For they wandered, 1. In deserts and solitary places, where were
neither Cities, nor Towns, nor Villages, nor Houses, nor so much as any poor
Cottages. And though man by Nature be a sociable Creature, and society with men
be comfortable; yet they could not enjoy any such comfort. To converse with
men, was dangerous to be deprived of society, was uncomfortable; therefore to
avoid the danger, they willingly did forego the comfort. 2. They wandered in
Mountains, which also are solitary places, and remote from the company of men.
And 3. In these Mountains, amongst the high and craggy Rocks, there were dens
and hollow places made by Nature, or by Art. 4. Where there were neither
Deserts nor Mountains, they made Caves and Holes under the Ground, and by Art
and Industry contrived Labyrinths, and subterraneal Passages, like unto Roma
Soterana. Here they hid themselves, and laid up such Utensils and Necessaries
as they had; hither they did in time of danger retire themselves. So abandoning
the World, they chose such desert and desolate places, where they might be more
safe amongst wild Beasts than amongst their Persecutors; where they might enjoy
peace and quiet of Conscience, converse with God, and have sweet communion with
their Savior, whom they prized and preferred far above the contents of the
World. Thus David hid himself in the Wilderness of Maon, and of Ziph, in the
Cave of Adullam, and in diverse other places for to save himself from the
persecuting rage of Saul. Thus an hundred of the Lord's Prophets were hid by
Obadiah by fifty in a Cave, and were fed with Bread and Water. Thus Elijah fled
from Jezabel into the Wilderness, and stayed not till he came to Horeb. In all
these Sufferings, you must observe, 1. That they were innocent, and so
persecuted without any just cause. 2. They encured Death, and all these
miseries with patient and cheerful minds. 3. In all this they preferred Christ
before the World, and were willing to suffer loss of All, and many great
miseries for his sake, and continued faithful in the Covenant of their God. 4.
They did all this by Faith. For they believed the Word of God to be true,
rested in his promises, exspected the great Reward, and were assured, that it
was better to suffer Affliction for a while, then lose the eternal Comforts of
their God.

. 38. Thus the Catalogue and Induction of these rare Worthies is finished; and
by it we understand the universal necessity of Faith, and the excellency of it
in the rare Effects thereof, and the Chapter is closed up thus,

Ver. 39. And these all having obtained a good Report through Faith, received
not the Promise:

Ver. 40. God having provided some better thing for us, that they without us
should not be made perfect.

IN these words, we may observe the difference of the Times wherein these
Worthies, and those wherein the Apostle and these Hebrews lived; with the
imperfection of the one, and the perfection of the other. In the former Verse
we have a Rhetorical Epanalepsis, and a elegant Repetition of the main
Proposition, which the Author intended to prove by Induction. For he had said,
ver. 2. That by Faith, which he had described, the Elders obtained a good
Report. This he repeats again in this manner, These all having obtained a good
Report through Faith. The propositions are two,

1. The forementioned Elders obtained a good Report through Faith. 2. Yet they
received not the Promise.


In the first, we must consider;

1. The parties intended. 2. Their good Report. 3. The means whereby they
obtained this good Report.


These things were formerly spoken of, and therefore I may be brief:

1. The persons formerly said to be the Elders; that is, the Saints who lived
in former time. This was a general term, which is here more explicitly
limited, and enlarged by pointing at the particular persons. The words are [all
these]; by [these] are meant Abel, Enoch, Noah, Abraham, and the rest by name
expressed, or some other ways employed. [All], this note of universality puts
them all and every one together, without exclusion or exception of any one.

2. These, all these, obtained a good Report, and had their Testimonials: To be
witnessed, is to be commended and well spoken of by a Synechdoche, as you
formerly heard, The person, who approved and testified of them, was God, and
that in the holy Scriptures, and Records of former times; and they must needs
be good, whom God does commend. All expressed by name, are spoken of expressly
and particularly in the Canonical Writings of the Old Testament; and some
others not named at all. The rest who lived after the Canon was finished, are
also in the Canon commended implicitly, and by undoubted Consequence. For when
God approves any Virtues and virtuous Acts, he approves all such as are endued
with those Virtues, and manifest them in their lives and conversation.

3. The means whereby they became so famous, and of so good report, was, their
Faith. For without it, they neither could have pleased God, nor done so rare
and glorious Works, nor obtained so great Promises, nor suffered with patience
so great trials and afflictions. Faith was the fundamental Virtue in them all,
and the very principle of all their divine Actions and Sufferings.

These obtained a good Report, yet received not the Promise. For,

1. They had a Promise. 2. They received it not.


1. By Promise, understand something promised, which, upon God's Promise made
to them, they expected. What this was, is doubted by many; some will have it to
be the Resurrection, some the Deliverance out of Limbus; where it is imagined,
their Souls were lodged till Christ descended into Hell, and brought them out
of that Lake. As for the former opinion, if understood of the universal
Resurrection, it may be true: As for the latter, it presupposes diverse things,
which yet were never proved; and therefore it is no matter or fit object of a
divine Faith: it is a mere fiction, and no better. This is very certain, and
clear out of Scripture, that they all had a Promise, of Christ to be exhibited;
and this was the great Promise, the foundation and chief cornerstone of their
Faith: No Faith but in him could please God, or give sinful man any hope of
eternal Glory.

2. This Promise they received not; for though it be said before, ver. 33. That
many of them received Promises, and it is true they did so; yet Christ was not
exhibited in their times, they all dyed before the Incarnation, Passion, Death,
and Glorification of Christ, The Word made Flesh. This signifies both the
imperfection of those Times, and of their Faith; for they believed indeed in
Christ, and by that Faith were justified and saved: yet their Faith was in
Christ to come, and could not be so full and clear, as that of the Saints under
the dispensation of the Gospel. And the Redemption of Christ to come was
foreseen, and fore-accepted of God, and was effectual to all Believers from
the beginning. Yet this does manifest the excellency of Faith, in that it was
so effectual in these Saints before the exhibition of Christ; and does much
commend these Saints, who seeing Christ represented unto them at so great a
distance, yet did so firmly believe in him, and by that Faith did effect so
glorious Works, and so constantly endured so many Afflictions. And here one
thing specially is to be noted, that is, that the Faith, whereby they obtained
a good Report, was not a mere speculative assent, but a divine, lively,
powerful, working Faith: Such must ours be, or else we can never certainly
expect eternal life. This condemns many of us, living in the times and light of
the Gospel. For some of us have no Faith; some have only a speculative liveless
Faith, some have only a weak Faith, and come far short of these Worthies. Yet
we have their example, and enjoy a clearer Light: Thus far concerning the times
wherein these Saints lived.

3. In the next place, follows God's benignity and favor unto us, who live in
the days of the Gospel. [For God has provided some better thing for us, that
without us they should not be made perfect.] Where we have two Propositions,

1. God provided some better thing for us. 2. They were not made perfect
without us. In the former observe,


1. Some better thing.

2. The same provided by God. for us.

This better thing is the exhibition of Christ, and the revelation of the
Gospel, which made the latter times more perfect and more happy. The truth of
this appears, 1. By that [Halelujal^] which the Angels sung at Christ's
Nativity, when they brought the News thereof from Heaven, Luke 2. 13, 14. 2. By
words of our Savior, who turning unto his Disciples, said privately, Blessed
are the Eyes, which see the things, that ye see. For I tell you, that many
Prophets and Kings have desired to see the things which ye see, and have not
seen them; and to hear the things which ye hear, and have not heard them, Luke
10. 23, 24. 3. The joy of Simeon, when he saw his Savior, though then but an
Infant, and embraced that blessed Babe in his arms, does manifest the same. 4.
We might add, that the times of the Gospel were more excellent, because the
Angels came to School on Earth amongst Men, to learn something that they had
not known before. This is employed by these words of Paul, And to let all men
see, what is the fellowship of the mystery, which from the beginning of the
World has been hid in God, who created all things by Jesus Christ. To the
intent that [Now] unto Principalities and Powers in heavenly places, might be
known [by the Church] the manifold wisdom of God: According to the eternal
purpose, which he purposed in Christ Jesus our Lord, Ephesians. 3. 9, 10, 11. And by
those of Peter, 1 Pet. 1. 17. -- Which things the Angels desire to look into.
5. Upon the exhibition of Christ, and the revelation of the Gospel, the rule of
Faith was more fully, clearly, and distinctly declared (as the former places do
signify), and the Holy Ghost was more plentifully powered down from Heaven. So
that the times of the Gospel were times of far greater perfection then the
former had been.

2. This better thing was provided by God, who disposes of all times, and of
all things to be done, as knowing both what, and when is most fit to be
effected. And as by his Wisdom he contrived this better thing, so by his Will
he determined it, and when the time came by his Almighty Power, he accomplished
what he had provided. This implie^, that it was his Work, and from his own free
Will he made this provision, without any thoughts of Man.

3. He provided this better thing [for us], that is, for Paul and the Hebrews,
and all such as lived under that excellent dispensation, and enjoyed the light
of the Gospel. For they are the parties, who had the benefit and the privilege,
which the Elders and Ancient worthies expected, but never received in their
times.

. 40. They were not perfected without us, this is the second Proposition, which,

1. Implies, That they were perfected. 2. Expressly affirms, That they were not
perfected without us.


1. The former times were times of imperfection, both in respect of the object
of Faith, which was Christ to come, and also in respect of the revelation and
proposal of the rule, which was then more dark and implicit; and therefore
before Christ's exhibition, and the clear light of the Gospel, the Saints and
Elders of Old, could not be perfected. What the imperfection of their Souls and
Spirits separated, was before the time of Christ's Ascension, we know not so
clearly, and we are ignorant in part of that perfection, which they then
acquired. But certainly, besides that some of them were raised with Christ,
their condition was much bettered. The knowledge of their Savior was much
increased, and their joys much advanced. But that this perfection should be
their deliverance out of the dark [Limbus], and upper part of Hell; I cannot be
persuaded, I find no Scripture for it.

2. Yet they were not perfected without us, who live under the Gospel. God so
ordered it, that as their Faith was not so perfect as ours, so their estate
should not be bettered, till the glorious light of Heaven shined out upon us
and them jointly, and upon us both together. If they were not made perfect
without us, and they received not the promise, and we did, and they continued
constant in Faith; how much more are we, who have received it, bound to be
constant and persevere.

. 41. Though we find many examples in Scripture proposed for imitation, and
several Duties pressed thereupon; yet we find no place in this kind so full, so
large, so particular as this of the Apostle, wherein he singles out the prime
and choicest Worthies of God, which have lived in all Ages before Christ from
the beginning of the World. And it is a kind of Induction, which though not
expressly, yet implicitly reaches almost a general. For examples logically
considered, are but particular individuals, which united together, make up a
[Totum genericum], which many say, is nothing but [species ^^sima]; but we must
not quarrel about words. Morally and Theologically taken, they do illustrate
and make plain the matter whereof they are examples; but as examples do not
bind, except the matter be found in some precept in force, or of universal and
perpetual obligation, as this of Faith and perseverance in Faith is. Yet this
is observable in Scripture, that God does not only give us examples for
imitation, but commands us to follow them, and they are added to the precepts
to make the duty more evident, more easy, and more fit for encouragement.
Surely there was some special reason, why the Author should so enlarge in this
topic of examples: The reason seems to be the necessity of Faith in respect of
Salvation, which was such as that never any of the best of Saints could attain
it, or did attain it without this Virtue. Besides, as there was danger, so
there was great fear of Apostasy, because of many temptations. And it is
remarkable, that he does not instance in any Ceremonial Duty, as of Sacrifice,
and such like; nor in the works of the Law, but in Faith, yet a most lively and
working Faith: and he does manifest, that this was a fundamental virtue from
the beginning. As for his method, it is as clear as such a matter is capable of,
and the subject is handled with a great deal of artifice. He, 1. Describes
Faith, and makes that the basis and foundation of his following Discourse, not
only to let them know what the duty was he formerly exhorted unto, but to give
light to the Examples following. 2. He signifies that it was an ancient and
general virtue whereby the Elders became so famous. 3. Because it was fit in
producing so many Examples to observe some Order, and so begin; with one more
ancient than the rest, as with Abel, who was the second Son of the first Man;
and lest it might be said that there were many Ages of the World before his
time, he informs us that the World had a beginning, and that by Faith we
believe it, and therefore his first Example is one living in the beginning of
the World, and from him draws the Series or Catalogue down to latter times.

CHAP. XII.
Wherein the Exhortation to Perseverance is continued.

. 1. THE Analysis of this Chapter is easy; for in the Exhortation continued, we
must observe,

1. The Duty exhorted upto, which is Perseverance. 2. The Reasons and Motives
whereupon it is urged.


Which are,

1. The former Examples. 2. The Example of Christ. 3. The Nature of their
Sufferings, as they come from God. 4. Diverse ill Consequents; if Apostasy, and
the Causes and Occasions thereof, be not avoided. 5. The Excellency of the
Church under the Gospel, above the Church under the Law. 6. The Manner of
revealing the Gospel. 7. The Immutability of that happy and glorious Estate
which we receive by the Gospel.


The first Reason is from the former Examples, in this manner,

Ver. 1. Wherefore seeing we also are encompassed about with so great a Cloud
of Witnesses, let us lay aside every weight, and the Sin which does so easily
beset us, and let us run with Patience the Race that is set before us.

IN these words the Apostle makes use of the former Examples, inferring from
thence an hortative Conclusion: For they are brought in by the Illative
Particle Therefore, which implies, that Logically considered they are
Dianoetical. So that in them we may observe,

1. The Premises. 2. The Conclusion.


If we look upon the Text Theologically, we find

1. A Duty commanded, which is, Perseverance. 2. A Reason why we should perform
it, and that is, the Multitude of Examples proposed for Imitation.


I will begin with the Reason, wherein we have the Premises; and it is this,
[We have a Multitude, or are compassed with a Multitude of Witnesses. This is
the Assumption of the Syllogism, and presupposes the Proposition, which is
this, [That they who have a Multitude of Examples, ought to follow them,] out
of which the first words of the Text are assumed: And in them two things are
affirmed,

1. There was a Multitude, or a great Cloud of Witnesses. 2. They were
compassed with this great Cloud.


1, There were Witnesses. By Witnesses are understood the rare Worthies
mentioned and reckoned up in the former Chapter, as Abel, Enoch, Noah, Abraham,
and the rest, which here he does not severally and distinctly name, but puts
them in one Body to make them a great Cloud. These are called Witnesses, not
only passively because they obtained a good Report or Testimony, for God
witnessed of them and commended them; but also actively, because they testified
and declared by their rare Acts, and many Sufferings, the excellency and
necessity of Faith; so that by it they became Examples worthy of Imitation.
Every one of them severally, and all jointly, speak to all future Generations,
and exhort them to believe constantly as they did, and they shall receive the
like Reward: Yet they might be Witnesses, and yet not so many as to make a
Cloud, but they were a Cloud, that is, a Multitude, as a Cloud is made up of a
Multitude of Vapors gathered together, and condensed in one Body. The
Expression seems to be taken from the words of the Prophet, Who are these that
fly as a Cloud, and as Doves to their Windows? Isa. 60. 8. The place speaks of
the Multitude of Converts which should be added to the Church, and they are
compared for their Multitude to a Cloud, and to Doves which fly in great
Companies, and darken the Air intercepting the Light of the Heavens. Yet they
were not only a Cloud, and so many, but a great Cloud, and so very numerous;
and yet more numerous, because they did compass them on every side. All these
did compass them, and were set before them in such Multitudes as Examples, and
proposed to them for Imitation and Encouragement.

2. The Conclusion he infers from the Euthymetical Premises, follows; the
Illation implies an Obligation to imitate them, and the Duty is delivered by
way of Exhortation; For it was their Duty to follow their Example, and he
exhorts them to do so. The Duty exhorted unto has two parts, 1. They must lay
aside every weight, and the Sin which does so easily beset them. 2. They must
run with Patience the Race which was set before them. The former is subordinate
unto the latter, which cannot be performed without the Performance of the
former. The Pharse and Expression is Metaphorical, and taken from the Isthmian
or Olympian Games, wherein certain Persons did strive in wrestling or running
or some other Excercises for a prize. And in these there were many Bystanders
and Spectarors, and a space in the midst of them for the Agonists and
Contenders to run in, and a Goal before them; and he that by constant and
speedy running did reach the Goal first, obtained the Victory and wan the
Prize; and in the first place they laid aside their loose and heavy Garments,
that they might not be hindered or entangled with them, but that they might more
speedily, and with greater Expedition, finish the Stage and Course. Thus much
premised, the parts of the Duty, as you have heard before, are two:

1. They must lay aside every weight, and the Sin that did so easily beset
them. 2. They must run with Patience the Race that was set before them.


1. There is something to be laid aside: It was their Duty [removere prohibens]
to remove Impediments; for there are Impediments, and these must be removed and
laid aside, because they will hinder us in this heavenly Course. The things
that do hinder are said to be Weight and Sin. By the former, some understand
all outward; by the latter, all inward things which make our Passage slow and
troublesome. By Weight no doubt is meant something, which to the Soul is as
heavy things are to the Body: Some think the word (...) here signifies Pride,
and an high Persuasion of our own Perfection, as though we had finished our
Course and obtained the Prize. This is contrary to that of the Apostle,
Brethrea, I count not my self to have apprchended, but this thing I do,
forgetting those things that are behind, and reaching forth to those things
that are before; I press toward the Mark for the high prize of the Calling of
God in Christ Jesus, Phil. 3. 13, 14. This is Hensius his conceir. Others by it
do think are signified the cares of this Life, the Multitude of secular
business, the many Temptations and Opposition; from without; and no doubt all
these do hindet much. Yet by Weight may be signified Sin, and so the latter
word is put exegerieally to interpret the former: This Sin, as many tell us, is
our imbred Corruption; and this is not only native, but acquired and improved;
and is not only our Imperfection, which is our Weakness and Want of Strength,
but a positive Deprivation, which; with the Devil and the World, will make a
great Opposition. By Reason of the former, we can make but little speed; by
Reason of the latter, we are often Interrupted. From this Corruption arise our
cares, fears, discouragements, and our too much love of the World: And our
Translation takes notice of the Article in the Greek, and turns it The Sin,
which some will have to be original Corruption and Concupiscence; yet it may
import, that in every Man there is some Predominant Sin, and in every
regenerate Person some Relics of that Sin, from which is the greatest danger,
because, as it follows, it will so easily beset us. It Is like our Garments,
which enfold us, and stick close unto us. By Reason of this Weight, and the Sin
which does easily beset us, our spiritual Strength, Vigor, and Agility, are
much abated, and our Course toward eternal Glory retarded; therefore the Duty
is, to cast off these. This is the same with putting off the Old Man, and
mortifying the inordinate Inclinations and Motions both of the concupiscible
and irascible part; and this Mortification must be universal, we must cast off
every weight.

2. The second Proposition is, That when these Impediments are removed, and
every Weight and Sin cast off, to run with Patience the Race that is set before
us. This implies, 1. That there is a glorious prize set before us. 2. That
there is a Distance between it and us. 3. That there is a space or way through
which we must pass, and leads directly unto it. These things presupposed, the
Duty is, To run with Patience the Race that is set before us. This Running is a
Motion, and a speedy Motion too, whereby we measure the space between Heaven
and us; it must be speedy, and therefore requires the putting forth of our
utmost Strength so as to strive, as the Original word turned Race implies. As
we must run, and so make speed, so we must run with Patience. The word (...)
implies, 1. That the way is troublesome. 2. That it is long. It Is troblesom,
because we shall meet with many Impediments; it is long, because of the great
Distance between us and eternal Glory. Because it is troublesome and grievous to
Flesh and Blood, therefore we must be patient and endure; because it is long, we
must be constant: and though the Flesh may much desire it, yet we must not
rest, nor think of Rest, before we reach the Goal, and be possessed of the
Prize; for the word does not only signify Patience, but continued Patience. If
it be God's Will, that we must pass unto our heavenly Inheritance through a
Wilderness, and there to wander forty years and longer, we must be content, go
on, not rest, not think of returning into Egypt; we must quietly submit unto
his good Pleasure. This business of Perseverance is not so easy; it cannot be
performed, except we receive a new life and vigor from Heaven, and continual
Assistance; besides our care, watchfulness, and incessant labor. We must
strive if ever we will enter in at the strait Gate; for the Kingdom of God
suffers violence, and the violent take it by force: Yet the Prize is
excellent, and far above all that we can do and suffer; for though we pass
through Fire and Water, yet God brings us into a wealthy place. The force of
the Apostle's Reason is very strong; for we should persevere, because 1. We
have good Examples. 2. These Examples are many. 3. They are Examples of rare
and excellent Persons, some of the best that ever lived under Heaven. 4. These
Examples, being upon Divine Record, are proposed unto us by God himself. 5.
They are Patterns of the rarest Virtues, manifested in their Divine and Noble
Acts. 6. They are Precedents, not only in Words and Profession, but in Deeds
and bitter Sufferings, and do manifest unto us, that there is nothing in this
Duty impossible, nor any thing so difficult but may be overcome through Christ
strengthening and enabling us.

. 2. The Apostle closes up this Induction with the Example of Jesus Christ our
Lord, and the Son of God: This he kept for a Reserve, as far above all the
rest; for Christ was the purest Mirror of all heavenly Virtues, which, as
exemplified in Him, were beyond Comparison, and in the highest Degree. They
must eye the other Worthies much, but Christ more, for they must follow them,
and run their Race; yet in running they must be

Ver. 2. Looking unto Jesus, the Author and Finisher of our Faith; who, for the
Joy that was set before him, endured the Cross, despising the Shame, and is set
down at the right hand of the Throne of God. IN these we have,

1. An Example proposed. 2. An Exhortation to look upon it.


In the first we may consider,

1. Who it is that is proposed as an Example. 2. Wherein He is an Example, and
what it is in Him which we must look upon.


The Party proposed for an Example is Christ, who is described to be

1. The Author 2. The Finisher of our Faith.

That which we must look upon, is,

1. His Virtues manifested in his Humiliation. 2. The great Reward of these
Virtues, and his glorious Exaltation.


The whole may be reduced to these Propositions,

1. Jesus Christ is the Author and Finisher of our Faith. 2. He, for the Glory
set before him, endured the Cross, and despised the Shame. 3. After that,
despising the Shame, he had endured the Cross; he sat down at the right hand
of God. 4. In running with Patience the Race that is set before us, We must
look upon him thus represented.


1. Christ is the Author and Finisher of our Faith. This is not meant, that he
is the adequate Object of our Faith, as saving; nor, that if Faith be taken for
the habit and gift of Faith, that he does plant it in us at the first, and
continues to preserve it till it be finished; though both these in some
respects are true. But Faith seems here to be taken for our Christian Religion
which we profess, and also for the Rule of our Faith and Religion. It Is true,
that this Christian Faith was from the beginning, in a large sense; for there
was never any time since the first Promise of Christ, wherein the Saints did
not believe in Christ, and had a certain Rule of their Faith: Yet here Faith is
taken more strictly for that Doctrine, which represents Christ more fully and
clearly, as already come into the World, and as having finished the great Work
of Redemption. This place is like that in Chap. 3. 1. where these Hebrews were
exhorted to consider the Apostle and the High Priest of their Profession Christ
Jesus. That which is there called Profession, is here called Faith; he who
there is said to be the Apostle and High Priest of our Profession, is said here
to be the Author and Finisher of our Faith; as though he were the Author as an
Apostle, and the Finisher as a Priest. That as an Apostle and Prophet he was
the Author, Institutor, and first Publisher of our Faith, is evident: For,
Chap. 2. 3. that Salvation, that is, that Doctrine of Salvation, which is the
Gospel, began first to be spoken by the Lord. He might be said to finish,
perfect, and confirm it, as a Priest, when he sealed i^ with his Blood, and
merited the Spirit of Revelation, to make it known, and of Power, to make it
effectual upon our hearts. Again, he is the Finisher of it, as sending the Holy
Ghost from Heaven upon the Apostles, and by them making known the Gospel, and
diffusing the Christian Religion through the World. In a word, He was the sole
and whole efficient Cause of Christian Religion; and this is the meaning of the
words. The Reason of this Character given, is, to set forth the Excellency of
the Person, who is here proposed a Pattern, more effectually to encourage us to
Imitation. And whom should we follow, if not him to whom we have so near
Relation, and upon whom that Religion and Faith whereby we hope to be saved
does so much depend, for the institution, efficacy, and perpetual continuance?

The second Proposition. This Jesus Christ, for the joy that was set before
him, endured the Cross, despising the Shame.

Wherein we have,

1. The Rice, or Virtue. 2. Prize, or Reward.


The way was tough, the Prize was excellent; yet he ran the Race, and won the
Prize. That which made the way so troublesome was the Cross, and the Shame of
the Cross; yet he endured the Cross, and made nothing of the Shame, but run
through Pain and Shame, and so attained the eternal Crown of Glory. By Cross is
meant, all the cruel pains of his Body, and bitter sorrows of his Soul, which
islued from, and were caused by, all these Wrongs and Evils inslicted upon him
unjustly and maliciously from Men and Devils, yet justly from God for our Sins,
which he had undertaken to expiate. These were such as never any man did
suffer, which never any Angel could have born as He did; thus dear it cost our
Savior to propitiate for our Transgressions, though many make a mock of Sin.
By shame we understand all the Abuses, Reproaches, and Indignities cast upon
him. He was apprehended, accused, condemned as a Malefactor; buffetted,
hood-winkt, spit upon, scourged, reviled, derided, and put to death upon a
Cross, which was the most ignominious death of all others. And the more
excellent and innocent he was, the more intolerable the shame. All this must be
laid upon him, that God might manifest his hatred of Sin, the sacred power of
his Laws, his severest justice against Sin, his Love to Man in transferring
from him unto Christ his own Son, that Punishment, which was deserved by our
Sin; and to let men know, that he would not pardon Sin, except his Justice were
satisfied. Therefore let no man presume to Sin, but to be afraid to offend his
God and Supreme Lord: Yet he endured the Cross, which implies, that he was sore
pressed with our sins, and was very sensible of the pressure; but
notwithstanding his strength was such, as he bare this heaviest burden, and
that with greatest patience. He did not yield, faint, murmur, or despair; he
overcame all.

He despised the shame: Some high Spirits dare look Death in the face, and be
no whit daunted or appaled; yet even these cannot brook shame and disgrace;
they will rather dye, then suffer in their Honor and Reputation, which are
dear unto them. Yet Christ endured the shame, and with that patience and
constancy, as that he made nothing of it: He despised it, as though it were
nothing; though it was much, and so much as never any suffered. That which in
all this did strengthen and encourage him, was the glorious prize, and the joy
set before him. This joy, by a Metonymy, signifies that happy and glorious
estate which followed upon his Suffering; for immediately upon his Resurrection
he attained an estate of perfection, and laid aside his mortality, and the
infirmities of his humiliation, was fully and for ever freed from all Sorrows
and Sufferings, did enjoy a most sweet calm and blessed peace of eternal
continuance, after that ascends above all Heavens, entered the place of Glory,
and had fullness of joy in his Fathers presence, and pleasures at his right hand
for evermore, and so bathes himself perpetually in the streams of eternal
delights. This joy was set before him, both by a clear representation, and a
firm promise, and he had a lively apprehension of it, as it was represented;
and a certain expectation of it, as it was promised. This joy and blessed
estate so apprehended, so expected did strengthen, revive, and refresh him in
the midst of his Suffering, so that his burden was made the lighter, and his
sorrows much abated; and this was the reason, why he was so patient and
cheerful in his Sufferings, and so much despised the shame. This patience and
cheerfulness might be attributed to his Faith; for he did both believe and
trust in his heavenly Father. Yet this Faith was of another kind then ours, far
more perfect, and far above our Sphere: And if we had a firmer belief, more
lively apprehensions, and a more full assurance of Heaven's Joy and Glory, we
might rejoice in, Tribulation, and be exceeding glad in the midst of siery
Flames. Christ knew the time of the Cross and shame was but short, the distance
between him and eternal Joy not long, and his assurance of Glory very great;
and this was the reason why he made so little account of the greatest evils
that any ever yet did suffer.

Proposit. 3. After he had endured the Cross, despising the shame, he sat down
at the right hand of the Throne of God. God's Throne puts us in mind of his
Majesty and Power; for he is the Supreme and Universal Lord, Lawgiver, and
Judge of the World. The right hand of this Throne is the highest place of
Honor, Dignity, and Power, next unto that of Gods. Christ was set at the right
hand of this Throne, when he was advanced and mounted above all Angels, and all
other Creatures. For all Power in Heaven and Earth was given him before his
Ascension, and after he was solemnly invested in Heaven, he began to reign and
exercise this Power as Administratour-General of the World. This glorious
estate was the great Reward which he received and enjoyed after that he had
endured the Cross, and despised the shame. For because he had taken upon him
the form of a Servant, and been Obedient unto Death, the Death of the Cross,
God exalted him, and gave him a Name above every Name.

Proposit. 4. In running with patience the Race that is set before us, we must
look on Christ thus represented. He that has a Copy or Pattern set before him
for imitation, must often look upon the Pattern or Copy; and the more excellent
the Pattern, the more carefully and frequently it must be eyed and observed.
This Pattern is the best that ever was proposed, and that in three respects. 1.
Of the person. 2. Of the rare performance of the hard Service performed so
patiently and cheerfully. 3. The glorious Reward, which followed thereupon. 1.
The person was the Author and Finisher of our Faith, one far above all others.
2. The Pattern wherein his heavenly Virtues were manifest, was the fairest and
most excellent that ever was given. And though the Service was the hardest that
ever was undertaken, yet it was performed with the greatest perfection. 3. The
reward attained and enjoyed, was incomparable and most glorious. All these must
severally, and seriously, and frequently be viewed, that we may be the more
effectually encouraged.

. 3. Besides what had been said of Christ example, there was something in it
farther considerable; therefore he goes on with his Exhortation, in the words
following,

Ver. 3. For consider him that endured such contradiction of Sinners against
himself, lest you be wearied and faint in your minds.] THe Apostle here seems
to use a Rhetorical Prolepsis or anticipation, for to prevent an Objection
which might be made. For they might say, We have not only been reproached and
spoiled of our Goods, but much opposed, and our profession is continually
contradicted. So the Jews at Rome could tell Paul, As concerning this Sect, we
know that every where it is spoken against, Acts 28. 22. The Answer implied in
these words, is to this purpose; What though it be so much contradicted and
opposed, yet there is no reason why ye should be wearied and faint in your
minds, if you consider Christ, who endured such contradiction of Sinners
against himself. The Text is an Exhortation, and in it we may observe,

1. The Duty exhorted unto. 2. The reason why we should perform it.


In the Duty, we have

1. The Matter and Object to be considered. 2. The Act of consideration.


All this may be reduced to Propositions, thus.

1. Christ endured much contradiction of Sinners against himself. 2. This they
must consider. 3. It must be considered, left they be wearied and faint in
their minds.


For to understand the first, we may note the several parts of it, as

1. Christ himself was contradicted. 2. He was contradicted by Sinners. 3. He
was contradicted much. 4. Yet he endured all this contradiction from Sinners.


Propos. 1. 1. Christ himself was contradicted. To be contradicted in strict
sense, is to be spoken against; yet sometimes the word is taken more largely to
be opposed, and so one may be in words or deeds. This contradiction
presupposes, 1. A difference in Judgment. 2. For the most part, in Affection;
and this difference is signified usually by words or writing, or some other
way. It Is either just or unjust: Just, when it arises from a certain knowledge
of, and a firm adherence unto, the Truth with that affection, that the party
contradicting cannot brook the contrary error. Unjust, issues either from
ignorance, or the contrary error received into a man's mind; and sometimes
it is joined not only with an hatred of the Truth, but of the person professing
it: Such was the contradiction here expressed. The party contradicted was not
John the Baptist, though he was spoken against, nor the Apostles and Disciples,
but Christ himself; and they spoke not only against his Doctrine, and his
Miracles, but against his person, and his divine Offices. They not only denied
his Doctrine as false, and refused to receive it; but accused him as a false
Prophet, a seducer of the People, an Impostor, an Enemy to Moses, a Blasphemer.
They ascribed his glorious Miracles to Belzebuh the Prince of Devils: They
denied him to be the Son of God, the great Prophet, the King of Israel, and the
Messiah.

2. This contradiction was from Sinners. For though he was innocent, and never
deserved any blame, nor ever gave them any cause of contradiction, and they
were many ways guilty of many grievous sins; yet they did oppose and
contradict him, so that the most worthy suffered from most unworthy, wicked,
cursed persons. It Is true, that Christ suffered from all sort of persons, both
Civil, and Military, and Ecclesiastical; and from these of all ranks, even very
abjects: yet they who most opposed him, were the Scribes, Pharisees, Priests,
and Rulers, who under pretense of greatest Piety, and purest Holiness, were the
most cursed, wicked, and abominable Wretches under Heaven. They were proud,
ambitious, covetous, envious, malicious, bloody wretches, and guilty of most
damnable Hypocrisy. He was the best, and they the worst of all others: That he
so excellent, should suffer from them so vile, did aggravate; as their Sin, so
his Suffering very much.

For, 3. He suffered much. For [such] is [so much] contradiction. And this
implies, that it, was much, and that it was so much, that is, very much. And so
it was in respect, 1. Of the Persons, which were Sinners, and they very many.
2. Of the Contradictions, which were also many, frequent, bitter, base,
malicious, continued to the end of his Life; yea, after his Death and
Resurrection. Even Paul himself was a Blasphemer, and many more, and did
violently contradict him.

4. Yet he endured all this; He was not wearied, he fainted not; but as the
contradiction was continued, so was his patience. For he did not yield or abate
the least of his heavenly zeal and fervor, but went on to testify the Truth,
to confirm it by his miraculous Works, to reprove Sin, to convert Sinners, to
gather Disciples, and to finish his Fathers great business. His courage and
constancy was invincible, and unparalled.

Propos. 2. This is the thing to be considered; to consider this, is the Duty.
What consideration is, you have heard before: it is opposed to glances, to
leight sleighty, superficial, momentany thoughts, and cogitations of a serious
business. It Is an act of the Understanding, which more clearly apprehends, more
exactly judges of things, and re-views and remembers them often, so that in it
we find the use of apprehension, judgment, memory, and all the acts of the
intellective faculty. And they must not only consider what these Contradictions
were, but also how many, and sum them up; that they may appear not only what
they are, but how great they be; this the word implies. The end of all this, is
the more perfect knowledge of them both as absolute, and also as comparative.
The object and matter which we must consider, is, 1. Christ so excellent, the
party suffering. 2. The thing suffered, Contradiction. 3. The parties from whom
he suffered, Sinners, so base, so unworthy. 4. How much, how long he suffered.
5. How patiently and constantly he endured all. And shall he, so far more
excellent then we are, endure so long, so patiently, from such unworthy
persons, so vile, and so much contradiction? And shall we so unworthy, not
endure far less? Was not He most innocent, and more glorious then the Angels,
and We poor and unworthy. Wretches? Are our Sufferings comparable to his? And
shall he endure, and we be impatient under so light a burden? O continue
patient to the end.

Propos. 3. This must be considered, left they be weary and faint in their
minds; wherein three things,

1. The dificiency of their minds. 2. The remedy to prevent it. 3. The use of
the remedy for prevention.


1. There is a twofold deficiency, one of the Body, another of the Mind. The
former is expressed in two words, [weariness and fainting]. These are
accidential to the Body, and may signify the same thing; or, if they differ,
it is but gradually; and weariness is a less, fainting, an higher degree of
deficiency; which may arise from labor, hunger, thirst, sickness, travall,
which abate the strength, weaken the active power, and dull the vital spirits,
and principle of motion, so that the body requires some rest or refreshment, or
receiving Cordial, without which, all labor, motion, resistance, toleration
cease, and sometimes the vital power is contracted, retires, and leaves the
curward parts liveless and sonsless. This is the deficiency of the Body, from
which the Metaphor is taken: For, the deficiency of the Soul, in the profession
of the Christian Faith is intended, and signified by these words; therefore is
added the word [mind,] that is, lest you ^e ^^ary and faint in your mind. This
implies, that there is a divine, spiritual, or moral strength and fortitude of
the mind, whereby it is enabled to endure Persecutions and Contradictions,
though many, and long continued. Yet as the Body, so the Mind may be wearied,
faint, yield, ly under the burden, and entertain thoughts of forsaking the
Faith, and at length forsake it indeed, And this was the Devils design, to tire
and weary them out, that so they might be willing to renounce Christianity, the
Profession whereof was so toublesom.

2. The Remedy here mentioned, whereby this sad Event might be prevented was to
consider, what Contradiction Christ suffered from Sinners, and yet endured with
Patience to the End. This, through the Sanctification of God's Spirit, would
refresh, strengthen, and revive them. And here we must observe that some are of
so poor a spirit, as that they will yield before their Strength fail them; some
are lazy, and love their Ease; some are negligent, and make no use of such
Helps as God has put in their power, and this is a great Sin in any of us who
profess the Faith of Christ, and it tends to Apostasy: For God requires whilst
we have any strength, to use it.

3. Therefore they are exhorted to use the means, and consider Christ's
Patience and Constancy, and following his Example, not sink under a far
leighter burden, seeing he did not shrink under a far more heavy Temptation.

. 4. Besides the Example of Christ, which they must consider, there is another
Reason.

Ver. 4. Ye have not yet resisted unto Blood, striving against Sin. THough this
may seem to be another distinct Reason from the former, yet it may be a Branch
of the same: For Christ had resisted to Blood, which they had not done. Yet
there may be something more in the Text; for, not only Christ, but also other
Saints far inferior to Christ had been faithful unto Death, and had sealed
their Profession with their Blood. This was no more than Duty, and God required
it at their hands, and to faint and fall off, before that Period, was agrievous
Sin: This therefore presupposes that it was their Duty to resist unto Blood,
and to suffer far more than yet they had endured, therefore they must go on.

In the words we have two Propositions,

1. They did strive against Sin, or they did suffer striving against Sin. 2. In
striving against Sin, they had not yet resisted unto Blood.


1. By Sin is not meant any kind of Sin, but some one principal, and far above
the rest, and its Apostasy, called so [Antonomastik (...) s] by way of
Eminency. It Is true, that it is a general Duty of all Christians to strive
against all Sin; for we are no sooner regenerate, and have renounced the Devil
and the World, and bid desiance and proclaimed eternal Feud and Hostility, but
we are fearfully assaulted, and after that time our Life is a continued
Warfare; hence the many fearful Conflicts between Flesh and Spirit within us.
The Events of this War are many and various, but the final Issue is a total,
final, eternal Victory. The great Design of Satan in this Battle is, to shake
our Faith in pieces; for then, if that be done, the Conquest is complete:
Therefore said our Savior to Peter, Simon, Simon, Behold Satan has desired to
have you, that he might sift you as Wheat: But I have prayed for thee, that thy
Faith fail not, Luke 22. 31, 32. And if Christ should not strengthen and
support, no Man could stand. Therefore we should remember and consider what our
condition is, it is a state of War and not of Peace, and we are environed
continually with potent, vigilant, and cruel Enemies, which seek our temporal
and eternal Ruin; in this respect we must always sight, and strive with all
our Power, and stand continually upon our Watch, pray for help, and humbly
depend upon our God; and of all other things, let us keep our Faith: If that be
safe, all is safe, and all other Sins pardonable; but if that be lost all is
lost, and our case is desperate.

2. Yet in this War they had not resisted to Blood. By Blood is meant Death,
and a violent taking away of Life; and though they had resisted stoutly, and
suffered much, yet their lives were safe. Reproaches, and loss of Goods, were
grievous; yet Life is very precious, and the best thing we have in this World,
it is far more than Goods and these temporal Estates, and Man will do much and
give much to save it: In this respect Death is said to be so terrible, as the
greatest of all temporal Evils. Upon this he urges this Duty of Perseverance
in Resistance, because their Life was due to Christ, and whosoever will not lay
it down for Christ's sake, cannot be his Disciple: For if any man (says
Christ) come to me, and hate not his Father, and Mother, and Wife, and
Children, and Brethren, and Sisters; yea, and his own Life also, he cannot be
my Disciple. Seeing therefore their Duty was to do and suffer far more than yet
they were put unto, they should not faint under the loss, when they were bound
to bea^ the greater burden: And as this was their Duty, so it is ours; and if we
think it unreasonable to be put unto so hard Service, to resist even unto Blood
if God require it, let us consider, that Christ suffered cruel pains, and laid
down his Life for us, that many of God's Saints did cheerfully suffer loss of
all earthly Comforts and of life it self; that if we lose our life, which is
but mortal and momentany, we find a Life immortal, glorious, and for ever
blessed; that we resist and strive not for our temporal Estates, Wives,
Children, earthly Country, but for our eternal Safety, Peace, and Happiness;
that our Sufferings, though far greater than they are, yet are but leight and
for a moment, but the Glory which will follow is exceeding and eternal, and
will make amends for all. Lord increase our Faith, and strengthen our hearts in
the hour of Temptation.

. 5. The next Argument is taken from the Nature of their Sufferings, as they
are Chastisements upon them from God, as a Father chastning every Child,
according to his Wisdom, for their Good and Happiness, wherein they end; for
the end of them is Peace. This Argument we find proposed first, and then
excellently polished. It begins,

Ver. 5. And ye have forgotten the Exhortation, which speaks to you as to
Children, My Son, despise not thou the chastening of the Lord, nor faint when
thou art rebuked of him. IN these words, with those that follow unto Ver. 14,
we may observe

1. Something presupposed. 2. Something expressed.


1. The thing presupposed is a Text, found in the Old Testament, and here
alleged and applied to these Hebrews.

2. In that which is expressed, or expressly delivered, we find three things:

1. The manner how this Text is brought in and applied. 2. The Text it self. 3.
The Apostle's Discourse upon the same.


1. It Is brought in by way of Reprehension; for they are charged with
forgetfulness of an Exhortation of a Father to them as Children. This informs
us,

1. That the words are an Exhortation. 2. This Exhortation is directed unto
them. 3. It Is directed to them as Children. 4. They had forgotten it.


1. The words are an Exhortation. To understand this, we must consider both
what an Exhortation is, and also how these are an Exhortation. An Exhortation
in Scripture has always for Object some Duty commanded by God, and is a
stirring up of Man to the Performance of the Duty, and that the Will may be
more effectually moved, the Performance is urged upon powerful Motives. That
they are an Exhortation may easily appear, if we understand the general nature
of all Exhortations, and consider the Portion of Scripture whence these words
are taken, wherein we find the wise man pressing many and weighty Duties. The
word it self here used in the Greek does sometimes signify a Consolation, and
such the Text is; sometimes an Exhortation, and such it may also be: Yet in
strict sense it is a Dehortation, for it is Negative [despise not, faint not],
and to despise the chastening of the Lord, and faint under his Rebuke, is an
Evil, a Sin, which is forbidden in God's Law, and here dehorted f om: But yet
as every Negative implies an Affirmative, so does every Dehortation an
Exhortation to some Duty; and the Duty here exhorted to, is, to take our
Sufferings as Chastisements from God, and to bear his Rebukes patiently.

2. This Exhortation is directed to them; for so it is said, The Exhortatien
which speaks unto you: It Is true that the words are the words of God, written
by Solomm, and seem to be directed more immediately to the People of God in his
time; yet this is a certain Rule, that when a Duty is ordinary and general, and
of general Concernment, and commanded in the Scriptures by God the universal
Lawgiver, then it concerns all men, so that no man can be exempted; nay
further, if it be not only universal, but also perpetual, it binds all men of
all timos, And in this respect it may be said, that what God speaks to one, he
speaks to all, like that of our Savior, [What I say to you, I say to all,
Watch.] Therefore we must understand this as spoken even to us, as well as to
others of former times: This therefore would be our wisdom, that when we read
or hear of exhortations to duties, of universal and perpetual Obligation, to
apply them to our selves, and to make full account, that God in them does speak
to us.

3. It Is directed to them as Children. This he infers from the word [my Son],
where word [Son], though singular, must be taken collectively, so as to include
the whole body and community of Sons, both all jointly, and every one
severally, without exception. This implies a special Relation, such as is
between Father and Children; and also the love and authority of a Father, and
the Duty and Obligation of a Child. Yet there are many kinds of Sons, as
natural, and adopted amongst men; and also spiritual, who are related unto God,
and such are here meant. Such all should be, but many are nor, some are: These
are made by spiritual Regeneration, and gracious Adoption; and so soon as any
shall sincerely believe in Christ, they are justly Sons, and so in this special
manner related to God. The matter of the Exhortation is such, that it must be
directed unto them, and them alone.

4. This they had forgotten. It was their duty to have remembered it; yet they
did not: For, 1. It was forgotten; this was a sin. 2. [They] had forgotten it;
this was their sin, and therefore so charged upon them by the Apostle: actually
to remember this expressly at all times was impossible, neither was it required:
yet in time of Affliction, when God's chastising and rebuking hand was upon
them, they should have thought upon it. But it was not necessary to remember
these very words, but the thing contained in the words, neither is the
remembrance here required merely speculative, and an act only of the
Understanding; but it is also practical. For they must so remember the Duty, as
to do it; memory without this is to no purpose. This seems to imply, that we
are bound to understand the word of God in Scriptures necessary to Salvation;
and often to call to mind, that which we do understand.

. 6. Thus the Text, which we find, Prove. 3. 11. is brought in; and now the
matter is to be considered, wherein we have,

1. The compellation. 2. The exhortation it self.


1. The compellation is sweet and comfortable; for the person speaking and
calling unto us, is God, as a Father; the parties called unto are sinful men,
as children. This implies a great condescension, and a special love on God's
part, and a near relation and happy condition on man's part. How low did the
glorious and eternal Lord of Heaven and Earth descend to look upon, respect,
and love poor mortal man, dust and ashes; who had defaced his Image imprinted
upon him, and was become his Enemy. To redeem him with the precious Blood of
his only begotten Son, to call him, regenerate him, adopt him, and make him
Heir of an eternal Crown, was matter of astonishment to Angels. And how much is
this silly and unworthy Creature honored? and how much is his estate advanced
by this Relation? How deeply is he engaged and obliged to eternal gratitude and
obedience? David might well admite and say, Lord, What is man, that thou take
knowledge of him? or the Son of man, that thou make account of him? Psalm. 144.
3. This compellation [my Son] is full of comfort, and should be a mighty motive
and incentive unto perseverance in the midst of greatest Sufferings.

2. In the exhortation it self, we may consider;

1. The Duty exhorted unto. 2. The Motive unto performance.


1. The Duty is;

1. Not to despise the Lord's chastening. 2. Not to faint under his Rebuke.


In the first, we may take notice:

1. Of Chastisement and Rebuke. 2. Of not despising, not fainting.


1. Chastisement and Rebuke are here taken for the same, and signify their
Sufferings from their unbelieving Brethren; yet so, that in the Book of the
Proverbs, they signify any Afflictions suffered by God People. The Hebrew word
[(...)] signifies to restrain or correct by instruction, admonition, chiding,
threatening, punishing. So the word (...) signifies to blame or reprove: Both
these are either verbal or real; by words of the Mouth, or violence of the
Hand: and here both may be meant, and especially the latter. The former word
used in the Greek, seems to allude to the institution and education of
Children; who are sometimes more severely corrected, not only by Words, but by
the Rod. The cause of Rebuke and Chastisement, is some fault or offense; the
end is, correction and reformation: in respect of the former, they are
Punishments; in respect of the latter, Corrections; in themselves they are
Afflictions, and sometimes they are Trials. God's Children have their failings,
ignorances, negligences, and sometimes are guilty of more heinous Sins. In
respect of these God, as a Judge, does punish, as a wise Master tryes them, as
a loving Father corrects them, and by these does prevent Sin for time to come,
stirs up to heavenly Duties, makes them more penitent for Sin past, more
careful of themselves, and prepares them for their possession of their eternal
Inheritance. Though they may truly be said to be Punishments, because grievous
for the time; yet they are more properly Chastisements and Corrections; because
the principal thing intended, is their future good. As they come from their
Persecutors, they are Wrongs; as from God, they are Effects, not only of his
Justice, but chiesly of his Mercy.

2. To despise, is, to think them fortuitous, and to bear them with a stupid or
senseless mind, and not consider and understand they come from God; that the end
is repentance and amendment, that the cause is sin; or, if we understand these
things, not to repent and reform, but continue and harden our hearts in sin:
For this is not to regard God's chastising hand, so as to make right use of our
Sufferings. To faint under these, is to be weaty of our Profession, and to
incline to Apostasy, because our Sufferings for it are so grievous, and of so
long continuance. And in this negative Dehortation, is implied an affirmative
Exhortation; and the Duty exhorted unto, is to make the right use of our
Afflictions by reformation of our selves, and a patient and constant Suffering
unto the end. For God's des^^n in these, is to prevent Apostasy, that we may
not be condemned with the World.

. 7. The Motive and Reason inclining us to performance follows,

Ver. 6. For whom the Lord loves, he chasteneth, and scourges overy Son, whom
he receives.]

AS for the translation of these words, there is some difference between the
Hebrew Copies which we now have; and the Septuagint, which the Apostle
follows. For the Hebrew reads, [That God corrects even as a Father the
Son, in whom he delights.]; but the S^ptuagint otherwise, [That he chastenth
and scourges every Son, whom he receives.] Some think, that the Hebrew Copy
which the Seventy translated, differed from that which we now have. Yet
notwithstanding the sense of both, for the matter and substance, is the same:
For, to chastise a Son whom he loves, and in whom he receives; is, to correct
and scourge as a Father the Son, in whom he delights. The words must be
considered, 1. In themselves absolutely. 2. As a reason of that which went
before. 1. In themselves, the matter and subject of them is the castigation and
correction of Children. And here correction and chastigation of every Child
whom God receives is the Effect, and his love is the Cause; and from this
Cause and love of God, is inferred the Effect, the Chastisement of every Child.
The Propositions are two,

1. God loves and receives some as Children. 2. He chastises every one whom
he so loves and receives.


1. This Love here intended, is a Love wherewith God loves us as Children,
which is the greatest and most tender love of all others; and presupposes
another love antecedent, whereby he Regenerates, Adopts, and makes us his
Children: this latter is a Love of benevolence and good will, issuing from his
own Goodness; and that most freely. The Object of it is Man, as sinful,
ungodly, an Enemy, in whom there is nothing amiable and sit to move God to love
us. The former is a Love of complacency, after he has made us amiable, and a
sit Object of Love: This Reception may either be an admission of us into the
number of Sons, which is adoption; or his acceptance of us, and delight in us
once adoped; and this seems here to be intended: This paternal love and
acceptance is the cause.

2. The Effect is Chastisement: For to correct, chasten, and scourge a Son here
are the same. And here it is to be noted, 1. That the Subject of this
Castigation is, Every Son. 2. That it is an Effect of Fatherly Love. 1. It Is
proper to a Son; for though he may punish and afflict others, yet he does not
chastise them. And as it is proper unto Sons, so it agrees to every Son, not any
one of them is excepted; for as all are castigable, so all are castigated in
one kind or another, in a greater or lesser measure. 2. That this Castigation
is from Love, because it tends, conduces, and is in some sort necessary, to
our spiritual and eternal good. God knows both our condition and disposition,
that both are such that they require Chastisement and Correction, without which
we are in danger of many Sins, and of Apostasy to be prevented. Yet the
principal Cause of prevention is the sanctifying Spirit, which always makes
use of the Word, and many times of the Rod of Correction, which will not be
laid aside wholly whilst God's Children are in the Flesh: But in Heaven, where
there is no danger, there is no Use of it any more: because them we shall be
sanctified fully and for ever.

This is the meaning of the words considered absolutely; but if we refer them
to what went before, we shall find them to contain a Motive and a Reason to
persuade us to perform the Duty exhorted unto. And the force of it is very
great; for if our Sufferings be from God as a Father, and out of Love to us as
his Children, tending to our good; and no Child of his is exempted from them,
then we should not despise them, not faint under them; but God himself says
they are such. This Reason is more distinctly and particularly unfolded and
urged in the words following.

. 8. Thus you have heard, 1. How these words are brought in, 2. What the Matter
of them is: Now, 3. Follows the Apostle's Discourse upon them.

Ver. 7. If you endure Chastening, God deals with you as with Sons; for, what
Son is there whom the Father chasteneth not?

Ver. 8. But if ye be without Chastisement, whereof all are Partakers, then are
ye Bastards and not Sons.

THis Discourse is grounded upon these words of the former Text [He chastises
every Son], and informs us, that God by his Chastisements does evidence his
Fatherly Affection toward us, and that he accounts us his Children and not
Bastards. The Reasons which he finds in the former words of Scripture are
reducible to three. The first is taken from his Fatherly Affection manifested
in Chastisements. The second from God, as a Father different from all earthly
Fathers, even in chastening us. The third is taken from the Issue and Effect of
Chastisements. In the first, the Apostle makes this his Principle, that
chastening is proper to every Child of God; and so proper, that it agrees to
none else: From hence he argues to this purpose, If God chastises all Sons and
only Sons, then if you endure Chastening, he deals with you as with Children.
But he chasteneth all Sons, and only Sons; Therefore if you endure Chastening
he deals with you as with Sons. The Assumption, that he chasteneth all Sons
and every Son, we find in the latter end of Ver. 7. That he chasteneth only
Sons is implied Ver. 8. For Explination I will

1. Reduce the whole into Propositions. 2. Inform you of the principal
Conclusion inferred from the whole.


The Propositions are these,

1. With those who endure Chastening, God deals as with Sons. 2. There is no
Son whom the Father chasteneth not. 3. They who are without Chastening, whereof
all are Partakers, are Bastards and ^as Sons.


These Propositions are made in Thesi, though we find them here in Hypothesi,
as applied to these Hebrews. In the first Proposition we have

1. The Antecedent. 2. The Consequent.


1. The Antecedent supposes them chastened, or enduring Chastening; for these
may be the same, because enduring may be suffering, so as that in and under
Afflictions they may be considered as only passive. Yet sometimes to endure may
be a virtuous Act of the Soul, receiving and bearing Affliction as a Chastening
from God; for Affliction may be sent from God as a Chastisement, and for
Correction, and yet not so received by Man. Thus God complains of his People,
They received not Correction, they turned not to him that smote them; God dealt
with them as a Father, but they proved undutiful Children. When God does
accompany his Chastisements with the sanctifying power of his Spirit, so that
Reformation follows, then the Party chastened may be said to endure
Affliction not only passively but actively too.

2. This presupposed and granted, the Consequent of this first Proposition is,
that God deals with them as with Children; that is, out of Love he chasteneth
them for their spiritual Good which he intends, because he will not suffer Sin
to ly upon them, lest it prove their Ruin. The Chastening issues from Love,
and the End is their Benefit and Good; for such is the Chastening of a wise and
good Father. This is necessarily consequent upon the former granted: For if he
chastise any, so that they are corrected, then he does the part of a loving
Father, and thereby manifests that he accounts them as Children.

The second Proposition. There is no Son which the Father chasteneth not. Here
it is expressed Interrogatively; For what Son is there whom the Father
chasteneth not? Where the Rule, That a negative Interrogation is a vehement
Affirmation, holds good. This may be understood of an earthly or an heavenly
Father; if of an earthly, then it is to be understood of wise and good Fathers,
not of such as are careless, or ignorant, or foolishly indulgent, as too many
such there be: And of such, if they have many Children, they deal thus with
every one, and all such Fathers deal thus with their Children. And as this is
true of all wise earthly Parents, so much more is it true of our heavenly
Father: For, there is not any Son of his who needs Correction, but he
corrects him, otherwise he did not love him. The rational or causal
Conjunction for, does intimate unto us, that when it is said, He deals with
you, or uses you as Children, that by Children he means all and every Child of
his.

The third Proposition. They which are without Chastisement, whereof all are
Partakers, are Bastards and not Sons. Here it is put Hypothetically, and the
Proposition is Connex, yet so that it may be extended to an universal
Categorical. This takes for granted, according to the former Proposition, that
all are Partakers of Chastisement; for all the Sons of God are corrected. This
presupposed, the Antecedent is, that some are without Correction or
Chastisement; that is, God suffers them to go on in their Sins, and in his just
Judgment permits them to go on to their own eternal undoing: The Consequent of
this is, that all such are Bastards and not Children, and so accounted of God,
who denies his Mercy unto them. No (...), a Bastard, may be either a Son
illegitimate, or if Legitimate yet degenerate, or one that is no Son; or if a
Son, yet not so accounted, not so acknowledged: Many such there be, who profess
themselves the Children of God, and bear that glorious Name, yet are not truly
and really such, and God does deny them; therefore it is said that they are
Bastards and not Sons; where it is employed, that by Bastards are meant such as
are not Sons of God, either in his account or indeed. The Consequence is clear
enough; for if all Sons are Partakers of Chastisement, and some or many are
without, then such as God chasteneth not are not his Sons, they are Bastards;
and to be such is the saddest condition of all others, for no man in this Life
can be in a worse or more miserable. It Is a sad and woeful thing for a Child to
be left unto himself, and suffered to go on in untoward courses; but far more
sad it is for a Man to be suffered to go on in Sin without any Chastisement or
Correction: There is no Hope of such; God seems to cast them off, desert them,
leave them to their own Lusts, deliver them unto Satan, and then they must
needs perish: It Is evident, God loves not such, nor intends their everlasting
Salvation, but leaves them with the World, to be condemned with the World.
Blessed be that God, who takes a more special care of us, and, when we need,
corrects us, and so deals with us as with Children.

2. The Conclusion, which he intends to infer from this, is, That if God out of
a Love as a Father chasteneth us as he does every Son, and only his Sons, then
it is our Duty not to despise the Chastening of the Lord, nor to faint under his
Rebuke.

. 7. The second thing observed by the Apostle, is, that God is a Father, as is
employed in the Text, where we are called his Sons; and if we be his Sons, then
he is our Father in chastizing us, and far above our earthly Fathers, and that
in chastizing: For thus he argues,

Ver. 9. Furthermore, we have had Fathers of our Flesh, which corrected us, and
we gave them reverence: Shall we not much rather be in subjection unto the
Father of Spirits and live.

Ver. 10. For they verily, for a few days, chastened us after their own
pleasure; but he for our profit, that we might be partakers of his Holiness.

THese words are virtually an Exhortation; for by the clear manifestation of
the Duty, he exhorts us to performance. The Duty is, subjection to God our
spiritual Father Chastising us: The reason of this Duty is delivered by way of
comparison, taken from our subjection to our earthly Fathers, and that from

1. The excellency of our heavenly Father, as far above the Fathers of the
Flesh, ver. 9. 2. The manner of Chastening us, for our greater good, ver. 10.


The reasoning in form, is to this purpose;

If we have been subject to the Fathers of our Flesh, how much more ought we to
be subject to the Father of Spirits, that we may live.

But we have been subject to the one Chastening us.

Therefore much more ought we to be subject to the other.

This is the substance of ver. 9.

The Consequence he proves thus;

1. If our earthly Fathers Chastened us only for a few days, and after their
own pleasure, and yet we were subject to them; much more ought we to be subject
to God our heavenly Father chastening us for our profit, that we might be
partakers of his Holiness.

But we were subject to them so chastening us for a few days after their
pleasure.

Therefore much more ought we to be subject to him, Chastening us for our
profit, that we may be partakers of his holiness.

This being the form of the Apostle's Argument, I will proceed to consider the
words,

1. Absolutely. 2. Comparatively.


I need not stand upon the word (...), turned [furthermore], whereby the
Connection with the former words, is signified to this purpose; that besides
what I have observed out of the former Text, it is further observable, that God
is compared to a Father, who both as a Father, and as Chastening, is far more
excellent then any earthly Father, and from thence an argument, and that of
great force, is drawn to prove, that they should take his Chastening patiently.
This premised, the words considered;

1. Absolutely, declare some things of Man, as chastising Fathers. God, as
chastising his Children.

Of men, three things;

1. We have had the Fathers of our Flesh. 2. These corrected us. 3. We gave
reverence to them correcting us.


1. We have had Fathers of our Flesh. All Children have their Fathers; for in
that respect they are called Fathers, because they have Children. There are
Fathers Moral, Political, Physical, and all regenerate persons have a Father
spiritual, and the same subordinate or supreme. By Fathers, here are meant,
they who are Physical or Natural, who under God, by regeneration, are causes of
our natural Being; and these are said to be the Fathers of our Flesh, that is,
as most do understand it, of our Bodies; thereby implying, that our Souls are
not by Genetation or [Ex traduce], but in a more excellent and immediate manner
from God creating and infusing them, as many do express it. Whether these be
proper or fitting expressions, I do not here debate; but only say, that the
immortal Soul is concreated with, and in the Body, as a fit Receiptacle by an
higher way, and in a more excellent manner then we do or can know. This does
not exclude, though it does not intend Fathers by Adoption, and seems to be
added to difference Men from God, and earthly Fathers from our heavenly; who
makes the Body, yet frames the Soul in a more special manner.

2. These Fathers of the Flesh did correct us. And this is the Duty of all
Parents, if they wisely and truly love their Children, desire their happiness,
hope for comfort from them. And there are very few Children, which do not
sometimes need Correction, as well as Instruction. Yet many Parents are very
negligent in this particular: Some are imprudent, some are too indulgent and
remiss; some are careless, and do not consider what the Consequents of this
neglect will be. The ignorance, imperfection, corruption of Children conceived
and born in Sin, require in their Parents a more then ordinary care. Yet many
Children are duly corrected, and this Correction is a kind of punishment, and
yet a mercy, and may prevent many sins, and much misery for time to come, for
the end of it is reformation; and though the party correcting may in respect of
correction be thought to be, and in some sort is, a severe Judge; yet in respect
of the good intended, he is a loving Father. Happy are those Children which are
duly corrected in time.

3. Being corrected, we gave them reverence. The word [(...)] seems in
signification to agree with the Hebrew [(...)], which is, with humility to
submit. For Children being ashamed of what they have done amiss, do with
humility submit, not only to their Fathers instruction, but correction. And
though they would take it ill at the hands of others, yet they endure it
patiently from them to be beaten and scourged for their faults. And all
Children should know, that their Fathers have power not only to instruct and
direct, but to punish them, when they see just Cause; and they should the more
willingly subject themselves, because their Parents are under God, the Cause of
their Being, maintain them, love them, and even in punishing them seek their
good.

. 10. These absolutely declare some things concerning Men, as earthly Fathers;
the words following inform us of some things concerning God as a Father, and
our Duty to him as such, and they are three:

1. God is the Father of Spirits. 2. We must be subject to him. 3. We must be
subject that we may live.


1. God is the Father of Spirits. By Spirits, some understand spiritual
intellectual substances, as Angels and immortal Souls; yet here it seems to be
restrained to humane Souls, as contradistinct to the Flesh and Body, mentioned
before. And the Soul is a Spirit, that is, an invisible, spiritual,
intellectual Substance, of a far more curious and excellent constitution then
the Body. Yet here it may be taken, not only Physically as a Soul and Spirit;
but Morally, as capable of a spiritual Felicity: God is here said to be the
Father of this Soul, this Spirit; in the Creation whereof, the earthly Father
has no efficiency, as by Generation, not able to reach so noble and divine a
Substance. God only is the Efficient and Maker of it, as you have heard before,
and that in some special manner: And he is the Father, not only because he has
made it, but also because he alone has power over it; so that it is exempted
from all jurisdiction both of Men and Angels, who, as they cannot make it, so
they cannot command or judge it. For the Conscience and immortal Soul is only
subject unto his Imperial Dictates, especially as it is ordinable unto an
eternal estate.

2. Therefore as he alone has power over it, so our Spirits and Souls are
bound to be subject to him, and him alone. For where there is Soveraignity,
there subjection is due; and as it is due to him alone, so we must submit freely
and willingly to him alone, as our Supreme Lord both commanding,; and as a
Father correcting, and sanctifyng his correction unto our good.

3. For we must be subject unto him, that we may live. To live, is not only to
enjoy a physical Life and Being, but to be happy. For as bitter Pills and
Portions, and also correcting Plasters may effectually cure our Bodies
motrally wounded or diseased; so the Lord's Chastisements may heal our sick
Spirits, and so prevent spiritual Death and Punishments. And as the Patient
must be willing to receive bitter Pills and Potions for recovery; so must we
cheerfully submit unto our heavenly Fathers Correction, for our eternal safety
and felicity.

. 11. Thus far the absolute consideration of these words: Now follows the
Comparison, which, presupposing some agreement in quality, as in quanity of
imparity. For if we be bound to obey and reverence our earthly Fathers
correcting us, then we are bound to obey and be in subjection to our heavenly
Father chastening us: The reason is, because as they, so he has power over us.
But this is not all; for if we are bound, if to them much, then to him much
more: They are only Fathers of our Flesh and Bodies, and have only a correcting
power over them; but he is the Father not only of our Bodies, but also of our
Spirits, and has an absolute Dominion over both, not only to instruct,
counsel, command, but also to correct; and his Correction tends not only to our
temporal but our spiritual Health, Safety, and Happiness. This the Apostle
makes evident in the 10th Verse.

Where again we may consider some things,

1. Absolute, concerning our Earthly Heavenly Father. 2. Comparative.

The words absolutely considered, inform us

1. That our earthly Fathers for a few days chastened us after their own
pleasure. 2. That God, our heavenly Father, chasteneth us for our profit, that
we may be Partakers of his Holiness.


1. In the former Chastisement we may observe,

1. It Is short, and for a few days. 2. It Is arbitrary, after their own
pleasure.


1. It Is short, because it continues only for the time f our Childhood and
Minority, when we are most apt to go astray, and least able to direct out
selves. In these tender years, Children may receive any Impression, and that
more easily than afterward: then the Foundation of Virtue or Vice is laid; and
if Children have their Liberty, be neglected, and left unto themselves, they are
most subject to be corrupted: Therefore the^ they have most need of Correction,
and may be more easily kept under; yet many times it falls out, that Fathers
devoid of Wisdom, and not considering what is best and most truly good for
their Children, out of Passion, and rashly, not aiming at the choice End, do
correct them: And the more Power they have, and the less Resistance there is,
the more arbitrary and irregular their Chastisements prove; so that as the time
of their Chastening is short, so it is not regulated by the Dictates of Reason,
but follows Fancy and false Imaginations of the mind, which many times
represents, as just and good, that which indeed is evil and unjust. The
Intention of the Apostle in these words, is, to manifest the imperfection and
deficiency of humane Castigation, whereby it differs from that which is divine.

For, 2. God chasteneth ^^ for our Profit, that we may partake of his Holiness.
This is the Perfection of God's Correction, which is not for a few days, but
continues for term of Life, till he has made us perfect, and done his whole
Work upon us. It Is always regulated by his perfect Wisdom; issues from purest
Love; tends unto, and ends in, our Happiness; It Is no ways arbitrary, for he
never chasteneth but when he sets cause, and knows certainly that it will be
good for us. All this is employed in these words [for our profit]; where by
profit, we must not understand the good things of this World, and the great
Mammon which so many worship; but some better thing, some spiritual and divine
benefit, which in a word, is a Participation of God's Holiness, which Clause
seems to be exegetical, that we might know what he meant by Profit: For
whatsoever tends to make us spiritually better, more like to God, and more
capable of Communion with him, that is true Profit. God's Holiness may either be
that whereby she is holy in himself, o^ that whereby wear holy. He in himself
is essentially, infinitely, and eternally holy, most glorious, excellent, and
pure in himself: For the Holiness of God is sometimes taken for his Excellency
and Glory sometimes for his Purity and perfect Righteousness, in which respect
it is said, That he is Light, and in him is no Darkness, so that he cannot sin,
be impure or unjust; and therefore may be said to be Holiness it self: As he is
holy in himself, so he is the Efficients and Fountain of Holiness to us, for he
makes us holy; yet our. Holiness is from him by participation, and participated
by us, is more his than ours. To be Partakers of his Holiness is, either to be
made holy as he is, and so purified from Sin, or, being made holy, to have
Communion with him in some degree here, or fully and for ever hereafter. This
Holiness is communicated to us by Chastisement, accompanied with the
Sanctisication of the Spirit; for that is the end wherea^ God aims, and the
Effect which he produces in his Children: His Love does set him on work, his
Wisdom directs, and his Almghty Power effects that which his Love desires.

This is the Absolute Consideration: the Comparative follows, and that in
quantity inequal; for he argues from the less unto the greater. For, if they
had with Patience endured their earthly Fathers chastizing them for a few days
after their pleasure, how much more should they with Patience and all humble
Subjection endure their heavenly Father chastizing them in Wisdom for their
everlasting Good. This is a place which teaches all Children their Duty
toward their Parents chastening them; and they must acknowledge their Power,
humbly submit unto it, and be thankful unto them and their God for this good
Work, without which they might have been more wicked and more miserable. And
all Fathers should know, that their Children are trusted in their hands by God,
not only to be instructed but corrected; and in this part of Education they
must imitate God, and chasten them wisely in Love for their good. The principal
thing to be remembered, is, that seeing it is God that does chastile them, and
in this manner, and for their greatest good; therefore they should not faint in
their Sufferings for their Profession.

. 11. The Apostle proceeds further to discourse on the Text in Proverbs, which
speaks of Chastisement. Of which it might be said, that it is a matter not of
Joy but Grief, and how then can it proceed from Love, and be any ways
beneficial? By way of prevention he resolvs this doubt in the words following,

Ver. 11. Now, no Chastening for the present seems to be joyous, but
grievous: Nevertheless afterward, it yields the peaceable fruit of
Righteousness, unto them that are exercised thereby. BY these words we learn
what the End and Effect of the Lord's Chastening is, and that is, The peaceable
fruit of Righteousness; for surely there is nothing which God does unto his
Children, but therein he intends their good. The Subject Matter of this
Passage, as of the former, is the Lord's chastening of his Children; and it is
considered,

1. In respect of it self, for the present. 2. In respect of the Fruit, which
follows afterward.


According to these two Considerations, we have two Propositions,

1. That Chastening for the present seeineth not to be joyous, but grievous. 2.
That nevertheless afterward it yields the peaceable fruit of Righteousness to
them, that are exercised therewith.


1. The Nature of all Chastening in general, and of the Lord's Chastening his
Children in particular, is here assumed to be grievous and evil: For it is not
matter of Joy, but Sorrow, to the Party suffering it; for, as Good present is
the cause of Joy, so Evil is the cause of Sorrow: Yet this Evil is not the evil
of Sin but of Punishment; yet it is for Sin, as deserving it, and to take away
Sin and prevent the Punishment; and when Sin is taken away, and the Party
chastened is reformed then God's chastizing hand is taken off us; and in
Heaven, where shall be no Sin, shall be no Chastening. Yet because it issues
from Love, and tends unto the good of the Party chastened, therefore the Evil
is so little that it may be a Question whether it should have the Denomination
of Evil: For this Reason the Apostle uses terms of Abatement, as, 1. It Is so
only for the present. 2. It seems to be so, not that it is so absolutely, or
in any high degree, or in it self, but rather in the sense and conceit of the
Sufferer. 3. It Is not of Joy, that is, it seems not to be Joyous; for many
times God's Saints rejoice in Tribulation; and these very Hebrews suffered
joyfully the spoiling of their Goods.

In the second Proposition we may observe, 1. The Benefit and Profit of
Chastisement. 2. The Parties that reap this Benefit by it. 3. The time of
receiving this Benefit. 1. This Benefit is the peaceable fruit of
Righteousness; where fruit of Righteousness is nothing but Righteousness, which
is here compared to Fruit, as every Effect may be said to be a fruit of it is
Cause. Man is the Soil, God's Chastening is the Culture or good Husbandry; and
this Man, thus cultivated by Chastening, accompanied with the Word and Spirit,
yields and brings forth this Fruit. But it is much doubted what this peaceable
Righteousness is: Some think that Righteousness signifies heavenly Virtues, or
the Works of these Virtues; for Justitia in s^f^ virtutes co^tin^^ omnes, and
righteous Works are virtuous Works; Others conceive, that by Righteousness is
meant that particular Virtue of Patience, which seems to be a proper Fruit of
Chastizing, Tribulations, and Afflictions; For Tribulation works Patience,
Romans 5. 3. and the trying of our Faith by Temptations and Afflictions works
Patience, says another Apostle, Jam. 1. 3. And Patience may be said to be
peaceable, because it is the quiet, the peace, the calm of the Soul, in the
midst of the Storms of Affliction. But to understand the words more fully, we
must consider, 1. That the End of God's Chastening is Correction, Reformation,
and the reducing of the Party chastened into the right way: For, says David,
Before I was afflicted I went astray, but now I have kept thy Word, Psalm. 119.
67. and again, It Is good for me that I have been afflicted, that I might learn
thy Statutes, Ver. 71. Where we may observe, 1. That Afflictions, which are
God's Chastisements, are for Sin; for he had gone astray. 2. The End and Effect
is Obedience, keeping of God's Word, and learning to do his Statutes: To obey
and do God's Laws is Righteousness. 2. Upon this Reformation follows Peace; for
God's Anger and Chastisements, the Effects thereof, do cease, the Conscience is
quiet, and the Comfort of the Party corrected is great. 3. This Chastening may
be used as a means of our first Conversion, and so of unrighteous may make us
righteous; or it may be made subservient to the Reformation of one converted by
making him sensible of Sin, and causing him to renew his Repentance, and
exercise and improve his heavenly Virtues, which lay dormant in him through his
neglect. The Sum of all this is, 1. God by his Chastisements, joined with his
Word and Spirit, makes his Children more holy and righteous, and also more
happy. By this, that is, Smiting and Affliction, or Chastisement,) shall the
Iniquity of Jacob be purged, and this is all the fruit to take away Sin, Isa.
27. 9. And the End of all our Chastisements, which we suffer here on Earth, is,
that when this Life is ended, we may be perfectly righteous, and attain eternal
Peace: For they exercise our Graces of Repentance and Faith, whereby we obtain
Remission of Sin, a greater measure of Sanctification, and Reconciliation with
our God. 2. The Parties that are Partakers of this benefit are, such as are
exercised therewith: There is an Exercise of the Body, whereby men are made
stronger, more active, more skilful in the thing wherein they are exercised,
and by continued Practice are enabled to endure and hold out far more and far
longer than others can do. There is also an Exercise of the Soul in the School
of Affliction; for this is the manner of God's training of his Children, and
the stirring up and improving of their heavenly virtues. The principal Virtue
he intends to teach them is Patience, which once had, and brought unto some
Perfection, is a rare virtue. This is an hard Lesson, and not easily learned,
and without Exercise cannot be attained; yet this virtue once made habitual
raises Man to an high degree of Christianity, so that nothing will be
difficult unto him: Therefore this was the Exhortation of the Apostle, Let
Patience have her perfect Work, that ye may be perfect and entire wanting of
nothing, James 1. 4. They therefore who are exercised by Afflictions, so as to
be habitually patient, are they who receive this benefit, and reap the
peaceable fruit of Righteousness. 3. Yet there must be some time before an
habit be acquired; therefore the Apostle says, That, not at first but
afterward, when we have been well ^v^rcised, then it yields this peaceable
fruit, and not before. God could so sanctify us at first, and in an instant so
deeply implant all heavenly virtues in us, that this Exercise might be
needless: Yet it was not his Will and Pleasure so to do, he will humble us, try
us, refine us, before he admits into his Kingdom of Glory. He knew this was
good for us; for it is good for a Man that he bear the Yoke in his Youth; He
sits alone, and keeps silence, because he has born it upon him, Lament.
3. 27. 28. The Sum of this Discourse is, That seeing from the Text of Solomon
it appears, that God out of Love chasteneth all his Children, so that none are
exempted; and he does this, not like our earthly Fathers in an arbitrary way,
but after a certain Rule of perfect Wisdom, and that for our good, that we may
be more holy, and reap the peaceable fruit of Righteousness, let us endure it
with Patience, and patiently continue to the End.

. 12. After this Discourse, the Exhortation to the main Duty is expressed and
repeated in these words,

Ver. 12. Wherefore lift up the Hands which hang down, and the feeble Knees.

Ver. 13. And make strait Paths for your feet, lest that which is lame be
turned out of the way, but let it rather be heaeled.

THis Text might be considered as a Conclusion drawn from the former Discourse,
or inferred from the last words of Ver. 13. If from the former, then take it in
this manner: If Suffering be God's Chastening, issuing from Love, ordered in
Wisdom, ending in our greater good, then we must lift up the hands which hang
down, etc. If from the latter, then the Argument is drawn from the ill
Consequence of our fainting Remissness, we shall, like that which is lame, be
turned out ^f the way. In the words themselves we have,

1. A Duty. 2. The Reason why it should be performed.


1. The Duty is set forth in Metaphorical terms, and the Similitudes seem to be
taken,

1. From Wrastlers. 2. From such as run in a Race.


The former, when once they begin to faint, hang down their hands, and cannot
lift them up; the latter, when they are wearied, become feeble in their knees,
cannot run strait on, but turn or are turned out of the way. These things are
translated unto the Soul: It implies, that these Hebrews, through neglect of
their heavenly virtues, and other means of Perseverance and Prayer unto God,
began to faint and lag in their heavenly Course. They were wearied much, and
vexed with the Opposition of their unbelieving Brethren, reproaching,
persecuting, threatening them, and spoiling them of their Goods, and began to
waver in their Profession: They perhaps entertained thoughts of falling away,
and debated within themselves, whether they should continue or no; and to doubt,
and be unresolved, was a degree of Apostasy: This was in them a Sin; and though
the words are an Exhortation yet they imply a Reproof. The Duty exhorted unto,
was a Reformation of this deficiency, by a more serious consideration of so
many and rare Examples; the nature of Sufferings, they were Chastisements; the
glorious Reward of Perseverance; the fearful Punishment of Apostasy: And by
this consideration, with Prayer for strength, they ought to encourage
themselves, rouse up their drowzy Spirits, gird up the Loins of their minds, and
resolve to go on and finish their Race: They must not through sloth, love of
Ease, of their Estates, of Liberty, of their Lives, now begin to turn back, and
so lose the benefit of their former Labors and Sufferings. By this we
understand our frailty, and how ready we are to give back in the way to eternal
Glory, if God do desert us; yet this is our Comfort, that he will not deny to
support us, except we give him Cause by our negligence and grievous Sins.

2. The Reason why we should often renew and raise up those Graces which are
left in us, is, lest we prove lame, and so be turned out of the way. To be
lame, is, to lose our spiritual strength and vigor of heavenly motion; and
this is our Sin, because we diminish it by not using that Power which God has
given us: And the Punishment of this Sin is, to turn us out of the way, and
reject us; for God may in this Case justly withdraw his sanctifying Power, and
condemn us as unworthy of that eternal glorious Reward to which he called us.
Yet this turning out may be considered, either as a Punishment and Judgment
from God, or as a Sin of Man, who willingly turns out of the way and makes
himself guilty of Apostasy. This Lameness may be cured, for some times it is
not a mortal and desperate Disease, but such as by Discipline of the Church,
and Penitency of the Party may be healed. Therefore it is added. But let it
rather be healed: This seems to point at Ecclesiastical Censures, whereby
Persons that begin to fall away are excommunicated and delivered up to Satan,
and so left in a desperate Case; yet the Apostle does advise, that where there
is any hope of Recovery, the Church should endeavor to make them penitent, and
so to absolve and restore them upon Repentance, and not leave them to perish.
Thus the ancient Church dealt with those who were called Lapsi: And according
to this sense, to turn out of the way, is, to censure and excommunicate, and to
heal, is, to restore them made penitent.

. 13. Though Perseverance both in Faith, and the Profession thereof, be the
principal D^ty; yet Faith cannot be without other virtues, as Peace and
Holiness, therefore he adds,

Ver. 14. Follow peace with all men, and holiness, without which no man shall
see God. THe reason of this Exhortation to these two Duties of Peace and
Holiness, may be this, 1. Because, without these, our Profession is but
Hypocrisy. 2. These beautify and grace Christian Religion much, and demonstrate
our sincerity. 3. By these we so demean our selves, that our very Adversaries
can have no just occasion to persecute us. 4. If we follow peace with all men,
we shall avoid many Troubles, which unadvised Zelots, busy-Bodies, turbulent
and quarrelsom Persons bring upon themselves, and other good Christians. If we
follow holiness, we shall give no scandal unto others, please God, and prepare
our selves for Heaven, the vision and fruition beautifical, which will be our
full hapiness. So that there was special reason for to add these Exhortations:
But to consider the words in themselves, we find in them a twofold Duty:

1. Of peace with Men. 2. Of holiness toward God.


1. We must follow peace with all men, where we must consider,

1. What peace is? 2. The parties with whom we must have peace. 3. The
following of this peace.


1. Peace in this place, is not agreement with every one in opinion, affection,
practice; for many have false opinions, corruptions in affections, and their
practice is ungodly. But peace is a virtue whereby we live quietly: It issues
from the loving of our Neighbor, as our selves. It Is opposed to a turbulent
disposition of the Soul, and all those qualities, motions, passions, which
cause dissension. It cannot be without humility, meekness, patience,
forbearance, kindness: It so orders all words and actions, that they tend to
preserve concord, and it gives no just cause of offense to any. It labors to
make up Breaches, and reconcile Differences: It Is an excellent virtue, and is
hardly separable from any Duty of the second Table; therefore some have
thought, that by Peace, in this place, is signified the observation of all the
Duties of that part of the moral Law, which prescribes the duty of man to man.

2. The parties with whom we must have peace, are [all men]. For as we must
love all men, even Strangers, Enemies, and Persecutors; so we must have peace
with all, yet so far as this concord agrees with the Laws of God. For we must
agree with no person in that which is evil; and we must have a special care to
agree with the best: If we differ from any man in that which is lawful, we
offend. This peace presupposes society, and is the bond that knits together
multitudes.

3. We must follow peace, as one that follows and pursues some thing running
from him, for to take it; it is the same with that Exhortation: Seek peace, and
pursue it, Psalm. 34. 14. The phrase implies, that it is a very difficult thing
to have peace with a few, much more with all. For we find that true, That when
we are for Peace, and speak for it, most men are for War, Psalm. 120. 7. The
means whereby we may lay hold of it, according to the advice of the Psalmist,
is, to eschew Evil, and do Good; to keep our Tongues from Evil, and our Lips
from speaking Guil. For we must not comply with any person in his Errors, or
his Sin, nor neglect to reprove him or oppose him in his iniquity, for our own
quiet. Yet to be just and merciful, and kind, is a good and lawful means, and
very effectual to obtain peace. And in this way we must do what we can, and use
all diligence; and if the issues answer not our defires and endeavors, we have
done our Duty, and discharged our Conscience; God does not bind us to
impossibilities: For the Command is not absolute, but given with this Proviso,
If it be possible, as much as in you lies, live peaceably with all men, Romans
12. 18. The sum of all is this, We must give no just occasion or cause of
difference to any person, but use all lawful ways, and just means to procure
peace.

Secondly, We must follow holiness, etc. where we have,

1. The Duty, which is holiness. 2. The Reason why we should perform it, and
that is, because without it no man shall see the Lord.


Some think these words are added to limit and direct our pursuance of peace,
wherein we must be so innocent, as not to offend our God. Some think holiness
to be sincerity in the religious Service and Worship of our God: For all
Worship, even of the true God, is unholy, if not performed with a sincere
heart; which being washed in the Blood of Christ, and sanctified with the
Spirit out of love to God, hates Sin, and endeavors to avoid it. The principal
subject of Holiness, is the will and heart of man, and it is a qualification,
whereby it is conformed, and made like to God. It is the supernatural light,
beauty, and purity of the Soul; and purifies all acts and operations, both
inward and outward. It Is that whereby we devote and consecrate our selves to
God, and have union and communion with him: It Is opposed not only to profaness,
but hypocrisy and iniquity. This holiness we must follow and pursue; for it is a
difficult thing, as to follow peace with all men, so to be holy; and the
greater the difficulty, the greater must be our care, not only to be, but to
continue holy.

2. The Reason hereof is, because without it no man shall see God. This implies,

1. That God may be seen. 2. That without holiness he cannot be seen. 3. That
by holiness, this happiness may be obtained. 4. That because without holiness
it cannot, and by holiness it may be obtained; therefore we must follow
holiness with God, as we do peace with Man.


The three first are absolute; 1. To see God, as many understand it, is
immediately and clearly to behold God's Glory, which is a privilege reserved
for Heaven. Thus to see him, is that which they call intuitive Knowledge, and
beatifical Vision, from which unspeakable joys, and eternal delights do ever
issue. Yet it is an Hebrew expression, and signifies to enjoy; therefore to see
God, is to enjoy him, and have some special union and communion with him, and
derive some happiness from him; either by Grace in this Life, and Glory in the
Life to come.

2. This communion cannot be obtained without holiness. For all Communion
presupposes union, all union agreement, and without holiness there can be no
agreement, no union, no communion with God. For he is holy, and requires
holiness in all them that draw near unto him, for to worship him: He is Light,
and in him is no Darkness; that is, He is pure, and perfectly holy: and as
there is no fellowship of Light and Darkness; so they who walk in Darkness, and
are polluted with Sin, can have no fellowship with him. So that without
holiness we are not capable of fellowship with him.

3. By holiness we may see him and enjoy him; and according to the measure of
our holiness, is the measure of our enjoyment. The more holy we are, the nearer
fellowship we have with him, and derive more joy and comfort from him. That by
this holiness, this sight and enjoyment may be obtained, is evident from
Christ's words, [Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God.

4. Seeing there can be no vision or fruition of God without holiness;
therefore our Duty is to be holy, as God is holy, for that is the Duty urged
upon this ground. The reason, why it is not said, [by holiness we may see God],
but [without hol^ness we cannot see God], is to signify the necessity of this
purity, as a means without which this blessed fruition cannot be attained.
Every one that knows how blessed a thing it is to be near unto our God, and
converse with him, does purify himself as he is pure, 1 John 3, 3. And it
highly concerns us all to keep our hearts right with God; and this should be
our chiefest work in this Life, as we desire to have Communion with God here,
or see his Face in the Light of eternal Glory by Repentance, and Faith in
Christ's Blood, and constant prayer for sanctification to cleanse our hearts
from all impurity. For the more pure we are, the more capable we shall be of
this great benefit; and when we are once fully purified, we shall be admitted
into his glorious presence, and enjoy him for evermore. And this must be a
certain principle, That he that will be happy as God is, must be, holy as he is.

. 14. That they might continue holy, the Apostles Exhortation is;

Ver. 15. Looking diligently, lost any man fail of the Grace of God, lest any
root of bitterness springing up trouble you, and thereby many be defiled.]
THese words may be understood either of private care and vigilance of one over
another, or of public Discipline, and the end of both; especially of the
latter, is to prevent Apostasy and Scandal. And here are observable,

1. Some Danger or Evil to be prevented. 2. The prevention of the same.


The Evil seems in this Text to be Apostasy; in the next, Scandal. If we reduce
the whole to Propositions, they are these:

1. Some of them might fail of the Grace of God. 2. There might grow up amongst
them a root of bitterness. 3. By this Root growing up, many might be defiled.
4. They must be careful and vigilant to prevent any such thing.


1. To fall short of the Grace of God, is to fall from the Grace of God. By
Grace, may be meant the Gospel, which is the Doctrine of that special favor
and grace of God in Christ, wherein was revealed and promised remission of Sin
and eternal Life; which Doctrine they professed, and by which they expected to
receive these incomparable mercies upon their Belief. To come short of this
Grace with some, is to faint and recede from their Profession, especially
because of persecution or seduction; and this is nothing else but Apostasy, or
else at least some degree thereof: and if any do thus either out of doubting,
or the love of the World; he deprives himself of that excellent benefit, which
by perseverance he might have obtained. There was great danger of this, not
only because of their frailty, but of the many temptations of those times.

2. There might grow up amongst them a Root of bitterness. A Root of
bitterness, is a bitter Root; and a bitter Root is some person infected with
heresy; which is one kind of Apostasy, or at least is the beginning of Apostasy
which begins in the Understanding, receiving some ^^^our contrary to the
Doctrine of the Gospel; goes on in the Will, resolving to deny the Truth; and
is finished in the profession of that Heresy. Such heresies, by reason of many
subtle Seducters, and the ignorance of Professors, with other temptations,
might easily by degrees grow up amongst them, and in the end manifest
themselves. Whereas it is added, [Left any such ^oot sprining up trouble you]
It Is very likely, 1. That the Apostle followed the Septuagint, which thus
translate the place, [Left there (...) Rest springing up, (...)], in gall and
bitterness. 2. That the Transcribes turned the words, [(...)] into [(...)],
which signifies to trouble. 3. We must note, That the Root of Gall and Wormwood
in Moses, signifies an Apostate, who violates the Covenant of God, in turning
to Idols; and therefore, in this place, to fail of the Grace of God, and to be
a Root of bitterness are the same, and both intend Apostates and Apostasy. We
must not here too curiously distinguish between Apostasy and Heresy; for though
some Heresy is not Apostasy, yet some is; because it denies the fundamental
Truth of the Gospel.

3. By this Root of bitterness many may be defiled. For a little leaven
seaveneth the whole Lump. Heresy and Apostasy are like Wormwood and Gall, a
little of them will make bitter a great measure of Water, Wine, or any other
Drink or Meat: One evil example may do much hurt, many will do more. One
Heretic or Apostate, especially if eminent, may draw many after him, not only
by his example, but by his false Doctrine. The Dragon is said with his tail to
draw down the third part of the Stats: (...) could cause all Israel to Sin. How
much mischief was done to the Church by Simon Magus, Cerinthus, Ebion,
Valentius, and other Heretics? Therefore by one, many may be polluted.

4. To prevent this danger, they must look diligently. To this end, 1. Every
man must have a care of himself, and look to his own Soul. 2. They must watch
one over another: and, if they see any inclining to Apostasy, or beginning to
doubt of, or decline his Profession, they must by good example, instruction,
admonition, reproof, and exhortation, seek to (...) him, 3. The Minister of the
Gospel being trusted with man's Soul, must be very watchful above all other;
must exhost, reprove, and by his wholesome Doctrine, inform the ignorant,
strengthen the weak, reform the erroneous, encourage the faint, and suffer no
such bitter Root to spring up amongst his People. 4. They that have the power
of discipline, upon information must by Admonition and fighter Censures first
seek to reclaim a sinning Brother; and, if so they cannot rectify him, they
must cast him out, left others be infected.

. 15. As Apostasy, so Scandal must be prevented; therefore he add,

Ver. 16. Lest there be any Fornicatour, or profane person, as Esau, who for
one morsel of meat sold his brithright.

Ver. 17. For ye know how that afterward when he would have inherited the
Blessing, he was rerejected; for he found no place for Repentance, though he
sought it carefully with tears.]

IN these words, as in the former, we have two things:

1. Some Evil to be prevented. 2. The prevention of the same.


The prevention is the same you heard before. For the words [looking
diligently] are to be re-iterated; and every one must have a care of himself,
watch over others; and the Minister must especially watch over his Flock, and
they, who are trusted with the power of the Keys, must use all means to make
the parties guilty, penitent and sensible of their sins; or, if they continue
impenitent, they must cast them out.

The Scandal to be prevented, is twofold;

1. Fornication. 2. Profaness.


These two are expressly named, because there were some amongst them guilty of
them, or many or some of them propense and inclined unto them. Yet by these all
other Scandals may be understood, which are not to be suffered in a Church.

1. They must look diligently, lest there be any Fornicatour. By Fornication in
Scripture is signified not only simple Fornification between single persons,
but also Whoredom, Adultery, Incest, and all kind of Lewdness and Uncleanness.
And Christians, of all others, should take heed of this Sin; especially because
they are called to Holiness: their Bodies are redeemed by the Blood of Christ,
consecrated to God by Baptism, and are the Temples of the Holy Ghost.

2. Profaness is the second Sin to be eschewed; and this is to be considered,

1. In General; for we must not be profane. 2. In Particular; for we must not
be profane, as Esau.


1. Profane is opposed to holy: and as that which is holy is pure; so that
which is profane is impure and polluted. As there be things, so there are
persons that are profane Profane things are such as are common, base,
contemptible, not consecrated to God, not set apart for any religious Use:
Profane persons are such as are irreligious, polluted with Sin, who fear not
God, contemn holy things, and by their contempt profane them. And this
profaness of persons is sometimes plain Atheism, and always some degree of
Atheism, on rather a Sin issuing from an Atheistical heart.

2. Profaness in particular is here the profaness of Esau; there must be no
profane person amongst them like unto Esau. This instance he gives not only
that they might understand what the Sin is, but that by his example, they might
abhor it. In Esau, we must consider,

1. His Sin in General. Particular.

2. The Punishment and Consequent of this Sin.

1. The Sin in general was profaness; for by the History it appears, that the
disposition of his heart was irreligious and profane, and his practice did
manifest the same. His marriage, and his purpose to murder his Brother were
sufficient evidence. Yet the particular here expressed, was the selling of his
Birthright for a morsel of meat: This was a plain contempt of his Birthright,
as not worthy to be regarded. To understand this the better, we must consider,
1. What this Brithright was. 2. His sale of it. 1. This primogeniture, which is
here meant by Birthright, anciently had certain Privileges. As, 1. The
dominion over his Brethren, upon the Death of his Father. 2. A double portion.
3. The Priesthood. Yet besides these in the Birthright, there was something
peculiar, and that was his Fathers Blessing, which included the Covenant, and
the promise of the Messiah; and these were sacred things, and of great value.
So much is intimated by his seeking of it with tears. 2. This Birthright he
sold, and that for a morsel of meat.

By which words we understand his Contempt of this sacred Birthright; for, 1.
He sold it, that is, he voluntarily parted with it; for sale is voluntary. 2.
He sold it at a very vile Rate, even for one Morsel of Meat, one Meal to
satisfy his Appetite. Therefore is it said, He did eat, and drink, and rose up,
and went his way; thus Esau despised his Birthright, Genesis 25. 34. This was his
Profaness in particular. By this we easily understand, that Profaness is a
Contempt of that which is sacred. And many may exceed in Reverence and Devotion
of outward Worship, and the Observation of Rites and Ceremonies, and yet be
guilty of this Sin, whilst they make their Belly their God, and prefer earthly
Profits or Pleasures before those heavenly Blessings which Christ has
purchased and God has promised. These two, Fornication and Profianess, may be
termed Apostasy in Practice, as the former in Profession.

2. The Punishment follows, and that was an irrecoverable loss of the Blessing.
The words contain two Propositions,

1. That Esat lost the Blessing irrecoverably. 2. They knew this.


1. That he lost it irrecoverably is evident; for, 1. He would have inherited
it, and was rejected. 2. He sought it carefully with tears, and found no place
for Repentance. All this we may learn from the History of Isaac the Father, and
Jacob and Esau his Sons; for Jacob, according to the Direction of his Mother
Rebeccah, obtains the Blessing from Isaac: Esau comes after with a purpose to
receive the Blessing, of which he made full account. But the Blessing being
already passed upon his Brother, his expectation was disappointed: Upon this he
weeps, he petitions, and with greatest Importunity; yet all in vain, and too
late, the Blessing was gone, and what was done could not be undone. That which
was done unwittingly by Isaac was confirmed by God, and made irrecoverable and
unalterable. Therefore is it said, There was no place found for Repentance;
that is, the Blessing of Jacob stood firm and could not be altered; no place
was found for Esau's Repentance, but that was in vain; no place was found for
Isaa^'s Repentance, for the Blessing could not be revoked, nor transferred from
Jacob to his Brother: For so he said. I have blessed him; ya, and he shall be
blessed, Genesis 27. 33.

2. This they knew; for, being Hebrews, they took Moses for a Prophet, and were
acquainted with his Writings, and in particular with this History of their
Father Jacob, from whom they were descended. He puts them in mind of this, as a
thing well known unto them, that by this Example they might take heed of
Profaness, that grievous Sin, lest in the End they suffer the like Punishment:
For if any of them should be profane, and despise the Blessing of eternal Life,
tendered in the Gospel, and should prefer their Credit, the quiet and peaceable
Possession of their Estates, and other temporal advantages, before this
glorious Reward, their Punishment in the End would be grievous; because they
should not only lose the Blessing irrecoverably, but also suffer eternally. And
all such as prefer the World before Christ, and earthly Blessings before
heavenly, are profane; and whatsoever their Profession may be, they are in
great danger of Apostasy.

. 18. The Author willing to omit nothing that might confirm them in their
Profession, and prevent their Apostecy, argues further in this manner.

Ver. 18. For ye are not come to the Mount that might be teuched, and that
burned with fire, nor to Blackness, and Darkness, and Tempest;

Ver. 19. And to the sound of a Trumpet, and the Voice of words, which Voice
they that heard, entreated that the Word should not be spoken to them any more.

Ver. 20. For they could not endure that which was commanded: And if so much as
a Beast touch the Mountain, it shall be stoned, or thrust through with a Dart.

Ver. 21. And so terrible was the sight, that Moses said, I exceedingly fear
and quake.

TO find the Connection of these with the former words is difficult; because
they seem to come in abruptly, without any dependence upon the antecedent
Discourse. Some think these, with those that follow unto Ver. 25. are the same
with those, Ye are not under the Law, but under Grace, Romans 6. 14. and likewise
with those, You have not received the Spirit of B^^dage to fear again, cap. 8.
15. For, as these two Passages, so this Text speaks of the different Estate of
such as are under the Law, and such as are under the Gospel; so does this. And
if compared together, they do assert and implicitly prove, that the State of
the one is far more excellent and hapyy than the Estate of the other. And if we
consider the Scope of the Apostle, which is, to confirm these Hebrews in the
Faith, and persuade them to Perseverance in their Christian Profession and
Practice, then this is an effectual and convincing Argument to persuade, and a
forcible Motive to stir them up unto Perseverance. Yet this is not all; for if
the Gospel, and the Estate of such as are under the Gospel, be so much more
excellent than the Law and the Estate of those that are under the Law, then we
must have a special care to persevere in the Profession of the Gospel: The
Reason of the Consequence we find Ver. 25. For if they escaped not, who refused
him that spoke on Earth (when he gave the Law), much more shall not we escape,
if we turn away from him that speaks from Heaven. Where the Apostle
presupposes, 1. That the greater the Sin is, the greater the Punishment is. 2.
That it is a greater Sin to reject and transgress the Gospel, than to reject and
transgress the Law; and from these presupposed, he inferrs, That as they would
escape a far greater and severer Punishment, so they should avoid the far
greater Sin of Apostasy from the Gospel. So that the Order and Method of the
Apostle is this, 1. He compares the Law and the Gospel. 2. By this Comparison
manifests the excellency of the Gospel above the Law. 3. From this manifested,
he inferrs the Duty, They must not reject the Gospel and fall away. 4. He
urges the Performance of the Duty from the severe and terrible Punishment,
which must be suffered by such as perform it not. So that from the 18th. Verse
to the 25th. we have the Doctrine; and in the 25th. the Use. This Argument has
great Affinity with that we find used Chap. 2. 2, 3.

. 19. This being the Coherence, whereby the Scope of the Apostle may be
understood: Let us consider the words themselves, wherein we may observe the
Doctrine concerning

1. The Law. 2. The Gospel. 3. Their passing from the one to the other. 4. The
Use to be made of it.


In the first we have,

1. The Manner of Promulgation. 2. The fear it caused in Israel and Moses. 3.
Their freedom from it.


According to these three things we have three Propositions,

1. The Promulgation of the Law was terrible. 2. Being terrible, it caused both
Israel and Moses to fear exceedingly. 3. These Hebrews were freed from this
Law.


1. For to understand the manner of Promulgation, we must know the place, and
that in general was a Mountain, in particular Sinai, a Mountain in Arabia the
Desert. This Mountain is said to be [palpabilis, tactilis,] touchable, or which
may be touched; that is, it was visible and sensible, a Mountain bodily
accessible, though not at that time, and on Earth. This is added, to put a
difference between this Hill, and the spiritual Zion, which is sometimes called
Heaven, from whence the Gospel was revealed; therefore when Christ revealed the
Gospel, it is said he spoke from Heaven; whereas, when God gave the Law on the
Mountain, he is said to speak on Earth, Ver. 25. This place was not terrible in
it self but at this time, because of the Fire wherewith it burned at that time:
For some Mountains, where there are Vulcans, as upon Vesuvius, Aetna, Hecla,
the Pike of Tenariff, and many in America and other places of the Earth, to
burn with Fire is usual, But this Burning was extraordinary at this time; for
the Mountain then did burn with fire, Deuteronomy. 5. 23. yea, it did burn with fire
up to the midst of Heaven, Deuteronomy. 4. 11. as though Heaven and Earth had been on
a flame: And this was some resemblance of that dreadful Fire, which shall
consume the combustible World at the latter day. The flaming Fire gave Light,
but there was Blackness and Darkness, which might be caused by thick Clouds and
Smoke which covered the Mountain; for ^as before, it burnt with Fire unto the
midst of Heaven, with Darkness, Clouds, and thick Darkness, Deuteronomy. 4. 11. For
Mount Sinai was altogether on a Smoke, because the Lord descended upon it in
Fire, and the smoke thereof ascended as the Smoke of a Furnace, and the whole
Mount quaked greatly, Exodus 19. 18. There were also Thundrings and Lightnings,
and the Noise of the Trumpet, and the Mountain smoking, Chap. 20. 18. This was
a Type of that utter Darkness of Hell. Besides, there were Tempests and
terrible Storms, a Sign of God's fearful Indignation, which shall fall upon the
Wicked. The Sound of the Trumpet, and the Voice of words, did increase the
terror; for the Voice of the Trumpet was exceeding loud, Exodus 19. 16. And all
the People saw the Thundrings, and the Lightnings, and the Sound of the
Trumpet, Chap. 20. 18. This Trumpet did summon the People to appear before the
Lord, and did prepare them for to receive the Law, and to hear their doom if
they should transgress it: As this was a Legislative, so there shall be a
Judicial Trumpet to convent the whole World to appear before the Judgment Seat
of Christ; An Archangel shall sound the Trumpet, and the Noise shall be loud
and miraculous. When the People were prepared, on the third day the Trumpet
sounded, and then followed the Voice of words; for God, condescending to the
Capacity of Man, gave the Law out of the midst of the Fire, and spoke in an
audible Voice in the Language of that People, that they might understand it. As
the Sound of the Trumpet, so the Voice of God was loud, majestic, terrible,
like Thunder; so that the Words or Commands of the Law were dreadful, not only
in respect of the Sound but the Matter. This dread and terror did appear in
two things, 1. In this, that they that heard entreated, that the word should
not be spoken to them any more; for they said to Moses, Speak thou with us, and
we will hear; but let not God speak with us, lest we die, Exodus 20. 19. And
again they said, Now therefore why should we die? for this great Fire will
consume us: If we hear the Voice of the Lord our God any more, we shall die,
Deuteronomy. 5. 25. Let me not hear again the Voice of the Lord my God; neither let me
see this great Fire any more that I die not, Chap. 18. 16. 2. They could not
endure it, and this is evident from their fear of Death. And if Israel could
not endure this Voice of the Lawgiver, and the sight of the Lord, how will
Wicked men endure to see Christ come from Heaven in flaming Fire, and to hear
his Sentence, Go ye cursed into everlasting Fire, prepared for the Devil and
his Angels, the most dreadful words that ever God spoke, or Man did hear or
shall hear. The terror was yet greater; for there was a Line drawn, and a
Range sixed, to keep both Man and Beast at a Distance from the Mount, and Moses
was commanded to set these bounds beforehand to the People; and if either Man
or Beast came within the Range, they were stricken dead instantly by Lightning
or Thunderbolts.

The Reasons why this Law was given in this manner are many; as, 1. To signify
the Majesty of the Supreme Lawgiver, and that they inight know, that the Laws
given were not the Laws of men but of the great Lord of Heaven and Earth: And
the more clearly he did manifest himself, the greater Authority the Law must
needs have. 2. Great and weighty things are done with greatest solemnity; and
the more the solemnity is, the greater Impression is made upon men's hearts. 3.
Seeing the very Promulgation and giving of the Law was so dreadful, how
dreadful must the Transgression be; this was a mighty Motive to incline them to
Obedience. Therefore Moses said, that God was come to prove them, and that his
fear might be before their faces, that they sin not, Exodus 20. 20. 4. This did
let them know, that little Comfort was to be expected from that Law, which did
so strictly command, and ministered no Power to obey, had no Promise of Pardon;
therefore they should more earnestly desire and look for that great Prophet, by
whom God would speak unto them more comfortably, and by whom they might have
free access and boldness to come before the Throne of Grace, made accessible by
his Blood. This was a Law or Covenant rather of Justice than of Mercy, of Fear
than of Hope, of Servitude and Bondage rather than of Liberty: It was made to
discover Sin, to make it exceeding sinful, to be a Schoolmaster to Christ.

2. This was the terrible manner of Promulgation, the Effect whereof was fear
and terror, and the same very great and exceeding; and that 1. In the People,
as we heard before, who could not endure either the Voice or the strict
Commands and Comminations: They endured it a little, but could endure no
longer, for fear of present death. 2. And that which was more, in Moses; for,
so terrible was the sight, that Moses feared, did quake, did fear and quake
exceedingly, and he said so, and expressed his great fear. And how terrible
must that sight be which did strike such a terror into a man so holy, of such
a constant Spirit, so familiarly acquainted with God, and who alone at that
time should comfort and encourage the People: That Moses said thus we do not
read, yet that which is affirmed by a man inspired, as inspired, must needs be
true.

3. They were not come to this Mount to receive so terrible a Law; but they
were freed from all these Terrors, and from the Curses threatened, and had
received the Spirit of Adoption; and therefore there was no reason why they
should fall off to Judaism, and return to that dreadful Mount and consuming
Fire any more.

. 20. Thus far of the terror of the Law, the condition of such as were under
it, and the freedom of these Hebrews from it: Now follows the condition of them
as freed from the Law, and living under the Gospel. Before their Conversion
they were in Minority, Servitude, and continual Fear; but since they are in a
more happy condition, as being translated into the Kingdom of God's dear Son,
wherein they enjoyed incomparable Privileges, spiritual Liberty, and many
sweet Comforts. To understand all this, the Apostle says,

Ver. 22. But ye are come unto Mount Zion, the City of the living God, the
heavenly Jerusalem, and an innumerable Company of Angels. IN these words, and
those which follow unto the five and twentieth Verse, we may observe,

1. A Description of a spiritual and eternal Kingdom. 2. The Enjoyment of, or
rather the Admission into, the same.


In the Description some observe,

1. The Place 2. The Persons of this Kingdom.

The Place is Zion, the City of the Living God, the new Jerusalem.

The Persons are, Subjects, Sovereign.

The Subjects are Angels. Men. Living. Departed. The Sovereign is God, the King
and Judge. Christ, the Priest and Mediator.

There was a certain Place and certain Persons, and they were come unto this
Place, these Persons. Here we have a Zion, a City, a Jerusalem; this Zion is a
Mount, this City is the City of the living God, this Jerusalem is the heavenly
Jerusalem. Zion the Mount, the City of the Living God, the heavenly Jerusalem,
here are the same; and they may signify the Place or the Persons, or the
Association of Persons in such a Place; and they may signify grammatically and
properly, or Rhetorically and Tropically. Grammatically, Zion opposed to Sinai
is a Mount in Jerusalem; where was first a Fort of the Jebusites, then the
Royal Palace of King David, who adorned it with other Buildings, and thence it
was called The City of David: On the North of this Mount some say the Temple
was built; and because that was the Palace and Throne of God, therefore,
according to some Writers, it was styled The City of the great King; and,
because God did choose that place for his special presence, it had the Name of
The City of the Living God. Shindler observes, that the whole City was called
Jerusalem in the Dual Number, because it had two parts; the one was the City of
David on Mount Zion, the other the City of Vision on Moriah, which afterward
was enclosed. But not to stand upon these things, Zion and Jerusalem are taken
for one City, which God in former times did honor above all Cities in the
World. Therefore sung the Psalmist, Why leap ye, ye high Hills? This is the
Hill which God desires to dwell in: yea, the Lord will dwell in it for ever,
Psalm. 68. 16. For by God's special Residence in this place it was advanced
above all other Cities of the Earth, though never so magnificent: But this was
her greatest Glory, That Christ the Son of God was presented there, preached
there, and there did glorious Works; there the Holy Ghost came down from Heaven
upon the Apostles, there the Gospel began first to be preached, and thence it
came out into all the World. According to the Prophecy of old it came to pass;
for so the Evangelical Prophet wrote, And in the last days it shall come to
pass, that the Mountain of the Lord's House shall be established in the top of
the Mountains, and exalted above the Hills, and all Nations shall flow unto it.
And a little after, for out of Zion shall go forth the Law, and the Word of the
Lord from Jerusalem, Isa. 2. 2, 3. Where, by Law, and the Word of God,
understand the Doctrine of the Gospel: This is the Grammatical sense.
Rhetorically Zion and the City of Jerusalem often signify the Church Militant
and Triumphant, by reason of God's spiritual and supernatural presence and
habitation in the same. If we consider this Church locally, the place of our
Pilgrimage is the Earth, the place of our Rest and perpetual Abode is Heaven,
from whence we receive our spiritual Being, where we must converse, and whither
we tend; in these respects Heaven may be said to be the place whither upon our
first Conversion we come. The Persons which make up this Body, and the
spiritual Inhabitants, are more intended by this Zion and this City; yet they
cannot make up this Politic Body, Society, and Commonweal, but as associated
under their Sovereign, God-Redeemer. And to distinguish this Zion and City of
Jerusalem from that which was on Earth, situate and lying in the Land of
Canaan, in the Tribe of Judah and Benjamin, this is said to be The heavenly
Jerusalem which is above, and the Mother of us all, which one day shall come
down from Heaven, as a Bride prepared for her Husband; and God, who dwells in
her by Grace, shall then dwell in her by Glory, and bless her fully and for
ever. To come to this City and Kingdom is to be admitted and incorporated into
the same, upon our sincere Faith in Christ. In this City we find many Persons,
amongst whom the most eminent are the Angels, those holy, immortal, and blessed
Spirits of Heaven, who ever see the face of God, and environ his glorious
Throne: These are not few but many; for they are an innumerable Company or
Multitude, for the Chariots of God are twenty thousand, even thousands or (many
thousands) of Angels, Psalm. 68. 17. The number of the Angels round about the
Throne of God are ten thousand times ten thousand, even thousands of thousands,
Revel. 5. 11. To come to these is, to be of their Society, and every true
Believer upon his Regeneration begins to have Communion with these blessed
Spirits; for regenerate Men and Angels are fellow-Citizens of the heavenly
Jerusalem, and Fellow Subjects of the same Kingdom. They are above us, and we
are a great Distance from them in respect of our present Estate, yet some of
them are very near us, though we do not see them, nor speak unto them, nor
familiarly converse with them; and they love us, have a special care of us, and
all of them are ministering Spirits for us, who shall be Heirs of Salvation.

. 21. Yet there are other Subjects of this Kingdom of a lower and inferior
Rank, and a Supreme Lord and Judge of all: For we come,

Ver. 23 To the general Assembly, and Church of the firstborn, who are written
in Heaven, and to God the Judge of all, and to the spirits of just men made
perfect.]

Where we have God the Sovereign both of Angels and Men; the Men who are
Subjects in this Kingdom are the Living or Dead; both, in his Dominion, and
under his Power. Some Copies and Translations join the word (...), to the word
Angels in the former verse, [You are come to Myriads, the general assembly of
Angels.] But others read as we do in our English: The sense is not much altered
by this difference, for there is a general Assembly of Angels, and a general
Assembly of Men, and these are different; yet both make but one Body and
Community of Subjects in this heavenly and spiritual Polity. The Propositions
are these,

1. There is a general Assembly and Church of the firstborn, who are written
in Heaven. 2. There is God the Judge of all. 3. There are Spirits of just men
made perfect. 4. They were come to these.


1. In the first we have the firstborn; these are written in Heaven, these are
a great Assembly and Church. 1. The firstborn in this place are, 1. Such as
are regenerated and adopted; for here, to be born, is to be born again, and
made the Sons of God by Word and Spirit. They are God's firstborn, because
they have the spiritual privileges of primogeniture; they are Heirs, and also
Kings and Priests to God for ever. This signifies their excellent dignity above
other men, and their near relation to God and Christ. 2. These firstborn are
written or enrolled in Heaven, which is the same with having their Names
written in Heaven, and in the Book of Life, Luke 10. 20. Rev. 20. 12. and in
the Book of the Lamb. The meaning of the Phrase is, that upon their serious
Faith in Christ, God does account them as his Children, and Heirs of Glory;
therefore it imports two things, 1. Their title unto everlasting Glory. 2. The
certainty of the possession in due time, so that there shall be no alteration
of their Condition. They are destined to an eternal Inheritance, by an
immutable decree; and therefore their Names are said to be written in this Book
from the beginning of the World, and so they shall never be blotted or rased
out again. This enrolment is but virtual, which upon their new Birth becomes
actual: This is a great privilege, to have our Names enrolled in the Register
of Heaven, which never shall be changed; and an unspeakable comfort, by our
sincere Faith and Obedience to know it. 3. There is the Church of these
firstborn; that is, though they be many, yet they are called, chosen,
congregated, and united into one spiritual Body politic, and made one Society;
therefore the Church is so often compared to a Body, which has many members:
yet all these united, make but one Systeme, called the Church, the members and
parts whereof are not natural but naturalized, and by free Grace ingrafted. 4.
They are a general Assembly, made up of many different persons, gathered
together out of several Countries into one Body, though not into one place.
Some think the Apostle alludes unto the Olympian, and other Assemblies of the
Greeks, wherein many from many places met together. Some were Scholars, as
Philosophers, Poets, Orators, who did exercise their wit; some did manifest
their activity in running, wrestling, and other bodily Exercises: they had also
their Delights and Recreations. But the Analogy is not in these things, but in
this, that they were one general Assembly, and so did represent the Church as
Catholic and Universal. For these are a number gathered and redeemed by the
Blood of Christ out of every Kindred, and Tongue, and People, and Nation; and a
great multitude not only of Jews but Gentiles, which no man can number, of all
Nations, and Kindreds, and People, and Tongues, Rev. 5. 9, and 7, 9. They were
come to these, and were incorporated into this Society, and made Subjects of
this Kingdom, and the firstborn of God, had a title to the same heavenly
Inheritance, and their Names were enrolled in the Book of Life, and they were
destined to eternal Glory.

2. They were come to God the Judge of all: What is the Body without an Head? a
Kingdom or multitude of Subjects without a King, who is the Basis of the
People, and the Center of them all wherein they are united, and the
Cornerstone, that does support them? Therefore in this most excellent,
Society, there must be a King and Sovereign, and this is God, who is here
styled the Judge of all. In Hebrew, to judge is to rule and govern; and a Judge is
a Ruler and Governor, and so it may be taken here: Yet there are inferior and
subordinate Rulers, and also supreme and universal. Such God is, for all things
are subject to his Power; yet he has a special Kingdom, as he is Lord and
Redeemer by Christ, and so he is in a special manner the Supreme Governor of
this general Assembly and Church of the firstborn, who are not only his
Servants and Subjects, but his Sons and Heirs of Glory. He is their Lord and
Father, their Lawgiver, and their Judge; he takes a special care of them, and
by his Laws does order them to eternal Happiness, and in the End rewards them
with Glory. He is Almighty in Power, exactly just, wonderfully wise, and
infinitely merciful, and exercises his Perfections in promoting their eternal
Bliss: And they were come to him, and admitted into his Kingdom, received and
into his Protection; and as he is able, so he is resolved, to destroy all their
Enemies, and give everlasting Peace: His Angels must guard them, all Creatures
serve them, and all things must work together for their good: He continually
sits in the Throne of Grace, not in the midst of Smoke and Fire as upon Mount
Si^ai; he is compassed with Light, and ever shines upon them with his favor.

3. They were come unto the Spirits of just men made perfect. Those Spirits
were not Angels, but the Souls of Men; yet not in their Bodies, but uncloathed
and divested of their Bodies: Yet there were Millions upon Millions of
separated Souls before their times, and many of these the Souls of men dying in
their Sins; but these were the Souls and Spirits of just men, who in their
mortal Life upon Earth were upright, walked with their God, and endeavored an
universal Obedience; yet they were not perfectly righteous in themselves, but
were justified, sanctified, and cleansed from all Sin by their Faith in Christ,
before they departed this World: For, they were the Spirits of Patriarchs,
Prophets, Martyrs, and the Saints of God, who lived in former times, which were
made perfect. To be made perfect, is, to be washed in the Blood of Christ, and
consecrated, as many in this Life are; yet these had finished their time of
Consecration, and were made capable of a nearer Communion with God than we
Mortals are: Though these were removed out of the Church Militant, yet they had
not attained an Estate of full Perfection; for they had not received their full
Reward, though they were secure of it, as of the Resurrection of their Bodies;
and were nearer unto God and eternal Bliss than we on Earth can be. These were
the Spirits of just men made perfect, and to these the believing Hebrews were
come: For, wheresoever or howsoever God had disposed of them, yet they were
within the Verges of his Kingdom, and not only in, but of, this society, and
Fellow Members of the same Body. They were come unto them, though not in the
same place with them, and must expect to be by Death removed, and more nearly
associated with them when the time of their Consecration should be finished,
and then they should be freed from all Sin and Temptation, and their condition
would be comfortable and most certain. Our Converse with Saints departed is
very little or none, though some Communion there is between them and us living
upon Earth: We and they have the same God and Sovereign, the same Head Jesus
Christ, the same Charity, the same desire and hope of Resurrection.

. 22. They were also come

Ver. 24. To Jesus the Mediator of the new Covenant, and to the Blood of
Sprinkling, that speaks better things than that of Abel.

THis Text informs us,

1. That Jesus is the Mediator of the New Covenant by his Blood. 2. This Blood
of Sprinkling speaks better things than that of Abel. 3. They were come to this
Mediator, and this Blood of Sprinkling.


1. Christ is the Mediator of the New Covenant by his Blood. Of this Covenant,
and of Christ the Mediator of it, you have formerly heard Chap. 8. 6. and Cap.
9. 15. It Is written that the Law was ordained by Angels in the hand of a
Mediator, Gal. 3. 19. This Mediator was Moses, who 1. Signifies the mind of
God to Israel in his stipulation of Subjection and Obedience, and his Promise
to be their God, and make them his peculiar People, and return the Promise and
Restipulation of that People unto God, Exodus 19. 5.

6, 7, 8. 2. He confirms this Covenant by sprinkling of the Blood of the
Sacrifice, Exodus 24. 34 5, 6, 7, 8. In this he was a Type of Christ, who is the
Mediator of the new and better Covenant, to procure it, confirm it, make it
effectual: Some inform us, that he procure; it by his Blood and Sacrifice
satisfying God's Justice, and meriting his Mercy for sinful Man. He makes it
effectual, 1. By proposing it unto Man, and pressing the keeping of it upon
powerful Motives; and this is done by the Word of the Gospel. 2. He enables Man
by the Spirit to keep it. 3. Upon his keeping of it by his Repentance and
Faith, he makes Intercession for Man repenting and believing, and obtains
Pardon of his Sins and Defects, and Acceptance of his endeavors; and in the
End, he, as a Judge, gives Possession of eternal Life: So that after once the
Covenant is procured by his Blood, as a Prophet he proposes and declares it,
as a Priest he makes Intercession, as a King and Judge he gives Possession; Yet,
according to the Scripture, Christ is a Mediator in proper and more strict
sense as a Priest, and his Blood and Death is the Foundation of this Covenant;
for all the Promises thereof are made for, and in consideration of, this Blood
and Death, without which there is no Expiation of Sin, or hope of Pardon. And
though the Promises were made from the beginning, and that upon condition of
Faith in his Blood; yet they had been vain and unprofitable to Man, if Christ
in fullness of time had not shed his Blood, and by his Death made this Covenant
firm and unalterable for ever: And as this Blood, satisfying divine Justice,
and meriting his favor and all Mercies necessary for our happiness, is the
Foundation of this Covenant; so this Blood, by Christ's Intercession sprinkled
upon our Souls, makes this Covenant effectual: So that as this Blood being shed
procures and confirms this Covenant in it self, so this Blood pleades before
the Throne of Grace in our behalf, confirms this Covenant to us, and makes it
effectual to our Salvation. Therefore, though Christ as a Prophet and a King
may do something about this Covenant, yet it mainly depends upon Christ as a
Priest, and as a Priest he is a Mediator. Take away this Blood shed and there
is no Covenant; take away the pleading of this Blood before the Judgment Seat
of God, and there is no efficacy of this Covenant to us in particular: And
here, as we must distinguish of this Blood, as shed, as pleaded, and as
sprinkled; so we must of this Covenant, as procured, as made, as confirmed; as
likewise of it as kept, and as made effectual unto us. In all these respects it
depends upon Christ as a Priest, and upon his Blood, and by and in respect of
this Blood he is a Mediator. And it is further to be observed, that a
Mediator is one that deals and acts between two Parties, and is distinct from
both, at least so to be considered. The Parties here, are God and sinful Man:
Christ, as a Priest, is different from both; for, though he agrees with both,
yet in this business he is neither. The End of this Mediation is,
Reconciliation of God and Man, of the Sovereign offended and the Subject
offending: God offended will not hear of Reconciliation but upon certain terms;
as the satisfaction of his Justice by Blood, the Repentance of Man offending,
casting himself wholly upon his Mercy, and the Intercession of a just Party,
which had shed his Blood for Sins. Christ therefore being the Word made Flesh,
offers his pure and unspotted Blood in behalf of Man to satisfy Justice, and
this Blood is accepted; he makes Intercession for Man repenting, and relying
upon this Blood and God's Mercy, and so the Reconciliation is made, and the
Covenant proves effectual on both sides, and that by virtue of a Mediator
coming between God angry and Man guilty, and interposing between Man repenting
and God solicited by this High Priest ascended into Heaven.

2. This Blood of Sprinkling speaks better things thau the Blood of Abel.
This Blood is the Blood of Christ; and the End, and so the principal Effect,
is, to cleanse away Sin: yet this it cannot do, except it be first shed, and
then sprinkled. Once shed, it has a cleansing Power and Virtue, yet actually
cleanses and purifieth no man till it be sprinkled upon him. The Blood of
sprinkling is Blood to be sprinkled, and it is to be sprinkled upon the unclean
to make clean, and therefore the Blood of Sprinkling is by a Metonymy cleansing
and purifying Blood: Yet there was a sprinkling of Blood in the Sanction and
Confirmation of the Old Covenant, and so Blood of Sprinkling here may be the
Blood of Confirmation: for, as you heard (Chap. 9. 16, 17.) a Testament is of
force after men are dead; so upon and by the death of Christ the new Covenant
was made firm, valid, and in full force and power for that end God intended it.
If Christ had not dyed God might have abrogated or altered his Covenant; but
upon his death he was bound to stand to it for ever, and the Title to the
heavenly Inh^r^tance is good to all such as observe the terms and conditions;
yet in this Expression it is very probable the Apostle alludes to the Legal
Purifications by Water, Ashes, Blood, which being sprinkled upon such as were
Legally unclean, or upon the Lepers, did purify them. The like Effect Christ's
Blood has upon all such as are capable of it; therefore do we read, that the
Blood of Christ does, cleanse us from all Sin, 1 John 1. 7. and to cleanse is
to forgive, to be cleansed is to be pardoned, as is employed in that Text, If we
confess our Sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our Sins, and to
cleanse us from all Unrighteousness, Ver. 9. This Blood is sprinkled upon such
as confess, repent, believe, pray, receive the Sacraments. The means of
sprinkling is the Word, Sacraments, and principally the Spirit, or whatsoever
works or increases and strengthens Faith; and then it is sprinkled, when
it is so applied as that the Person receives the benefit of Christ's Passion,
one Effect, and the principal, is Remission of Sin and Sanctification, whereby
we are freed from Sin, and the woeful Consequents thereof; for this Blood
speaks better things than that of Abel. Abel's Blood was shed, so was
Christ's; Abel's Blood shed speaks, so Christ's Blood shed speaks; Abel's
Blood speaks to God, so Christ's speaks to him likewise; they both speak
loud, and cry so that God hears: Abel's Blood was precious, Christ's far more
precious, and the Cry of both is heard in Heaven. Thus far they agree, yet
differ much; for the one cries for Mercy, the other for Judgment; the one cries
against Man that did shed it, the other for Man though his Sins did cause it to
be shed. The meaning is, that Cain's Murder of his Brother Abel did so much
offend God that it moved him to revenge it; Christ's death, as caused by the
cursed, cruel, impenitent Jews, did so far provoke God, that he fearfully
punished them and their Children, according to their own words, Let his Blood
be upon us and our Children; yet, as suffered for the Sin of Man, and offered
unto God, it was so pleasing, so precious, and so highly accepted, that for,
and in condsieration of it, God was effectually moved both to reward him, and
pardon all penitent and believing Sinners, and that for evermore. This Blood
spoke when it was shed, and speaks effectually when pleaded before the eternal
Judge.

3. They were come to this Mediator, to this Blood. They were not come to the
Mount of Fire, Smoke, Darkness, Terror, Death, where there was no Mediator to
make their peace with God, no blood to cry for Metcy and cleanse them from
their Sin, and free them from eternal Death. But they were come into that
Society, where Christ was their Mediator and Priest, where they were freed from
the Law of Sin and Death, and under the Covenant of Free Mercy, Grace, and
Life; where the Blood of Christ, sprinkled upon their Souls, did cry aloud to
Heaven for Mercy, and did cleanse them from all Sin for ever. And now since,
they were received into an heavenly Society, (where Angels, and the best of men
both living and dead, were their Fellow Subjects; God Redeemer sitting in the
Throne of Grace, their Sovereign; Christ the Son of God, their Priest, who shed
his Blood to wash away their Sins: and though they had many Offenses, yet upon
their Repentance would make Reconciliation for them; and though they had many
failings, yet he was a righteous Advocate with their Father, and would plead
their Cause with his own Blood, procure their pardon according to the Covenant
of Grace, so that they should be justified and live for ever;) there was no
Reason in the World to return to Sinai and the Law again, and forsake the best
and happiest Kingdom that ever was, a Kingdom of eternal Righteousness and
Peace: If they did, Heaven might be astonished, and Earth amazed, at their
Folly. In this with that which follows, the Apostle seems to sum up briefly, in
a few words, all the former Arguments taken from the excellency of the
Prophetical Office, of the Covenant, of the Priesthood of Christ, and he does
this in that manner that he clearly takes away all color of excuse from such
as should incline to Apostasy.

. 23. Therefore he further argues thus,

Ver. 25. See that ye refuse not him that speaks; for if they escaped not,
who refused him that spoke on Earth, much more shall not we escape, if we turn
away from him that speaks from Heaven. THE words are a Dehortation, wherein
we have

1. The Sin dehorted from. 2. The Reason why we should take heed of it.


1. The Sin is, to refuse him that speaks. 2. The Reason is taken from the
greater Punishment to be suffered if they do refuse.


1. To refuse him that speaks, implies, 1. That Christ does speak, and God by
him. To speak, is, not only to reveal the Doctrine of the Gospel, which is the
thing spoken; but also to command Repentance and Faith in Christ, with a
Promise of Righteousness and eternal Life, and a Commination of eternal Death
unavoidable. To refuse him that thus speaks, is, either to reject this
Doctrine, and not receive it; or, if they have once received it, to renounce
it; so that this Refusal includes both Unbelief, and also Apostasy from the
Christian Profession: But they who had made Profession of this Doctrine must
not refuse to continue in it, nor renounce it to the dishonor and Contempt of
God, who out of greatest Mercy had tendered Salvation upon fairest terms.

2. The Reason is taken from the hainousness of the Sin, and the grievousness
of the Punishment, both which are set forth by a Comparison in Quantity: And
this Comparison presupposes many things; as, 1. That God did speak in former
times, and now again in these last days; then by Moses and the Prophets, now
by Christ his Son. 2. That when he gave the Law, and made the former Covenant,
he spoke on Earth upon Mount Sinai; but when he spoke by Christ he spoke from
Heaven; for he came from Heaven, returned to Heaven again, and from Heaven sent
down the Holy Ghost upon the Apostles and by that Spirit in them revealed the
Gospel. 3. That some Sins are more heinous than others; and the more heinous
the Sin is, the more heavy the Punishment will be. 4. That to refuse God
speaking on Earth was a grievous Sin, and deserved a grievous Punishment; and
so to refuse him speaking from Heaven is a great Sin, and renders the Refuser
liable to fearful Punishment. 5. That the latter is a more grievous Sin than
the former, and deserves a greater Punishment. These things presupposed, the
Reason is clear, and we must in any wise take heed of rejecting or renouncing
the Gospel; because, if they who transgressed the Law given on Earth were
severely punished, then they, if guilty of a far greater Sin, as all such are
who refuse the Gospel revealed from Heaven, then they must suffer a far greater
Penalty, and no ways could they escape it. This differs something from the
Argument used Chap. 2. 2, 3, etc. for that compares the Law delivered by
Angels, with the Gospel spoken and confirmed by Christ, and the excellency of
Christ above the Angels is the ground of his Argument: But here God's speaking
on Earth by Angels, is compared with God's speaking from Heaven by Christ; and
here the Excellency of Heaven from whence the Gospel was revealed, above the
Earth where the Law was given, is made the Foundation of the Reason: And God,
by giving the Law on Earth, and the Gospel from Heaven, did intimate, that
there was some Excellency in the Gospel which was not in the Law, in the new
Covenant which was not in the old; otherwise, God could have revealed them both
on Earth or both from Heaven. Let us apply this unto our selves, and consider,
1. Who speaks unto us. 2. What he speaks. 3. From whence he speaks. 1. It Is not
Man, but God; not Moses, but Christ: The Law indeed was by Moses, but Grace and
Truth by Jesus Christ. The Majesty and Power of him who speaks is such, as
Angels are bound to attend and obey with all humble Submission; and shall we
Worms, nay Dust and Ashes, refuse to hear this glorious Lord? 2. The Matter
that he speaks and we hear, is the best, the most sweet, the most comfortable,
and the most excellent; never better things seen, or heard, or understood by
the Heart of Man. The Gospel is a Doctrine of profoundest Wisdom, of greatest
Love and Mercy, and of highest Concernment, and most conducing to our
everlasting good. And shall we reject it? Shall we sin against so great a
Majesty, so great a Mercy? Sins against the Mercies of God so freely tendered to
us in Jesus Christ, are the most heinous of all others: Let us tremble to think
of these Sins, and those Punishments which they must suffer that are guilty of
them. 3. He speaks from Heaven; for the Gospel is a Mystery hid from the
beginning of the World, and was brought unto us from the Bosom of the Father,
by his only begotten Son; and by the Holy Ghost; it is the clearest
manifestation of God's deepest Counsels concerring Man's eternal Estate, and of
his greatest Love to sinful Wretches, the brightest Light that ever shined from
Heaven; yet we hear it, and most men regard it not, but reject it to their
everlasting Woe.

. 24. The Apostle draws to a Conclusion, and urges Perseverance by another
Argument in the words following,

Ver. 26. Whose Voice then shook the Earth; but now he has promised, saying,
Yet once more, I shake not the Earth only but Heaven also.

Ver. 27. And this Word, Yet once more, signifies the removing of those things
that are shaken, as of things that are made; that those things which cannot be
shaken may remain.

GOD shook the Earth when he gave the Law, and from this shaking the Author
takes occasion from the words of Haggai, to prove the Immutability of the
Gospel, and the Administration of Christ's Kingdom. In the Text the Proposition
concerning this Immutability is

1. Cleared. 2. Applied, in the two last Verses of the Chapter.


In the first, he does

1. Affirm the shaking of the Earth in giving of the Law. 2. Alleges God's
Promise of another shaking not only of Earth but Heaven. 3. From that Promise
he infers the Immutability of the Evangelical Administration.


The Propositions of the first part of the Text are two:

1. That God then shook the Earth. 2. That he that then shook the Earth,
promised to shake once more not only the Earth but Heaven also.


1. God then shook the Earth. The Adverb [then] points at the time of giving
the Law on Mount Sinai; for in the former; Verse it is said, that he spoke on
Earth in the Hearing of all Israel. That then he shook the Earth, is the
express words of the History; Mount Sinai was all on a S^^ak, and the whole
Mount quaked greatly, Exodus 19. 18. With this agrees that of the Psalmist, When
thou O God wentest before thy People, when thou did march through the
Wilderness, The Earth shook, the Heavens also dropped at the presence of God;
even Sinai it self was moved at the presence of God, the God of Israel, Psalm.
68. 7, 8. The principal things then signified by this shaking the Mount and the
Earth were two, 1. The Alteration of the former Administration of the Church,
and 2. The Constitution of that Order, which continued until the times of the
Gospel: For, 1. Then God made a great Alteration in the Kingdom of Egypt,
divided the Red Sea, and shook the hearts of men in several Nations. 2. He
reduced the People of Israel into a Polity both Civil and Ecclesiastical, made
a Covenant with them, gave them Laws Moral, Ceremonial, Judicial, ordained a
Priesthood, instituted a Form of Worship to continue till the coming of the
Messiah. Thus then he shook the Earth.

2. He promised once more to shake not only the Earth but Heaven. Where the
Subject is Shaking, and presupposes one Shaking past, and informs us of
another, and the same far greater: The former was only of the Earth, the latter
of Heaven too. This Shaking is the thing promised; the Promise was made first,
the Performance follows several hundred years afterward. The Promise we find
in Haggai the Prophet; the words are these, For thus says the Lord of Hosts,
Yet once it is a little while, and I will shake the Heavens, and the Earth, and
the Sea, and the dry Land. And I will shake all Nations, and the Desire of all
Nations shall come, and I will fill this House with Glory, says the Lord, Hag.
2. 6, 7. Where we may observe, 1. That the Occasion of these words was this;
the People of Judah returned out of Captivity, rebuilt the Temple, and
dedicated the same with great Joy, yet so that many in this Solemnity did weep;
for the ancient People which had seen the former House built by Solomon, knew
that it was far more magnificent than this latter Temple, which was no ways
comparable to the former. God, to comfort these dejected Jews, makes a Promise
to make this latter House far more glorious than the former by the coming of
Christ, who should honor it with his presence. 2. That the Apostle neither
follows the Hebrew, nor the Septuagint, precisely; yet he takes that which was
for his purpose, and retains the sense, and rather expounds, than translates or
cites, the Prophet; for ^ie signifies, 1. That the words are a Promsse of God.
2. That the Shaking promised, and to come was greater than the former; for then
God's Voice shook the Earth, but now he would shake not only the Earth but the
Heavens. 3. That the Earth, the Sea, the dry Land, are the same, and only
different parts of the same Globe. By all this we understand the mighty Power
of God, who by his Word and Voice can shake the Earth, the Rocks, the strongest
Mountains; who can shake not only Earth but Heaven; who can make great
Alteration in the World when he pleases; yet the proud and stony Heart of Man
is little moved at the word of this glorious God. But, for the more full
Explication of the words of the Prophet, we must consider, what this shaking of
Heaven and Earth is, and how this was fulfilled. 1. This Shaking is a Work of
God, whereby he makes great Alterations and Commotions in the World, preparing
for something to follow; and in this he usually manifests his glorious Power
and Wisdom; Yet these Alterations are seldom made without some prodigious and
miraculous Works, and such as many times amaze and terrify mortal men. Thus,
before the coming of Christ when this Promise was fulfilled, there were many
prodigious and dreadful Signs i^ Heaven, Earth, the Sea; before the Civil Wars
between Pompey and Caesar; and that between Augustus and Brutus, Cassius,
Lepidus, Antony. Upon these followed the Alteration of the Roman Government,
and an universal Peace. At Christ's Birth the universal Enrollment was a great
Commotion amongst men; the Angels from Heaven singing and celebrating Christ's
Nativity on Earth, and the new Star seen of the wise men in the East, and
directing them to the place where Christ was born, imply an extraordinary
Commotion in Heaven. When Christ suffered and dyed upon the Cross, the Heavens
were darkened, the Earth did quake, the Rocks were rent asunder, and the Graves
were opened; and at his Resurrection there was an Earthquake, and a glorious
Angel descended from Heaven, so that even then the Earth and the Heaven were
shaken: and so they were before the Ruin and Destruction of Jerusalem. But the
principal performance of this Promise was, the Alteration made by taking away
the Law and bringing in the Gospel: Then Heaven was shaken; for Christ
ascended, entered, sat down at the right hand of God, began to reign and make
Intercession, the Angels and all the Holls of Heaven became Subject unto him,
and all Creature; were at his Command. Then the Earth was shaken; for the Holy
Ghost descended upon the Apostles, the Gospel was preached to Jews and
Gentiles, the Law and Levitical Service and Priesthood were taken away, the
Idolat^y of the Gentiles beaten down, the Jews and Gentiles are converted and
became Christian. So that this Shaking was an Alteration in Religion and in the
Administration of Christ's Kingdom, and it was universal in Heaven and Earth.

. 25. The latter part of the Text is a Discourse of the Apostle upon the words
of the Propher, wherein he 1. Takes notice of the word Yet once more. 2.
Informs us what it signifies and imports. Yet once more has no sense without
the Verb I will shake, which is therefore to be understood. The Action is
Shaking, yet once more the Circumstance: The meaning is, I have once shaken the
Earth, and I will shake it again, and not shake it but Heaven also, and make a
far greater Alteration; yet I will but do this once, and no more. From hence in
the second place the Apostle inferrs two things, 1. That whatsoever was removed
and abolished in this latter Shaking, was removed for ever; and, 2. Whatsoever
was then brought in, must stand unalterable for ever. This is that which the
Apostle says is signified by that word Yet once more. If the words be reduced
to Propositions they are these,

1. There is a removing of things shaken, as of things made. 2. There are
things which cannot be shaken, which remain. 3. The former things were removed,
that the latter might remain. 4. All this was signified by the word of God's
Promise, Yet once more.


1. There is a removing, etc. 1. We have things shaken: The things are the
Levitical Law, Priesthood, Tabernacle, Service, and the Administration of
God's Kingdom under the Law, and the first Covenant. These things were shaken,
moved, and altered; yet an Alteration may be of the Substance or Accidents of
the thing, but this was of the Substance; for they were so moved that they were
removed, the very Substance and Being of them was so changed that they were
wholly taken away; for as one Law may be so made as to repeal and wholly
abrogate another, so the Gospel and the Administration of Christ were so
brought in by God as they took away and wholly abolished the Law.

It Is further said, that there was a removing of these, as of things made;
which some do so understand as though the things made were the Tabernacle or
Temple, with all the Utensils of both; which, though they were made according
to the Pattern in the Mount, yet were [(...)] things made with hands, and but
Shadows of far better things, which once exhibited, these must needs vanish:
Yet (...) may signify things finished and past, never to return again. The
Hebrew wo^d (...), which is very often turned (...) does signify to destroy,
suppress, and make an End of.

2. There were things which could not be shaken, which remained. Things not
shaken or moved are the Gospel, and the manner of the Administration of
Christ's Kingdom, after his sitting at the right hand of God: These are not
shaken nor altered, either in part or whole, in Substantials or Accidentals;
but they remain in full force, and shall so continue unto the End. No other
Doctrine, Manner of Worship, Order in Heaven or Earth or Administration must be
expected; for the Christian Religion shall continue to the End, till time shall
be no more; and this was God's purpose in the bringing in of these things.

3. The former things were removed, that these might be introduced and
established When two things cannot stand together, the one is removed that the
other might take place; and this is the Case in particular. The Law and the
Gospel are inconsistent; so is the Legal and Evangelical Administration, and
they cannot stand in force together; therefore there is a necessity of nulling
the one, because otherwise the other cannot be established. Now, though the Law
was suitable to former times of Minb^ity and Imperfection, yet, being imperfect
and full of shadows, there was great Reason it should be removed when the
Substance of those shadows, and that which was far more perfect, was exhibited;
and there was a necessity of the removal of the former, that way might be made
for the latter as far more excellent. This was the Reason why the Apostles,
especially Paul, did labor so much not only to prove the Imperfection, but to
endeavor the Abolition of the Law, after the Gospel was revealed from Heaven.

4. This Removal of the Law, to bring in the Gospel and a more perfect
Administration, was signified by that word of the Propher Yet once more: For if
God had said, I will again shake Earth and Heaven, and omitted the word once
more, then there had been in that Promise no ground of the Apostle's Inference
to prove the stability and immutability of the Gospel. But seeing the word yet
once more is [added, his Inference was firm and valid; and the Apostle knew
that God's meaning was not basely this I will once more, but I will once, and
no more, and never again, shake Heaven and Earth: For, from the Expression thus
understood it does necessarily follow, that if in this one shaking he (...) any
thing, that must needs stand firm for ever; because there shall be no (...), no
Alteration in matter of Religion to the World's End. This is a strong place
against M^^^-nens, and the cursed Innovators of all times.

. 26. Thus far the Doctrine concerning the Gospel and the Immutability of
Christ's Kingdom has been cleared; the Application of it to these Hebrews
follows,

Ver. 28. Wherefore we receiving a Kingdom which cannot be moved, let ^^ have
Grace whereby we may serve God (...) with reverence and godly fear.

Ver. 29. For our God is a consuming Fire.

THE illative Particle [Wherefore] does inform us, that these words follow upon
the former as a Conclusion from the Premises; yet the Conclusion is not in the
first words, but those that follow. If we consider the words in themselves, we
have

1. A Doctrine in the first words. 2. An Use in those which follow.


The Use is an Exhortation, wherein we may observe,

1. The Duty exhorted unto, which is, To have Grace to serve God. 2. The manner
how we must serve God, and that is, (...) and ^^dy fear. 3. The Reason, Because
our God is a consuming Fire.


The Doctrine is this, [Paul and thsee Hebrews received a Kingdom, which could
not be moved,]; and it is first to be explained, and the difficulty lies in this
phrase of receiving a Kingdom. For, 1. There is a Kingdom. 2. This Kingdom
cannot be moved. 3. They received it. 1. There are many temporal Kingdoms, but
this is Spiritual and Divine. The King is God, the Administratour-General is
Christ; who in the administration of this Kingdom is so one with God, that he
is King as he is; the Subjects, believing Saints; the rules of Government are
the Doctrines of the Gospel, the privileges and benefits of this Kingdom are
the blessings of Grace and Glory. 2. This Kingdom cannot be moved, or is not
movable or alterable, because Prince, People, Laws, and Administration continue
for ever. The present manner of Administration shall not determine, till God be
all in all: That it cannot be moved, but remains stable, you have heard before.
3. They had received this Kingdom: A Kingdom may be received either by a Prince
to Govern it, or by Subjects to be Governed; the former is not, the latter is
intended. For Subjects to receive a Kingdom, may be either a Duty or a Benefit;
as a Duty, it is to submit unto the Power and Laws of the Sovereign: as a
Benefit, it is to be admitted as a Subject to enjoy the privileges, peace, and
happiness of the Kingdom. Both may be here meant, and the benefit presupposing
the Duty fully and finally performed may be and shall be, that we shall be
Kings and Priests, and reign with Christ for ever. For the eminent and
excellent estate of Glory following upon a final Victory over all Enemies, even
Death it self subdued, is said to be a Kingdom. This expression seems to be
taken from that of the Prophet: But the Saints of the most High shall take [or
receive] the Kingdom, and shall possess the Kingdom for ever, even for ever
and ever, Dan. 7. 18. The reason why here is mention of a Kingdom, is, because
the former Discourse from ver. 22. to this Text is, concerning the excellent
administration of Christ's Kingdom; unto which, God by his Grace and Calling
upon their receiving of the Gospel, had translated and admitted them.

. 27. This is the Doctrine; the Exhortation follows, Where, 1. The Duty is to
have Grace to serve God. Where we may observe,

1. Grace. 2. The having of this Grace. 3. The having it to serve God.


1. By Grace, may be meant the Doctrine of Grace, which is the Gospel so
called, Tit. 2. 11. 2. Faith and Belief. 3. The profession of this Faith. 4.
The sanetifying power of the Spirit, which all true Believers and Professors
have; and this presupposes all the former, or infolds them. 2. To have this
Grace, is to have this sanctifying power, and to hold it, keep it, exercise it
more and more: And though some Coples read it Indicatively [we have], yet most
read it [let us have]; that is, let us hold it. 3. The end why, we must have
and hold it, is that we may serve God. This implies, that God is the Sovereign
in this Kingdom, and we are the Subjects, and our duty is continually to serve
our Lord and King. To serve him, is not only with all humility to adore his
excellent Majesty; but also sincerely, wholly, and absolutely to submit unto
his power, and obey his Laws. This implies, 1. That in this Kingdom we are not
our own Masters, or at liberty to do what we would. But God is our Master, and
we are bound to obedience by his Laws. 2. That without the Grace of God
continued and held fast, we cannot serve our God constantly: without Grace, we
cannot serve him; without Grace held fast, we cannot serve him to the end.

2. The manner how we must serve God, is to serve him acceptably with reverence
and goldly fear. In general, our Service must be acceptable; in particular, it
must be reverence and godly fear, which render it pleasing to God, and without
which it cannot be accepted. Men may fear God, that is, perform some religious
Service to God, and yet it will not prove acceptable. For some serve God, and
not with a pure and sanctified heart; some serve God in outward Circumstantials
and Rituals, not in Substantials; some serve God with a profane and wicked
heart; some serve him ignorantly or negligently, without servency and due
affection. The Pharisee could give Alms, Fast, Pray, pay Tithe of Mint,
Anniseed, Cumin, and neglect the weighty things of the Law, as Justice,
Judgment, Mercy; they could and did draw near to God with their Lips, and yet
be far from God with their hearts: they served God, but according to the
Traditions of men. The Jews were zealous, and devout in Ceremonials; yet their
hearts were polluted, and their hands full of Blood. Therefore we must know,
that no profane man or hypocrite, or indisposed person can serve God
acceptably. To do this, does presuppose man in the state of Grace, and an heart
prepared and rightly disposed; the person must first be accepted, before the
work can please God. And as the Person, so the Service must be rightly
qualified; and so it is, when it proceeds from Faith in Christ, is conformable
to the Word of God, and tends unto his Glory. And if We and our Service be thus
qualified, though our infirmities be many; yet so great is God's mercy, that
for Christ's sake he will accept both us and it: we must not presume upon his
mercy; but yet we must rely upon him, when we have a special care to shun that
which offends him, and do that which is just and holy; and when we have done
our best, humbly in the Name of Christ pray for pardon of defects, and
acceptance of our sincere endeavors: Yet we cannot serve God thus acceptably,
without reverence and godly feat. Reverence, in God's Service, looks at his
excellency and glorious Majesty, and at our own unworthiness, and the infinite
distance between Him and Us; and therefore we must adore God's excellent
Majesty with deep humility, abasing our selves very low, being afraid and
ashamed, out of a sense of our own vileness, to come near him, except in his
great mercy and free grace he vouchsafe access: Signs of this reverence, is cut
kneeling, bowing, covering our faces, prostration, and such like gestures. And
if we were either apprehensive and sensible of our own vileness, or God's
excellency, how could we possibly be so profane and unreverent in his Worship?
Godly fear may be the same with Reverence, or distinct from it. The word in the
Greek signifies sometimes caution, sometimes devotion, sometimes fear, and that
in the Service of God; which is a religious fear, and care not to offend, but
to please him. Both reverence and fear, in this place, may farther be, a more
then ordinary care and diligence in the Service of God, that we may please him,
and be accepted of him. For, as the greatest honor with the greatest humility
is due to God, that Supreme Lord, whose Majesty is infinite and eternal; so the
greatest caution must be used in his Worship, for he will be sanctified in all
them that draw near unto him.

3. This is the manner how he will be served, by all such as are admitted
Subjects of this unmovable and unchangeable Kingdom. The reason is, He is a
consuming Fire: These words are improper and metaphorical; and a Metaphor is a
contract Similitude, which here we find. In such Comparisons, we may observe,
1. The things compared, as like and agreeing. 2. The thing wherein they do
agree. The things here compared, are God and Fire; God is like to Fire. The
thing wherein they agree is this, that they are consuming. So that the meaning
is, That God is like unto Fire; and he is like to it in this, that as That, so
He, has a consuming force, Many are the qualities and effects of Fire, but
this one is singled to represent the terror of God. For though that flery Law,
which God gave out of the midst of fire burning up to Heaven be removed; yet in
the Gospel of sweetest mercy and freest grace, there are threatenings of
unquenchable Fire and eternal Flames. Therefore this expression signifies his
punishing and vindictive Justice; the Subjects whereof are profane, impenitent,
and unbelieving persons, who are disobedient to the Law of Grace, and refuse
the tender of saving mercy. The effect of this Justice, upon these Offenders,
are severe and everlasting punishments, which cannot be expressed or conceived;
but are represented by the raging flames, and ^^erce burning of the most
violent Fire which cannot be quenched. And as the torment of violent hottest
flames is the most grievous, so these punishments are; and, if the Sufferers be
immortal, and immortally sensible, the Torment will be not only grievous, but
perpetual. The sum is, that the punishment of delinquent and disloyal Subjects,
which the Judge shall execute, and they suffer, is extreme and everlasting. The
force of the Reason is great; for as men tremble to think of everlasting,
tormenting, and consuming Flames; so let them have a special care to serve God
unto the end, in due manner. This implies, that there is a glorious Reward of
eternal Light, and delight to all such as shall like loyal Subjects continue
constant unto the end, in the profession of the Truth, and the acceptable
Service of this glorious and eternal Sovereign.

CHAP. XIII.
. 1. PRofession without Practice; Faith without good works cannot attain the
fruition of that eternal Life, which Christ has merited, and God has
promised; therefore the Apostle in this Chapter exhorts to Love, good Works,
constancy in the Truth, and other Duties. He begins with Love,

Ver. 1. Let brotherly Love continue.]

THe Analysis of this Chapter is easy; for we have,

1. The hortatory part thereof. 2. The conclusion of the whole.


The Duties exhorted unto with several Motives, are reduced to a kind of order
by diverse Expositors: Yet as this is not exactly done, so it is needless to do
it. We may indeed enumerate the Duties, and reduce them to their proper places
and heads in the Body of Divine Wisdom; and that is very easy to be done. Yet
the Wisdom of the Apostle was this, that he does not mention all Duties; but
such as were most requisite at that time to be performed by those persons; and
does not strictly follow the method of the moral Law, but takes liberty to
place them in that order which he thought most convenient. For he knew the
performance of them to be the principal thing, and it was sufficient for him to
press them, and then to know them.

The first Exhortation is to brotherly Love. The Duty is, 1. Brotherly love. 2.
Continuance in it. Brotherly love, is love of the Brethren: For there are
Brethren, and these must be loved. To love our Neighbor as our selves, is the
substance of the second Table of the moral Law. And as there are several
degrees of Neighbors, so there is of Love: Neighbors, in full extent, include
Strangers, Enemies, and all such as are capable of our Love: Of these, some are
more nearly linckt unto us, as Brethren. Yet these are either natural,
political, or spiritual; here spiritual Brethren are meant, who have God to be
their Father, Jerusalem above to be their Mother, are born of the same
incorruptible seed, animated with the same Spirit of Christ, and partakers of a
divine Nature. This spiritual consangunity is a principle of spiritual Love,
and this Divine Nature an object of a more ardent affection. Though therefore
we must love others truly, and as our selves; yet these, if we be Christians,
we must love more then others. And though we know no man's heart and reins, yet
such as appear, and manifest themselves by their profession and practice to be
Saints, we must love as Brethren; and though they be not such, and we mistake,
yet our Love is acceptable to God. This Love is not only a complacency in them,
and an esteem of their persons, as having more of God in them then other men;
but we must effectually desire their good and happiness, and when occasion
serves, really promote it. It must be a real, and a giving, and a suffering
love: For as Christ laid down his Life for us, so we must lay down our Lives
for the Brethren: And we must not love only in word and tongue, but in deed and
in truth, 1 John 3. 16, 18. By virtue of this Love, there is in us a secret
Sympathy, which will manifest it self by rejoicing with them that rejoice, and
mourning with them that mourn. Yet this spiritual Love, and divine Affection,
is found in few; and it is not so fervent and effectual in us, as it should be:
Self-love, and love of the World, do much abate it: And as the Brethren love
the Brethren, so the World hates them, and counts them their greatest Enemies.
This is the love; we must love them, but this love must remain and continue in
them. This does presuppose, that they formerly had loved them, and that was
evident enough; for they had ministered unto the Saints, and did minister, Chap.
6. 10. and became Companions of such as were teproached, Chap. 10. 34. And
their Duty was, that as they had begun, so they should go on, and love to the
End: Life and Love must end together, whilst we live we must love the
Brethren. And the words are not only Paul's Exhortation, but God's Command,
and the same universal, and binds us as well as them.

. 2. The second Duty is Hospitality,

Ver. 2. Be not forgetful to entertain Strangers; for thereby some have
entertained Angels unawares. Where,

1. The Duty is, to entertain Strangers. 2. The Motive is, Because some have
thereby been so happy as to entertain Angels unawares.


The Object of this Duty is, Strangers; the Duty it self is, to entertain them;
the Cayeat is, Not to forget so to do. Strangers, in this place may be either
Christians, or others; both are an Object of Charity, but especially the
former: We are Strangers when we are from home in another Place or Country,
where we have few Friends, are not well known: And being amongst Strangers,
where we have neither harbor nor other necessaries, we must needs be in a
miserable Condition, and a proper Object of Hospitality. Though this extends to
others, yet it is principally understood of such as in these times were
persecuted and scattered in strange Countries, and being spoiled of their Goods
were in great necessity, not knowing sometimes where to have the next Lodging
or Morsel of Bread: These are principally meant, and must be entertained. To
entertain them, is, freely to take them into our Houses, and according to our
ability supply their Wants; for, where should these receive Comfort or Relief,
but with Christian Brethren? Some might pretend themselves to be such, and that
falsely, and so abuse the Charity of well-meaning Christians; yet there were
several ways whereby poor Christians and their sad Condition might be known:
And if they were once known, we must not forget this Duty; to forget, is, to
neglect it; not to forget, is, to perform it.

The Motive or Reason is this, That by the performing of this Duty some have
entertained Angels unawares. The Persons who are here understood were Abraham
and Lot, both pious and righteous men of great Civility and Humanity, and such
as considered the Condition of Strangers, as being Strangers themselves, and
dealt with them accordingly. These received and entertained Angels, who being
sent by God did appear first to Abraham, then to Lot: Their business was to
destroy Sodom, Gomorrah, and the Cities of the Plains: Yet in the Execution of
this Judgment, God remembered Abraham and Lot, and according to his tender care
of them, gave these Angels a Charge and Instructions to preserve them. They
first came to Abraham in the appearance of men, and of Strangers, and as such
he invites them and entertains them; in the same manner they came to Sodom
where they were invited and entertained under the same Notion; yet they were
truly and really Angels, though conceived to be Men: Therefore is it said, they
entertained them unawares; that is, though wittingly and willingly they
received them as Men, yet they knew them not at first to be Angels. The force
of this Reason to persuade Hospitality, is, 1. In respect of the Guests. 2. Of
the benefit they received by them. 1. It was an Honor and a special Grace,
that the glorious, blessed, immortal Inhabitants of Heaven should enter their
Houses and Tents, accept of their Invitation, and be so familiar with them. 2.
In respect of the benefit they received by them; for first they came from
Heaven to Abraham to let him know his Wife Sarah should bear him a Son, and
within a short time God would perform his Promise unto him: This was a great
Blessing, much expected and desired of a long time, and now determined
assuredly to a certain Period within the present Year; besides, God acquainted
him by these Angels with his Intention to destroy Sodom, and yet upon his
Intercession to save the Righteous in it; and this Prayer may be conceived to
be effectual for saving, though not the City, yet his Kinsman in it. Lot also
had the Honor and the Benefit too; for, by his blessed Guests he was saved not
only from the cursed Sodomites, but from the Flames that destroyed that City.
Yet it may be said, What was this to these Hebrews? or, What is it to us? It
was a rare thing, and not expected of these Saints and beloved Servants of God:
Yet it is much to us; for by the receiving Strangers out of Faith in Christ and
Love to God, we may receive precious Saints, and with them some blessed Angels
which have a special Charge to keep and guard them in that condition; and if a
Cup of cold Water shall be rewarded, how much more will so great a Work of
Mercy be remembered: Nay, which is more, by receiving them, we receive Christ,
who will acknowledge this kindness as done to Him: For, in the day of final
Judgment He will acknowledge before all Men, all Angels, and his heavenly
Father, that this Work of Mercy done to His was done to Him.

. 3. Yet there is another Work of Mercy, which he exhorts them unto in this
manner.

Ver. 3. Remember them that are in Bonds,' as bound with them, and them which
suffer Adversity, as being your selves also in the Body. IN this Exhortation we
have, as in the former,

1. The Duty exhorted unto. 2. The Reason, why we should perform it.


In the Duty there be

1. Some Persons to be remembered. 2. The Remembrance of them.


1. The Persons are of two sorts, and the Reasons applied severally. 1. There
are Persons bound; and here we must consider, 1. Their Condition. 2. The Cause.
1. Their Condition in general is miserable; in particular, they are restrained
of their Liberty, which is a precious thing. The misery of them that are bound
may be greater or less, according to the place of Imprisonment, or their Usage,
or Absence from such as would relieve them, or some other Accidents. The Place
may be a Dungeon, or filthy and nasty, or very grievous in respect of the
wicked Fellow Prisoners. Their Usage may be very bad, because they may be
denied Food and other necessaries, their friends not suffered to come to them
or relieve them, or they may be scourged and abused: They may be so consined,
as that their Friends may be ignorant both of the Place where they are, and
also of their Condition. 2. The Cause in this place may imply, that they are
Christians and God's Servants; thus Paul and Silas, and Peter, and many other
Disoiples were cast in Prison, and that for the Profession or Preaching of the
Gospel; this was to suffer for Righteousness sake, and for Christ's sake, and
in a good Cause. This Imprisonment, if just, was a disgrace, a securing of
Malefactors, not only to restrain them from mischief, but to reserve them for
Trial and Punishment, and sometimes it was a Punishment in it self; and was
never intended for innocent but for criminous and guilty Persons. These must be
remembered, and their Case and Cause considered, that so they might be visited,
comforted, encouraged, relieved, or released, eased, and delivered: Thus to
remember is an Act not only of the Understanding, but the Will, and also the
Executive Power; so that the word is taken both Metonymically and
Synechdochically.

2. They, and so we, must remember them, as being bound, or in Bonds. This
implies the Manner how they must, and also a Reason why they must remember
them: We must love our Neighbor as our selves, and this we cannot so well do,
except we make our selves ohe with them, and make their condition ours so as
that we may do as we would be done unto. In particular, when we seriously
suppose our selves bound, even then when we are free and at Liberty, we are made
far more sensible of their misery, and are the more effectually moved to
Compassion; therefore some observe, that Misericordia, est miseria aliena in
cord nostro: For when the Misery of others is not only in our Memory but in
our hearts, we are affected with it, sensible of it, and moved to relieve and
comfort them: This is the manner of Remembrance. The Reason implied is, That
seeing they are one Person with us, and our Brethren, if they be bound we are
bound with them, because one part of us is in Bonds, and as we would be
sensible of our misery, and would use all means to release and relieve our
selves, so we should endeavor to help and deliver them: They are part of our
selves, therefore we must remember them. Again, we are one with them, so that
we are in the same Condition with them so far, that we are obnoxious to Bonds
as well as they, and we know not how soon it may be our Case; and this should
persuade us much to do our Duty: For we being in Bonds will stand in need of
the help of others; and of them, if they be set at Liberty, when we are bound.

The second Duty is, to remember those that are in Adversity: This implies that
there are many kinds of Afflictions, besides Bonds; for that is one kind of
misery: and that of Bonds is not always single, but joined often with other
Vexation; and Adversities. Therefore, not only they that are in Bonds, but
others in other Adversities, must be remembered, and so relieved and comforted;
and we must use all our Power and Ability, which God has given us, to remove
their Afflictions, and make their Condition more comfortable: For the
Providence of our heavenly Father does so order it, that the whole Body, and
all the Members of the Church should not be afflicted at one time, but whilst
some are afflicted others are free, that they may relieve and comfort their
Brethren, and so exercise their Grace; and manifest their Virtues: And the
Afflictions of our Brethren will discover either our sincerity or hypocrisy.
The Reason why we should remember these, is, because we are in the Body: To be
in the Body, and to be in the Flesh, are Scripture-Phrases, and signify the
same thing. They imply, that there are some in the Body, and some out of the
Body; the one living, the other dead: For while we are living on Earth, the
Soul, which is the principal part, is in the Body, which is said to be the
Tabernacle and Mansion of the Soul: But Death separates them, and divests and
dispossesseth the Soul. This Soul in it solf is above the Power of Man, and no
mortal hand can reach it, not touch it immediately; yet because of the Body
which is so nearly united unto it, men may vex and torment it, and that very
much, and whilst it is in the Body it is liable to these Vexations; and the
Body, whilst it is enlivened by the Soul, is sensible of many miseries: But
when these are parted by Death, both are free from all sense of these
Afflictions. Therefore said our Savior, That when men have killed the Body,
after that, they have no more that they can do, Luke 12. 4. All this being
presupposed, the Apostle to persuade them to Compassion toward their afflicted
Brethren, puts them in mind of their present condition: They were yet in the
Body, that is, they were obnoxious to the same Adversities, and cannot promise
to themselves security from them for a day or an hour; therefore they must pity
them as themselves, and use all means to comfort, help, and deliver them. Thus
to remember our Brethren in Bonds and Adversity is the Duty of all such as
profess their Faith in Christ, and own the Name of Christian; yet few perform
what by their Profession they are bound to do. Where are our Bowels of
Compassion? Where is our Christian Charity? We should remember, that as Christ
pitied us, so we should pity our distressed Brethren, and show Mercy unto them,
as we desire God in the time of our distress to have Mercy upon us. But many
who are Christians in Name are devoid not only of Christian Compassion and
Charity; but of Humanity and Civility, which have bin found in very Heathens
and Mahometans.

. 4. These were Duties which we owe unto others, especially to our Christian
Brethren; and now the Apostle exhorts to Duties of another kind, as first of
Chastity.

Ver. 4. Marriage is honorable in all, and the Bed undefiled; but Wheremongers
and Adulterers God will judge.

Where we have,

1. A Duty, which is Chastity and Fidelity in Marriage. 2. The Reason why we
should be chaste, and that is, because Whoremongers and Adulterers God will
judge.


1. The Duty is expressed in most Copies and Translations Indicatively, not
Imperatively; for it is not said, Let Marriage be honorable in all, etc. but,
It is honorable: Yet this is not material; for, suppose the Indicative-Reading
should be true, yet a Duty is plainly implied; for, 1. The Texts both
antecedent and consequent are hortative to Duties. 2. That Marriage should be
honorable, and the Bed be undefiled, is certainly a Duty, and an Exhortation
thereunto is implied. 3. The Reason added does prove as much. The Duty exhorted
unto is Chastity, and Chastity is twofold; first, of single, then of married
Persons: This is of married Persons, who according to God's Constitution and
their own Contract give their Bodies one unto another, and are bound to be
faithful: And this Fidelity is, to preserve the honor of Marriage, which they
do whilst they keep the Marriage Bed undefiled. When it is said, Marriage is
honorable, and the Bed undefiled; the meaning is, Marriage ought to be
honorable, and the Bed ought to be undefiled. Not only Adultery, but also
Fornication and all Uncleanness dishonor the Body; and this is evident from
these words of the Apostle, For this is the Will of God, even your
Sanctification that you should abstain from Fornication: That every one of you
should know how to possess his Vesselin Sanctification and Honor, 1 Thessalonians. 4.
3, 4. Where we may observe, that by Vessel, according to the Hebrew, is meant
the Body. 3. That by Sanctification in that ^lice is understood Chastity, as
opposed to the Lust of Concupiscence. 3. That this Sanctification is the Honor
of the Body; therefore when it is said, That he that commi^^eth Fornication,
sins against his own Body, 1 Cor. 6. 18. the meaning is, He dishonors his
own Body. As Marriage must be honorable, so the Bed must be undefiled; which
latter words explain the former, for then is Marriage honorable, when the
Marriage Bed is kept undefiled: For, by Bed is meant the Marriage Bed, and the
Bodies of the Parties married; to be undefiled, is, not to be polluted by
Adultery: And if it be, it is dishonored; if it be not, then the Honor of it
is preserved. So that the sense of the whole is this, Let married Persons be
faithful one unto another, and take heed of dishonouring their Bodies by
Adultery. To signify this Duty to be general, and to bind all such as are Man
and Wife, he faith, Marriage is, and by God's Institution ought to be,
honorable in all; that is, in all married Persons both Man and Wife, whilst
they are Man and Wife: And as it ought to be honorable, so it ought to be
undefiled in all. In these words, Whoredom and Adultery are prohibited and
ehorted from. This Chastity is the Duty of Christians more than of other
Persons, because they know God's Institution, and their Bodies are the Members
of Christ, and the Temples of the Holy Ghost.

2. The Reason and Motive is, because Whore-^ougers and Adulterers, who
dishonor their Bodies and defile the Marriage Bed, God will Judge, that is,
punish: So that the Dissuasive is [a Poena] from the Punishment which God will
certainly inflict, and they shall certainly suffer, if they be not chaste but
prove guilty of Adultery. This Punishment is not only eternal after this Life,
if they repent not; but also temporal, even in this Life, though they may
repeht. This is evident in David, who, though he repented, yet suffered
grievously for his Adultery. [More of Marriage, Chastity, Adultery, may be read
in my [Th^c-Politica.]

. 5, The fifth Duty pressed upon them, follows

Ver. 5. Let your Conversation be without Covetousness, and be content with
such things as ye have; For He has said, I will never leave thee nor for sake
thee.

Ver. 6. So that we may boldly say, The Lord is my Helper, I will not fear what
Man shall do unto me.

IN these words we must consider,

1. The Duty. 2. The Reason why we should perform it. The Duty is,


1. Negative, Be not covetous. 2. Astirmative, Be contented.


For if we look at the Law, and so consider the words, they are

1. A Prohibition. 2. A Precept.


If we look upon the Performance of the Duty as expressed by the Author, we
have,

1. A Dehortation. 2. An Exhortation.


The Dehortation is this, Let your Conversation be without Covetousness: The
meaning whereof in brief is, Be not cove^ou^. The word (...) is turned by our
English Translators Conversation; by the Viugar and Vatablus, [Mores, Manners];
by the Syriack and Arabic, [Mens, Animus, the Mind.] All these may be easily
reconciled; for Conversation signifies humane Actions, as they are habitually
morally-good or evil; these as Habits are termed by the Moralists, Mores,
Manners or Customs, as virtuous or vicious: And because the Principle of these
Actions are the Mind, as taken for the Understanding, and the Will; therefore
the word may be turned [mind or affection], for so the word in Greek does
sometime signify. Some do understand by the Original word, the means whereby we
seek these earthly things, and the manner how we use, spare, or spend them. And
this sense differs not much from the former: This Duty does presuppose, 1. A
right Judgment of these worldly Goods, in respect of themselves, the end for
which they are given, the manner how they are justly acquired, used, expended.
2. A right disposition of the heart, agreeable to this Judgment. These things
presupposed, we may the better inquire into the nature of Covetousness, which
is defined by many to be, An immoderate love and desire of these earthly Goods.
The object and matter therefore in general is these earthly Goods, whether
corporeal, movable, or immovable, or incorporeal, according to the distinction
of the civil Law. These are considered as conducing to the preservation and
continuance of man's Life; therefore called our Livelihood: The principal
things, as most necessary and more immediately preserving Life, are Food and
Raimen^. And because Money answers in value, and the esteem of men, all those
things, which may be called Goods, and by It upon exchange they may be
purchased and acquitted; therefore covetousness is called sometimes the love of
many, 1 Timothy 6. 10. And here our Conversation must be free from the love of
money; so the Original is: The proper act of Covetousness is in the heart and
mind of man, conceiving and judging of these things, as more necessary or
excellent then they are, which is a kind of overvaluing, and setting too high a
price on them, 2. Affecting, loving, and desiring them immoderately above the
worth of them, and that measure which God has prescribed in his Word. Of this
Sin, there are many kinds and degrees: For some cover superfluity and
abundance, and will not be content with Necessaries, that they may maintain
their pride and pleasure, for both are costly. In these, Covetousnes is a
grievous Sin; yet not predominant, but subservient to their love of other
things, which they more affect. Others highly esteem and admire Wealth, as some
excellent thing, as though it could make them happy. These not considering the
baseness, uncertainty, and emptiness of this worldly trash, do insatiably
thirst after it, as the chiefest good man is capable of, or can attain; and
these are flat Idolaters, and Mammon is their God, and him they serve with as
great devotion, as Saints do the true and living God. Others fearing want for
time to come, and judging their estates poor and insufficient, do distract
themselves with fruitless cares and thoughts for the things of this Life. These
being weak in Faith, do not consider that their heavenly Father knows they have
need of these things, and will certainly provide Bread for his Children; and
that if they first seek his Kingdom, and the Right c^sness thereof, these
things shall be added unto them, they must needs be guilty of this Sin. And
this is the Covetousness that seems to be here intended, as the words following
do imply. Some of God's own Children, in this particular, can hardly be
excused: For whosoever loves and desires these earthly Necessaries more then
God allows, and dare not trust in their heavenly Father for daily Bread, are
certainly covetous though not in so high degree as others. Therefore we must
remember both the advice which Christ gives us, when he says unto us, Take ^^
thought, saying, What shall we ent? or what shall we drink? or wherewith shall
we be clothed? and also the gracious promises wherewith he seeks to strengthen
out hearts against these cares and thoughts of the World. We can see and
censure this Sin in others, but not in our selves; for it steals insensibly
into the hearts of men, and at the first does not appear to be what it is.
Therefore some have taken very good pains in discovering of it by certain
proper Marks and Characters. But to speak of these, and of the Causes and
Effects of this Sin in general, in this place is not so pertinent; and
therefore I refer the Reader to other Texts of Scriptures, and to other
Authors, who have treated more at large upon it.

The exhortation follows in these words, But be content with such things as ye
have. This discretive particle [but] implie, that Covetousness and contentment
are Contrary, and inconsistent in one and the same heart. This presupposes, 1.
They had something for the present. 2. Persuades to contentment with that they
had. What they had for the present, is not here expressed; yet some had more,
some had less, and some very little: yet he that had the least, had Food and
Raiment, and did live, and so live, that he had time to serve his God, seek his
Kingdom, and the Salvation of his Soul. Such as had less, might be perplexed
with fear and doubt of want for time to come, and out of a desire to prevent
it, resolve upon a course to supply their wants, and to distract themselves.
Lest any should do thus or be thus perplexed, he exhorts every one, even him
that had the least to be contented, with what he had. This contentment is
opposed to murnuring against God, to distrusting and distracting cares, to
covetous desires, to all disquiet of mind about these earthly things. It Is a
quiet temper of the mind, relying upon God's merciful providence, and gracious
promises for support and necessaries. This Faith and Reliance is grounded upon
certain principles of Divine Truth; As, 1. That we brought nothing into this
World, neither must we carry any thing out. 2. That this Life was given us to
seek a better. 3. That these earthly necessaries are given us to preserve this
Life. 4. That all, besides Food and Raiment, which maintain this life are not
necessary. 5. That God cares for his People, as knowing that we have need of
these things. 6. That if we be godly, and first seek his Kingdom, he has bound
himself to give us these things. For godliness has the promises of this Life,
and that which is to come. Upon these, and the like, the heart quieteth it self
in God, is content with little, mind, the greatest business of Salvation, and
for these earthly necessaries casts all care ^on God. For he knows he is but
a Pilgrim and Stranger here, seeking after a better Conntry, and cares not much
for earthly Treasure, if he can lay up Treasure in Heaven; and knows for
certain, That godliness with contentment is great gain.

2. After the Duty, follows the Reason or Motive, where we must consider,

1. What God does promise. 2. What Man may expect.


For we have, 1. God's Engagement unto Man. 2. Man's Confidence and Security
upon this Engagement. The promise we find in several places of the Old
Testament, as, (1.) Deuteronomy. 31. 6. (2.) Ibid. v. 8. (3.) Joshua 1. 5, 11. (4.) 1 Chronicles. 28. 20. But these very words, with the five Negative Particles, yet in
the third person are found no where but in the first, Deuteronomy. 31. 9. The words,
according to the Septuagint and the Apostle, turned verbatins, word by word,
run thus, I will not not leave, I will not, not, not forsake thee. As they are
the words of God related by Moses, the Verbs are of the third person, as spoken
by God himself to Joshua, they are of the first. In Hebrew, in all the places,
the Verbs are the same. For the better understanding of them, we must observe,
1. That the words are a Promise. 2. That they are a Promise of God. 3. The
matter Promised is God's special presence and providence, according to their
Condition and Necessity. 4. To assure us of both. He, 1. Uses the Negatives,
[not leave, not forsake], which implies the affirmative without the least
failing; and this manner of expression is more full and peremptory, and in a
Promise more strongly obliging. 2. He was not content to say, I will not leave
thee, but adds further, I will not forsake thee. 3. He, prefixeth two Negatives
before the first Verb, and three before the second. 4. Though in the Hebrew,
the Negatives be simple; yet the Septuagint, and much more the Apostle, knew
that the fives Negatives were included in the Verbs. 5. The sum of the Promise
is, That God would in no wise, not in the least measure, neglect or desert his
People, or withdraw his Wisdom, his Mercy, his Power, or any ways, in the
least degree, remit them; but he would most certainly and effectually be with
them, provide for them, and help them in all things, so far as their necessity
required. 6. Though this Promise does extend to God's presence and providence
in all things, wherein they were requisite and necessary; yet here it seems to
be more particularly confined to that part of providence whereby God supplies
their wants in Necessaries: yet so, as that it does rather include then exclude
his protection against Dangers and Enemies. This is the meaning of the words,
the force of the reason contained in them is very strong, both to dehort from
Covetousness, and exhort to Contentedness. For there is no reason in the World
why we should either cover these earthly Goods inordinately or immoderately, so
as to distract and vex our minds; or that we should not be contented with that
we have, though little, seeing God has so deeply and strongly engaged himself
to be present with us, and to provide for us. If we had Faith to believe this,
and were so qualified, as that we could truly apply it to our selves, it would
effectually quiet our minds in God, in all our Necessities, S^raits, and
Perplexities. For the words being the words of God, fully and perfectly
expressing his mind and purpose, delivered by way of Promise, whereby he so
strongly obliges himself, extending to all persons in Covenant with him,
keeping the Conditions thereof, including all times, and all conditions, and
all kind of helps and assistance, are abundantly sufficient to cut off all
covetous thoughts and cares, and to content the mind with any estate. For
whilst we have our God, we have Perfection, Safety, Food, Raiment, and all
things that are necessary in this our time of Pilgrimage, until we come to our
abiding City.

. 6. After the Promise of God, follows the Confidence of Man grounded upon this
Promise: For we may boldly say, The Lord is my Helper, and I will not fear what
Man shall do unto me. Where we must enquire, 1. Whence the words are taken. 2.
What the Substance of them is, and what they do import. 1. We find words to the
same purpose, Psalm. 56. 4, 11. Yet the very same without any variance we rea^,
Psalm. 118. 6. if we follow the Septuaginr. The words in the Hebrew are
Elleiptical, and are made up and expounded from the Verse following; for the
first words are turned by Hierom, Thou art my Lord; by Pag^ine, The Lord is
with me; by Pr^tensis, The Lord is for me: The Septuagint give the sense, That
the Lord was my Lord, with me, for me, to help me: For it follows, Ver. 7. Thou
are amongst or with them that help me. For the Lord to be with us, for us, and,
as Vatablus has it, to on stand our side, is for God to be our Help. 2. The
Matter of the words are God's Help, Man's Safety and Security: The Psalm is
understood of Christ, and his Church and People. Here the Apostle applies it to
God's People: 1. These have their Enemies, signified by the word Man, What Man
may do against me. 2. These men being Enemies do much against them, or at least
attempt to do much; for wicked men together with the Devil are great Enemies to
Christ's Kingdom and his Subjects. The Devil designs their spiritual; the
wicked their temporal Ruin; and the Design of the one is subservient to the
other. The Devil makes Use of temporal Persecutions to shake their Faith; both
have the Church, and thrust sore at it, and consult and combine their forces to
destroy it: They fine God's Servants, imprison them, banish them, torture them,
murder some of them, spoil others, make them poor, and bring them very low,
and sometimes to a Morsel of Bread. 3. Yet God is with them, stands for them,
helps them, strengthens and protects them, and will not see them perish or want
Bread, and gives them Safety in the midst of Danger, Joy in the midst of
Sorrow. Bread in the midst of Famine. If they kill the Body, he will save the
Soul, and raise up the Body again at the last day, and all their Sufferings
shall conduce to their eternal Happiness. 4. If God be with them, for them, and
their Help; they need not fear any thing, no not the worst that Man can do unto
them, but may be confident of Safety and Deliverance; they need not much desire
the best things of the World, nor fear the worst. 5. They may think, believe,
say, and be assured, That God is their Help. And so much the rather, because
God has promised, that he will not leave them or forsake them at any time; and
why should they be covetous or fearful, there is no cause of either. Thus the
Apostle disswades from Covetousness and persuades to Contentedness, and that
upon most powerful Reasons taken out of the Book of God, wherewith they were
well acquainted. And though both the places are restrained to this particular
Duty, yet they are of far greater latitude, and minister effectual Comfort.

. 7. The next Duty exhorted unto is, the Imitation of their Teachers in

Ver. 7. Remember them who have the Rule over you, who have spoken unto you the
Word of God; whose Faith follow, considering the end of their Conversation.

Ver. 8. Jesus Christ, the same yesterday, to day, and for ever.

THese words may be considered in their general Coherence with the former, as
they are an Exhortation to another distinct Duty, or in their particular
Connection with the Text immediately antecedent; for their Guides and Teachers
have given them an Example, in that not being covetous, but contented always
with their present Estate though poor, they continued constant in the
Profession and Preaching of the Gospel of Christ in the midst of all
necessities and persecutions, and did not doubt of God's Presence and
Providence, nor fear what Man could do unto them: The former Connection is
certain, the latter probable.

In the Duty exhorted unto, we may observe,

1. Three Acts. 2. Their three Objects. 3. The subordination of these Acts upon
these Objects, one unto another.


1. The Acts are, Remembrance, Consideration, Imitation. 2. The Object of their
Remembrance was, their Guides, which had spoken to them the Word of God; the
Object of their Consideration was, the end of their Conversation; the Object of
their Imitation was, their Faith. 3. The Subordination was, that they must
remember, that they may consider; consider; that they may imitate. They must
remember their Guides, who had taught them the Word of God; they must remember
them, that they may consider the end of their Conversation; they must consider
the End of their Conversation, that they may follow their Faith. In the first
Act upon the first Object we may observe three Propositions:

1. They had their Guides. 2. These had spoken unto them the Word of God. 3.
These they must remember.


1. They had their Guides: These were the Apostles especially and principally,
and also others, both extraordinary and ordinary Dispensets of the Gospel.
These were Guides, because they did direct them unto Christ, by Christ to God,
and in God to eternal Life; for without a Guide, sinful, blind, and ignorant
Wretches know nothing of Christ, God, eternal Life, and the way leading
thereunto; and therefore they wander in the wide way which leads unto
Destruction. These Guides are said to be Overseers, which have a Charge of
men's Souls committed unto them for Direction unto eternal Bliss; and also
Rulers, because of their Power and Authority whereby they may in the Name of
Christ command them to obey his Laws; and in this respect the People are
subject unto them in that manner, that if they hear and receive them, they
receive Christ who sent them, and God who sent Christ: And whosoever receives
not but despises them, desplseth Christ and God who sent them.

2. These Guides, lest they should be ignorant who they were, were such as had
spoken the Word of God unto them. The Word of God is that part of the Word of
God which we call The Gospel, which is concerning Christ exhibited, humbled,
exalted, and reigning at the right hand of God, contained in that part of the
Scripture we call The New Testament. This Doctrine is the Word of God, not only
because it speaks of God, but also because it was revealed by God, and that by
his own Son, in the last days. This Word they had spoken and declared both by
Word and Writing, and that infallibly according as by Inspiration they had
received an immediate Knowledge of it; and this their infallible Doctrine was
the Rule of inferior Teachers.

3. These they must remember: Some of these might be living, some of them dead;
both must be remembered. To remember in this place is to call to mind, which
presupposes a former Act of Understanding, and is a Reiteration of the same
Act upon the same Object. These must be remembered not only as Men, but as
Guides, and as such as had spoken the Word of God even unto them, so as that
they had heard them, and learned from them the Mystery of the Gospel, so as to
believe in Christ: Yet amongst these they must principally remember the most
eminent, and in particular those by whom they had believed: For, if men begin
once to forget their Teachers, they will soon forget their Doctrine.

The second part of their Duty to which their former Remembrance was
subservient, is, the Consideration of the end of their Conversation. Their
Conversation and Course of life, no doubt, was agreeable to their Doctrine, and
the Word of God they taught, their Preaching and their Practice were suitable;
and as their Conversation was good, so the End was answerable: In that Faith
they lived, in the same they dyed; and as their Life was holy, so their Death
was happy. In these words some observe two things; 1. That these were dead, and
some of them at least had sealed the Truth of the Gospel with their Blood, and
dyed Martyrs. 2. That they had been constant in the Profession and Practice of
that heavenly Truth which they had preached and taught to others. This
Constancy and blessed Issue of their Conversation they are exhorted to consider
and seriously review with the Eyes of their Souls, as a rare and excellent
Pattern worthy their Imitation.

3. And if they were so worthy Imitation, it was their Duty in the third place
to follow their Faith, that is, their Doctrine which they preached, believed,
professed, practiced, unto Death; and which they confirmed by their Suffering:
This is the true End of hearing Word of God, and the true Use of all good
Examples, which are given us and set before our Eyes for this very End, that we
may do as they did, and as they taught us both by their Words and Works, their
Doctrine and Practice. We must follow the Example of all good men, and above
others, of such Guides as these were; amongst these Guides, the most eminent in
Truth, Piety, and Perseverance, because their Doctrine and Life did agree and
contiued suitable to the End.

. 8. It follows, Jesus Christ the same, etc. These words seem to stand
absolute in themselves, without any dependence upon, or Connection with, the
Context antecedent or consequent; and this has given occasion to many several
and different Expositions. Some of the Ancients consider them in themselves, and
understand them of Christ as God; and from them prove his Godhead by his
perpetual Existence, because he was, is, and shall be for ever; and by his
immutability, because he always is the same. Some understand this of Christ as
Redeemer, whose Power and Efficacy in redeeming and saving all such as believe
in him, was from the first time that he was promised unto the World's End; for
he saved all those who believed in him for to come, and all such who believe in
him already come and exhibited. Both these senses are true; but whether
intended here or no, may be a Question. But most Expositors consider the words
in Coherence, either with that which goes before, or that which follows; 1.
With that which goes before; and that two ways, 1. That as Christ the Word,
not incarnate or made Flesh, spoke to Joshua, and promised not to leave him and
forsake him; so, if they follow the Faith of their Guides and Teachers, and
persevere in the same to the End, Christ will be with them, and not leave them
nor forsake them. 2. That the Faith of their Guides was Faith in Christ,
according to their Doctrine of the Gospel concerning Jesus Christ, an eternal,
unchangeable, and never-failing Savior; and this their Faith in Christ they
must follow, and then Christ will be to them the same he was to their Guides,
and will certainly save them. In this sense the words not only signify what
kind of Faith that of their Teachers was, and what was the Object and
Foundation of it, but also contain a Reason why they should follow it: For
their Faith was Faith in Christ, which is the only saving Faith for ever, as he
Himself is the same for ever. The Aethiopick Version favors this sense in
part; for thus they translate the words, [Follow me in the Faith of Christ,
etc.] So that, according to this, Christ is Faith in Christ. But others
understand by Jesus Christ, the Doctrine of Jesus Christ; which is the same as
Christ is, and that for ever, and never shall be changed: Therefore they must
follow it, and never turn from it. Christ may, by a Metonymy, signify Faith in
Christ, and the Doctrine of Christ, because he was the Object of their Faith,
and the Subject of their Doctrine: This Vatablus terms an Enallage. This seems
to be confirmed by the Exhortation following:

To apply this to our selves; as it is our Duty, so we must have a care often
to remember the Apostles, and their Successors, who have taught us the Word of
God, and considering their happy Departure out of this World, with the Joy and
Comfort which they found in their Savior, let us follow their Doctrine and
their Faith in Christ; which if we do, we shall have the same End, and find the
same Comfort in Christ, who will be the same to us which he was to them; for as
He, so his Doctrine, is unchangeable for ever, and whosoever shall follow his
Doctrine, and believe in him, shall find this to be so.

. 9. Because the Faith and Doctrine of Jesus Christ, taught by the Apostles,
is, as Christ himself, the same yesterday, to day, and for ever; therefore the
Apostle dehorteth them thus,

Ver. 9. Be not carried about with diverse and strange Doctrines: for it is a
good thing that the heart be established with Grace, and not with meats, which
have not profited them, which have been occupied therein.] THese words are a
Dehortation, and in it we may consider;

1. The Sin dehorted from. 2. The reason, why they should take heed of it.


1. The Sin is, to be carried about with diverse and strange Doctrines.
Doctrines, diverse and strange, are all such as are different from the Gospel;
which is a Doctrine of perpetual and immutable truth, and always uniform and
the same. Therefore the word diverse may signify such as are different from it,
and different amongst themselves, as all false and heretical Doctrines are;
though the word [(...)], signifies new or absurd, and such all errors in
Religion are. They are new, because invented and vented after the Truth was
revealed; and absurd, because all such are irrational, and many of them very
gross. They are also strange, as having not the same Original with the Truth,
which was revealed from Heaven; and of another stamp and quality. By these,
some think, he means Judaism and Philosophy, and the Errors and Superstitions
of the Morinthians and Cerinthians, who attempted to make up one Body of
Religion, by joining Judaism and Christianism together; yet not only these, but
all other Heresies whatsoever are here intended. They must not be carried away,
or about with these; this is the Duty: The Metaphor seems to be taken from
Wethercocks or Ships, which turn every way as the Wind carries them; to be so
carried about, implies that they turn from the truth of the Gospel, believe
these false Doctrines, and so are deceived, as the word in the Original may
signify; and it signifies the inconstancy of such as receive them, as not being
firm and fixed in the saving Truth. For if we once turn away from that, we fall
first into one Error, then into another; and are first of one Sect, after that
of another, and can settle no where. We have had sad experience of this in our
times, wherein many forsaking their Orthodox Teachers, and the ancient and
apostolical Doctrine, turned Anabaptists, Seekers, Quakers, and men above the
Ordinances of Scripture, Sacraments; Sabbaths. Such we must not be, not so
erroneous, heretical, unstable: This Text agrees with many others; as, Romans 16.
17. Ephesians. 4. 14. Colos. 2. 8, 16. and many more, noted by Curcella^s. Great is
our frailty in this particular, because of the imperfection of our
Understanding, the corruption of our Hearts, the subtilty of the Devil and
Seducers; therefore let us he well informed in the Truth, endeavor to live
according to the Truth certainly known, pray for the Spirit of Truth to guide
us. For it is not wit or learning, without the Grace of God, can preserve us
from these Doctrines, which carry us away from Christ, and cause us to wander
in by-ways, that lead our Souls into Destruction.

2. The reason is, 1. Because the Doctrine of the Gospel can save us. 2. These
strange Doctrines cannot promote our Salvation; it is, [(...)] For, 1. It Is
good the heart be established with Grace, not with Meats. By Grace may
understand the Truth, and the Truth of the Gospel; so it is taken, Tit. 2. 11.
And it is called Grace, because it is the Word or Doctrine of Grace, Act. 20. 24,
32. which manifests the Grace of God in Christ; and the Knowledge and Love of it
is a Grace and Mercy of God. To have the heart established therewith, is to
understand it, believe it, be affected with it, so as to adhere unto it, and
make it our care in seeking eternal Life. And then the heart is thus
established with it, when the Spirit of God writes it in our hearts, so that we
know it more clearly, and are effectually moved to follow and practice it. It
must be deeply imprinted in our hearts, and our hearts must be firmly fixed in
it: And this is good and profitable for Sanctification and Salvation, but meats
are not so. By Meats, is understood the Doctrine of Meats; and by Doctrine of
Meats, may be meant Doctrine of Ceremonies: such we find in the Books of Moses,
yet all abolished by the Gospel. The Jews were persuaded, that they were
sanctified by the observation of Mosaical Ceremonies, and the Traditions of
their Elders. This also was the persuasion of all Superstitious Wretches,
whether Heathens or Heretics: For Meats may here signify not only false
Doctrines, and Ceremonial Observations of the Jews, but also all other various,
strange, and different Opinions, and Superstitions of all others, whose hearts
were not stablished by Grace. And though men's hearts be never so
pertinaciously fixed in them, yet they could not advance their Salvation. For
it follows, which have not profited such as were occupied or (as the Greek
word signifies) walked therein. To walk in them, is to profess, and in their
practice constantly to observe them: Not to profit them, is, not to sanctify,
justify them, or make them acceptable to God. For that is truly profitable in
this kind, which makes a man more holy, brings him nearer unto God, and renders
him more capable of eternal Life. The sum is, they must take heed of all false
Doctrines, and adhere to the truth of the Gospel: And the reason is, 1. Because
establishment in the truth of the Gospel is good, and certainly conduces to
eternal Life. 2. The belief, profession, practice of any other Doctrine is not
so, cannot further our happiness.

. 10. There is another reason, why they must not return to Judaism, or any
other Doctrine different from the Gospel. For,

Ver. 10. We have an Altar, whereof they have no right to eat, which serve the
Tabernacle. IN these words, we have;

1. A benefit or privilege. 2. A right unto it, granted unto Christians. denied
unto Jews and others.

The Propositions are two,

1. We have an Altar. 1 2. They who serve the Tabernacle, have no right to eat
of it.


1. Altar here is the Priest or Sacrifice offered upon, and sanctified by, the
Altar. The Sacrifice is that of Christ's Body slain and offered by the eternal
Spirit, without spot unto God. To have this, is to have a right unto it, so as
to eat and be partakers of it: The expression and phrase is Legal and
Levitical. For in the Law there were certain Sacrifices, whereof part was given
and offered to God, part was given to the Priests to eat thereof, part was
allowed to the People, which brought the Sacrifice, and they might eat thereof
before the Lord, in the Tabernacle or the Temple: The same Custom many of the
Gentiles had. To this the Apostle does allude, and does imply, that the Body of
Christ was slain and offered unto God to expiate Sin, given unto man in the
Word and Sacrament, as Food to preserve both Body and Soul unto eternal Life.
And as the Jews only had right to eat of their Sacrifices; so Christians, and
only Christians, have right unto, and by a true and lively Faith, according to
the Gospel, may partake of the same, and live for ever. For this meat alone
does profit those alone, whose hearts are established with or by Grace, and the
Doctrine of the Gospel.

2. To eat of this Altar and Sacrifice, they who serve the Tabernacle have no
right. They who served the Tabernacle, were unbelieving Jews, Priests, and
People, who adhered to the Law of Moses, rejected the Gospel, and refused to
receive Christ for their Savior. These could have no right unto the benefit of
Christ's Sacrifice^ for it was ordained only for the Salvation of such as
should believe on him. But these Jews out of a perverse belief, that they
should be justified and saved by the Law, would not believe the Doctrine of the
Gospel, and seek righteousness by Faith in Christ. So that Israel, following
after the Law of Righteousness, attained not to the Law of Righteousness. And
why? they sought not Righteousness by Faith in Christ, who was the end of the
Law, which was a Schoolmaster to Christ. They were so confident, that the Law
was given for Justification and Salvation; that they thought Christ not only
needless, but an Enemy to Moses, and all Christians to be Heretics, and worthy
to be persecuted to Death. The force of the Apostle's Argument is, That if
their heart was not established with Grave, but carried about with diverse and
strange Doctrines; they deprived themselves of the inestimable benefit of
Christ's Sacrifice; for there is no Faith without the Gospel, and no benefit in
the Sacrifice of Christ without Faith; for all right unto, and participation
of, this Sacrifice is by Faith grounded upon the Gospel.

. 11. That they that serve the Tabernacle, have no right to eat of this Altar,
he proves thus;

Ver. 11. For the body of those Beasts, whose Blood is brought into the
Sanctuary by the High Priest, are burnt without the Camp.]

Ver. 12. Wherefore Jesus also, that he might sanctify the People with his own
Blood, suffered without the Gate.]

IN these words, we have,

1. An Argument to prove the unbelieving Jew to have no right to eat of the
Sacrifice of Christ; And this is a Doctrine.

2. A practical Conclusion and Application of this Doctrine unto our selves, in
the two verses following.

In the Argument, we may observe;

1. The Proposition and the Type. 2. The Reddition and Antitype.


1. There were several Beasts Sacrificed, whose Bodies were burnt without the
Camp, yet their Blood was not brought into the Sanctuary; therefore it can
hardly be thought the Apostle intended any Sacrifice so much, as that of
general Expiation, whereof we read, Lev. 16. For though this does agree to
other Sacrifices, that their Blood was brought into the Sanctuary to be
sprinkled upon the horns of the Altar of Incense, and before the Veil, and
their Bodies were burnt without the Camp, as we may understand from Exodus 29.
Lev. 4. Yet of this Sacrifice, it is clearly written, 1. That the Blood was
brought into the inward Sanctuary, within the second Veil, and was sprinkled
upon the Mercyseat. 2. This was done by the High Priest alone, and could be
done by none else. 3. This Blood was brought in and sprinkled for Expiation and
Reconciliation. 4. The Bodies of these Sacrifices were burnt without the Camp.
This Sacrifice, as you have heard, was a more lively resemblance of Christ, who
is the propitiation for the Sins of the whole World. The principal thing the
Apostle takes notice of, is the burning of their Bodies out of the Camp; for
the Camp was that plot of Ground which was taken up with the Tents and
Habitations of the Israelites in the Wilderness. All this was counted holy, and
all unclean persons and things were to be removed out of the same. And because
the sins of the People were laid upon these Beasts, therefore they were
unclean, accursed: and God to signify, that all Sinners are accursed, and to be
cast out of his presence, and to be tormented with eternal fire, and also to
express his detestation of Sin, he caused these Bodies, 1. To be removed out of
the Camp. 2. To be burned.

2. This was the Type, the Antitype was Christ, of whom it is affirmed, 1.
That he Suffered without the Gate. 2. That he Suffered there, that he might
sanctify the People by his Blood. To Suffer, here, is to be Crucified and dye
upon the Cross: Without the Gate, signifies, the place where he Suffered and
was Crucified; and in particular, it was Golgotha, which was without the Gate
of Jerusalem, which was called the holy City, because God chose that City to
put his Name there, and so did consecrate it; this answered to the holy Camp.
The reason, why God thus in his wise providence did order it, was, because
Christ had taken upon him the Sins of the World, and God had laid on him the
Iniquities of us all. One sad consequent of Sin not pardoned, is, a Curse and
Excommunication out of God's presence, so as that the person cursed is put at a
distance, and deprived of all communion with Saints and God. Therefore it is
written, That Christ was made a Curse for us, Gal. 3. 13. The end of this
Suffering, and that without the Gate, was, that by his Blood, he might sanctify
the People. The People are all such as believe in him; To sanctify them, is to
free them from the guilt and punishment of Sin: For he was made a Curse for us,
that he might redeem us from the Curse due unto us for our Sins; And this he
does immediately by his Blood being shed, and his Death, which virtually and
efficiently took away Sin, and procures actual Remission and Sanctification
upon our Faith. For his Suffering out of the Gate made Sin pardonable, and the
punishment endured by him, and deserved by us, removable. But when by Faith
it is sprinkled upon our Souls, we are actually pardoned, and the punishment
actually removed, because God will not punish Sin both in him, and us
believing: The comparison is in similitude, and like quality. The things
wherein the Type and Antitype agree, are these. In the Sacrifice of general
Expiation, 1. The Blood is brought into the holy Place; so Christ by his own
Blood entered the holy place of Heaven. 2. That Blood did expiate Sin; so this
does obtain eternal Expiation, and the People are sanctified by it. 3. The
Bodies of those Sacrifices were burnt without the Camp; so Christ suffered upon
the Cross without the Gate of Jerusalem. 4. As they who serve at the Tabernacle
had no Right not License to eat of those Sacrifices whose Bodies were burned
without the Camp; so no Jews that will not leave Judaism, nor any other that
will not go out of the World to suffer for Christ's sake, can have any Right to
eat of this Altar and Sacrifice of Christ, so as to be saved by it.

. 13. Therefore the Apostle draws a practical Conclusion from the former words
in this manner,

Ver. 13. Let us go forth therefore unto him without the Camp, bearing his
Reproach.

Ver. 14. For here we have no continuing City, but we seek one to come.

THis Text is an Exhortation; and therein two things are observable:

1. The Duty exhorted unto. 2. The Reason whereupon it is urged.


1. The Duty is twofold,

1. We must go forth to him. 2. We must bear his Reproach.


1. We must come forth of the Camp or City to him. 1. The Camp or City is
Judaism, and all erroneous Sects, and also the World, and men of the World; we
must separate from all things inconsistent with the Truth and Christ. This is
not expressed, but implied. 2. Out of this Camp or City we must come forth; and
that we do when we renounce all Errors in Religion, and all earthly
Affections: Our Opinions and Errors in Religion are so many Idols setup in our
Souls, and are contrary to the Truth of the Gospel; and the things of the
World, which we so much affect and dearly love, are all of us by Nature
contrary to the Love of Christ: We have something in our hearts which keeps us
from our God, till we be truly converted. 3. To come forth to Christ therefore,
is to be rightly informed, and to believe the saving Truth of Christ; and upon
this right Information, to love him above all, as far more necessary,
excellent, and beneficial than any thing, than all things else. This is the
same with denying ourselvs, forsaking all for his sake, hating Father, Mother,
Wife, Children, Brethren, Sisters, and Life itself, out of love to him, and to
forsake all for his sake: For, lay all of these, with all the Kingdoms and
rarest Contents of the World together on oneside, and Christ on the other; they
are all base, uncertain, vain, empty things, Dross and Dung, and nothing to
Christ, who is infinitely precious, and incomparably more excellent than all,
and more beneficial to a poor guilty Sinner. To come forth to him, is not to
change the Place but our Hearts; it is a Motion not of the Body but the Soul;
and if we once knew the Beauty of Christ, and had tasted of his Sweetness, we
should be ravished with him, and all the World could not keep us from him; In
him alone true Happiness is to be found.

2. The second part of the Duty is, to bear his Reproach: Here is Reproach, his
Reproach, the bearing of his Reproach. In this the Author alludes unto the
bearing of the Cross, which was the greatest Shame and Disgrace any man could
be put unto. To endure Shame and Disgrace, and suffer in our Reputation,
Credit, Honor, and good Name is a very grievous Evil, and few can endure it,
and some can better suffer Death than Ignominy and Disgrace. The Cross was not
only a matter of Reproach, but of grievous pain and torment, and was the
Epitome of all positive Evils; and therefore by Reproach is signified all kind
of afflictions and miseries which we may suffer from men, or may be obnoxious
unto in this Life: Yet this Reproach and this Cross here meant must be his
Reproach, his Cross. If we suffer Punishment for our own Crime, and through our
own Folly, then it is not Christ's Cross: Simon of Cyrene did not bear his own
but Christ's Cross, and followed him. This is a Reproach and Cross laid upon us
for his sake, because we profess his Truth, obey his Laws, oppose Sin and his
Enemies, refuse to comply with the World in any Sin, renounce all Errors,
Idolatry, Superstition, and wicked Customs of the World, and all this out of
Love to Christ. To bear this Cross, is not merely to suffer any ways, but to
suffer the worst Man can do unto us with Patience, with Constancy, with Joy;
and to think our selve^ happy, and much honored, that we are counted worthy to
suffer for so great a Savior, and in so noble a Cause. This requires a divine
Faith well grounded upon the Word and Promises of God, and a special Assistance
of the divine Spirit; for these will strengthen our hearts, and make us willing
to suffer any thing before we offend our God and lose our Savior.

. 13. The words of the former Verse considered as a Doctrine or Proposition are
a Conclusion deducible from antecedent Premises: but as containing a Duty to
be performed they are inferred from the 14. Ver. where we have a Reason given
us, why we should come forth to Christ; and it is twofold,

1. Because we have here no abiding City. 2. Because we seek one to come.


1. We have no abiding City. By City understand two things, 1. A place fit for
comfortable and safe habitation. 2. An Estate answerable unto this Habitation,
whereby we may live happily in this place: For, neither can an Estate without a
place, nor a place without an Estate, make our condition good, and such as we
desire. An abiding City is a place of eternal Rest and Safety, which in it self
stands firm for ever, and the Inhabitants shall never remove or be
dispossessed: As it is such a Place, so it is an Estate not only of all
necessaries, but of all things delectable and desirable, with plenty of them,
sufficient to make a man fully happy; and as these things in themselves, so the
Enjoyment of them is everlasting: Yet here, that is, in this life on Earth, and
under Heaven, there is no such City, no such Place, no such Estate, And, as it
is not here, so we have it not; for nothing can be had or enjoyed where it is
not. We may have many great and glorious things on Earth; for here are goodly
Estates, Kingdoms, and vast Empires, strong and beautiful Cities, Towns, and
Habitations, and some have them; yet these are not abiding in themselves, nor in
the Possession of the Owners; Experience of all times, besides the Word of God,
does teach us this certain Truth: Therefore, we knowing that there is no such
City here, seek no such thing here, because no such thing can be had here.

2. But we seek one to come. That is, though there be no such thing here,
neither have we any such City on Earth; yet there is such a City, though not
here, yet elsewhere; though not present, yet to come, and we seek it. There is
one, a Place of everlasting Rest, and firm Mansions in our Father's House, and
a glorious Estate of full and perfect Happiness, far above the Conceit and
Imagination of mortal men; and the Possession both of the Place and Estate
shall be everlasting, as all the Inhabitants and Owners of this City shall live
for ever. Yet it is to come, which signifies, that no such thing is here,
neither can it be enjoyed in this present mortal life; the full and perfect
Fruition is reserved for Heaven, and the time of Resurrection and Immortality.
And we seek it; this implies, 1. That we believe there is such an Estate, and
that upon sure Ground; for God has said so. 2. That we knowing the Excellency
and Glory of it, do much desire and long for it, as that which, once possessed,
will make us fully and for ever blessed. 3. That we have some hope of the
attainment, and the same certain, as being grounded upon the Promise of God
confirmed to us by an Oath; and besides, we have a present Title unto it, and
the first fruits thereof, even in this Vale of Tears. This Belief, this Hope,
this Title, these First Fruits, set us on seeking of this City; and all our
Lifetime is nothing else but a Seeking, and this is our great business; all
our other Works and Labors are but upon the by, or subordinate to this. This
Seeking is the Exercise of our u^most Power, with greatest diligence in the Use
of those means God has ordained for the attaining of that blessed Condition,
which was prepared from the beginning, but to be fully enjoyed in the End of
the World: The outward means are Word and Sacraments; the inward Knowledge,
Repentance, Faith, and new Obedience; for by the Use of the outward, and
Improvement of the inward means, we are made capable of Heaven.

The words being th^s explained; let us consider the force of the Reasons and
Motives therein contained, which are two: 1. We have no abiding City. 2. We
seek one to come. 1. If we have nothing certain and constant here, Why should
we be willing to abide here where we have no abiding, nor enjoy any thing that
is abiding and permanent? All things are Vanity of Vanities, even most vain,
flitting, and empty of all solid Goodness. Every thing under Heaven, though
never so excellent and lasting, is subject to waste and consumption; yea, the
Heavens and the Earth shall perish, and wax old, and God shall change them as a
Garment, and as a Vesture shall they be changed: And as all things are mutable
and perishing in themselves, so our Possession of them is uncertain; and how
many ways may we be dispossessed of them? And shall it trouble us to part with
that which one day, and we know not how soon, must be taken from us? and to
leave that place which suddenly must be left? For, at the time of death, if not
sooner, shall we be stripped of all, take our leave with dearest Friends; and all
things and persons, though never so near and dear unto us, must be left behind
us, and then we must remove hence and be no more seen. And why should the
thoughts of bearing his Reproach torment our minds? For Christ has born it
before us, and the burden is but leight, and shall not ly long upon our backs;
for no Sufferings can extend beyond this mortal Life. 2. The second Reason is
very effectual; for we have an abiding City to come. Christ, as you heard, for
the joy that was set before him, endured the Cross, and despised the Shame; and
why should not we follow him, and do as he has done? We can lose nothing of
much value, but for what we lose we shall receive many things incomparably
better; for Treasure: on Earth, Treasure in Heaven; for a Mortal Life, an
Immortal; for uncertain and fading things, certain and everlasting; for a
removable Tabernacle, an everlasting Temple; for a Wilderness, an ever-blessed
Canaan. And every step of our Remove out of this World is but an Approach unto
our abiding City; where will be no Reproach, no Cross, no Suffering; but
perpetual Ease, Peace, Safety, Happiness: And if we had any effectual Faith
and lively Hope of these eternal Mansions and this glorious Estate, how easy
were it for us even with Joy to go out of this Camp, this City, to our Savior,
bearing his Reproach? For want of Consideration we have no lively clear
Apprehension, no firm Belief and effectual Hope of this heavenly City. Some
press this Duty upon other Reasons implied in the former words; namely,
because, 1. We shall be Partakers of the Sacrifice of Christ. 2. We are
sanctified by his Blood. 3. He went out of the City first, carrying his Cross,
and gave us an Example. Yet these may infer and prove this to be a Duty,
though they be not so powerful Motives stirring up to Performance.

. 14. The next Duty we are exhorted unto, we find

Ver. 15. By him therefore let us offer the Sacrifice of Praise to God
continually, that is the fruit of our Lips, confessing unto his Name. LET us
consider,

1. The Context. 2. The Text.


1. The Context, and Connection with the former words, is implied in the
Illative Therefore, which usually inferrs a Conclusion from some Premises
Antecedent; and most Expositors do take this Text to be a Conclusion; but what
the Premises, be they do not agree. 1. Some think they referr to Ver. 10. We
have an Altar, though not Mosaical and Levitical, therefore let us make use of
it, and offer upon it some Moral and Spiritual, not Carnal Sacrifice: Others
infer it from Ver. 12. where it is said, We are sanctified by Christ's Blood,
therefore let us offer, etc. For the Priests were first sanctified and
consecrated by Blood before they could minister and Sacrifice: Others make it
part of the formet Duty Ver. 13. and urged upon Motives in the 14th. and in
this manner. Seeing we have no abiding City here, but seek one to come, which
is purchased by Christ's Blood; let us not only go forth to him bearing his
Reproach, but let us also do this with Praise and Thanksgiving, in that we are
counted worthy to suffer for him and with him. This seems to agree with that of
the Apostle, Coloss. 1. 11, 12. where Prayer is made for strength, that they
may be able to suffer with Patience, long-Suffering, and Joyfulness, giving
thanks that they were made fit to have part of the Inheritance of the Saints in
Light: And it is true that this Conclusion may be inferred from these severally,
or from all jointly in this manner, That seeing we have an Altar, an
High Priest, are sanctified by his Blood, and made capable of an abiding City
to come; therefore let us offer, and offer this Sacrifice of Praise, and that
by him: Yet the Conjunction therefore^ may be expletive here, as sometimes it
is, and the words have no Reference to the former, but be a new Exhortation
distinct from the former, and added unto them.

2. The Text in it self is an Exhortation, and therein we may observe,

1. The Duty exhorted unto, which is, to offer the Sacrifice of Praise and
Thanksgiving. 2. The Directions how it must be offered, and they are these:


It must be offered,

1. By Christ. 2. To God. 3. Continually. 4. To his Name.

Yet the Directions concerning the manner are properly two: It must be offered,
1. By Christ. 2. Continually. If we reduce these into divine Axioms or
Propositions, we may digest them thus,

1. There is a Sacrifice of Praise and Thanksgiving. 2. This Praise is the
fruit of our Lips, and so is Thanksgiving. 3. This Sacrifice of Praise must be
offered unto God, with Thanksgiving to his Name. 4. This Sacrifice must be
offered by Christ. 5. It must be offered continually.


1. There is a Sacrifice of Praise; for there is Praise, and this Praise is a
Sacrifice. Praise, as it is a Duty to be performed to God, 1. Has for Object
some divine Virtues and Perfections, and the same manifested unto us by his
Word, or Works, or both; and also apprehended by us. 2. It is an Acknowledgment
of these Perfections as proper unto God, as most glorious and excellent in
respect of them. 3. Some outward Expression of this Acknowledgment, as by word
of Mouth, or some other way. 2. This Praise is a Sacrifice, because to be
offered to God, of which hereafter.

2. This Praise is the fruit of our Lips, because by our words which issue from
the heart, we express our inward thoughts and high Apprehensions of the same:
Therefore our Tongue in Hebrew is said to be our Glory; and the Reason given by
some is not only this, that by our Speech and Language we excel irrational
Creatures, but because it was given us to praise and glorify God: And as our
Understanding is given us to think of God, and to know him; so our Speech was
given us to speak of God, and declare his wondrous Works, and his excellent
Perfections manifested therein. In this respect, Praise is said to be a
speaking well of the person or thing to be praised. This Expression is made
either in private or public, and the public is the principal: It is made
either in our Prayers, in our singing of Psalms, Hymns, and spiritual Songs,
wherein the Voice is louder, sweeter, and melodious, which is called Vocal
Music, sometimes joined with that which is called Instrumental: The Reason why
in Assemblies we use this Vocal Praise, is, to inform others, and stir them up
to praise God jointly with us. Thanksgiving also is the Fruit of our Lips,
wherein we use our Voice as in Praise, and sometimes Praise and Thanksgiving
are the same; therefore the word here used signifies Confession, which
presupposing our inward Acknowledgment, is an outward Declaration of the same.
Yet Thanksgiving strictly taken, is different from Praise; for the object of
it is the works of God, as beneficial to us, and manifesting his mercy, love,
and kindness; and the act of it is an acknowledgment of his love, mercy, and
kindness, and an expression of the same. And this is also a Fruit of our Lips
as well as Praise, and is signified outwardly for the same Reasons, for which
the inward Acknowledgment of Praise is expressed: This Phrase [Fruit of our
Lips] is taken out of the Prophets, as Isa. 57. 19. but especially Hosea 14. 2.
where the word Calves is turned by the Septuagint, Fruit.

3. This Sacrifice of Praise and Thanksgiving must be offered to God and to
his Name. A Sacrifice is sometimes taken largely for an Oblation or Offering,
and in this sense a Sacrifice is an Offering of something to God, as Supreme
Lord. Praise therefore, and so Thanksgiving being something offered to God as
Supreme, may be said to be a Sacrifice; which is proper to a Deity. Praise is
due to Him, as Supreme in some Perfections; Thanks as to the Supreme
Benefactor, and Fountain of all Goodness, Blessings, Mercies. These are due to
him as he is Supreme, and we are bound to offer these by virtue of the first
Commandment, which requires Love, Fear, Praise, Thanksgiving, Honor, and
other Duties to be performed to Him alone, as Supreme in the highest degree.
The Reason why the Author mentions Sacrifice may be this, Because all
Religions require Sacrifices to be offered to a God whether true or imaginary;
and God required in the Law several kinds of Sacrifices, both Ilastical and
Eucharistical to be offered unto him, and these Hebrews might say, What is the
Law of Moses so abrogated, that all Sacrifices and Offerings to God are taken
away? Has Christian Religion no such thing? Is it singular in this particular?
To this the Apostle answers, that indeed all Sacrifices of Bullocks, Goats,
Lambs, Rams, which were carnal are taken away; yet there are more excellent
Sacrifices, which are moral and spiritual, of which praise and thanksgiving are
not the least, to be offered unto God as Supreme Lord. For you are an holy
Priesthood, to offer up spiritual Sacrifices, etc. 1 Pet. 2. 5. Where it is
expressly signified, 1. That there must be Sacrifices in the Christian Religion
and Worship. Yet, 2. These Sacrifices must not be carnal, but spiritual. And
under the Law God required the Sacrifice of Thanksgiving, more then the Blood
of Bulls and Goats, Psalm. 50. 14. and the Knowledge of God and mercy, more then
those Legal Sacrifices of Beasts, Hos. 6. 6. and the Sacrifices of a broken
Spirit, of a broken and contrite heart, Psalm. 51. 17. This Sacrifice of praise
was and is most solemnly to be offered in the Sacrament of the Body and Blood
of Christ, for that inestimable blessing of Redemption by that great Sacrifice
offered upon the Cross. Therefore that Sacrament was called the Eucharist or
Thanksgiving, and a Commemoration of Christ's Death. And this might be the
reason, why the Ancients so often called it a Sacrifice, to signify, that
neither the Heathens nor Jews had any reason to upbraid them with the want or
neglect of Sacrifice. It must be offered unto God, and God alone, as Supreme,
and to his Name: where, by Name may be signified either his Majesty and
Supremacy; and it is the same with offering unto God; or it may signify his
Glory: and then the meaning is, that it must be offered to him to manifest his
Glory, and to ascribe all Glory, Honor, excellency and Perfection unto him.

4. This Sacrifice must be offered by Christ. By Christ, that is, by Faith in
Christ: 1. As having propitiated God by his Blood, and made his Throne
accessible. For by him we have access by Faith, into this Grace wherein we
stand, Romans 5. 2. Through him we have access, by one Spirit, to the Father,
Ephesians. 2. 18. And in him we have boldness, and access with confidence, by Faith
of him, Col. 3. 12. For how should sinful guilty man, dare to approach into his
presence of an holy and just Lord, if satisfaction be not made first unto
Divine Justice, offended by Sin. 2. By Faith in him, as having merited God's
favor, and acceptance of our Services; for without this Merit, we are unworthy
to enter into his presence, and our best Services considered in themselves,
without his merit are not acceptable. 3. By him, as our Mediator and
Intercessour; for he is our Advocate with the Father, 1 John 2. 1. As no man
under the Law could offer his Sacrifice unto God, but by the Priest; so under
the Gospel, no man can offer his Prayers, Praises, Alms, or any other spiritual
Sacrifice unto God, but by Christ as his High Priest, who offers them unto God.
John, in a Vision, sawin Heaven an Angel standing at the Altar, having a golden
Censer, and there was given him much Incense, that he should offer it with the
Prayers of all Saints upon the golden Altar which was before the Throne, Rev.
8. 3. This Angel is Christ our High Priest, who offers the Prayers of all his
Saints perfumed with the Incense of his merits, mhich makes them as offered by
him so acceptable, and so effectual. This is the reason, why we conclude our
prayers in Christ's Name, and desire that they may be heard for his sake.

5. We must offer this Sacrifice [continually], not that we must be like the
Euchitae, which would do nothing but pray, but that we must keep a constant
Course, and observe a certain order in worshipping God, both in private and
public. For God is continually, beneficial unto us, blessing and delivering
his People every day, and by new mercies giving new matter of praise and
thanksgiving; and there are some mercies so general and so beneficial, that
they should never be forgotten; but remembered before God every day. This is the
same with that Exhortation of the Apostle. To give thanks [alwayes] for all
things unto God and the Father, in the Name of Jesus Christ, Ephesians. 5. 20. We
read, that the four Beasts: which were the universal Church, did not rest Day
and Night, saying, Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God Almighty, which was, and is, and
is come, Rev. 4. 8. For this is one continual Employment of the universal
Church militant, to give Praise and Glory to God for ever. The more lively
apprehension we have of God's perfection, and the more sensible of his love and
mercy we shall be, the more excellent and acceptable this Service will prove.

. 15. There is another Sacrifice to be offered, which is the matter of another
Exhortation.

Ver. 16. But to do good, and to communicate, forget not: for with such
Sacrifices God is well pleased.] Where we have,

1. The Duty exhorted unto; 2. The Motive.


1. The Duty is, Not to forget to do good, and to communicate. This has some
affinity with the former, and is fitly subjoyned. For, 1. If God be beneficial
to us, and communicate his goodness, then we must be benesicial unto our
Neighbor, especially his poor Saints, and communicate of those Goods he has
given us; for he has not given us a greater measure of his Blessings, either
to hoard them up, or spend them vainly and sinfully upon our selves, to
maintain our pride and pleasure. We are but Stewards, and only trusted with
them, and must give an account; 2. There were Eucharistical Sacrifices under
the Law, wherein they must remember the Levit, the Poor, the Fatherless, the
Widow; such as these are, and God requires them in the Gospel. 3. By doing good
to others, we manifest our praise and thankgiving offered to God, to be real
and sincere; for I cannot think, that any man can be truly thankful to God, who
is not merciful to his Brother. The matter of this Duty, is something of these
worldly Goods which God has given us, are justly our own, and which we may
spare, though never so little, if but the poor Widow's mite: for God requires
our Charity according to our portion, we must give willingly and plentifully.
The Objects of this our Charity, are such as want, and we are able to relieve;
and, amongst others, the poor Saints of Christ. This Duty must not be
forgotten, that is, neglected; but we must have a special care to exercise our
Charity, as God shall call for it. Though we are not bound to relieve others by
the Laws of Men, yet we are deeply obliged unto it by the Laws of God; and
therefore we are not left at liberty, to give or not give: it is an universal
Duty, and lies upon us and all Christians, and upon them more then upon any
other.

2. The reason and motive is, With such Sacrifices God is well pleased. Where
it is employed, every work of Charity should be a Sacrifice, and so given to Man,
as to be offered to God. So it is, when it is done out of Faith in Christ, love
to God, and in obedience to his Command. In this respect, Alms are part of
God's Worship, given and offered to God at the perception of the Sacrament, of
the Eucharist, added unto their thanksgiving. Therefore they were called
Oblations, and also were reckoned as works of Sanctification of the Christian
Sabbath, 1 Cor. 16. 1, 2, etc. This Sacrifice, if offered aright, is pleasing
to God; there are Sacrifices which God is not well pleased with; for some he
abhominates, some he regards not, but this he accepts, and it is very pleasing
unto him. For the benevolence and charity of the Philippians sent to Paul, was
an Odor of sweet smell, a Sacrifice acceptable and well-pleasing to God, Phil.
4. 18. Where we may observe, 1. That it was a Sacrifice. 2. It was acceptable
and well-pleasing, that is, very much and highly accepted of God. It Is called
[(...)], the ministration of divine Service, a part of the Liturgy and Service
of God, 2 Cor. 9. 12. Thatit is thus pleasing to God, is evident, because
hecommands it, commends it, and that often and much, promises to reward it
with temporal and spiritual Blessings, takes that which is given to the poor,
as lent unto himself, and becomes Debtor to repay it: Christ takes that done to
himself, which was done to his poor Saints, and assures us, that a Cup of cold
water should not be forgotten, and magnisies the Widow's mite cast into the
Treasury. And how willing and ready should we be to perform that Duty, which
God so much accepts!

. 16. The last Exhortation follows,

Ver. 17. Obey them that have the Rule over you, and submit uour Selves; for
they watch for your Souls, as they that must give account, that they may do it
with joy, and not with grief: for that is unprofitable for you.] CHrist in the
administration of his heavenly Kingdom, and the ordering of men unto
everlasting Life, has his Officers under him. For though by his Spirit alone,
without the Ministry of Men or Angels, he could save us; yet he is pleased to
make use of Min, and by Man convert Man, and bring him to everlasting Glory.
Therefore when he ascended up on high, to take possession of his Kingdom, he
gave Gifts to Men, and gave some Apostles, some Prophets, some Evangelists,
some Pastors and Teachers; and all this for the building up of his Church. In
laying the foundation, he used extraordinary; in building upon the foundation,
ordinary Officers: and this Text is concerning both; the work of these
Officers, and the duty of the People subject unto them: In that as being an
Exhortation, we have, as in most of the rest,

1. The Duty exhorted unto. 2. The Reasons and Motives.


1. The Duty is, To obey them who have the Rule over us, and to submit our
selves. The parties who must perform this Duty are Christian People, as having
Rules over them; they are the Flock under their Shepherds, Subjects under
their Governors. The parties to whom the Duty must be performed, are such as
have the Rule over them, who before were called Guides, which taught unto them
the Word of God, and here such as watch over their Souls. All this implies,
that they are Superiors, Governors, Officers; and to distinguish them from
Civil Magistrates, they are said to be trusted with men's Souls, not their
Bodies and Estates; these are Officers in the Church, whether extraordinary or
ordinary; of what order, rank, or quality soever, if instituted by Christ: yet
ordinary are here chiefly meant. These are called Ministers of the Gospel,
Elders, Pastors, Teachers; Their work chiefly is in Word, Prayer,
administration of the Sacraments: These most be fitly qualified for knowledge,
life, utterance; and approved by such as being sufficient to judge of them, are
appointed by the Church for that work. They should be such as against whom no
exception can justy be taken: And this is said to be their Vocation, upon which
usually follows Ordination, by Imposition of hands, a certain form of words and
prayer. These are acts of the Church designing, and engaging fit persons; but
their power is from Christ: All this is to be understood of ordinary Pastors:
These are the persons to whom the Duty is to be performed; The duty is
Obedience and Subjection. Obedience presupposes Commands, and subjection
Power: The Commands must be done, the Power must be acknowledged. The Power is
spiritual, and from God; for they are made Overseers of the Church by the Holy
Ghost, Act. 20. 28. And it is so great, that Christ plainly affirms, That
whosoever hears and receives them, hears and receives Christ, and God who
sent Christ; and he that despises them, despises Christ, and God who sent
him, Matthew. 10. 40. Luke 10. 16. And this is true, not only of the Apostles,
but of their Successors: Yet this presupposes, that they do all things in
their place, according to their Commission from Christ, and in his Name,
exercising their Power according to his Command.

2. The Reasons are taken,

1. From their Work. 2. From their Account.


1. Their work is to watch over their Souls; and here we must take notice, 1.
That the subject of their work, are men's Souls, and the Soul is the principal
and more noble part of man; and here it is to be considered as immortal, and
capable of an eternal estate of felicity or misery. And here they are
considered, as in great danger of eternal punishment, and the work of the
Minister must be to prevent it so far as he can. This is done by watching,
which is a Metaphor taken from a Shepherd, or a Scout, or Sentinel. And
whatsoever the one should do for his Sheep, and the other for his Country, to
save and preserve them; this he must do for the Salvation of men's Soul. For
men's Souls are as Sheep without a Shepherd, wandering in the ways of Sin, in
danger of Satan, Hell, and Death; d^st^^ute of all necessary saving Blessings,
and all power either to direct or protect themselves. And this Watching
includes many works, as instruction of the Ignorant, reproof of the Guilty,
threatening the Stubborn, strengthening the Weak, comforting the Sorrowful,
directing all, giving good example to all, encouraging all; praying for all. To
Watch, is to do the whole work of the Ministry for Doctrine and Worship, in the
right dispensation of the Word and Sacraments. Some understand by these Guides
and Rulers, all other Officers and Governors of the Church for Discipline; but
these may be other besides Ministers, which are here principally intended.
Seeing these watch, and that over their Souls, and for their eternal Salvation,
to prevent their damnation, they should be considered as most necessary of all
other men, and should be esteemed highly in love for their works sake. People
do little consider how great a blessing from God, and happiness to Man, good
and faithful Ministers are; but if they once find the power of their Doctrine,
and the comfort of the Spirit, they prize them as Messengers and Angels sent
from Heaven, out of great mercy for their eternal good. Yet the best are most
hated of the Devil, despised by Men, reviled, persecuted, and sometimes
martyred: Yet we must not think this any strange thing, seeing they called
Christ Beelzebub, and counted the Apostles the filth of the World, and the
offscouring of all things. But the insufficiency and infidelity of vicious,
lazy, ambitious, covetous Wretches, though it may give some occasion of
contempt, cannot excuse the wickedness of the World in this particular.

2. As Watching over men's Souls, is the first reason; so the second is taken
from their Account, which may be good or bad, in respect of the Ministers or
the People committed to their Charge: where it is to be observed, that it may be
good in respect of the Minister, who has been faithful; and yet bad in respect
of the People, who have been disobedient: Yet here the account is chiefly
considered, with reference to the People. And it is twofold, 1. Good, and made
with joy, which is profitable. 2. Bad, and made with grief, which is
unprofitable to the People. This implies, that Ministers, as they receive power
from Christ; so they receive Mandates with Instructions, and are deeply
charged; and woe unto Paul, if he preach not the Gospel. For such will be
guilty, not only of their own sins, but of the Blood and Damnation of the
Peoples Souls; this is an heavy Charge. This implies, they are Stewards, and
the Flock is not their own, but Christ's, who trusted them in their hands, and
will call them to account; and as they prove faithful or unfaithful, so he will
deal with them, and punish or reward them more then other men: and surely if we
did remember this Account, or loved Christ, we would feed his Flock, which cost
him so dear, even his own Life and Blood. And the People should consider the
expense of Christ's Blood, the charge, the study, the pains, the prayers of
their faithful Ministers; and this consideration should work much upon them,
and persuade them to obedience and submission, because the performance of the
Duty will end in the Ministers joy, and their profit. For as it is a great
grief to their Guides to see the People impenitent, and all their labor lost
in respect of them; so it is a matter of great joy to see them converted, and
brought into an estate of Salvation, so that they can say, These Souls I have
gained and saved from Hell; and can present them blameless, as washed in the
Blood of Christ, before the Judgment Seat of God. And as it is a joy to their
Pastors, so it is a profit and great advantage unto them; for their joy shall
end in the Peoples Salvation, who will bless the Day, that ever they hearkened
to them; and in receiving them, received Christ, and God who sent him. But then
on the contrary, if the People be disobedient, though the Ministers conscience
will acquit him, and Christ will richly reward his fidelity and pains; yet it
will trouble him much to see his Labors lost, the People's Souls, whose
Salvation he so much desired, and labored for, to perish. And as this will be
a grief to him, so it will be an unspeakable damage unto them; for they shall
lose the fairest opportunity of Salvation, and shall be condemned to eternal
punishments, and the same more grievous, because their sin was greater then the
sin of other men, who never heard the Gospel. For the greatest punishments in
Hell shall ly upon such as continued impenitent and unbelieving under the
Gospel, and a powerful Ministry. For it shall be more tolerable for Tire and
Zidon in the day of Judgment, then for Bethsaida and Corazin; and for Sodom and
Gomorrha, than for Capemaum. These are mighty and powerful reasons; and if
People would lay them to heart, they would tremble to think of disobedience to
their Guides. Where it is to be noted, that the same word, which ver. 7. is
turned Guides, is here translated Rulers; for they are not merely Guides, to
direct, but Rulers, instructed with power to command, and forbid, to bind and
loose in the Name of Christ; and in the former place the Author seems to speak
of such as were Dead, and here of such as are Living. And some observe, that
this is the last Exhortation, because the Apostle, for other Duties not here
mentioned, referred them to their present Pastors.

. 17. Thus far the Epistle has been continued in the main Matter and
Substance; and it is an excellent and profound Discourse concerning Christ's
Prophetical and Sacerdotal Office, joined with an Exhortation unto Perseverance
in their Christian Profession and Practice. That little which remains may be
said to be the Conclusion; and of the same, in a few words, we have many parts
or particulars; as

1. A Request. 2. An Intercession. 3. An Exhortation. 4. An Information. 5. A
Salutation. 6. A Benediction.


1. The Request we have,

Ver. 18. Pray for us; for we trust we have a good Conscience, in all things
willing to live honestly.

Ver. 19. But I beseech you the rather do to this, that I may be restored to
you the sooner.

IN this we may observe,

1. The thing requested by Paul; and that was their Prayers. 2. The Reason of
this Request: And


It was twofold, 1. He was capable of their Prayers, and a fit Object of the
same. 2. Upon their Prayers he might the sooner be restored unto them.

1. From this, that he desires their Prayers for him, we may observe, 1. That
we must pray for others as well as for our selves, and most of all should pray
for the Church, and in the Church for the Guides thereof, upon whom the Good,
Edification, Peace, and Welfare of it does so much depend. 2. That there is no
Man living but needs the Prayers of others, no, not the best and most eminent,
not Ministers, not Apostles, not Paul; nay, Christ himself in the day of his
Agony desired the Prayers of the Apostles. 3. That though the Apostle does not
mention or express what in particular they must seek of God by Prayer for him,
yet this was easily understood, and we may learn from other places what the
matter of their Prayers for him must be; they must pray for Utterance,
Boldness, Success in Preaching the Gospel, Deliverance from wicked and absurd
men, and in particular for his Liberty and Enlargement, as is implied in the
next Verse And he implies, that all these may be obtained by their Prayers.

2. The Reason which might persuade them to perform this Office of Love, was,
1. Because he was not altogether unworthy of their Prayers, nor any ways
incapable of the benefit of their Petitions: For there are some whom no Prayers
and Intercession can help or profit; though Moses, Joh, Daniel, pray for them,
God will not hear. But he was none of these; for he was persuaded he had a good
Conscience, and the Reason of this persuasion was, because he was willing in
all things to live honestly. Here some observe his Modesty, in that he does not
say I have, but I trust I have a good Conscience; not, that in all things he
lived honestly, but that he was willing to do so. A good Conscience in this
place is, 1. A Conscience rightly informed by the Word of God, and of his own
Life as agreeable thereunto. 2. A Conscience that could restify of the sincere
Intention of his Heart, and the Righteousness of his Actions without Error. 3.
It may be a Conscience also which did rightly dictate the Truth, and put him on
to do good. Conscience may be taken for the Heart, and the intention of the
Heart.
Such a Conscience his was, and he was persuaded of it; for by due Examination
a Man may know his own Conscience, or his own Conscience may know it self. The
Reason of this Testimony of himself might be, because some did accuse him that
he was an Apostate from Judaism, and turned Christian out of hatred to Moses
and the Law, and out of Design not of Sincerity; but he being conscious to his
Intentions, and the Grounds of Conversion knew this Accusation to be false. The
Reason of this Trust was this, he was willing in all things to live honestly:
To live honestly, is, to direct our Lives according to the Will of God, and
that in all things; for true Honesty is a divine Virtue, and a Life regulated
constantly and universally by the Word of God. And though no man attains to
this Perfection of Honesty in this Life, because every one has his failings,
and none lives and sins not, yet we may be willing to live so as to be
perfectly honest. The Will is the Imperial Power in the Soul, the first Mover,
and Principle of Moral Actions, and, as it stands disposed and constantly bent,
so the Life is good or bad. Paul's heart was rightly disposed, and
predominantly bent unto Righteousness, and he knew it to be so, and especially
in his proper Work of his Apostle-ship, which was the Preaching of the Gospel,
which he first undertook, and afterward continued upon right Grounds, strong
Convictions, and out of the Sincerity and Integrity of his heart.

2. There was another Reason which might make their Prayers in his behalf more
frequent and ardent, and stir them up unto this Work, and that was Hope of his
more timely Liberty, and Restitution unto them. This implies, he was in Bonds,
and that he had some Hope of Liberty, which their Prayers might obtain, or at
least hasten. Some think he was then promised his Liberty, but not yet fully
discharged; but whether it was so or no, yet the force of the Reason is from
the comfort and benefit which might redound to them upon his Release. When
James was slain and Peter imprisoned, earnest and continual Prayer was made by
the Church for his Release, and this Prayer was so successful and effectual,
that he was miraculously delivered and restored unto them, for their great
Comfort and the benefit of the Church. And it is certain, many Prayers were made
for Paul's Liberty, when a Prisoner at Rome: For they thought it a great
Prejudice to the Gospel, a Damage to the Church, and an hinderance of the
Conversion of many Souls, that so vigilant, laborious, faithful, zealous, and
eminent an Apostle should be imprisoned and consined. And Paul himself knew
that his Liberty and his Presence would be both a great Comfort, and also a
Benefit, not only unto these Hebrews, but to many other Christians and
Disciples. Therefore he requests them, as they desired the Comfort and Benefit
of his presence amongst them upon his speedy Release, to pray for him
frequently and servently.

. 18. The next part of the Conclusion is the Apostle's Prayer,

Ver. 20. Now, the God of all Peace, that brought again from the dead our Lord
Jesus, that great Shepherd of the Sheep, through the Blood of the everlasting
Covenant.

Ver. 21. Make you perfect in every good Work to do his Will, working in you
that which is well-pleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ, to whom be
Glory for ever and ever. Amen.

THESE words are a perfect Prayer; of which we have two principal parts,

1. A Petition. 2. A Doxology.


Yet these may be made four,

1. The Compellation of the Party invocated. 2. The Petition of the Party
invocating. 3. The Doxology. 4. The Conclusion and Confirmation of the whole.


Yet the first and last of these four belong both to the Petition and Doxology.
To begin with the Petition, which, presupposing Adoration, begins with the
Compellation and goes on with the Petition. In the Compellation we have a
Description of God, the Party prayed to, and that is from his Titles, 1. Of
Peace; and, 2. Of Power. He is first acknowledged the God of Peace, as in
another place the God of all Grace, 1 Pet. 5. 10. The God of all Peace and
Grace may be the same, and that is, a most gracious and loving God. Yet if
Peace be taken according to the Hebrew for perfect Happiness, and the Enjoyment
of all Blessings, then the God of Peace is that God which is the Fountain of
all Goodness, and perfect, full, eternal Happiness; yet such he is, as a
gracious God and loving Father reconciled and propitiated by the Blood of
Christ. As he is a God of Peace, so he is of Power, and this Power is set forth
by that glorious Work of raising Christ from the dead; for therein was
manifested the exceeding greatness of his Power, according to the working of
the s^^e, when he raised Christ, Ephesians. 1. 19, 20. The Party whom he raised was
Jesus Christ, whom he describes from his Relation to the Church to be the great
Shepherd of the Sheep, through the Blood of the everlasting Covenant. Where we
may observe, 1. That there is the Blood of the everlasting Covenant. 2. By or
through this Blood Christ became the great Shepherd of the Sheep. 3. God raised
this great Shepherd from the dead. 1. The Covenant is the Law and Covenant of
Grace, wherein God binds himself to sinful Man by excellent Promise upon the
Conditions of Repentance and Faith, to give him remission of all his Sins, and
everlasting Life; Of this you have heard, Chap. 8. This Covenant is
everlasting, because, though the Covenant made with Israel in the Wilderness
was abolished; yet this is unalterable, and shall continue for ever, and by it,
and it alone, the Called attain both the title and possession of the eternal
Inheritance. The Blood of this Covenant, so called by Christ, Mark 13. 22. Luke
22. 20. is the Blood of Christ, which was shed, as for other ends, so for the
confirmation of this Covenant. And the Blood, Death, and Sacrifice of Christ
confirmed the Covenant, because it made it effectual, and able to reach the
end, which was the eternal Salvation of sinful man. For by this Blood being
shed, he satisfied divine Justice, and made Sin remissible, and merited the
mercies promised, the promises themselves, the terms and conditions, and power
to perform them; and by this Blood pleaded in Heaven, upon the performance of
the conditions, he obtains actual Remission, and in the end actual fruition of
their eternal Inheritance. The former Covenant with Israel was indeed confirmed
with Blood of Sacrifices; yet because that Blood could not expiate Sin, and the
Levitical High Priest could not enter Heaven to plead any such expiatory Blood;
therefore that Covenant was not everlasting. In respect of this Blood, purging
men's Consciences from dead Works, Christ was made the Mediator of the New
Covenant: of which you may see, Chap. 9. 15. By this Blood therefore it is
said, That Christ is the great Shepherd of the Sheep: For because Christ took
upon him the form of a Servant, and became obedient unto Death, the Death of
the Cross, and shed his Blood; therefore God exalted him, and gave him a Name
above every Name. And therefore did his Father love him, and made him an
eternal Shepherd of the Sheep, because he had laid down his life for his
Sheep, Joh. 10. 17. For this very cause his Father gave him Po^er over all
Flesh, that he might give eternal Life to as many as he had given him, Joh. 17.
2. So that by this Blood, he became the Shepherd, the Great Shepherd: For all
the Prophets, and the Apostles, and Ministers of the Gospel, are Shepherds;
yet so, that they are but Servants under him; the Sheep are not theirs, but
Christ's, who bought them by his Blood. And God raised him, and made him Lord,
and the great and chief Shepherd of the Flock, that he might keep them, raise
them up at the last Day, and then give them everlasting life.

This Shepherd was raised by the mighty power of God, who not only raised him
From the Dead, but made him King and Priest for ever; that is, the great and
chief Shepherd. This is more at large described, Ephesians. 1. 19, 20, 21. to the
end; for that place does expound this for one part. For if we consider Christ
in this place, as the Object of God's almighty Power: We may observe, 1. His
Humiliation. 2. His Exaltation. His Humiliation is signified by his Blood and
Death, whereby the new and everlasting Covenant is confirmed: Thus humbled,
thus Dead, he is the subject of God's almighty Power, which did manifest it
self, 1. By raising him from the Dead. 2. By making him the great Shepherd,
Lord, and King, advancing him above the Angels, the Principalities, Powers, and
Dominions of Heaven, and all Names and Powers on Earth, and gave him to be Head
and Shepherd of the Church-Universal. And the reason why the Apostle gives God
these titles of Peace and Power, and instanceth in the Resurrection and
Exaltation of Christ, as glorious Effects of this Power, is, because the
continued sanctification and perfection of man once regenerate, which is the
thing desired in the Petition following, depends upon this mercy and power as
having raised and advanced Christ first, that by him thus raised and exalted,
he may first sanctify us fully, and then give us everlasting Glory. Therefore
the Apostle says, That God out of his great mercy and love had quickened the
believing Ephesians, being formerly dead in Sins and Trespasses, together with
Christ, and raised them up together, and set them in heavenly places in Christ
Jesus, Ephesians. 2. 4, 5, 6. Where we may observe, 1. That he quickened Christ being
dead, raised him up, and set him in heavenly places. 2. That he quickened them
being dead in Sins and Trespasses, raised them up, and set them in heavenly
places together with Christ, and by Christ. 3. That both these were done by the
same mercy and power first exercised upon Christ, and then upon them. After the
Adoration and Compellation, follows the Petition, wherein the principal thing
desired is Sanctification, and the power of Regeneration continued in them,
that so they might perform a constant and universal Obedience^ which was a
means to attain the possession of eternal Glory. Where we must observe, 1. That
the Apostle having requested their prayers formerly, does in these words, being
not requested, but of his own accord pray for them. 2. That having exhorted
them to the performance of several Duties, and the exercise of several Virtues,
knowing, that without the sanctifying Grace of God they could not perform these
Duties constantly, to the end, in these words he prays for the continuance of
God's sanctifying power to enable them to do that, which they without it cannot
do. 3. That seeing the Duties exhorted unto were but few, and there were many
more, he desires God to perfect them, not only in these, but in every good
Work, that so they might perform an universal Obedience. These things first
observed, in the words we must consider

1. Their Duty which is to be perfect in every good Work, to do God's Will, and
that which is well pleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ.

2. God's Power, whereby they are enabled to do their Duty, and the same sought
for by prayer.

1. The Duty, 1. Has for the Rule the Will of God. 2. This Will is observed,
when we do every good Work. 3. Every good work thus done according to the Will
of God, is well-pleasing unto God. 1. By the Will of God, is meant his
legislative and commanding Will, whereby he signifies unto man what is just and
good, and binds him to observe these his Laws.

2. The Will of God, being our binding Rule our Duty is to observe it; and we
observe it, when we do every good Work. The works of man are the actions and
operations of Man, as a rational Creature, and subject to the Laws and Will of
God. These works may be good or bad; and then they are good, when they are
conformable to the Will and Law of God: and this goodness presupposes knowledge
of this Will, and the right disposition and qualification of the heart. For if
the heart be not good, the work, which is qualified by the heart, cannot be
good. But it is not sufficient to do some, but every good work: For the Laws of
God command all good works, and require that every work of man be good. This is
universal Obedience; for the Law binds in all things, and at all times, so that
it gives no liberty to do evil, or transgress at any time. 3. Every good work,
as good, is well pleasing to God through Jesus Christ, because it is agreeable
to his Will: for to please God, so as to be accepted of God, is a Consequent of
the goodness of the work, as it is the end whereat man must aim. Yet it cannot
please God, but by Faith in Jesus Christ: For without Faith, it is impossible to
please God. Though these word; [Jesus Christ] may be referred also to the
Prayer, wherein they desire sanctifying power through him, and for his sake.

2. The sanctifying power desired of God, is expressed in two words, 1.
Perfecting. 2. Working. 1. The work of God must perfect us, before we can do
any good; the word [(...)], in the Septuagint, signifies to uphold, stablish,
direct, compose and make up a thing, so as to set it in order, and finish it,
that it may be fit for the end it was made. Thus to compose, and make up a man
in this place, is to sanctify him, and give him a power to do every good work:
and this is a work of the regenerating Spirit of God abiding in us, and
renewing us more and more. In this respect we are said to be God's workmanship,
created in Christ Jesus unto good Works, Ephesians. 2. 10. Yet this is not here meant
of the first Regeneration, but of the continuance and increase of this
sanctifying Grace, to strengthen us more and more. As preservation and
providence is to Creation, so this work of perfecting is to the first
Regeneration; and as we are at first created unto good Works, so we are
perfected in Christ. Another thing desired of God is, [working in us that which
is well pleasing unto him]; this signifies, that God does not only give us
Power, but continually cooperate and work in us, and with us, without whose
cooperation, we can do nothing that will please him. For it is he that works
in us, both the Will and the Deed of his good pleasure, Phil. 2. 13. This
prayer in effect is the same with that we read, was made for the Colossians.
For the Apostle and Timothy did not cease to pray for them, and desire, that he
might be filled with the knowledge of God's Will in all spiritual Wisdom and
Understanding. That ye might walk worthy of the Lord unto all pleasing, being
fritful in every good Work, increasing in the knowledge of God, Col. 1. 9, 10.
Where we have, 1. The Will of God, as here, which is the rule of our Obedience.
2. Being fruitful in every good Work, which is the same with doing every good
Work, which is the observation of God's Will. 3. They must walk worthy to all
pleasing; so here, they must do that which is well pleasing in his sight, not
in the sight of Man: And as here, when we do every good work, we please him; so
there we please him, by being fruitful in every good work. 4. As here they
could not please God, except God perfect them, and work in them; so there,
neither could the Colossians please God, without spiritual Knowledge, Wisdom,
and Understanding of God's Will: for Knowledge, spiritual Wisdom, and
Understanding, are the same, as appears; Prove. 2. 6. Where we find, the words
of the Septuag^nt taken up by the Apostle. 5. As there this Grace of wisdom,
and fullness of it, was sught by prayer; so this continuance of God's
sanctifying Grace, is prayed for here. This prayer informs us, 1. That in doing
all our good works, we depend upon God, both for the power given at the first,
and continued unto us, and also for the working it self: both will and deed are
from him, because he makes us of unwilling, willing; and causes us actually to
do that which we do. 2. That we cannot obtain any mercy of God, but by Christ,
nor do any Good pleasing to God, but by him: For without me, says Christ, ye
can do nothing. This Petition is reducible to that in the Lord's Prayer, Thy
will be done on Earth as it is done in Heaven.

The Doxology follows, [To whom be Glory for ever and ever.] This
presupposes, 1. God's glorious and excellent perfections; for he is glorious
for ever in himself. 2. The manifestation of these glorious and excellent
perfections. 3. The acknowledgment of this glory manifested in his works unto
him, so as to ascribe praise, honor, thanks unto him, as due. 4. The ascribing
of it to him, as due for ever and ever: This may be understood by that of the
Apocalyptist, Thou art worthy, O Lord, to receive Glory, Honor, and Power; for
thou have created all things, and for thy Will and pleasure they are and were
created, Rev. 4. 11. Where we may observe, 1. That God did manifest his
excellency and perfections by his glorious works. 2. That in this respect,
Glory, Honor, and Power was due unto him, and deserved by him; for he was
worthy to receive it both from Men and Angels. 3. This they acknowledge, and by
their acknowledgment return and give them unto him. And here this Glory may be
understood as given unto him, for that great and blessed Work of raising
Christ, and making him the great Shepherd of the Sheep, for their eternal
Salvation. As when we depart out of the presence of Kings and great Ones, we
bow and bless them; so when we have made our Prayers, and presented our
Petitions to the great Soveraigh of Heaven and Earth; we do not abruptly and
rudely turn our backs, and so depart, but in all humility bless and glorify his
Name, and acknowledge him worthy of eternal praise: This is one of the
Ceremonies used in the Court of Heaven. The Petition presented, is sealed up
with [Amen]; which is to be understood as added not only to the Petition, but
the Doxology; it is the conclusion of the whole, and seems to request that God
would subscribe his [Fiat] to our Petitions, and so seal up and confirm our
Prayer. We find it used in the Old Testament, to signify our consent with
others in what they had said or prayed; and so it is employed, it should be used
under the Gospel, 1 Cor. 14. 16. It Is a word of Faith and Hope, as Prayer is an
Act of both; and though our Prayer be long, yet it is an Abridgment, and
contains the substance of all, and repeats, and in one word, prays the whole
prayer over again.

. 19. The third part of the Close, is a kind of Exhortation or entreaty.

Ver. 22. And I beseech you, Brethren, suffer the Word of Exhortation; for I
have written a Letter unto you in few words.] IN these words, we have two
Propositions;

1. Paul had written unto them in a few words. 2. He beseeches or entreates
them to suffer the Word of Exhortation, which he had written in a few words
unto them.


1. That which he had written, and sent unto them in writing, was this Epistle;
and it is the largest Epistle of all the Epistles general of James, Peter, John,
and Jude; and of Paul's, except two; that to the Romans, and the first to the
Corinthians. Yet he terms it brief; and if we consider the hortatory part, it
is but brief, though the whole be somewhat large. If we consider the matter and
subject, it required a very large Discourse; yet he comprised much matter
concerning the Offices of Christ, both prophetical and facerdotal, in a few
words. For we find, that he omits many things, not only because of their
incapacity, but because he had confined himself to such things as were most
pertinent, necessary, and of greatest concernment. And by this his practice he
seems to condemn all such, as unnecessarily enlarge their Discourses upon a
certain distinct subject by impertinent, needless; and sometimes empty and
unprofitable Digressions, as many of copious Inventions, and yet of no solid
Judgment, use to do.

2. Because his Discourse was brief and contracted, and not likely either to
oppress their Memory or confound their Judgment, he beseeches them as Brethren
(for that is his loving Compellation) to suffer it: He calls it a word of
Exhortation. By a Word, is meant an orderly, solid, and Methodical Discourse;
and by a Word of Exhortation may be understood a Discourse of Comfort, as the
Vulgar, Syriack, Arabic, turn the word, or of Reproof, Instruction,
Admonition: For the word may imply, if not directly signify, all; for Sermons
and whole Discourses had the Name of Exhortation, though we find in them many
other things. Howsoever the Apostle meant by the word the whole Epistle, which
in respect of the last part from Chap. 10. 19. is chiefly hortative and
consolatory. They must suffer this, so our Translators and some others turn the
word; which gave occasion to some to tell us, that Paul was more offensive to
the Hebrews than any other of the Apostles, because they were so much taken
with the Law and Ceremonies, to which they had been so long accustomed; and
therefore he both conceals his Name, and desires them to bear with this
Discourse, and not to be offended with it. But whether this was so or no, it is
certain that the word here used signifies not only to suffer and tolerate but
to receive, hear, and obey; and so certainly it must be taken here: For if they
did not thus receive his Doctrine and Exhortation with Attention and Obedience,
the Epistle had been in vain and unprofitable unto them. And whereas he might
have commanded them as Inferiors, and subject to his Apostolical Power, yet in
his Wisdom he thought good to entreat them as Brethren. And this might the
rather persuade them, because his Discourse was brief, and contained much
profitable and necessary matter in a few words: This implies, 1. That it is our
Duty to receive the Word of God readily, and with all Attention, and with
Thankfulness of heart, because it is so great a Blessing. 2. Yet such is our
Corruption and depraved disposition, that a short Discourse though full of
heavenly matter is tedious to us, and we are soon weary of it: But profane and
wicked Persons will not endure it.

. 20. The fourth thing is Information concerning Timothy,

Ver. 23. Know ye that our Brother Timothy it set at liberty, with whom, if he
come shortly, I will see you. THis was Intelligence and good News; the Subject
of it was Timothy and himself. Of Timothy he delivers,

1. That he was set at Liberty. 2. Gives some hope that he would come shortly.


Of himself he promises, upon condition of Timothy's speedy coming to them,
that he would

1. Come with him. 2. See them; so that there was some hope that they might see
both him and Timothy together, and enjoy their blessed Society.


1. Timothy was set at Libetry: Who this Timothy was, both by Birth, Education,
Office, and Employment, we we may easily understand from the Acts of the
Apostles, Paul's Epistles, and especially from two written and directed to him
in particular: He was a Jew by his Mother, a Christian by Paul's Conversion of
him, a Minister of the Gospel, an Evangelist, and an Assistant unto Paul in the
Work of the Ministry; and though he was but young, yet he was eminent and
famous in the Churches planted by Paul, a Person of Integrity and Fidelity.
This Timothy was set at Liberty; which implies, that he was bound imprisoned,
or some ways restrained of his Liberty; but where and how, is not expressed in
Scripture: Yet now he was set at Liberty, God had delivered him out of the
hands of his Enemies, and they must know it as a matter of Joy and Comfort. It
was a sad thing that such a Man as Timothy, so faithful, so serviceable, to
Paul and the Church of God, should be restrained; and he knew, that to hear and
have certain Intelligence, and from him, that he was released, must needs
comfort and rejoice their hearts: So also we, when we hear of the Liberty and
Peace of the Church, and especially of pious and eminent Ministers, should be
glad and should render Thanks unto our God, for so great a Mercy.

2. Yet there was a further degree of Comfort; for he gives them hope, that as
Timothy was ser at Liberty so he would come unto them shortly, and would see
them, and give them a Visit in his own Person. And not only Timothy, but he
himself would come with him, and see them together with him, that they might
mutually comfort and rejoice one another; and this Meeting and Society would be
sweer. To hear of their Liberty was good News, but to be certified of their
speedy coming together to see them was better: God's Servants cannot always
converse together on Earth, that Happiness is reserved for Heaven; yet their
hearts do rise and much rejoice, when they can see and enjoy one anther, though
but for a time.

. 21. The fifth part of the Close of this Letter is spent in Salutations,

Ver. 24. Salute all them that have the Rule even you, and all the Saints. They
of Italy salute you. THE Saulutations are,

1. Of Paul. 2. Of them of Italy.


For Paul and they of Italy were the Persons saluting; and their Guides and the
rest of the Saints were the Persons saluted. True and hearty Salutations are an
Expression of our Love and good Affection toward the Persons saluted; and they
are either of Persons present or absent. When we salute Persons present, we
express our Affection by words of Peace, Health, Happiness, and by
Embracements, or Kisses, or both, according to the Custom of the Time and
Places: But when Friends are absent, we signify our good desires by Writing, or
words of Messengers, and so embrace one another at a Distance. There are some
who are not capable of Salutation, to whom we must not say, God speed, 2 John
10. Some are capable, but not of a Christian Salutation, because not capable of
spiritual Grace and Peace in Christ: Yet these Salutations are Christian, 1.
From Paul a Christian to the Hebrews Christians. 2. From the Saints and
Christians of Italy to the Saints and believing Hebrews. Paul is the first in
sending Salutations; the Persons by him saluted are, 1. Their Guides or
Ministers, put in the first place because of their Office and Eminency. 2. The
People, which by Profession of Faith in Christ, their Baptism, and Society with
the Church, were Saints. The Persons saluting in the second place, and that by
Paul, were they of Italy, that is, their Brethren, Saints, and Believers in
Italy, and of the Church of Churches in Italy; the Persons saluted are the same
saluted before. To salute anciently amongst the Jews and Israelites was to wish
Peace; under the Gospel, Grace and Peace. The Syriack turns these words, Desire
ye the Peace of your Guides, etc. but he is singular. These Salutations, though
good in themselves, are much abused, and made words of Course and Custom, or
turned into Complements devoid of real and hearty Love.

. 22. The last part of the Conclusion is a Benediction in these few words,

Ver. 25. Grace be with you all. Amen. THis is so a Salutation, as that it is a
Benediction pronounced with Apostolical Power, and was effectual upon all such
as are capable. This is a Benediction proper to Paul, and usually if not
always written with his own hand (which then was well known in many Churches),
though the Epistle it self might be written by some other, whom he used for his
Scribe. It is so proper unto him, that we find it used by none other of the
Apostles, neither James, nor John, nor Peter, nor Jude: Only John does conclude
and shut up the Revelation with it; but that was not written with Paul's own
hand: And by this in those times this Epistle might certainly be known to be
his. We use to salute one another at our first Meeting, and also at our
Parting, which latter is called a Valediction. So Paul in all his Epistles,
excepting this, begins with Grace and Peace, and that is his Salutation; and he
ends this as all the rest with Grace, and this is his Valediction and
Benediction. This Benediction we find sometimes briefer, sometimes larger, and
the largest of all closes up the second Epistle to the Corinthians; and we
must know that the briefest contains all the matter of the largest though not
expressly. The usual Blessing both of old and of latter times is, The Lord be
with you: For if the Lord be not against us, but for us, and with us, we must
needs be so far happy; yet the Lord may be with us, and in Mercy many ways;
but to be with us in the Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ is the highest and
happiest degree of God's presence tending to our eternal Bliss. Therefore the
Apostle's Blessing is, The Lord be with you all greater Blessing than this
there cannot be: By Lord, is meant Jesus Christ, our God-Redeemer; whom the
Father out of greatest Love sent to save us; in whom and by whom we receive all
spiritual Blessings, which are signified by Grace, which presupposes here the
Love of the Father, the Redemption by Christ, and the Communion of the Spirit:
the Effects of all which in us is Remission, Reconciliation, Adoption,
Sanctification, heavenly Joy and Comfort: For this Grace is sufficient to make
us in time, though by degrees, fully and for ever happy: And by Grace here is
meant the continuance, increase, and perfection of Grace. This Grace he
desired; prayed for, and pronounced upon, them all as Believers; for none but
such are capable of it. Amen is added to Petitions, Doxologies, Confessions,
and Benedictions; as here it is to confirm his Benediction, and to seal it up
unto them.

The God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ be blessed for ever.

FINIS.

