MAGNA CHARTA Ecclesiae Universalis: THE Grand Charter Issued out and Granted
by JESUS CHRIST FOR THE Plantation of the Christian Faith In all NATIONS.

Registered and Enrolled,

Mat. 28. 18, 19, 20. Chosen for the subject of the ensuing Discourse.

By GEORGE LAWSON, Rector of More in the County of Salop.

The Second Edition, Corrected.

LONDON: Printed by T. M. for Jeremiah Lawson; And are to be sold by Tho.
Newborough, at the Star in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1686.

IMPRIMATUR,

Caroulus Alston, R. P. D. Hen. Episc. Land. a Sacris.
Martii 22. 1685/6:
THE PREFACE.
THough it be no ways needful to usher in this little Treatise, with a Preface
or Epistle, yet I will premise a few things concerning the occasion, matter,
method, use, and end thereof. When I considered the multitudes amongst us, who
profess their Faith in Christ, own the name of Christian, and seem to glory in
that title, and yet are ignorant, not only of the original and ground of
Christianity, but of the very first Principles and Rudiments of Religion, and
also highly guilty of the breach of that Covenant, whereby they solemnly in the
sight of men and Angels bound themselves to be loyal and obedient unto Christ
their Savior, I thought it might be a service acceptable to God, and
profitable unto the Church, to mind them of their sin, and give them some
directions, with an exhortation to amend betimes, that so they may avert Gods
judgments, and escape the wrath to come; therefore I took occasion to single
out this Text, compose this brief Treatise, submit it to the judgment of the
Church, and upon approbation make it public: And first I bring the Reader into
the sacred Arches, where the Monuments of eternal saving truth are kept; and
show him the very place, where the grand Charter of our profession is enroled;
for we find it in the words of our blessed Savior, related by the Evangelist
St. Mat. chapter 28. v. 18, 19, 20. Where we have a commission issued out from
Christ to his Apostles and Successors, and the same grounded upon a far higher
Patent, whereby all power in heaven and earth is derived immediately from his
heavenly Father, and given unto him: And seeing (as Tertullian observes) we
receive our Christian Religion and Faith from the Apostles, the Apostles from
Christ, and Christ from God, it must needs be from heaven: and here we should
take special notice of, and admire the excellent wisdom of Christ our Lord and
Savior, as far above all the wisdom of men and Angels, who could in so few
words, and in such excellent order contract so many high mysteries and matters
of greatest weight and concernment: for here' in a very narrow compass we may
find the ( Credenda) all the Articles of our Faith, and the ( Agenda) all the
commands of Christ: Here we have the original Creed, and perfect form of
Confession, which was the ground of all the ancient and Apostolical Creeds:
here we have the sum and substance of all that excellent Doctrine, which is
dispersed here and there through all the Books of Moses, the Prophets,
Evangelists, and Apostles. Here we have the institution of sacred Orders for
the dispensation of Word and Sacraments, and the application of the benefits of
Redemption. Here we have the institution of Baptism, with a certain form of
words; the Eucharist and Prayer as parts of Divine Worship are to be reckoned
amongst the commandments of Christ: So that here is a Rule of Faith, of
Obedience, of Worship, and something of Discipline implied. All these things I
make clear, and then proceed to say something of that form of Confession we
call ( The Apostles Creed,) and of the principal points of Scripture in order
to the same; teach the Reader how to refer the several parts and passages of
Scripture unto the general heads of the Creed, and reduce the matters of Faith
into a form of a larger Confession. This I conceived a ready way to understand
the public Catechism, so much despised by many, to improve our knowledge of
the Word of God, and of the particulars of that Faith, which by our Baptism we
are bound to hold and profess unto the end. After this I go on to the ( Agenda)
the Commandments of Christ, and show how they are in several parts of Scripture
contracted, how all are performed in Love; give a more full explication of the
moral Law, which is to be understood Evangelically, as including Repentance and
Faith in Christ, and then bring them into the form of a Vow, that so we may
have a more explicit knowledge of the last part of our promise made to God in
Baptism; be more sensible of our obligation, and more careful of performance,
and obedience, formerly urged upon most effectual reasons. Amongst the (
Agenda) I reckon the Sacraments and Prayer; and after I have declared the
nature, end, and use of the Sacraments from the Institution, I single out that
Prayer of Prayers, the pattern of all our Devotions, which is commonly called
the Lords Prayer: and having explained it in all the parts, I reduce the
particulars into a larger form of Prayer: The former makes it clear how
comprehensive and methodical it is, as being a wonderful abridgment of all
Scripture Prayers; the latter teaches us how to reduce all the parts of our
public Prayers unto the heads thereof, and to enlarge upon them in our private
Devotions. Somethings in my ( Theopolitica) are here repeated; yet they are but
few, and are here improved; handled there more largely, here more briefly;
there in one manner, here in another, and for another use and immediate end.
Here I single out a certain Text, and confine my self unto it, and fit it to
the capacity of the common sort, and weaker Christians, for whom it was
principally intended. I further conceived, that many who will not meddle with a
greater Volume, may yet buy a lesser Book, or Manual, such as this is, and read
it through. Now if after these, and many other helps, we continue ignorant, or
if not ignorant, yet impenitent, we shall render our selves highly guilty of
Rebellion against Christ's Power, of Disobedience to his Commands, and of
perfidious violation of the Covenant of God: but if we diligently use the
means, and exercise the power God has given us, and pray continually for
Grace, there is comfort, and hope of mercy; for here we have a promise, That
Christ will be present with the Church unto the end, and assist us with his
blessed Spirit; to whom, with the Father and the Son, be given all Glory,
Honor, Praise, and Thanks, for ever and ever.

Amen.
Matthew 28. 18, 19, 20. And came and spoke unto them, saying, All power is
given unto me in Heaven and in Earth.

Go ye therefore, and teach all nations, baptizing them in the name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.

Teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you; annd lo
I am with you always, even unto the end of the world, Amen.


CHAP. I. Of Christ's Universal Power.
Section 1:
THese are the words of our blessed Savior, which he spoke unto his Apostles
and Disciples, when after his Resurrection he was ready to ascend into Heaven;
for they pre-suppose Man's Sin, Christ's Suffering, and his Resurrection; Man
by sin had made himself miserable, and liable to temporal and eternal death;
yet God was willing to deliver him: Sin and Satan cast him down, yet God in his
abundant mercy was pleased to raise him up again. The way which his eternal
Wisdom had contrived to effect this great deliverance was strange and
wonderful; his only begotten Son, even that word which was God, and by which he
made the world must be made flesh, and assume the nature of man, and in that
nature must take upon him the form of a servant, be obedient unto death, the
death of the Cross, rise again, and be advanced to the highest pitch of glory:
so that the means of man's salvation are the humiliation and exaltation of the
Son of God. By his humiliation and sacrifice of himself he expiates man's sin,
satisfies Divine Justice, and merits all mercies and blessings necessary for
the full and eternal happiness of man. By his exaltation he makes his
sufferings effectual, and communicates the benefits he had merited; for we
read, That he was delivered for our offenses, and was raised again for our
justification, Romans 4. 25. To be delivered for our offenses was his humiliation
unto death for our sins, to render them pardonable. To be raised again for our
justification, was his exaltation for the obtaining of actual remission: his
humiliation begins, his exaltation consummates our salvation. For being
advanced to the right hand of his Father, he sends down the Holy Ghost, reveals
the Gospel, causes it to be preached to all Nations, and by his Word and
Spirit converts man, and plants the heavenly virtue of Faith in his heart; and
upon Conversion and Faith makes intercession in Heaven, and procures his actual
pardon, reconciliation with his God; and in the end the enjoyment of eternal
glory: so that without his humiliation man is not savable, and without his
exaltation he is not actually saved. And thus we must understand that of the
same Apostle; For if when we were enemies we were reconciled to God by the
death of his Son, much more being reconciled shall we be saved by his life,
Romans 5. 10. where we must observe, That the death of Christ is his humiliation,
his life is his exaltation. 2. That reconciliation is ascribed to his death,
salvation to his life. For the Death and Blood of Christ was the propitiation
for our sins, and the foundation of our reconciliation: the life and exaltation
of Christ by his Word and Spirit converting us, and making intercession for us,
is the cause of actual salvation.

Sect. 2.
As in the two former Chapters we may read of Christ's suffering, death, and
humiliation, whereby he mirited incomparable mercies and blessings; so in this
we read of his resurrection, and the manner how he will apply and communicate
his blessings, and that is by a commission and power received, and a commission
and power given; for the subject of the words are a twofold commission.

The first granted by God to Christ, The second by Christ to his Apostles.

These agree in some things, differ in others. 1. They agree as commissions
giving great power. 2. As expressing an unspeakable love unto, and a tender
care of sinful man. 3* As issuing from the supreme and universal Lord. 4. As
tending to the same end, man's eternal salvation: yet they differ in these
things. 1. The former commission is granted by God immediately to Christ; the
latter is granted from God by Christ unto the Apostles. 2. The former is the
cause of the latter, the latter an effect of the former. 3. By the former
Christ receives an universal power in heaven and earth; and by the latter the
Apostles receive only a limited power on earth.

Sect. 3.
I will not say much of the first commission expressed in these words, Ver. 18.
All power in heaven and earth is given unto me. Wherein he signifies that he
had large power, and it was given him; where we must consider, 1. Power given.
2. The party to whom it was given. 3. The donor, or the Donation of it from the
Donour.

In the power we may observe, 1. The nature and quality of it. 2. The measure
of it.

1. For the nature and quality of it, it is spiritual and divine; for Christ
said, My kingdom is not of this world, John 18. 36. That is, its no secular
power like that of the Princes of the world; its far more excellent and above
it in respect of the subjects, the laws, the judgments, the end thereof. The
subjects besides Angels are men considered in a spiritual notion, and as
capable of an eternal estate. The Laws also are spiritual, and bind not only
Angels, but the immortal souls and consciences of men. Such are the judgments
which determine and accord not only temporal but eternal punishments and
rewards. The end in respect of all loyal and obedient subjects, is eternal
peace and felicity: for God gave Christ power over all flesh, that he should
give eternal life to as many as he had given him, John 17. 2.

2. The measure of this power is extensive, and intensive. Extensive in respect
of the territory which is very large, even the whole world; whereof there be
two parts, heaven and earth; so that it extends to all places, and all things,
and so is universal; yet the principal subjects are Angels in heaven, and men
on earth, both intellectual and immortal creatures. Intensive: for its (all)
power; one may have some power, or all power on earth, and none in heaven, or
some, or all power in heaven, and none on earth; but this is all power in
heaven, all power on earth, all power on both; so that Christ is over all
persons, in all causes supreme Governor, without any created superior,
without any competitour, without any partner; its all in the highest degree
invested and inherent in one. This is concernig the power.

2. The person invested with it is Christ; For all power (says he) is given to
me: it was not given to any Angel, or Angels, nor to any Monarch, or Monarchs
of the world, but to Jesus of Nazareth, a man nearer to God then any of the
Princes of the earth, or any Principalities and Powers of heaven; one more
beloved of God, and who had done a greater service than any other; for he had
humbled himself at his Fathers command so low as to be a servant, and a servant
obedient unto the death of the Cross; therefore he, and none other, was thus
highly exalted, and received a name above every name.

3. The Donour was God the Father. As none but Christ was capable, none was
worthy of this transcendent power, according to that universal acknowledgment
of Saints and Angels; Rev. 5, 10. The Lamb slain was worthy to receive power,
and riches, and wisdom, and strength, and honor, and glory, and blessing. And
as he was only worthy, so God his Father alone was able to give so great power:
for it was given; which implies, that Christ as man had it not of himself: it
was not an original and primitive, but a delegate and derivative power. 2. He
was no usurper, he did not glorify himself; he had a fair and clear title by
donation from the universal, supreme, and eternal Sovereign, who might justly
dispose of it as he pleased; he was decreed to this place from of old, designed
to it from his Birth and Conception, and began to act in it after his Baptism.
But upon his resurrection he was declared more solemnly to be King and Priest.
The words of the decree and patent were these, Psalm. 2. 7, 8. Thou art my Son,
this day have I begotten thee: for then God set him his King upon his holy hill
of Zion, and gave him the heathen for his inheritance, and the uttermost parts
of the earth for his possession. And as by these words he was made King, so by
the same he was made Priest: for so we read, Heb. 5. 5. He glorified not
himself, nor took upon him to be high Priest, but he was made such by him who
said, Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee. This day is the day of
resurrection; and for God to beget him that day, was not only to raise him from
the dead, but to create him universal King and Priest: When he was ascended
into heaven, he was set at the right hand of God, took more full possession of
his Kingdom, and by oath was confirmed an eternal Priest* and from that time
began to exercise his universal power, to command the Angels, and to rule over
men.

Sect. 3.
The end wby Christ signified unto them the receiving of this power, was, 1. To
let them know that now in part he had received his glorious reward for his deep
humiliation, and great service performed upon the Cross, and the time of his
full glorification was at hand; and that suffering was the way to glory. 2.
That he had full power to grant them a large commission; and therefore as his
Father sent him, so he sends them: and as he could, so he would make good
whatsoever they did according to this patent: for upon this universal power
received by Christ depends the ministry of the Gospel: and the efficacy of Word
and Sacraments, which must continue unto the worlds end: and by virtue thereof,
the Apostles and their successors, shut and open the gates of heaven; and what
they bind or loose on earth, is ratified in heaven: and this is the great
comfort to the universal Church, and especially to the Ministers thereof, that
the blessed Lord and Savior who has made so many and great promises, is
enabled by this great power to make them all good.

Chap. 2. Ver. 19. Of Christ's mandate.
Sect. 1.
NOw follows the second commission granted by Christ unto his Apostles, wherein
we have the institution of the Ministry for the dispensation of Word and
Sacraments tending to the conversion, edification, and eternal salvation of
sinful man: and in the text with the words following three things are
observable.

1. The party granting the commission. 2. The parties to whom its granted. 3.
The parts of it.
1. The party granting it is Christ, as risen from the dead, having received
all power in heaven and earth, and ready to ascend into heaven, that he might
send down the Holy Ghost to enable the persons commissioned more fully to
discharge their trust.

2. The parties to whom it was granted were first the Apostles, and in them all
Ministers lawfully called to succeed them in the dispensation of the Word and
Sacraments.

3. The parts of the commission are two. 1. A mandate. 2. A promise.

1. The mandate we have in these words, Go teach all nations, baptizing them in
the name of the Father, and the Son, and the Holy Ghost, teaching them to
observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you.

This mandate in respect of the matter has four parts.

1. They must go to all Nations. 2. They must preach and disciple them. 3. They
must baptize them in the name of the Father, and the Son, and the Holy Ghost.
4. They must teach them to observe all the commandments of Christ.
The promise also for the matter is twofold; for Christ engages himself unto
them for, 1. His presence and assistance, I will be with you. 2. The
continuance of his presence and assistance: for he will be with you to the
worlds end.

The mandate did give them power, and bound them to exercise it: The promise
did encourage to go on with the work, and gave them hope of success. The
mandate bound them to Christ, the promise bound Christ to them. The words of
the mandate and promise may be reduced to three propositions, or divine axioms.

The 1. Christ grants a commission to the Apostles.

2. In this commission ^se commands them to go, disciple, baptize, teach all
Nations.

3. He promises certainly to be with them always unto the worlds end.

The 1. (Christ grants a commission to the Apostles) is to be handled briefly,
to make way for the enisung discourse. A commission issuing out from some
eminent power has two effects for it.

1. Gives authority and power to the party commissioned. 2. Binds to exercise
that power according to the instructions given.
This Authority and the obligation usually follow upon a Mandate; for when God
or higher powers command any under their power to do any thing expressed in the
mandate, then the party commanded has not only power, but is bound to do it;
when Christ therefore as universal Lord and Sovereign had signified his will
and pleasure unto the Apostles, and expressed what their work was, this
signification was not only a sufficient warrant for the dispensation of Word
and Sacraments in the administration of his heavenly Kingdom, but also bound to
the performance of their duty. And now if they do any thing specified in the
mandate, it must needs he valid according to the Constitution of the universal
Empire, and they must be indemnified as no ways guilty of presumptuous
usurpation or intrusion into their Office. And if they be diligent and faithful
in their place, and perform their duty, they may make a good account, and
expect a reward. By virtue of this mandate the Apostles received an
extraordinary, and all Ministers duly qualified, elected, approved, an ordinary
power. And its a great comfort and content unto a Minister, when he can truly
say, and his conscience testify it; I did not go before I was sent; and the
word of the Lord came to me before I did presume to declare it to others. I did
not assume power before it was given me; neither have I done any thing for*
which I have not my Masters command. As Christ gave, so the Apostles received
this commission; yet this was not the first, for Christ had formerly sent them
and consined them to the lost sheep of Israel; but now he enlarges their
patent, and they must go to all Nations. And here its observable that when he
sent them first to the Jews only, he gave them not only authority but the
ability of Apostles, and when he sends them the second time 20. 21, 22. he
breaths upon them saying, Receive ye the holy ghost, and commands them to stay
at Jerusalem till the spirit from on high should be poured upon them, which
should fully enable them for the discharge of their high office; for they
received and were endued with all heavenly wisdom, and the knowledge of
languages and all other gifts requisite for their place. Christ did in this
proceed by degrees; first, he makes them Disciples, then Apostles, then
Messengers fit to be sent unto all Nations: and he never required any thing at
their hands but according to their ability, which he had given them* Humane
commissions if rightly granted, do not make the persons to be commissioned able
and rightly qualified, but find them such. And though men may choose and advance
insufficient and unworthy persons, yet Christ never did so; but if they be not
fit, he makes them able before he sends them or puts them in office; otherwise
he knows power should be given in vain* for though they should be very willing,
yet they shall not be able to do their duty. Therefore if God send any man,
there will be found in him not only authority but ability too. Let no man
therefore take upon him the charge of a Minister except he find himself
qualified; for insufficiency in any person is evidence enough that God never
intended him for his service in this kind. As the mandate presupposing ability
as necessary, gave authority; so it did induce an obligation of the person
commanded to do his work. Therefore the Apostles receiving a command for to
perform the works proper to their place and office, were not at liberty, but as
they had received power so they must exercise it; otherwise they cannot be
faithful to their trust, nor make any good account, nor expect a reward; nay,
they will be guilty and liable to punishment. This Paul being constituted an
Apostle knew full well, and does confess it, saying, 1 Cor. 9. 16. ( A
necessity is laid upon me, and woe unto me if I preach not the Gospel) where we
may observe, 1. An obligation to preach the Gospel, and this a necessity from
the command. 2. Another obligation unto punishment, if he discharge not his
duty.

From this commission we may observe many things. 1. In respect of Christ. 2.
of Ministers. 3. Of People to whom they are sent; In Christ's giving this
mandate is manifested his great care of the Church, and his tender love to our
poor souls ready to perish. 1. He redeems us by his precious blood, and merits
unspeakable mercies for us. 2. Least this blood should be shed in vain, and
these mercies never imparted unto us, he giv^s commission to his Apostles and
Messengers, furnishes them with gifts, gives them authority and power, binds
them to dispense the Word, administer the Sacraments, and use all means which
he has appointed for our conversion, confirmation and eternal salvation, that
we in the end may attain the ultimate benefit of his death and passion; and be
fully and for ever saved. And woe unto them if they be not diligent and
faithful; for he will be highly offended with them, and require their blood at
their hands.

2. For Ministers, let them consider whether they have ability, and be rightly
qualified, before they enter upon the place, whether they have authority and be
sent, and if they take the charge upon them, let them remember their duty, and
the strict obligation that lies upon them. If they have not ability, Christ
never intended to trust them; they cannot discharge the place; if they have not
a clear call and mandate, they cannot expect his assistance, success or
comfort; if they neglect their duty, woe unto them; they shall be called to an
account, and shall be found more guilty then other men, and punished with more
grievous punishments; and they must know that the Office of a Minister is not a
place of ease, worldly honor, filthy gain, much less of tyranny over men's
consciences, and proudly domineering over Christ's flock.

3. As for the people, they must consider Christ's dearest love unto them,
highly esteem their Ministers in love for the works sake, hearken to their
Doctrine, obey their commands, follow their directions. And if they despise
them, they despise Christ who sent them; and shall severely be punished.

Chap. 3. Of Christ's command to go to all Nations.
Sect. 1.
THe second proposition is concerning the Mandate the 1. part of the
commission, and it is to this purpose: Christ commanded the Apostles to preach,
baptize, teach all Nations. And because this is a copulate compound axiom and
divisable into several simple axioms; therefore according to the four several
parts of the work and matter commanded, I will deliver them in four distinct
propositions which are these.

1. Christ commanded the Apostle to go to all Nations. 2. Christ commanded them
to teach all Nations to whom they went. 3. Christ commanded them to baptize all
Nations taught. 4. Christ commanded them to teach all Nations baptized to
observe all things which he had commanded them.
Before I enter upon these particulars, let me inform you. 1. That those
actions commanded are subordinate one to another, the first to the second, the
second to the third, the third to the last, For they must go that they may
teach or disciple: They must teach or disciple that they may baptize; they must
baptize that they may teach the parties baptized the observation of all Christ's
commands.

2. The general object of these actions is all nations; that is, the men of all
nations; the object of their preaching is the number of them in all nations who
hear them; the object of their Baptism are such as being taught are Disciples;
the subject or object of teaching are the baptized.

3. The whole work charged upon these Apostles and their successors is
reducible to the dispensation of Word and Sacraments.

4. That in these words we have a clear institution of the ministry, and
directions for Doctrine, Worship, and discipline Christian.

5. The end of the ministry is the application of Christ's Redemption; and of
his Redemption applied remission of sins and eternal life.

Sect. 2. The Proposition.
Christ commands his Apostles to go to all Nations.
Here is not determined the particular time and day when thy should begin the
work, what Nation or Nations they should first go unto; whether they should go
severally or jointly: whether they should do the whole work in their own
persons, or some of it by assistants qualified for that purpose, when their
work should be finished, whether in their own time, or much was to be left unto
their successors; yet these things though not here expressed are certain. 1.
They must go to all Nations, for none are excepted or excluded. 2. They must
begin at Jerusalem, and first tender salvation to the Jew. 3. They must begin
in this place immediately upon the receiving of the Holy Ghost, and the gift of
Languages. 4. They must go to other Nations as providence did direct them, and
the Spirit did reveal unto them. 5. They might go severally and have their
several assignations; yet so that sometimes two or more might go together, or
meet at the same place. 6. They might do and did many things by assistants. 7.
The principal work of the Apostles was to plant and lay the foundation of the
Christian Church and Religion. 8. Seeing the work could not be finished before
the Worlds end; therefore much must be left to their successors. 9. Christ did
not so limit himself to the eleven Apostles then present as that he could not
commission others and invest them with Apostolical power: for afterward St.
Mathias was substituted in the place of Judas, and St. Paul made a thirteenth
Apostle. 10. This universal power in respect of all Nations was not so limited
to the Apostles or any extraordinary Ministers, that the ordinary might not do
Christ service in the universal Church, or any Nation whether God should call
him according to the opportunity and ability which God should give him.

But to be brief and hasten to the principal part of the commission, I will in
this proposition briefly observe four things.

1. The preventing grace of God. 2. His enlarging mercy. 3. The benefits which
redound unto us thereupon. 4. Our duty to be performed in respect of this
grace, mercy, and those benefits.
Sect. 3.
1. The preventing grace of God appears in this, that the Nations did not pray
to God to send them, nor seek to the* Apostles to come unto them, nor did they
come unto the Apostles; but the Apostles were commanded to go to them, and did
go, and came to all Nations. They must not take their ease, and make Jerusalem
the place of their residence in one College, Consistory or palace there. They
must not stand upon terms of Honor, and send out their Edicts to cite and
summon the Nations to come unto them and appear before them. Its true, that
hitherto the Jew had taken State upon him; and because of Gods Election of that
City and the Temple, the Gentiles must assemble there, and appear before God in
that holy place* If thus he refuse to do, he must stand at a distance and
continue without Christ, without honor, without God in the World. If the
Gentile will not come over to the Jew, the Jew will not, must not go over unto
him. But the time of this dispensation was expired, and God will take another
course; and in his infinite mercy he will prevent the Gentiles of all Nations.
The Apostles must part asunder, take several ways; and with great labor,
peril, charge, visit the Nations of the World; and seek their souls in every
climate. And God by them did bring the Gospel, Christ and Salvation to their
doors; and offer Heaven and Eternity of bliss unto most unworthy wretches, who
never sought or thought of any such thing. Then began to be fulfilled, that
which was spoken by the Prophet long before. Esaias 65. 1. I am sought of them
that asked not for me: I am found of them that sought me not: I said, Behold
me, behold me, unto a Nation not called by my Name. The distance between God
and sinful man is very great: and would for ever so continue, if God should
deal with him in strict justice: nay, if he should not show him great mercy.
For man would never think of God as he ought, never desire him, never come unto
him, if God should not prevent him, call him and come unto him first. For man
will never seek his God, if God do not seek him first. For man's salvation must
begin in Gods free love and preventing grace, whereby he seeks him, finds him,
and finds him dead in sins and trespasses, and ready for to perish. This is
Gods preventing grace.

2. His enlarging mercy appears in that the Apostles must go not only to the
Jew, but to the Gentile; and not only to the Gentiles of some few Nations, but
of all; and seek to gather them into one body, and close them up into one fold.
For formerly his special mercy was confined to a single Nation, the people of
the Jews, the posterity of Abraham by Jacob, but now it must be extended to all
Nations, and to all sorts of all Nations* No Nation in particular by name is
excepted, excluded, or to be omitted and passed by. God for a long time
enclosed the Jew, and by a partition wall severed him from all Nations in
matter of Religion. His Oracles, his Covenant, the promise of Christ, the
sanctifying Spirit, and all the means of conversion were the privileges of
this people. But now Gods mercies will not be thus straightened and contained in
such narrow bounds The partition wall must be broken down, and his saving grace
will overflow these petty Banks, and like the Ocean compass the whole Earth.

3. But for what end must this mercy thus enlarge, and why must they go unto
all Nations of the Gentiles? They might have gone to denounce most fearful
judgments. For what could Idolatrous Apostates, who had forsaken their God who
made them, and every moment preserved them, expect but some fearful punishments
to be executed upon them. Yet such was Gods mercy toward them that they were
not sent to denounce judgment, but to proclaim an act of Eternal Indemnity and
Pardon of all their many grievous sins, and promise, and that upon fairest
terms, Eternal life. Therefore the benefit of this preventing grace and
enlarging mercy, which did redound to all people of all Nations, was very
great. They sat in darkness and the shadow of death under the power of Satan,
ignorant, blind, corrupted, hardened, without any means of conversion or hope of
salvation. But by the Apostles God sends unto them light, life, peace, joy,
comfort; Heaven gates are opened, Eternal Life offered, and Christ is very
willing and desirous to save us, and give us eternal bliss. O that men would
consider how great a mercy it is for God to come so near unto us, and put us in
a capacity of salvation. 1. This benefit would appear to be the greater, if we
would remember how unworthy we are. 2. The sad condition of others to whom God
never vouchsafed the light of the Gospel: without this preventing grace
Salvation is impossible to all; without this enlarging mercy impossible to
many, especially to us who live at so great a distance in a corner of the
World. But it has been so enlarged that it reached us, God has found us,
Christ is come unto us; and the heavenly light of saving truth does clearly
shine upon us; So that if we perish, we are deeply guilty, and the cause of our
own eternal misery.

4. If the benefit be so great, and so redounds to us that we have a great part
and share in it; then our obligation to thankfulness is very great. If we knew
our own unworthiness, and our woeful condition, the greatness of the benefit
would more clearly appear, and stir us up to thankfulness. Therefore lets
consider these things more seriously and acknowledge the benefit with all
humble thankfulness; use the means of grace vouchsafed unto us, and receive
Christ upon those gracious terms he is offered unto us. Shall God come so near
to us, and shall not we come near to him? Shall he seek us first, and we not
seek him? this were a grievous sin; and the highest degree of ingratitude. I
must needs tell you that to receive a message of eternal peace from heaven, and
not acknowledge so great a mercy, to enjoy the means of conversion, and not use
them, to have Christ offered and resist him, are the greatest sins, deserve the
greatest punishments, make salvation impossible, and damnation unavoidable.

Chap. 4. Of teaching all Nations, and of teaching in general, and the Matter
to be taught, and of Christian confession.
Sect. 1. The Second Proposition is this.
1. Christ commanded the Apostles to teach all Nations. AS they must go to all
Nations, so they must teach them, except they go, they cannot teach, therefore
this going as was formerly observed, is subordinate to this work of teaching
without which the former is in vain And as they were bound to the former, so
they were to this latter much more; and the persons to whom they must go, the
same they must teach. But for the better understanding of this Proposition, we
must enquire.

1. What this teaching is. 2. What Is the matter to be taught.
1. Teaching is a communicating our knowledge to others, and this done by
certain outward signs and expressions, which God has appointed for that end.
For he has given us the gift of speech and writing to signify our mind unto
others. To teach in St. Matthew and St. Mark is to Preach, which seems to be
somewhat more: But both imply, that they were endued with certain and
sufficient knowledge of such things as they must make known unto the Nations of
the World; and as their knowledge was certain, so Christ had promised the
Spirit for to guide them infallibly in their teaching and preaching, whether by
word or writing. And there was a special reason why Christ should thus direct
them: for their doctrine must be the rule of Faith and practice unto the whole
Church, not only for a time, but till time shall be no more. But to teach in
this place seems to be teaching with success, so as to cause the persons taught
to learn; that is, to receive their Doctrine, understand it, approve it, be
convinced of the truth of it, and be converted by it so far as to be made
Christians. Therefore some have thought fit to turn the place thus, Go and
Disciple all Nations, and the Persian translator so understands it. For he
makes this work to be a reducing of the whole World to the Religion and Faith
of Jesus Christ. Its true, that their Doctrine had not this success with all
persons to whom it was sent. For some opposed and blasphemed it, some heard it
and neglected it; to some it was foolishness, to others very offensive and a
scandal; but by virtue of the spirit it was to many the power of God unto
Salvation. This is teaching which must be not only private but public; they
must Preach. Preachers anciently were called amongst the Heathens (...)
Messengers from Heaven; and also public Officers employed by their Sovereigns
to signify their Will and Pleasure unto their sujects. Their work was to go
into all parts of their Dominions, and solemnly with a loud voice and sometimes
with sound of Trumpet to publish their Edicts, and let their subjects know
their Princes mind. But it its very likely the Evangelists took the expression
out of the Old Testament, and therein did allude to the Proclaiming of the year
of Jubilee, as may appear from the Prophet. Esaias 61. 1, 2. where the word is
used. In respect of this act the Apostles might be truly denominated
Messengers, Cryers, Public Officers; yet sent from Heaven and not from Earth,
From God and not from Men. They were eminent Officers of Christ's kingdom. Their
works was to Proclaim and publish his Laws, promise peace, persuade men to
Repentance and Faith, and so make them Subjects unto their blessed Savior and
Redeemer. This teaching both for the matter and manor was extraordinary,
wonderful and plainly Divine, was accompanied with the blessed spirit, and
wrought wonderfully upon the hearts of men, and had rare effects, and proved
the mighty power of God unto Salvation. This will be more evident from the

2. Thing, which is the matter commanded to be taught; which according to St.
Mark is in one word the Gospel, Mark 16. 15, 16. Go ye unto all the World, and
preach the Gospel unto every creature. He that believes and is baptized, shall
be saved; but he that believes not, shall be damned.

The matter therefore in general is the Gospel, in particular the Doctrine of
Christ, Faith, Baptism, and Salvation of Unbelief and Damnation. According to
Luke, Luke 16. 46, 47. its concerning Christ's suffering, Resurrection,
Repentance, Faith, Remission of sins. In this Evangelist its the Doctrine of
God the Father, who made heaven and earth, and so loved sinful man, that he
gave his only begotten Son for his salvation: concerning Jesus Christ who was
incarnate, suffered, died, rose again for our Resurrection; concerning the Holy
Ghost by the word converting us, making us capable of remission, and
sanctifying us to Eternal Life.

Sect. 2.
Thus we understand what teaching and preaching is. 2. What the Doctrine to be
taught; Now I will take the liberty to enlarge and manifest

1. That this is our Saviors Creed. 2. That its the ground of the Ancient and
Apostolical Creed. 3. That that which is called the Apostles Creed, is
agreeable unto this of our Savior. 4. That it is the abridgement of the
Scriptures.
1. This is our Saviors Creed delivered in these words unto his Apostles, as
the substance of the Doctrine which they must teach, and a form of Faith to be
professed by all such as by Baptism are to be solemnly admitted into the number
of his Disciples. Not that he had not often and more at large taught the same,
as we may read in his Sermons and conferences related by the Evangelists. I
will instance in one passage of his discourse with Nicod^mus. The words are
these, 3. 16. God so loved the World that he gave his only begotten Son, that
whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have everlasting life. This
Text begins with God, and ends with everlasting life, as many confessions do.
And therein we may observe. 1. God the Father who created the World, loving
sinful man. 2. His only begotten Son given to redeem us. 3. The Holy Ghost
regenerating us and working Faith in us; that by faith we may escape eternal
death, and attain eternal life. For this is the true and genuine sense of these
words; we read of many forms of faith and confession; some called Apostolical
related by many of the Ancients, and of the Nicene, Ephesine,
Constantinopolitan, Roman, Athanasian, and others; yet this is before them all,
above them all, the ground of them all, immediately divine, delivered by Christ
himself, recorded in holy Scipture; and therefore no unwritten Tradition. In
this respect Tertullian might well say that the Apostles had the rule of Faith
from Christ, and Christ from God. For from whom he received his power, from him
he received this Doctrine which he commands his Apostles to teach, and all
Nations to believe.

Sect. 3.
This is the ground of the ancient and Apostolical Creed delivered by the
Apostles to the Churches, which they planted, as by several of the first
Primitive Writers we are informed. For they for matter and method agree with
this, and in both are conformable unto it. The matter of them all is God the
Father, and the Son, and the Holy Ghost; and the method is to begin with the
Father, go on with the Son, and end with the Holy Ghost, though not in express
terms, yet by consequence. By which it appears they took their rise from these
words.

1. They begin with God the Father, and under this part bring in that first
great work of Creation.

2. They proceed to the Son the eternal word of the Father, who was made flesh
and redeemed mankind, created righteous and holy, and fallen in Adam.

3. They speak of the Holy Ghost, who as Tertullian expresses it, is (
Sanctificator fidei)* by whom Christ was conceived, the Prophets inspired, the
Church comforted. Diverse of them conclude with the final judgment wherein
Christ shall render to all such as being sanctified by the spirit do believe,
eternal rewards, and to the devil and wicked men eternal punishments; where we
must observe. 1. That creation extends to all things: for God created heaven
and earth, and all things therein. 2. Redemption reaches only man, for Christ
redeemed not the Angels, nor any other creature but sinful mankind. 3.
Sanctification is confined to the Church and the Elect people of God. So that
the Spirit sanctifies not all men but the Church; Christ reedeems man, but not
all creatures; God the Father creates all things and all persons. The first
part of the Creed concerning one God, is against all Atheists and Heathen
Idolaters. The second concerning the Son Jesus Christ is against all Mahumetans
and Unbelieving Jews. The third concerning the Holy Ghost is against all
Pelagians, enemies of grace and counterfeit Christians.

And here it is to be noted that the mystery of God the Father, and the Son,
and the Holy Ghost was never so clearly and distinctly made manifest, as it was
when the Father out of Love gave his only begotten Son, and sent him into the
World; and when the Son and eternal word was made flesh and redeemed man: and
when the holy Ghost descended in the likeness of a Dove, and rested upon our
Savior Jesus Christ and came upon the Apostles and sanctified believers.

Sect. 4.
After it has been manifested that in this Doctrine concerning God the Father,
and the Son, and the Holy Ghost. 1. We have Christ's own Creed, and 2. That this
was the ground of the ancient Apostolical Creeds and Confessions; it remains 3.
that I say something of that which is commonly called the Apostles Creed, which
we find in Ruffinus with an Exposition, and which is used in the Catechisms and
Liturgies of the Roman and reformed Churches. In this we may observe

1. That for the principal matter and method its grounded upon our Saviors
Creed, and exactly agrees with the ancient and primitive Confessions. For
therein we have three principal parts, the 1. Concerning God the Father and the
work of Creation of the world; the 2. concerning God the Son, and the work of
Redemption of man; the 3. concerning God the Holy Ghost and sanctification of
the Church and the Elect people of God. This appears by that brief contraction
of it in our public Catechism, which is a prime piece in this particular of
antiquity; and gives great light how to understand the confession, and implies
that it was grounded upon our Saviors Creed.

2. To understand this Creed the better, we must observe. 1. The object. 2. The
act of man about this object. 1. The object is God the Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost considered.

1. In himself. 2. In his works, which are 1. Creation. 2. Providence.

Providence where of there are two parts.

1. Preservation. 2. Ordination. 1. General of all. 2. Special of man,
especially as fallen. Of this special providence there be two principal branches
Redemption. Application.


Concerning the Redeemer two things are to be observable.

1. Who he is. 2. What Is his work. 1. He is Jesus Christ, who for person is the
only Son of God; for Natures God and man, and as man he was conceived by the
Holy Ghost, and born of the Virgin Mary: for Offices he is King, Priest, and
Prophet. 2. His work is that which we call Redemption, whereof two parts. His
Humiliation. His Exaltation.


His humiliation in that he taking upon him the form of a servant, suffered
under Pontious Pilate, was Crucified, dead, and buried, descended into Hell.

His Exaltation in his Resurrection. His Exaltation in his Ascension. His
Exaltation in his Session at the right hand of God. His Exaltation in his
Coming to Judgment.
The application of this Redemption has three things considerable.

1. The principal cause, which is the holy Ghost by the word working Faith in
us. 2. The subject to which this application is made, which is the holy
Catholic Church, the Communion of Saints, which is the number of believers. 3.
The effects of this Redemption applied.
Which are

1. Forgiveness of sins. 2. Resurrection of the body. 3. Life everlasting.
And here its to be noted,

1. That by the humiliation of Christ, and especially the death and sacrifice
of himself upom the Cross, these effects and blessings were merited, and in
consideration of the same were promised. 2. That God as loving us, Redeeming us
by Christ, and applying this Redemption by his Spirit, is the fountain and
cause of salvation and eternal happiness. 3. That God the Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost, as considered in himself and in his works of Creation, Redemption, and
Sanctification, is the principal object of the acts of this saving faith.
2. As these things are the object of our Faith, and the ( Credenda) so the act
is to believe. To believe is 1. To be certainly persuaded of the truth of these
things* as revealed by God, and certainly known to be so. For the ground of a
divine infallible faith, must be a divine Testimony known certainly to be
divine. 2. To rely upon God thus represented and believed as able and
promising eternal life unto sinful man upon fairest terms. 3. To profess this
our faith. God is the efficient cause by his Spirit of this faith; he is the
object, his word is the rule.

3. This faith we Protestants do profess, this faith they of Rome do profess;
and both agree not only in the words, but for the most part in the sense of
this Creed, as appears by the exposition thereof given in their Trent
Catechism. This is not so to be understood as though there were no errors in
that, except in these three particulars. For besides the many truths delivered
in that part of the Catechism, there are several errors intermixed, though none
of them so gross as these three.

1. In the manner of Christ's birth. 2. In the division of Hell into several
parts. 3. In the visible Headship of their Roman Pontif over the universal
Church.
Though none of these have any ground in Scripture or in the writings of purest
Antiquity, are no ways necessary or conducing to Sanctification and Salvation;
and are more like Fancies and Fables then any solid truth: yet we must be
condemned as Innovators, Heretics, Schismatics, as having no hope of
salvation till reconciled to their Church; and having no existence of a Church
before Luther: this is their charity, but this is our comfort; God will be
Judge, and they as well as we must be judged: and they cannot prove that by our
public Doctrine we have added any new Article to the Ancient, Catholic,
Apostolic Faith; nor rejected any matter of doctrine or practice which is
necessary or effectually conducing to salvation.

4. Though this form of confession be generally received amongst us; yet we
find in it two additions not expressed in many former Creeds.

1. Is the descent of Christ into Hell. 2. Concerning the holy Catholic
Church, the Communion of Saints.
Concerning the first its doubted,

1. When it was added to this confession. 2. What the sense and genuine meaning
of it is.
1. We find it not in many of the ancien^ and Apostolical forms of confession;
not in the Nicene, or Ephesiene, or Constantinopolitan Creed, nor yet in the
Roman. Therefore Ruffinus in his exposition of this Creed, confesses that this
article of Christ's descent into Hell is not found either in the Roman or
Oriential Creeds. Besides, some inform us that it is not found in genuine
Copies of Athanasius his form therefore some say, that it was brought in by a
Synod held at Aquileia.

2. As for the sense, its much controverted. For some will have the words to
signify no more then that he was buried* others, that Christ suffered in his
soul the pains of Hell; others that he passed into the estate and place of the
dead; others that in his soul he passed locally and substantially into Hell to
preach unto the spirits and souls there imprisoned. Thus Lib. 6. Ruffinus in
his exposition, thus Stromat. Clemens Alexandrinus, thus the first Reformers
wko in the time of Edward 6th. composed the Articles of Subscription; for which
they out of Clemens Alexandr. alleged the Text, 1 Pet. 3. 18, 19. yet that
explication was omitted in aftertimes, when the Articles were reduced to the
humber of 39. as now they are without any addition to the words of the Creed;
for the words of the Article are only these; As Christ dyed for us and was
buried, so also is it to be believed that he went down into hell.

The second addition is concerning the holy Catholic Church, the Communion of
Saints. For though there is no Creed but implies that there a number of people,
who being called do believe, and are partakers of the benefits of Christ's
Redemption, yet in many ancient forms we find no mention of these words. Yet
the sense of them is plain, and the matter clearly expressed in Scripture. The
occasion of the inserting of them might be the Schism of the Donatists (or some
others like them) who confined the Church to themselves at Cartenna in Africa,
and like many in our days refused Communion with any other Christian but of
their own party. Whereas the Article according to the Scriptures signifies that
the Church since this commission in my Text was put in execution by the
Apostles going into all Nations, and reducing many unto Christ, became
universal. And these reduced are all of them Saints; and though they be many
living at a distance without any interview or converse civil one with another;
yet they are but one Body, Society, Corporation under Christ their Head, and
have spiritual communion one with another in the same Faith, Sacraments, and
Spirit. This is against not only the Jew, but the Schismatical Donatist, and
also Rome it self as confining the term Catholic to her own party, and
engrossing the privileges of the universal Church, as though they did only
belong to her, who is but a little part or particle of the same.

Chap. 5. Showing how in this Doctrine of our Savior we have the abridgment of
the Scripture.
Sect. 1.
THe second proposition in the Mandate was, That Christ commanded the Apostles
to teach all Nations; after the explication whereof I did enlarge and undertook
to manifest four things.

1. That the Doctrine to be taught was our Saviors Creed. 2. That it was the
ground of all the Apostolical and ancient Creeds. 3. That the Creed commonly
called the Apostles is agreeable to this Doctrine. 4. That it is the abridgment
of the holy Scriptures.
This undertaking in respect of the first three things, according to my poor
ability I have performed; It remains I make good the fourth and last, which is
to make it evident that it is the abridgment of the holy Scriptures. To this
end I will

1. Acquaint you with the principal subject and parts of the Scripture
according to the method of the Creed. 2. Teach you how to refer the several
parts of the Scripture to those parts. 3. Reduce the whole to the form of a
confession.
1. The principal subject of the Scriptures is God, and therefore they are
called the word of God in writing: not only because in them God speaks to man,
and has revealed his mind, but also because they speak of God. So that he is
not only the efficient, but the Subject of the same. This most excellent
subject is represented in this Book of Books.

1. As he is in himself from everlasting to everlasting: 2. As he is the
univesal and supreme effiecient of all things out of himself.
1. As in himself he is represented as only one most perfect glorious
substance, wh^ always acting upon himself and contemplating himself produces a
word, which perfectly and fully represents himself and his own infinite and
eternal goodness unto himself; and so is infinitely and eternally enamoured,
delighted, and satiated with himself. For the Scriptures tell us, that he does
know and love himself from all eternity, and is infinitely and eternally
blessed in himself.

Sect. 2.
As he is represented the universal and supreme and efficient cause of all
things out of himself, the Scriptures inform us of 3 things

His Wisdom contriving All things His Will decreeing All things His Power
effecting All things
For God beholding himself and his Almighty power, and knowing that he could do
many great and glorious things out of himself, and that nothing was impossible
to him, did before the foundation of the world exercise 1. His Wisdom in
contriving, all things he was pleased to effect. 2^ His will in decreeing them
according to his Wisdom. 3. His power in effecting all things he had decreed.
In his Wisdom contriving we have the true Idea and model of all things, in his
Will decreeing, the certain and unmovable foundation of the future existence.
Thus all things being prepared before hand by the counsel of his will, when he
thought good, he issues out of himself with his Almighty executive power, and
begins to effect what he had thus contrived and decreed. And the works effected
are two.

1. Creation. 2. Providence.
1. Creation whereby he made, and that by himself alone this vast, stately,
magnificent, and stupendous pile and Fabric of Heaven and Earth, and all the
hosts thereof* which in all Nations in all times and places proclaims his glory
and his eternal power and Godhead. The stuff and matter was nothing, the
workmanship most curious, the work it self wonderful, the beauty was pure and
glorious, and the order excellent and far above all expressions of the tongue
of man. The principal and most noble creatures amongst all the rest were Men
and Angels immortal, intellectual and free creatures, created holy and
righteous and capable of Eternity felicity; when God finished this great work
and saw that all and every thing that he had made was very good, he cease
from this work of Creation and kept his Sabbath, which was a rest, not from all
working, but only from this first; for he did not leave his creatures to
themselves, but took care of all and every one, and continued to work though in
another kind, and is working still. For says Christ, Jo. 5. 17. My Father
works hitherto, and I work. For he did exercise his power in preserving and
ordering all things created. Hence the works.

Of Preservation. Of Ordination.
1. He preserves, supporteth all things made, and continues their being so
long as he will have them to enjoy their being, substance, virtues. For by him
all things do subsist. If he either withhold his hand, or stretch out to
destroy them, they perish and cease to be what they were.

2. Because all things were made in an excellent order, and had their ends for
which they were created; therefore he does not only preserve them, but directs
every thing unto its end. The principal subject of this Ordination are Men and
Angels and especially Men; and in the Ordination of men the principal work of
all was Redemption, which God before the world did decree, and in the beginning
of the world upon the fall of man did promise, and in fullness of time issued
out of himself by his eternal word made flesh to redeem man performed. And so
we come unto the second part of our Saviors Creed infolded in the word (Son.)
For as we have the most glorious being of God, his eternal acting upon himself
with the great and excellent works of Creation and providence employed in the
word (Father) so we must understand by this word (Son) God the word made flesh
redeeming sinful man.

In this part of providence the Scriptures inform us.

1. Of the person Redeemed. 2. Of the party Redeeming. 3. Of the work of
Redemption. 1. The party redeemed is sinful man, who being tempted by the
Devil, sinned and fell into a miserable condition; yet God pitied him and
entertained thoughts of his deliverance, and did choose one who was mighty to
save. 2. The party redeeming was the word made flesh, anointed with the Holy
Ghost, so that for his person he was the eternal word and Son of God: for his
Natures nited in one person, and eternally distinct, which were his Godhead and
his Manhood; for his Offices they are three, for he was made a Prophet, a
Priest, a King, who as man was coceived by the Holy Ghost and born of the
Virgin Mary. This was the way whereby the word was made flesh. 3. The work of
Redemption, which was begun in his humiliation, and accomplished by his
exaltation. For the Scriptures tell us that it was the will of God according to
the contrivance of his wisdom, that his eternal Son made flesh should so humble
himself in this flesh assumed as to become a servant; and in that low estate be
obedient unto death, the death of the Cross; which he suffered with greatest
patience in obedience to his heavenly Fathers command, for to expiate the sin
of man. This he did as a Priest, sacrificing himself unto God the supreme
Judge; and by this offering he so pleased God and was so much accepted, as that
by his own blood he entered the holy place of heaven, and obtained eternal
Redemption, purged the conscience from dead works, and confirmed the new
covenant for ever. By this Bloody sacrifice of his Consecration he satisfied
divine justice, and merited all mercies necessary for the eternal salvation of
man. That this Redemption might be complete, he that was humbled so low, was
advanced as high, and the degrees of this advancement and exaltation were, 1.
His Resurrection. 2. His Ascension into Heaven, to sit at the right hand of
God, to exercise all power in heaven and earth till all enemies be subdued, and
then he shall come to the universal judgment of the quick and the dead.


When Christ was set at the right hand of God, and confirmed in his everlasting
Priesthood, the Scriptures inform us that to make his sacrifice and death
effectual, and communicate the blessings which he thereby had merited, he first
sends down from heaven the holy Ghost. God from the beginning, and the first
promise of a Redeemer, issued out of Eternity to sanctify sinful man; but when
the great high Priest had offered his great sacrifice, and rose again, and was
established in his Throne at his right hand, this spirit was poured out in
great abundance upon all flesh, reveals the Gospel, makes it effectual upon the
hearts of men, converts them, by faith, ingrafts them into Christ; upon his
intercession regenerates them, sanctifies, adopts them, raises them up at the
last day, makes them fully holy, and fills them with eternal joy before the
face and Throne of God for ever. All this is to be understood in the last word
of this Creed (the Holy Ghost) who is thus represented to us in the Scriptures
of God.

Sect. 3.
Yet here its to be observed. 1. That though Creation and Providence be
attributed, and as it were appropriated unto the Father; yet the Father does
neither create, nor preserve, nor govern the world but by the Son and by the
Holy Ghost. 2. That though the work of Redemption be appropriated to the Son
and the word made flesh, yet this work also was from the Father by the Son, and
not without the Holy Ghost to whom the Conception and Incarnation of Christ is
ascribed. 3. That though Sanctification and the eternal glorification of sinful
man redeemed be appropriated to the Spirit; yet this work also is from the
Father and the Son both, doing this by the Spirit. The order of their working
is evident, the distinct manner is hidden and more Mysterious.

4. The beginning of man's salvation is from the love of the Father giving
Christus the progress is in the Son given and made flesh; the consummation is
by the holy Ghost sanctifying man redeemed.

5. If man had not been created, he had never been; if he had been created and
then fallen and not been redeemed, he had been for ever miserable; if he had been
redeemed and not sanctified, Redemption had been in vain to him, and his
eternal ruin hand been unavoidable. This is the pith and marrow of the
Scriptures, as they who read them with due consideration may understand; and
the whole sum and substance of it is wonderfully abridged, secretly couched,
and methodically disposed in these few words, of (God the Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost.)

Sect. 4.
Yet to make this more Clear, I will proceed to the reducing of the principal
Doctrines of the Scriptures unto these several heads of the Creed. To this end
I will 1. Take my Topics disposed in a certain order out of the Creed. 2.
Inform you what places of Scripture must be referred to these heads and
Topics. The general heads and Topics according to this our Saviors Creed are
three.

1. Concerning the Father. 2. Concerning the Son. 3. Concerning the Holy Ghost.
The more particular Heads of the first part are,

1. Gods Essence. 2. Gods Subsistence. 3. His Efficiency.
1. To the first of these we must refer all those Scriptures which speak of
Gods perfections and attributes, representing this most excellent and perfect
being: as his unity, infiniteness, immensity, eternity, his infinite and
eternal knowledge, wisdom, goodness, holiness, justice, mercy, power, glory,
bliss.

2. To the Subsistence must be referred such as speak of his eminent and
wonderful acting upon himself, as knowing himself, loving himself, delighting
in himself, of the Father begetting the Son, who is the word and brightness of
his glory, the express image of his person, produced and begotten from
everlasting, of the holy spirit breathed and proceeding from the Father and the
Son, and therefore called the spirit of the Father and the Son, of their being
one God, of their union and inexistence, whereby the Father is in the Son, the
Son in the Father, both in the Holy Ghost; the Holy Ghost in both, and
infinitely contented one with another.

3. Under efficiency we must bring in the exercise of his Wisdom, Will, and
Power in the

Creation of all things. Preservation of all things. Ordination of all things.
To the exercise of his Wisdom we must refer such places as speak of his
excellent and wonderful contriving and ordering all things within himself; to
that concerning the acts of his will such as speak of his thoughts, purposes,
decrees; and amongst these decrees those especially of Election and
Reprobation; whereby he predestined and ordered in himself according to his
free will, yet in justice and mercy, Men and Angels to their eternal estates:
to that of the exercise of his power, such as speak of his mighty strength,
according to which all things are possible unto him, nothing impossible.

4. These began to be exercised first in Creation, to which refer all such
places as speak of the first beginning and effecting of these things in the
first six days of the world, the order according to which, the end for which
they were made, the several kinds of creatures, their variety, their nature,
properties, and perfections, their unity whereby they make one body and systeme
of the world consisting of two chief places, Heaven and Earth with all their
ornaments, and the hosts of them; such as speak of the attributes and
perfections manifested in this work of the good will and pleasure of God which
moved God to make the world, of the power of God acquired unto himself thereby,
of the subjection of all things created unto him and their dependence upon him;
of the use men must make of the doctrine of this creation, which is to know God
by the things made and to worship him. But we must take more notice of such
places as speak of the creation, nature, qualities, place, function, employment
of Angels, and most especially such as inform us of the making of man, of his
body, soul, and union of both, the sex, the image of God in him, his excellency
and dominion over the creatures, the place prepared for his habitation and his
employment; of the creation of woman, the institution of marriage, and all
other things which did agree or belong unto men and Angels by virtue of their
creation.

5. To that Head of preservation we must reduce all such Scriptures as speak of
Gods supporting, upholding, maintaining, and continuing all things created in
their being; of the means which he uses to that end, and the ordinary and
extraordinary, mediate and immediate ways he takes in this work, how all
things live, move and have their being in him, who is in all creatures, in all
places, providing all things necessary for the continuance of their exsistence,
of deliverance of his creatures from destruction by preventing danger, or
removing destructive causes. The places which speak of wasting, consuming,
destroying man, beast, or any other creature either in some ordinary or
extraordinary way; by powerful or by weak and inconsiderable causes, or by
withdrawing his hand.

6. Under that Head of Ordination come such Scriptures as speak of the order
wherein God created all things, their ends, and his disposing and directing
every thing to his proper end, and all to the supreme and last; of the
subordination of creatures and their several ends to which they tend; of the
changing of this order by his extraordinary power and wisdom when and how he
pleases.

7. In this respect the Sea does not pass his bounds, the Stars and Lights of
heaven observe their order in their motion, and do that service for which he
made them; and all and every creature are at his command and beck to effect
what he requires; and so subject all things are unto him, that when he
pleases they must change their wonted order; the Sun must stand still, go
back, deny his light, the fire must not burn, nor the waters come together, but
must stand firm like a solid body. The Scriptures inform us that this part of
providence extends to all things, the least, to the falling of a sparrow upon
the ground, to the numbering of the very hairs of our heads. But chiefly to
this Head must we refer such places as speak of the government of Men and
Angels, of Laws, Obedience, Disobedience, Punishments and Rewards; of the
obedience of the blessed Angels, and their Confirmation in a state of holiness
and bliss, of the fall of the rest, and the wrath of God upon them, and their
irrecoverable misery.

Sect. 5.
The second general Head and Topic i^ that of the (Son) who redeems us. The
particulars considerable under this Hea^ are*

1. The party Redeemed. 2. The Redeemer. 3. The work of Redemption.
1. To that of the party redeemed, which is man, as sinful and guilty, we may
reduce such places as inform us of the first Laws both Moral and Positive,
which God gave man upon his creation; of man's obedience and comfortable
condition, and his hope of future happiness; of the fall and first sin of man,
of Satan's temptation, and temptation and sin in general what it is; what the
aggravations or attenuations thereof, what the consequents, especially shame,
fear, guilt, punishment; of the derivation of sin and death unto all mankind,
from Adam, the root and head of all his posterity, and of the sad condition of
man in respect of the first sin, upon which an inevitable ruin had followed,
if God had not prevented it.

2. The Redeemer; and hither refer such places as speak how God decreed and
promised a Redeemer and Savior, and all the Prophesies, Predictions, Types,
Shadows of him, such as inform us of his person as he is the eternal Word and
Son of God, of his Godhead, Manhood united, and the eternal distinction of
both; of his Offices Sacerdotal, Prophetical, Regal, of his Conception, Birth,
Life, of his Doctrine, Miracles, holy life and excellent virtues and the whole
history of the same as delivered by the Evangelists.

3. His work of Redemption, which has two parts.

Humiliation. Exaltation.
In his Humiliation we have his low estate suffering.

To that of his low estate may be reduced the Scriptures which speak of the
poverty and meanness of his Birth, as he was born in stable and laid in a
manger, of the poverty and mean condition of his Parents, his Circumcision,
Presentation in the Temple, his Infirmities as Hunger, Thirst, Weariniss, and
the like, which were without sin, and his mortality. To that of his suffering
refer the Texts concerning his Persecutions, dangers from the Contempt, malice,
envy and jealousy of Herod first, then of the Pharisees, Scribes, Priests,
Rulers of the Jews; of his Agony, Judas treachery, Peter's denial, and
principally such as represent unto us his death upon the Cross, and his
continuing under the power of death for a time; and in these sufferings of his
Pains, Cries, Tears, Complaints, and inward sorrows; of his Meekness, Patience,
Humility, Charity, Hope of glory, Considence in his Father, of his obedience to
the great command to suffer so many indigninities, such shame and curse, that
by his death he might make propitiation for the sin of man; and such as speak
of this death as a sacrifice propitiatory offered unto God as supreme Judge
offended by our sins, and that out of dearest love unto us, and a longing
desire to save us; of the eternal virtue and efficacy of the sacrifice so
highly accepted of God, and the rare effects of the same both mediate and
immediate; of the prodigies which fell out in the time of his passion and at
his death, of the Prophesies fulfilled in this humilitation, even to the
casting lots upon his seamless Coat, the piercing of his side, and the not
breaking of a bone.

His exaltation follows in his

Resurrection. Ascension. Session at the right hand of God, Coming to judgment.
To this Head of Resurrection may be reduced such Texts as spoke of the
Prodigies falling out near unto the same, the distinct time, the manner, the
manifestation of it, the persons to whom, the time where the places where he
was manifested, his abode upon earth for forty days, his converse with his
Disciples, his instruction given, his commission granted to the Apostles who
saw him. The use which is to be made of this Doctrine to that of his Ascension,
may be reduced such places as speak of the time when, of the places from which
and to which he ascended, the persons both Men and Angels who beheld it of the
end of this part of this exaltatio^ which was to be confirmed in his
everlasting Kingdom and Priesthood, and to exercise his power which he received
more solemnly upon his Resurrection, and to receive fullness of joy in his
Fathers presence and pleasures at his right hand for evermore, to make
intercession for such a^ come to God by him, and to prepare eternal mansions
for his Saints, and so be fully blessed for ever.

To that of his sitting at the right hand of God, refer those places which
speak o^ the super-eminency of his power above all men and Angels, and all
creatures, of his being the head of the Church, the administrator general of
Gods spiritual kingdom of the exercise of this power, and the wonderful effects
thereof in heaven and earth, and his abode in the place of glory, and the
continuance of his reign until all enemies be subdued.

To that of his coming to Judgment, refer such Scriptures as speak of the place
from whence he comes, the manner of his coming in the glory of the Father, in
flaming fire, with the attendance of all the holy Angels, the burning of the
world, the Archangel sounding his Trumpet, the Resurrection, whereby death the
last enemy is destroyed, the parties to be judged, their summons, appearance,
discovery of all their works, even the secrets of their hearts, the sentence of
him the universal Judge, the execution of the same in eternal punishments and
rewards, the delivering of the Kingdom up unto his Father.

Sect. 6.
The third and last Head is concerning the holy Ghost, in which we must observe

1. The Holy Ghost himself Vocation. Justification. Glorification 2. The
effects of this Holy Ghost in respect of the Churches

To the first reduce such places as inform us of his Divine Nature, Properties,
perfections and the Worship due unto him, of his relation to the Father and the
Son, of his working with them and from them, of his apparitions, of his resting
upon Christ, of the several Names and Titles given him.

As for the effects and works of this Spirit, we must know that he with the
Father and the Son is the universal cause of all things, for the Father and the
Son does all things by his Spirit; yet the Creed takes notice in this place
only of those works and operations which tend to the eternal salvation of man

The first whereof is Vocation.

To this Head refer all Scriptures which speak of the condition of man to be
called, as being blind, ignorant, senseless, perverse, guilty, not thinking of
any danger, not desiring, not seeking any remedy yet redeemed, and by
Redemption made saveable. For Redemption found man in no capacity of salvation;
vocation finds the foundation of his salvation laid. To this Topic also bring
such places as speak of preventing grace, and the means of Conversion, of the
Word, Sacraments, Sabbaths, Ministry, of Information and Instruction,
Promises, Threatenings, Conmands, Reproofs, Exhortation, good Examples,
Afflictions, and many other things used by God in the vocation; the power of
the spirit accompanying these means and working upon the heart; of the sight
and sense of sin; of godly sorrow, fear, hope, prayers, tears, harkening unto
the word, receiving it into the heart, longing after Christ, some beginning of
comfort, faith and conversion. To this place also reduce the Scriptures which
speak of the contrary, as God passing by a people and denying them the means of
conversion, of such as to whom the means is vouchsafed, yet they refuse to
receive them, despise them, blaspheme, rebel, persecute Gods messengers, and
seek the abolition of Gods Laws and Kingdom. Of such as seem to receive these
means yet do not use them, or if they use them, yet not diligently and aright,
but are like to the high way, the stony or the thorny ground. Such places as
speak of impenitency, hardness of heart, unbelief, neglecting the day of
Visitation, unfruitfulness under the means of Salvation, Hypocrisy, Apostasy,
all neglect or resistance of any motives unto repentance, deferring the time of
conversion after conviction, and falling off from any resolutions to repent, or
any degree of grace.

To that of Justification, which presupposes not only Gods mercy and Christ's
merit, but also the sinners Repentance, Conversion, and sincere faith, may be
reduced all Scriptures which speak of Christ's Intercession, Remission,
Regeneration, Reconciliation, Adoption, Manifestation of Gods special love,
hope of glory, a right unto eternal life, peace of conscience, joy in the Holy
Ghost, freedom from condemnation, removal of judgments, the earnest and first
fruits of the spirit abiding in us; the guardance of Angels, near communion
with God, Gods special care of the justified, the turning of every thing to
their good, mortification of sin, sanctification continued, good works,
heavenly affections, divine virtues, patience and perseverance in Hearts,
Afflictions, Persecutions, Martyrdom, Conflicts with sin, Satan, the world,
fastings, falls, recoveries, increase of heavenly virtues, longing desires to
be with Christ, watching, praying, providing for removal hence, and the last
account, comfortable death, conveyance into Abraham's bosom, the secure
expectation of the Resurrection, freedom from all sin, misery, temptation, and
troubles of this life. To this Head must be referred all such Scriptures as
speak of the contrary, as of Gods desertion after disobedience to his heavenly
call, withdrawing the light of the Gospel, taking away his blessed spirit,
leaving the parties thus deserted to the power of Satan, delivering them up to
a reprobate mind; security in sin, despair, terrors of conscience, loss of all
the former mercies and graces, or rather a dinial of them, exemplary judgments
as forerunners of eternal destruction, abiding under Gods eternal displeasure,
a cursed death, and a reservation of the parts thus dead unto final
condemnation, and that sad condition till that time.

To the last of Glorification, refer such places as speak of the universal
Resurrection, of the power and spirit of God raising us, the manner of this
Resurrection, the nature and excellent qualities of the body raised, as being
immortal uncorruptible, glorious, spiritual, and like the body of Christ, our
final Justification and glorious reward, of ejoyment of the blessed presence of
God and Jesus Christ, our full and final Sanctification by the spirit, our
Society with Saints and Angels, our spiritual, glorious, pleasant Paradise, our
full joys, eternal pleasure, unspeakable content, freedom from all sin,
temptation, sorrow, songs of praise, and the certainty and security of the
continuance and perpetuity of full bliss. Here also must come in those parts of
Gods word, which speak of the contrary; as of the resurrection of such as are
designed to eternal death upon their final impenitency, of the immortality of
their bodies, that they may eternally suffer in body and soul, their appearance
before the dreadful Judge, their condemnation, their ejection out of Gods
blessed presence into utter darkness and unquenchable fire, their society with
the Devil and his Angels, their everlasting and intolerable sorrows and pains,
and the certainty of the continuance thereof without any hope of ease,
intermission, deliverance.

Sect. 7.
After that I have first declared the substance of the Scripture abridged in
the Creed, and secondly given some directions how to reduce the principal
particular places of the word of God unto the heads of the Creed: I now proceed
to reduce the former particulars into the form of a Confession in this manner.

I believe in God the Father, and the Son, and the Holy Ghost, who is only One,
Infinite, Incomprehensible, Eternal, infinitely and eternally Wise, Just, Holy,
Powerful, Glorious, and every way Perfect, and perfectly knows and loves
himself from everlasting, and is blessed in himself unto all eternity.

I believe that this One Glorious God did by his wisdom contrive, and by his
will decree to do many things out of himself; and when he thought good, he
issued out with his Almighty Power to effect those things which he had before
contrived; and first he created Heaven, and Earth, and all things therein; and
the most glorious place which he made was the Heaven of heavens, and the most
excellent creatures were Men and Angels, intellectual, immortal, free, capable
of Laws, and of an eternal estate. Man for his body was created of the dust of
the earth, and by the breath of God became a living soul, and he was sanctified
by the holy Spirit, endued with heavenly gifts and virtues, whereby he was
righteous and holy, and like unto his God, and capable of eternal bliss; tho
his present estate was not immutable, he might stand, he might fall. When this
great work was finished by his Word and Spirit, without any pre-existent stuff,
any assistant, any tool or instrument, he continued by his Almighty power to
support and preserve all things, which do subsist by that word whereby they
were created at the first. By creation he manifested his eternal power and
Godhead, became the absolute, surpreme, and universal Lord of all things, and
so continues by his preservation.

I believe, that as he preserves all things created, so he orders all things,
preserved in such a manner, as that a Sparrow falls not to the ground without
his will: And as he created all things in an excellent order, and gave them
their inclinations, and power, moving and tending to some end; so he by his
wonderful Wisdom directs every thing unto its several end, and all things to
the supreme, which is the manifestation of his glory. In this ordination, the
government of his most noble creatures, Men and Angels, which he orders by
certain Laws and Judgments, unto an eternal estate, as most excellent and
wonderful; to both he gave certain laws, which they were able to observe; and
upon the observation they might certainly expect a confirmation in that blessed
estate, for which they were created; many of the Angels sinned, and were
irrecoverably lost, and are delivered into chains of darkness, reserved for the
judgment of the great day. Man received Laws both moral and positive, by which
he was bound to perform perfect and perpetual obedience, or else to suffer
death: yet man being tempted by the Devil, fell; and by one man sin entered
into the world, and by sin death, and death passed over all men, in that all
men have sinned: This was the just judgment of God, who cursed the Serpent and
the Devil, punished man and woman, yet promised them a Savior, the seed of the
woman, who should break the Serpents head, and take away his kingdom and power
over mankind. This was the judgment of the supreme Lord, whereby many of the
Angels continuing obedientin the day of their great trial were confirmed in an
estate of holiness and bliss: the apostate wretches were condemned to eternal
death, and so fell as never to rise again; yet man had hope of recovery,
because God by his infinite mercy was willing to prevent his eternal ruin.

I believe that God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son,
that whosoever believes on him, should not perish, but have everlasting life.
This Son, who is our Redeemer, is that word whereby all things in Heaven and
Earth, even the Principalities, Powers, Thrones, and Dominions of Heaven were
created, who is the brightness of his Fathers Glory, and the express Image of
his Person. This word issued out of Eternity, and in fullness of time was made
flesh, dwelt amongst men, who saw his glory as the glory of the only begotten
Son of God full of Grace and Truth: So that he is truly God, and truly Man, in
whom conceived by the Holy Ghost, and born of the Virgin Mary, we have One
Person, Two Natures, eternally distinct, and inseparably united. He was
conceived at Nazareth, bornat Bethlehem, saved in Egypt from bloody Herod, and
brought up in the place of his conception, and his very birth was matter of joy
and melody to the Angels of Heaven. This Jesus of Nazareth was the Christ
promised of old, the seed of the Woman, of Abraham, of David, according to the
flesh, and was anointed with the Holy Ghost above his fellows, and was made
King, Priest, and Prophet, above all other Kings, Priests, and Prophets, that
he might govern us by his Power, direct and teach us by his Wisdom, and
sanctify us for ever by his own Sacrifice first offered for sinful men, and
then pleaded in Heaven (...)s all penitent Believers.

I believe that Jesus Christ, the Word made flesh, did humble himself very low,
took upon him the form of a servant, and became obedient unto death, the death
of the Cross, and both in life and death did manifest his Divine excellency,
and glorify his heavenly Father. In the day of his humiliation he did hunger,
thirst, fast, pray, weep, and took upon him the infirmities of man, yet without
sin, and was mortal. His conversation was holy and spotless, and was so
ordered, that both in life and death he was a Mirror of all heavenly Virtues.
His Doctrine whereby he revealed the Mysteries of Heavens Kingdom, was pure,
and full of profoundest Wisdom, and of sovereign power to save men's souls; and
his words such as never man spoke, and were confirmed by signs, and wonders,
and glorious miracles, by which he declared himself to be the Son of the living
God. He by himself, his Apostles, and other assistants whom he had chosen and
qualified for this work, began to gather Disciples, and lay the foundation of
his everlasting Kingdom; yet, notwithstanding these so many Divine
excellencies, he suffers many indignities from his unworthy and ungrateful
Brethren, whom he loved above all other People in the world; though he was a
Son, yet he learned obedience by the things he suffered. For many did not
believe in him, many were offended with him. The ambitious, covetous, corrupt,
hypocritical Highpriests, Rulers, Scribes, Pharisees, Sadduces being
discovered unto the people, and by him reproved for their sins, and deserted by
many of the people, did envy him, hate him, persecute him, revile him,
blaspheme him, and designed his death, which they often and many ways attempted
and in the end prevailed.

In the last night of his mortal life on earth after the eating of the
Passover, the institution of the Sacrament of his blessed body and blood, his
consolatory speech unto his Disciples, his heavenly prayer, he enters into the
fatal place and garden where his greatest sufferings began. Then upon his
serious consideration and lively apprehension of the bitter Cup he was to
drink, and the fearful passion and tempattion now at hand, he falls into a
grievous and extreme Agony, wherein with earnest prayers, tears, and loud cries
he desires his heavenly Father to spare him, and to let the Cup pass from him;
yet so that he wholly resigns himself unto his will. He desires his Disciples,
especially three of them to watch with him and to pray for an hour, yet they
fail him; he falls upon the ground, deprecates the Cup three several times,
sweats drops as it were of blood, and at length an Angel was sent from heaven
to comfort the Lords of Angels; so deeply was he humbled, so greatly was he
afflicted so much was he difcomforted, while he prepares himself to encounter
the powers of Hell and expiate the sin of man. This woeful fit was no sooner
passed over, but he is betrayed into the hands of sinners, apprehended, bound,
brought before the Council, accused, condemned as a plasphemer worthy of death,
and so the judge of Men and Angels was judged; he is hoodwink't, buffeted,
blasphemed, spit upon, and most fearfully aboused, and being formerly betrayed
by s, and now with cursing, swearing, and forswearing, denied by S. Peter and
forsaken of all his Disciples. As for this he is brought before Pilate, falsely
charged with heinous crimes, yet justified as having done nothing worthy of
death. The Judge is afraid to condem him, willing to release him, scourges
him, and at the importuniy of his bloody enemies he at length condems him to
the cruel, cursed, ignominious death of the Cross, and delivers him to the
Soldiers, who deride him, abuse him, torment him, and lead him to the place of
execution. There he is stripped, crucified, endures open shame, cruel pains,
revilings, bitter taunts from the Highpriests, the People, the Malefactors
crucified with him, and the Soldiers; yet he reviles not again, nor threatens,
but in respect of wrong received he is silent and dumb as the sheep before the
shearer, prays for his enemies, provides for his disconsolate Mother, comforts
such as do bewail him, and foretells their future misery. In the height of his
passion he cries out, (such was the extremity) My God, my God, why have thou
forsaken me! commends his Spirit into his Fathers hands, and so dies. This
suffering and death was such as never any before it, never any after it, like
unto it. So much was signified at that time, when the Heavens were darkened, the
Earth did quake, the Rocks did rend, the Graves were opened, the Veil of the
Temple was rent in the midst from the top to the bottom to signify that the
great High Priest having offered himself by the eternal Spirit without spot was
entering with his own Blood into the Holy Place of Heaven, to obtain eternal
Redemption, and the expiation of man's sin for ever. The very frame of Heaven
and Earth seemed to be shaken in the time of this great suffering; men were
astonished, women wept, many beat their breasts, the Centurion who had the
charge of this execution was convinced that the party executed was the Son of
God. Our blessed Savior suffered this death with unparalleled patience and
meekness, he laid down his life willingly in obedience to his heavenly Father,
and out of love and a longing desire of sinful man's salvation: No man could
take it from him till the hour was come, and he was willing to part with it,
because he as a Priest, and general head and representative of mankind, offered
his life unto his heavenly Father as supreme Judge, as a ransom for sinful man;
therefore his death was the greatest Sacrifice, and the highest piece of
service and obedience that ever was performed, and was so highly accepted of
God, that it made him propitious, satisfied his Justice, merited his favor to
sinful man, made his sin pardonable, and his salvation possible upon fairest
terms, whilst he was by his own blood entering the sacrary of heaven, his side
is pierced, and out of the same issue water and blood: His body is taken from
the Cross, decently interred in a new Sepulcher where never any man was laid
before; his soul abides for a time separate, and under the power of death, and
his humiliation did continue till the Resurrection, and by his burial he
hallows the grave to all believers. By this Humiliation thus finished the
foundation of our eternal salvation is laid, and a way prepared and opened for
a passage into heavens Kingdom.

I believe that Jesus Christ who was thus humbled, who suffered cruel pains,
and was delivered to death for our transgressions, was raised for our
justification, and so to communicate the mercies merited by his death, converts
us and procures the actual remission of all the sins of such as repent and
believe in him, and by his life saves such as he had reconciled by his death.
He that did rise was the very same who died upon the Cross; and the same body
and soul which were separated by Death, were united again by Resurrection; as
man he was raised, as God he raised himself; he rose never to die again, but to
live for evermore. The time was the third day, according to the predictions and
prefigurations of old* and the decree of God's eternal wisdom; God did not
suffer his Holy One to see corruption. The manner of this Resurrection was
glorious; God then shook the Earth, sent from Heaven an Angel appearing in
great glory, who terrified the Guard, rouls away the stone which closed up the
Sepulcher, and made way for Christ's Disciples to come freely, and see that he
was not there. The Graves were opened, diverse of the Saints raised, and
appeared in the holy City; Death was conquered, and diverse of his Captives
rescued out of his hands. This his Resurrection was made manifest by testimony
of Angels, and of diverse others who saw him, spoke with him, and were assured
of it; he appears unto many, and that many times, and especially to the eleven
Apostles, who saw him, heard him, did eat and drink with him, touched him with
their hands. To these he unfolds the Mysteries of his Kingdom, gives them
commission to go into all Nations, and commands them to stay at Jerusalem till
they received the Holy Ghost, according to the promise of his Father. God by
thus raising him did manifest that he had accepted his Sufferings and Death as
a full propitiation of the sins of men, and by saying, Thou art my Son, this
day have I begotten thee, made him universal King and Priest, fully consecrated
for ever. He rose as head and representative of mankind, especially of his
Church, and became not only the pattern, but the first fruits and cause of our
Resurrection; so that as in Adam dying all died, so in Him rising we shall all
be made alive, first to newness of life, then to eternal glory. The same Spirit
that raised Christ from the dead, shall raise us from the death of sin unto
newness of life, and raise our bodies to immortality; forty days he stays on
Earth to comfort his Disciples, strengthen their Faith, make evident his
Resurrection, and give orders for the administration of his future Kingdom;
then he ascends from Mount Olivet in a Cloud up into the Heaven of Heavens, Men
and Angels being witnesses according to a former Vision, that one like the Son
of man came with the Clouds of Heaven, and came unto the ancient of days, and
that the Angels brought him peace before him. He ascended, that he might
fulfill all things, send down the Holy Ghost, enjoy full joy in his Fathers
presence, and pleasures at his right hand for ever; make intercession for his
Saints, prepare eternal blessed mansions for them, raise up their thoughts and
affections to that heavenly estate he had merited and prepared for them, that
where he is, our hearts might be also; and that he might receive a place at his
Fathers right hand; so it was prophesied of old, that when the Son of man was
brought before the ancient of days, there was given him Dominion and Glory, and
a Kingdom, that all People, and Nations, and Languages should serve him, his
Dominion is an everlasting Dominion which shall not pass away, and his Kingdom
that which shall not be destroyed. For his Father said unto him, Sit at my
right hand till I make thy foes thy footstool, and gave him a name above all
names, and set him far above all Principalities and Powers, and Might and
Dominion, and every name that is named, not only in this world, but in that
which is to come. He was solemnly invested with a supreme and universal power
above all men and Angels established in his Kingdom, confirmed by Oath in his
everlasting Priesthood, sent down the holy Ghost; the Gospel, the rod of his
power, went out of Zion; he reigned in the midst of his enemies, and many
thousands did willingly submit unto him, and his people for number were like
drops of dew which fall from the womb of the morning. When all things are
fulfilled, all enemies subdued, the number of his Saints finished, he will come
from Heaven to determine of the final estate of men and Angels, and judge both
quick and dead; And then he will deliver up his Kingdom to the Father, that God
may be all in all.

I believe that the Holy Ghost, which is One God with the Father and the Son,
and is the Spirit of the Father and the Son, by whom all things in Heaven and
Earth are effected, was always in the Church to sanctify the same, and prepare
it for eternal Glory* and when Christ was set at the right hand of God, came
down upon the Apostles in the likeness of fiery cloven Tongues, gave them power
to speak in all Languages, enlightened them, gave them full and perfect
knowledge of the Gospel, endued them with all gifts and power requisite for the
laying of the foundation of the Christian Religion, the plantation of the
Church in all Nations, and did direct them in the dispensation of the Gospel,
that both by word and writing, they might publish and declare it infallibly. By
this doctrine, accompanied with the power of this Spirit, and conveyed to the
hearts of men, both Jews and Gentiles, were called, converted, sanctified, and
made up the body of the universal Church, which is the number of all believers
in all Nations; a community of Saints Militant first on Earth, and then
Triumphant in Heaven. These are the best society in the world, have the
greatest privileges, are the Children of God, the Members of Christ, the
Temples of the Holy Ghost, the Candidates of Heaven, the Heroes of Eternal
Glory, baptized by one Spirit into one body, and by Baptism admitted Subjects
of an everlasting Kingdom. Those, though dispersed through several parts of the
world, and mixed with counterfeit Christians, and profane persons, are
justified, regenerated, reconciled, the adopted Sons of God, have a title unto
eternal Life, the earnest of the Spirit, and the first fruits of glory; are
guarded by Angels, beloved of God; enemies to Sin, Satan, and the World;
tempted often; sometimes wounded and foiled, yet sin reigns not in them, and in
the end they attain a full and final victory: They suffer Persecution, and bear
the Cross with patience, deny themselves, are constant in the Covenant; nothing
can separate them from the love of God; all things work together for their
good; they increase in heavenly Virtues, abound in good works, rejoice in the
hope of Glory, watch and pray, and with sighs and groans wait for the adoption,
which is the redemption of the body. When they depart this world, they commend
their spirits into their Fathers hands, who sends his Angels to receive them;
they are with Christ, and secure of the resurrection unto eternal bliss, rest
from their labors, and their works follow them; when the number of these is
finished, Christ will come down from Heaven in the Glory of the Father, with
all the holy Angels, and shall descend with a shout, with the voice of the
Archangel, and the Trump of God. Then all the dead shall rise, the living
shall be changed, and made immortal; all shall be summoned, appear, be judged;
the righteous shall be justified for ever, receive the glorious reward of an
everlasting Kingdom, be admitted into God's presence, behold his glory, be
filled with eternal joy, and made fully, and for ever happy; such as know not
God, or obeyed not the Gospel, being unbelievers, and unrighteous, shall be
sentenced to everlasting Fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels, shall be
cast out of God's presence, imprisoned in Hell* where the worm never dies, and
the fire is never quenched, and shall there be tormented in soul and body
continually, and of their extreme misery there shall be no end.

These things I believe to be most certainly true, and as revealed from Heaven,
confirmed by many signs and wonders, and the rare effects of this Doctrine in
the conversion and consolation of many souls.

This Faith of my heart I profess with my mouth, and according to this belief
and profession I rely for everlasting life upon God the Father, who loved me,
and the Son, who gave himself for me, and the Holy Ghost, who sanctifies and
comforts me.

Sect. 8.
After this enlargement, I return again unto the Proposition, That Christ
commanded the Apostles to teach or disciple all Nations, and thence infer some
practical conclusions in a few words, and so conclude this Chapter.

1. If Apostles, and so all Ministers of the Gospel who take the charge of
souls upon them, be subject to Christ's power, and bound by this command, then
it is their duty to teach, to teach this Doctrine, to teach all this Doctrine;
they must teach this, and none other, because it is the only converting,
saving, comforting truth; if they teach other, it will be either unprofitable,
or, which is worse, pernicious; though they teach this, and yet conceal some
part thereof, and declare not the whole counsel of God, though it may be good
so far as they make use of it, yet it will be insufficient, and never reach the
end for which it was revealed from Heaven; for it is the Gospel, the whole
Gospel, that is the power of God unto Salvation; yet it must not be taught
confusedly, but as it was delivered by our Savior in a certain and exact
method, so it must in the same manner be dispensed by the Man of God, who must
not only be perspicuous, that his Doctrine may be understood, but also
methodical, that it may be remembered: therefore if we will manifest our love to
Christ, be faithful to our trust, pity poor Souls, redeeme^ by the precious
blood of Christ, make ^ good account at the last, receive a Crow^ of Glory when
the great Shepherd shall appear, and escape that fearful Woe an^ Judgment which
shall fall upon such as a(...) guilty of the blood of other men, let ^^ teach,
teach this Doctrine, and teach (...) thus, and in this manner, as Christ's
Command requires and directs.

2. If this be our duty, then the people whom we teach are bound to receive
this, all this Doctrine, and thus as it is taught: and if ever they will be
converted unto God, comforted by the Spirit, attain unto eternal life, and not
be adjudged to eternal Fire, for Ignorance, or Disobedience to the Gospel, let
them hear this Doctrine attentively, learn the whole counsel of God, lay it up
in their hearts, remember it, obey it, and make it the joy and delight of their
hearts, and the subject of their constant Meditations; let them reject all
other Doctrine which shall not be agreeable to this our Savior's Creed.

3. It Is a matter of perpetual Thanksgiving, and it is our Duty to acknowledge
God's wonderful mercy in this respect, and give all Glory and Praise unto his
Name, in that he has so well provided for our Salvation. For he has not only
sent his only Son from Heaven to redeem us by his precious Blood, raised him
from the dead, and given him all Power in Heaven and Earth; but Christ having
received this Power, gives Commission and Command to the Apostles and their
Suc^^^^ors to teach all saving Truth, has contracted it in so few words,
reduced it unto so clear a method, endued them with the knowledge of it, bound
them to teach it to all Nations in their own Language, fit it for the meanest
capacities, raise up a continual supply of faithful Ministers to instruct poor
souls, that hearing they may believe, call upon God, be saved from Hell and
Death, and when the number of God's Saints are finished, then they may be for
ever glorified.

CHAP. VI. Concerning Baptism.
Sect. 1.
YOu have heard of the first Proposition, commanding the Apostles to go to all
Nations; concerning the second, commanding them to teach all Nations: the third
follows, and is this, Christ commanded the Apostles to Baptize all Nations
taught and discipled. The former is concerning the dispensation of the Word,
this concerning the administration of the Sacraments; where we have something
of the Covenant, something of Discipline. In this Proposition we must enquire,

1. What Baptism is? 2. Who may and must administer it? 3. Who are to be
baptized?
1. For the nature of Baptism, it is easily known from the Institution in this
Commission. It Is an initiating Sacrament of the New Testament, wherein a
Disciple is washed with water, In the Name of the Father, and the Son, and the
Holy Ghost. The word Baptism is a derivative from (...), and that from (...),
both signify to dip or plunge a thing in water, or some other liquid
substance; and because the end of this dipping or plunging is sometimes to wash
and cleanse, therefore both the words do sometimes signify to wash and
cleanse; and because a spiritual cleansing is signified in this Sacrament,
therefore it is called Baptism. This is only for the Name. In this Description
we must observe,

1. That it is a Sacrament. 2. It Is a Sacrament of the New Testament. 3. It is
an initiating Sacrament. 4. This initiation is by washing with water, In the
Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.
1. A Sacrament, as here it is understood, is a Sacred or Religious Sign, Rite,
or Ceremony. And because there be many and several kinds of Rites which have
their several ends, and the end of Sacraments and these Mysteries is distinct
and different from the end of other Rites; therefore in strict sense a
Sacrament is a Rite instituted of God to confirm his Covenant, where we have

1. The general nature of a Sacrament. 2. The efficient cause of a Sacrament.
3. The end of a Sacrament.
1. The general nature is, that it is a Religious Rite; there are Civil and
Religious Rites, and both are used as additions to some other things or
actions, to which they are accidental, and no ways essential; and they usually
signify something to the understanding, besides that which they represent to
the senses. The reason why they are added is, the greater solemnity. Thus the
Sacraments are Religious Rites added to the Covenant of Grace, and in
themselves are some outward things and actions which represent some things and
actions which are Sacred and Divine. And this signification is not Natural, but
from Institution; in this respect they usually make two material parts of a
Sacrament, 1. An outward sensible sign. 2. An inward hidden spiritual thing
signified. So that the things and actions which are Rites, are to be
considered, 1. In themselves. 2. In their significative nature as signs. These
Sacramental Rites are annexed to the Covenant, that it may be made and renewed
with the greater solemnity. Thus Circumcision is said to be a sign added to the
Covenant made with Abraham and his Seed, and in these ceremonial religious
signs we usually have things, actions, words, which usually inform us of the
hidden mystical part.

2. The efficient cause of these Rites to be observed by all Christians, is
God, who by his Son Jesus Christ has not only spoken unto us, and revealed the
Gospel, but also instituted these Sacraments. There are Rites invented by Men,
and also by Devils, and some of them are abominable; and from the
multiplication of these in performance of Divine Service, spring so many
Superstitions, when such things as God never appointed, or required at our
hands, are conceited to be holy, or necessary, or of a sanctifying power;
therefore it concerns us all to consider what Rites are of Divine Institution,
whether they be Ceremonies of the Old or New Testament; for God instituted
Rites of old, as well as in these latter times of the Gospel. 2. What Rites
instituted by him are now in force so as that we are bound to the observation
of them. By reason of Divine Institution and Command they are positive Laws of
God, which do not bind by reason of the matter of them, which is indifferent,
but of God's Command, from whose Institution, Promise, and Command, but not of
themselves, they conduce to our sanctification.

3. The end of a Sacrament is to confirm the Covenant in Christ, made between
God and man. This presupposes, 1. The death and redemption by Christ as the
foundation of the Covenant; for if there be no Redemption, there is no promise
of life unto sinful man. 2. A Covenant; and this Covenant presupposes a Law
wherein God commands man to repent, and believe in Christ; and upon this
Repentance and Faith promises remission of sin, and eternal happiness. And
because God will deal with Man as with a rational free Creature, he proposes
the conditions required in his Law, and expects his assent and voluntary
obligation of himself. 3. When a man expresses his consent, and promises
freely unto God that he will believe and repent, then this Covenant is made.
The Redemption by Christ, the Covenant in it self, and the making of the
Covenant, presupposed, the Sacrament is added, that by it the Covenant may be
solemnly confirmed both on God's part and Man's, as though they put to it their
hands and seals, and so mutually engage themselves one unto another. Thus
Circumcision, which was a Sacrament, is said to be not only a Sign, but a Seal,
because as a Seal is put to an Indenture, or other Evidences, and particularly
to Leagues, to confirm them, so a Sacrament is added to this Covenant for
confirmation, so that neither part can draw back, or neglect to perform, except
they will go against their own act and deed, and solemn engagement. This
confirmation does limit the general nature of Sacraments as they are
Ceremonies, and differenceth them from all other Rites, which were but Signs or
Types, and not instituted to this end.

Sect. 2.
Thus you have heard what a Sacrament is: The second thing affirmed is, that it
is a Sacrament of the New Testament or Covenant. This does difference Baptism
from all the Sacraments used by man, and instituted by God before Christ's
Incarnation; for there were extraordinary Sacraments of old, as Baptism under
the Cloud, and in the Red Sea, Manna, and water out of the Rock; there were
ordinary Rites, as Circumcision and the Passover; yet these might be said to be
Sacraments of the Old Testament, which differ in many things from these of the
New, and that not only in the signs and circumstance of time, but chiefly in
this, that the former Sacraments did presuppose Christ to come, and faith in
him as not yet exhibited, but the Sacraments of the New Testament look at
Christ as already come, having shed his blood, and finished the work of
Redemption, and require ^aith in him under that notion, and in that respect. As
it differs from the former by this, that it is a Sacrament of the New Testament,
so in this particular it agrees with the Eucharist; so that from hence we may
describe a Sacrament of the New Testament to be a Rite instituted by Christ to
confirm the Covenant of Grace in the blood of Christ already shed, wherein we
may observe, 1. The blood of Christ shed. 2. A Covenant confirmed in and by
this blood of Christ, and Sacrifice already offered. 3. A confirmation of this
Covenant made between God and particular persons by these holy Rites.

Sect. 3.
Baptism, as it is 1. a Sacrament. 2. a Sacrament of the New Testament; so 3.
it is the initiating Sacrament of the New Testament. For there are but two
Sacraments of the Gospel instituted by Christ, and this is the first in order,
and first to be administered; it presupposes the party to be baptized as an
Alien, and not yet solemnly admitted into the Church and Kingdom of God, though
he may be prepared for this admission and incorporation. In respect of this
initiation it differs from the Eucharist, which cannot lawfully be administered
to any but such as are members of the Church, and incorporated already: For as
under the Law no stranger might be admitted to the Passover, so under the
Gospel no unbaptized person may come unto the Lords Table. This is the reason
why this Rite is called the Laver of Regeneration, the Sacrament of our New
Birth, and of our ingrafting into Christ: And as we are but once born, so we
are but once baptized; for this Sacrament once rightly administered is not to be
reiterated, whereas the Eucharist, being a Sacrament of our spiritual
nourishment and growth, is often to be celebrated.

Sect. 4.
Thus you have heard that Baptism is an initiating Sacrament of the New
Testament; it remains that I inform you of the particular Rite of Initiation,
which is by washing with water, In the Name of the Father, and the Son, and the
Holy Ghost. For this is the instruction and command of our Savior in this
Commission in these words, Baptizing them in the Name of the Father, etc. where
we have three things to be considered.

1. Water, the Element. 2. Washing with water, the Action. 3. Washing in the
Name of the Father, and the Son, and the Holy Ghost, the words.
1. Water in it self is a natural substance, and a liquid Element, granted unto
mankind as a special blessing, and to be used according to several virtues
thereof for several ends; one end is washing and cleansing bodies, and other
things that are ^ullied or defiled; and this according to the purging and
cleansing virtue thereof* This Water, according to this natural virtue, was
singled out by a Divine Institution and determination for an higher end; and
that is to signify and confirm a spiritual cleansing: And though some make
this in Baptism to be a sign of Christ's blood, which has a power to cleanse
and purge the conscience from dead works to serve the living God, yet in this
Sacrament it rather signifies the Holy Ghost, which sanctifies and regenerates
the Church. Therefore our Savior says,. 3. 5. Verily, verily except a man be
born of the Spirit and Water, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God. In this
respect Baptism is said to be the Laver of Regeneration, by the renewing of the
Holy Ghost, which God shed on us abundantly, Tit. 3. 5, 6. In both which places
the Spirit is assimilated to Water, as washing, cleansing, renewing; yet here
it is to be noted, that the Spirit does not renew and cleanse us, but by virtue
of Christ's blood, which merited the renovation and purification of the soul.
For if Christ's blood had not been shed, the Spirit had never been given to
sanctify us.

Sect. 5.
The action is Washing, expressed in this word [ Baptize] which word, as you
heard before, signifies to wash, and that often washing is the use and
application of this Elemement for to cleanse, which may be done many ways, as
by plunging the thing to be washed into the water wholly, or by dipping, or by
pouring water upon it; and sometimes by sprinkling; for many things under the
Law were cleansed by sprinkling of water or blood. This action for this end
implies the party to be baptized as polluted with sin, and so unfit to have
communion with God, and to be admitted into his heavenly Kingdom. Therefore he
must be renewed, purified, and regenerated, and that by the Holy Ghost
ingrafting him into Christ, and planting him into the similitude of Christ's
death and Resurrection, thence we have two parts of this Regeneration. 1.
Remission, 2. Sanctification, and in sanctification a death unto sin, and a
life unto righteousness. In some kind of washing, the death and Resurrection of
Christ, and also a death unto sin, and a life unto righteousness, were more
clearly represented; yet there is hardly any kind of washing but does in some
measure resemble these things. But we must not in this Sacrament stand upon the
more perfect or imperfect representation of the spiritual part thereof. The
principal thing visible and sensible is washing and cleansing; the principal
thing signified is the sanctification and purging of the soul and conscience.

Sect. 6.
The words are, In the name of the Father, etc. Where we must observe, 1. That
to be baptized in the name, into the name, unto the name of the Father, and of
the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, are the same. 2. That as the name of Christ,
and Christ, are often the same, so the name of God the Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost, is God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. 3. That though Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost are three, and some ways distinct, yet they are but one and the same
God. 4. That the Baptism in this name presupposes the party to be baptized, to
have professed his faith in, and his obedience unto the name of God the Father,
and the Son, and Holy Ghost, that his sins may be forgiven, and that he may
attain eternal life according to the promise of the Covenant on Gods part; so
that the Covenant is actually made between God and the party to be baptized.
These things premised, the meaning is, that in the name and person of God the
Father, and the Son, and the Holy Ghost, baptize thee in this water, and by
this solemn rite admit thee to be one of Gods people, and a subject of his
blessed Kingdom of grace, to enjoy all the privileges thereof, and assure thee
of the performance of the promises of the Covenant according to the profession
and promise thou have made; and by this same rite solemnly bind thee to make
good the profession, and perform the vows which thou have made unto God the
Father who has made thee, and God the Son who has redeemed thee, and God the
Holy Ghost who sanctifies thee; so that the Covenant of grace which was made
effectual and immutual by the death and blood of Christ, being first made
between God and the party to be baptized, the proper effect of this rite of
Baptism is a solemn confirmation of this Covenant in respect of both parties.
This confirmation being finished, both the parties are more strictly and highly
bound to performance; God to make good his promises, man to make goods his
vows: For God is bound not only by his promise in general, but by this rite to
the person baptized in particular. And man is bound not only in general, but by
name; not only by the command of God and his own vow, but also by receiving of
this solemn rite and being baptized. Upon this obligation follows a more
particular and certain right unto the mercies merited by Christ, and promised
in the Covenant, and a nearer relation unto, and a more special interest in
that God who made him, and loved him, and redeemed him by Christ, and
sanctifies him by the Spirit; yet the actual enjoyment of these mercies depends
upon the performance of the conditions to which man is bound; yet because this
performance depends upon the sanctifying power of the Spirit, therefore God in
his infinite mercy gives the Spirit to the party baptized, that so the Covenant
should not be in vain. For God nulling the Covenant of works which had no
promise of grace, and making a Covenant of free grace as a Father, a Redeemer,
and Sanctifier, and promising, and really intending to save man, must needs by
virtue of this promise give him the Spirit, which is absolutely necessary to
salvation, and also merited by Christ for such as believe in Christ, to abid?
in them, and enable them to perform all duties necessary to Salvation. This is
the reason why Baptism and the Spirit are s^ often joined together; yet the
giving ^^ this Spirit is not absolutely tied and limited to the very time of
Baptism, but is given sometimes after, and sometimes before and sometimes in or
at the time of Baptism. This Covenant is made by way of stipulation and
restipulation; and when the answer of a good conscience is made, the Spirit may
be received the more speedily. By all this we may easily understand how willing
God is to strengthen our weakness and confirm our hope; and how deeply we that
are baptized are bound and engaged to our God, and to him alone, so as to
renounce all other confidences, and to rely upon him as a Father loving us,
and his Son redeeming us, and the Holy Ghost sanctifying us. And here its to be
remembered that those supernatural effects which in the Scripture are given to
Baptism, are properly and principally to be ascribed to the love of the Father,
the merit of Christ, and the power of the Spirit; as by this Sacrament we
subject our selves unto God alone as our Supreme Lord, so we renounce the
Devil, all other false Gods; profess our selves Christians, and separate from
all other Religions. For Baptism is one of the bonds which ties the members of
the Church together in one body; a badge of our profession, and character
whereby we are didistinguished from all Idolaters, Mahumotans, and unbelieving
Jews.

Sect. 7.
Thus we understand what Baptism is, the next thing to be inquired into, is,
who may lawfully by this commission administer this Sacrament; The Text does
plainly determine the person: For he that must teach, the same must baptize.
It Is true that this power as universal and extending to the Gentiles, was given
immediately unto the Apostles; yet unto them as first dispensing the word; yet
because the word was to be dispensed and preached, not only by them, but also
by their successors unto the worlds end; therefore the ordinary pow^^ of
preaching is continued to all such as a(...) lawfully called to the Ministry,
and so the power of baptizing too: So that according to these words of our
Savior, they w^^ are trusted with the dispensation of the word, are trusted
with the administration of the Sacraments; for the promise of asistance in the
dispensation of both is mad^ only unto them as they are Ministers o^ Christ, to
be employed in the calling an^ conversion of sinners, and the applicat(...)on
of Redemption. These are the fitte^ and most able to prepare them for the
S(...)craments, and should be most able to ju(...) who are rightly qualified
for the receivi(...) of them: It Is true, that unworthy and insufficient persons
may be admitted into the Ministry; and others though more sufficient, may be
careless and negligent; yet these must answer for their infidelity and
betraying of their trust: However it is evident that the persons who may
lawfully baptize in the name of the Father, and the Son, and the Holy Ghost,
are the Ministers of the Gospel.

Sect. 8.
The third and last thing to be examined, is, who are subjects capable of this
Sacrament, and have a right unto Baptism by the rules of divine institution;
and according to the Text they are such as are taught and made Disciples; for
neither the Apostles nor their successors have any warrant from Christ to
baptize any but Disciples: for here it is said, Go and teach or disciple all
Nations, baptizing them; that is, these who are discipled. For we must know
that the Apostles were sent not to gather Churches out of Churches, and to find
the Nations made Christians to their hand, but to call men out of darkness into
light, and persuade men unbelievers to believe that of no Christians they might
be made Christians. They must not first baptize and then teach, but first teach
and then baptize, and so prepare them for Baptism; yet to be taught was not
sufficient; they must learn, understand, profess their faith in God the Father,
and the Son, and the Holy Ghost, promise to obey Christ's commands, and desire
by Baptism to be admitted into the Church; yet a Simon Magus may do all this,
and so obtain Baptism, and Phillip was bound to receive him; for God does not
bind the Minister of the Gospel to try the hearts and reins of any man, for
that he could not do; but he must persuade them in the name of Christ to
profess and promise sincerely from their hearts; yet if they do not this, and
it appear to him to do it, so that he knows nothing to the contrary, he not
only may, but must baptize such if they desire it; yet Baptism is little
advantage unto such; for though they may be admitted and received into the
visible Church; yet they are not members of Christ, nor heirs of Gods Kingdom;
but such as come with an upright heart, and make the answer of a good
conscience, and inwardly believe with their souls as they profess with their
lips, may certainly expect the Spirit of Regeneration and the benefits promised
in the Covenant.

But in all this discourse upon this part of the Text, I may seem to exclude
Infants from Baptism; and this place is alleged by diverse against their
admission; yet nothing in the Text, nor any thing in my Discourse does debar
them from this Sacrament. For the Apostles were sent to preach the Gospel both
to the unbelieving Jew, and also to the Gentiles, neither of these, much less
their Children, were enclosed in the pale of the Christian Church as believing
in Christ already come; and not only the Gentile, but the proselyte and native
Jew must repent and profess their faith before they were baptized; and this is
evident out of the history of the new Testament: And can any man infer from
hence, that because those who were adult, and at age, and out of the Church,
might not be baptized before they were taught, and confessed the faith:
therefore the Infants of Christian parents, who are actual members of the
Church, may not be baptized? Its evident, the sequel is not good: Some doubt
might be made of Infants born of Parents before they were made Christians; and
yet we find no question made of them in the Scriptures. But of such as are born
in the Church, and of Christian parents, after they were Christians, there is
less doubt; for these are part of their parents; not only as their parents by
nature, but as Christians; and were always so accounted, as born under the
Covenant, and in their parents bound to the condition thereof: and so far as
they were bound, so far they had right to the privileges and promises which
might be sealed unto them. God did not require any profession or promise
personal from them, because they had not the use of reason: and all the duty
for the present lay upon the parents and the Church, till the Infant came to
age, and was capable of instruction; for then being taught, they were bound in
their own persons to make their confession, and vow, and so own their Baptism;
and this was the end of Confirmation, which is an act performed by the Bishop
with imposition of hands, and certain words, according to a certain form
prescribed in the ritual part of our Liturgy. The covenant of Righteousness by
Faith was sealed to infants by circumcision from the times of Abraham, until
this commission was granted by Jesus Christ, who neither by himself, nor his
Apostles except them or exclude them: but of this see more in my Theopolitica,
lib. 2. cap. 15. Sect. 19, 20.

CHAP. 7. Of touching persons baptized to observe Christ's Commandments.
Sect. 1.
THE fourth proposition is, Christ commanded the Apostles to teach all persons
baptized to observe whatsoever Christ commands them.

This implies that the parties to be bapt^zed must not only profess their
faith, but promise obedience to Christ's commands. In the words we may observe a
twofold duty. 1. Of the people, which was the observation of Christ's
commandments. 2. Of the Minister, who must teach the people to observe these
commandments. In the first we have

1. Christ's laws and precepts. 2. The peoples obedience.
1. Laws are moral acts of a superior power, which bind the parties subject to
obedience, or upon disobedience to penalty. The sovereign and universal Monerch
is God, who by creation, preservation, and redemption has a total and absolute
power over man, and especially in respect of his piritual capacity as he is a
subject ordinable to an eternal estate: After Christ was risen from the dead,
God communicates a transcendent power unto him, especially as redeemer of man:
therefore as Christ had received this glorious power, so he did exercise the
same by making laws, and binding all the subjects of his spiritual and eternal
kingdom to the observation of the same. For these laws are not only a rule to
direct them what to do, but of a binding force; and the obligation is so
strict, that whosoever shall refuse to obey, shall be liable to eternal
punishments: for those Laws being written in the Scripture, are far more
excellent then any humane decrees and statutes; not only because they are the
Laws of God, and the other of men, but also because they are made in exact
wisdom, are most fitted for man, so as to direct all acts and operations of
soul and body, bind the conscience and immortal soul, promise eternal rewards,
and threaten eternal punishments, and aree very way so perfect, that upon
obedience eternal peace and happiness will certainly follow. The ignorance of
these things, and want of consideration, is the cause why these laws are so
little regarded, so much neglected, and disobeyed, though they shall be the
rule, according to which Christ shall judge the world, and determine of men's
final and eternal estate.

Sect. 2.
There are diverse laws therefore of Christ as is here employed, and the same
published, not only by word, but writing, and that long ago: and if so, it is
the duty of all, to whom these laws are made known, especially of persons
baptized, to obey these; and because this duty concerns us all, and that very
much, therefore I will, first, inform you of the duty more particularly, that
you may know what it is; and secondly, stir you up unto performance by certain
reasons, and motives. This obedience does presuppose our submission unto
Christ, as our superior Lord, upon our acknowledgment of his power; and this
is the condition of admission into his kingdom, and is the foundation of all
obedience: for we may do many things which another wills us to do, and yet the
doing of them is no obedience, because he has no power over us, neither do we
acknowledge him as our superior.

2. As it presupposes submission to his legal power, so it does the
promulgation of his Laws; for where there is no law, as there can be no sin, so
there can be no obedience.

3. These Laws must be known to us before we can observe them; for the laws of
Christ, as in our understanding, and known by us, are the immediate rule of our
obedience; yet when they are sufficiently published, it may be our own fault to
be ignorant of them, as through our own negligence it may so come to pass.

4. This obedience is properly an act of the will of man, freely conforming to
the will of Christ, and is required in the first Commandment.

5. The matter of this obedience is the law and command of God; the proper and
formal object is Christ as our supreme Lawgiver.

6. When the will of Christ is once made known unto us, our liberty is so far
restrained, nay altogether taken away in those things that are commanded, and
we must have no will of our own, but his will must be ours. These things
observed, we must know, 1. That this obedience must be yielded out of love unto
our Sovereign, yet with humble reverence to his Majesty, and joined with a fear
to offend him; and the more we love him, the more willingly and freely we shall
obey, and it will be our joy and delight to do his Commandments. 2. This
obedience must be universal; we must do whatsoever our Lord has commanded us;
for though there may be an inequality of things commanded; yet there is the
same reason why we should obey one as well as another, the least as well as the
greatest, and that is the will and command of our Savior. In this respect it is
said, that he that offends in one, offends in all, because of the contempt of
the will of the Lawgiver; we must not pick and choose to do what we please, obey
some, and disobey other commands; we must not expect from Christ any liberty,
indulgence, toleration, dispensation to transgress any of the least of Gods
Laws. 3. It must be constant and continued to the end; for there are no days
nor hours of intermission; we must always be doing, and we must not rest till
we have finished our work, and that will not be till this mortal life is ended:
we must serve our God day and night whilst we have any being. And as God did
not rest till he finished his work of Creation, so we must not expect our
Sabbath till we have finished the work of our Salvation; our obedience must be
one line drawn out and continued from the first moment of our conversion, to
the last day of our dissolution. 4. As we must be constant, so we must be
diligent, zealous, active, watchful. God loves not lazy servants, and the work
is great and difficult, and we meet with many enemies, much opposition, and
must wrestle with many difficulties, which are the greater, because of the
Devil and the World without, and the Relics of corruption within us. Therefore
our Christian life is a race, and a continual warfare; therefore we must not
only put on the complete armor of God, but we must strive, and fight, and put
forth all our power, and never think of rest till we have obtained a final and
full victory: And though we cannot reach, yet we must aim at the perfection of
Angels, according to that prayer, Thy will be done on Earth, as it is done in
Heaven; that is, by those immortal blessed spirits, who never sinned, but do
his Commandments, harkening to the voice of his word. 5. Yet we must know that
of our selves we are frail, weak, and without Christ we can do nothing, and can
do all things through Christ who strengthens us. Christ must give us his
Spirit and strengthen us within, and by this Spirit support us and assist us
without. Therefore must continually pray, that according to his promise he
would put his Laws in our inward parts, and write them in our hearts; and to do
this more and more according to his promise, we must not presume upon our
strength, but always humbly* depend upon him who works both the will and deed
of his good pleasure. If he but a little desert us, and withdraw his hand, how
suddenly may David and St. Peter fall and sin grievously? 6. Yet though we may
transgress, and sometimes fall grievously, yet we must not despair nor be
secure, but presently renew our repentance, return unto God, and muster up all
our power, and fight, and work, and strive again, and this with the greater
force and power. And this is our comfort, we are not under the Law of Works,
which requires perfect and perpetual obedience, or else threatens certain and
unavoidable death and destruction; but under Grace, which ministers power, and
when we fall, upon our repentance promises pardon and life; ane Christ will
plead our Cause, and procure our Peace. From all this it does appear that
baptized Christians must not be Soli^idians, much less Antomonians, and
Lawless; we must be loyal and obedient, and not live like base earthly
worldlings, but like Citizens of Heaven, for upon this condition we are
admitted Subjects of an heavenly Kingdom. Thus we understand that our duty is
to submit to Christ our Lawgiver, know his Laws, remember them, observe them
all out of Faith, Love, Fear, with all our hearts, carefully, constantly,
depending always upon our Savior, and renewing our repentance daily. For this
obedience must be universal, perpetual, sincere, free, and we must obey not
only in doing good, but suffering evil, if we be put unto it.

Sect. 3.
By this time we know what our duty is* now follows the reasons why we should
perform it; And lest any man should be discouraged with the difficulty of the
work, or think it: impossible, I must first prove that it may be done. It was a
famous question of old, Whether it be possible by Grace to observe and fulfill
all the Commandment^ of God? And it has been determined in the affirmative,
that by Grace it is possible; for what cannot Grace do? Paul says, I can do
all things. A Christian has a kind of Omnipotency in things necessary to
Salvation, and may truly say, That these things which are impossible with men,
are possible with God; and if God be for us, who can be against us? It Is true,
that to deny our selves, to subdue our native and deeplyrooted corruptions, and
our sins confirmed by custom, to bear the heavy burden of the Cross, and
suffer reproaches and bitter afflictions and persecutions for Christ's sake; to
forsake all, and hate Father, Mother, dearest relations, and life it self, to
offer an Isaac, to rejoice in the midst of fiery trials, are very difficult
things, and far above the power of nature, and so indeed they are. Yet there is
a divine power in Faith, whereby all this may be done, and has been through
the assistance of Christ: And therefore let none of us despair, but let us be
assured, that whilst Christ sits at the right hand of God, and his holy Spirit
abides in the Church, we shall be enabled to remove Mountains, subdue Sin, and
conquer Satan, the great enemy of our Salvation* Christ did never intend to
bind us to impossibilities; what we cannot do of our selves, he will enable us
to do; neither did he ever require that we should observe whatsoever he has
commanded us by our own strength; but as he has merited Grace and Power for us
by his Death, so he will give it us by his Resurrection; and then such things
as are grievous to flesh and blood, shall be sweet and delightsom to sanctified
souls. This being possible, let us consider the reasons.

1. We not only by God's command, but also by our promise so solemnly confirmed
by Baptism, are bound to observe these commandments: A loyal Subject will obey
his Sovereigns command, and will remember his Oath of Allegiance and Fidelity;
and an honest man will be as good as his word and promise made unto man; and
shall not we obey our Savior's Laws, written and confirmed with his own blood?
shall we promise, and promise unto him, and not perform? shall we not only be
disobedient, but perfidious too, and violate ou^ sacred bonds? This will make
our sins most heinous, and our punishment most grievous. O therefore let us
remember our Baptism, and solemn Vows, and prove faithful unto God and our
Savior Jesus Christ, and do his Commandments, and never suffer our Baptism to
be brought as a witness against us in the great day of our final Trial and
Account.

2. Let us consider the nature and qualities of these Commandments, for there
are no penal Statutes imposed by an arbitrary Power, intending to oppress us
and undo us. There is no injustice can be charged upon them; they are no ways
defective, but perfect every way, in respect of the end for which they were
given; they are holy, just, and good, Laws of Equity, Wisdom, and given out of
dearest love, directing us to Heaven and everlasting happiness, and in keeping
them there is great content: Nothing is so grievous to Gods Saints as to
transgress them, and to keep them is the joy and delight of their hearts.

3. The reward which Christ does promise is excellent, and far greater than man
could expect or hope for; rich prizes, high preferments, glorious rewards, work
strangely upon the hearts of mortal men, and cause them to venture life and
limb, and many times Soul and all; yet if any man could gain the Kingdom of the
World, and all the Glory thereof, yet this is nothing to the reward of this
obedience; the least work of obedience shall be rewarded, a cup of cold water
shall not be forgotten; and this reward is certain, most certain, as depending
upon the promise of an Almighty Lord, who can do what he will, and will do what
he has promised: and the time will not be long before it shall be rendered and
received; For he that shall come, will come, and will not tarry; and it shall
be eternal; and eternally enjoyed; and let all those who are obedient rejoice
and be exceeding glad, for great is their reward in Heaven.

4. Yet if reward should not move us so much, yet love should even constrain
us, and we should have no power to resist it. Christ loved us, and gave himself
for us, and greater love, greater gifts there cannot be. Therefore let us
consider whose commandments these are, which we must observe. Are they not the
commands of Christ our dearest Savior, who has redeemed us with his precious
blood, is the propitiation for our sins, and pleads his blood for us in Heaven?
and shall he love us so much, and shall not we love him again? O let us love
him, love him so much as nothing more; and if we love him, we will keep his
Commandments; and the more we love him, the more obedient we shall be, to the
laying down of our live^ Though we love him much, yet he love^ us more; and
though we should perform the obedience of Angels, yet we cannon (...) him*
seeing therefore that we ha(...) so solemnly engaged our selves by our Baptism
to this obedience, the Laws are so just, and tending effectually to our eternal
good: the reward which God has promised is so glorious, and it is our Savior
who loved us so much who commands us; therefore let us be obedient in all
things to the end, and let this be our great business.

Sect. 4.
The second part of the Proposition is concerning the Ministers duty, which is
to teach the persons baptized to do whatsoever Christ has commanded them. In
this we must consider,

1. The persons teaching. 2. The persons to be taught. 3. The act and work of
teaching* 4. The matter to be taught, or the heads of the Doctrine.
First, The persons teaching are first the Apostles, and after them their
successors, whose duty is not only to disciple the Nations, and baptize them,
but also to inform them of the Laws of Christ; for they must not only begin the
work of Grace, but must go on and finish: they must not only lay the
foundation, but build on, and consummate the work. The business of Pastors and
Teachers is not only to bring men to the amity of Faith, but to perfection in
Christ.

Seconly, The persons to be taught, are such as having professed their Faith,
and premised obedience, were baptized already, and so admitted into the Church.
The former teaching respected them as out of the Church, and tended to prepare
them for Baptism and Admission. This latter considers them as in the Church,
and tends to the further edification. The end of the former was regeneration
and conversion; and the end of the latter is spiritual nutrition and
confirmation. For the subject of this teaching are such as as had promised, but
as yet not performed obedience; such as were but babes and children, whose
condition required a tender and continual care in their teachers. And though
they know some of the Commandments by a general and imperfect knowledge, yet
they had not so clear and distinct knowledge of many of them in particular, and
did need not only instruction, but exhortation.

3. Therefore this teaching was not a bare instruction for to inform their
understandding, but also exhortation to stir them up diligently, constantly,
and zealously to observe the Commandments made known unto them: and besides,
with exhortation sometimes must be some admonition and reproof, with directions
in particular cases. First, knowledge was necessary; for how can they obey,
when they know not the particular commands to be obeyed? and to what purpose is
knowledge, though never so clear and distinct, if they do them not? When our
Savior had given his Apostles a commandment, and improved it by his own
example, he adds, If you know these things, blessed are ye if ye do them, 13.
17. So that it is plain, that the end of this teaching is the doing and
observation of Christ's Commandments; and therefore as they must represent them
clearly to their understanding, so they must press the obedience upon the
strongest motives, and let them know, that though their knowledge should be
sufficient, and they should have perfect directions* yet without the continual
supply of God's Grace they will not be able to perform any thing; and from all
this we may observe, that profession and knowledge will not be sufficient to
Salvation. This is the reason why the Apostles do labor so much, not only to
confirm their Disciples and Con^^rts, but also exhort them to obedience:
profession and practice must go hand in hand, and never part assunder:
profession and knowledge without obedience is but hypocrisy, an outward form
and shadow of Christianity without the soul and power; but where obedience
accompanies profession, it will be an evidence of the sincerity of their Faith,
and of their happy condition, that they are passed from death to life.

4. The principal thing in this Proposition is the matter of this teaching, and
that is the observation of all Christ's Commandments. The matter of the former
Doctrine was, Truths to be believed and professed; the matter of this latter
is, Commandments to be known and obeyed. 2. These Commandments must not be the
Traditions, Superstitions, and inventions of men; nor the Laws and Edicts of
Temporal Princes, but they must be the Commandments of Christ. 3. They must be
all the Commandments of Christ, whatsoever Christ had commanded his Apostles. 4
As these, and as these alone, and all these, must be taught, so they must be
taught and represented unto them as to be observed, and that freely,
constantly, and with delight, out of love unto their dearest Savior. If they
teach any other Commandments but these, the knowledge of them will be in vain:
if they teach some and not all, their knowledge will be imperfect: if they teach
all these, so that their knowledge should be perfect, and yet not effectually
stir them up to obedience, their knowledge will be in vain: if they exhort them
to observe some, and not all, their obedience will be short, and not reach the
end for which these Laws and Commandments were given.

Sect. 5.
But because many may be ignorant o^ these Laws, I will

1. Premise some general observations. 2. Note some places of Scripture where:
the morals are contracted. 3. Show how Love is the performance and fulfilling
of them all. 4. Deliver the Doctrine of the Eucharist. 5. Reduce the matter of
these Commandments into the form of a vow.
1. The observations are these.

1. That the Commandments of Christ are either moral, as the precepts, and the
prohibitions of the moral Law* or ceremonial* as the two Sacraments of Baptism
and the Eucharist, which we call the Communion of the Lords Supper.

2. That the morals are to be understood Evangelically, in which respect they
admit of diverse additions, whereby they differ much from the morals as given to
Adam in innocence, or to Israel in the Wilderness; for they were given to Adam
by God as Creator, to Israel by God as choosing them, and bringing them out of
Egypt; but they are given in the Gospel, especially since the exhibition of
Christ by God, as redeeming us by Christ already come; therefore called
Christ's Commandments: and so obedience in them must be performed unto God, not
only as Creator, but as Redeemer.

3. The blood of Christ's death made the transgressions against these morals
pardonable, and the punishment due unto the transgressors avoidable upon
certain terms; but according to the Covenant made with Israel, and the Law of
Works, neither was transgression once past remissible, nor the punishment
possible to be avoided.

4. According to the Law and Covenant of Works, perfect, personal, perpetual
Obedience, was the only condition of life: according to the Gospel, Faith in
Christ is the condition; so that though the sins of man against this Law may be
many and heinous, yet upon Faith in Christ they are no^ only pardonable, but
shall be pardoned.

5. Obedience to this Law was to be performed by Adam, according to that
sufficient power which he had received in his creation, and lost by his
transgression; bu^ obedience of Believers is performed according to the power
of the Spirit, restored in regeneration.

6. Though our obedience under the Gospel be imperfect, and therefore by it we
cannot be justified, yet it is accepted of God, and rewarded ugon the account of
Christ's Merit and Intercession.

7. We are strictly bound under the Gospel unto these morals; and therefore the
sincere and constant obedience unto them is so much urged and professed by
Christ and his Apostles in the New Testament. For Christ died not to free us
from obedience to these Laws, but to sanctify us that we may keep them better;
and that upon our transgressions we should renew our Repentance and Faith.

8. Though these moral Laws are more at large expressed and made known unto us
by Moses, the Prophets, the Evangelists, both in the Old and New Testament; yet
in many places they are contracted in a few words, and reduced to a few heads.

Sect. 6.
These things premised, I will in the second place observe some places where
they are contracted. 1. We are informed tha^ in the Decalogue published upon
Mou^ Sinai, all moral Duties are reduced to towords, or heads, and that in an
excelle^ method and manner. And indeed upon due consideration it will appear
that the model of the Law was from God, as being ^ar above the wisdom of men
and Ange^ ^^ Because every Commandment hat^ ^egative and an affirmative
consideration and consists of a Precept requiring goo^ and a prohibition of the
contrary ev(...)erefore we find this moral Law contr^c^ed diverse times to two
Heads; the (...)ewing of evil, and doing good, Psalm. 14. Isa. 1. 16, 17. 3.
Because that man whom this Law is given, has relation God and man his
Neighbor; there^^ the whole is reduced to two parts, the Ou^ duty toward God.
2. Our duty tow(...) Neighbor; therefore the whole b^ of the Law is reduced to
these two heads, according to that of the Prophet: He has showed thee, O man,
what is good; and what does the Lord require of thee, but to do justly, and
love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God? Micah 6. 8. Where to do justly and
love mercy, is our whole duty to man; to walk humbly with God, is our whole
duty to God. 4. But that contraction of the whole to one head, which is Love,
is most excellent; yet this Love is twofold. 1. The Love of God. 2. Of our
Neighbor. For our blessed Savior determined the first and great Commandment
to be the Love of the Lord our God; and the second, which is like unto it, is
to love our Neighbor as our selves. Yet, though this latter be like unto, yet
it is not equal with the first; for there is so great an inequality between the
love we owe to God, and that which we owe unto man, that if the love of man
come in competition with our love to God, so that they cannot consist together,
we must hate Father, and Mother, and nearest Relations, for Christ's sake. Our
Savior further adds, that upon these two Commandments hang the Law and the
Prophets; that is, all the moral Duties mentioned in the Law and the Prophets
are comprised in these two, Mat. 22. 37, 38, 39, 40. The Apostle tells us, that
love is the fulfilling of the Law, Romans 13. 10. that is, of the second Table.

5. Because man is indebted to himself, to his Neighbor, to his God, therefore
some think the Law is contracted in the words of the Gospel, which teaches us
to live soberly in respect of our selves, righteously toward man, and godly
toward God, Tit. 2. 12.

6. The Divine Apostle and Disciple whom Christ loved, comprehends all in two
Commandments, Faith and Love, saying, And this is his Commandment, That we
believe in the name of his Son Jesus Christ, and that we love one another, as
he has commanded us, 1 3. 23.

7. And here we must observe, that prohibitions, reproofs, threatenings,
examples, exhortations, dehortations, promises, denuntiations, and executions
of judgments belong, and are to be referred to the Law of God.

8. Repen^^nce, Faith in Christ, Self-denial, bearing Christ's Cross, are
duties not naturally, but supernaturally moral, and may be reduced to the first
Commandment Evangelically understood. Repentance, as it has God Creator and
Governor in general for it is object; faith as it is an assent to God as the
first truth, revealing his mind to man, or a reliance upon him as promising
some thing to men; Self-denial and bearing the Cross, as they are a total
resignation of our selves unto the will of God made known unto us: I say, all
these in this sense are naturally moral. But consider these as terminated upon
God as Redeemer in Christ, either promised or exhibited, and as conditions upon
which the Salvation of sinful man depends by divine Ordination, they are not
only naturally, but supernaturally moral.

9. When the Commandments of God are contracted and reduced to the love of God
and our Neighbor, we must understand that the love of God, or the love we owe
to God is not only antecedent, and the first in order of nature, but also of
dignity, and far higher and greater then the love of our Neighbor, or which is
due unto our Neighbor: For we must love God with all our heart, soul, mind,
might: and so we must love nothing else. God is worthy of infinite love, and
therefore he loves himself infinitely; yet he requires not in these words an
infinite love from us who are infinite, yet we must love him more then any
other thing, yea far more; we must love him with the highest degree of love
that possibly we can, and should be willing if we could to love him infinitely;
we may exceed in loving our selves or any other thing; in loving God we cannot;
they that love him most, love him far less then he deserves. To love God with
the whole heart is not only to love God sincerely and truly, but to love him so
as that his love may take up, and fill the whole heart; and this is to love God
as God; and if the whole heart be wholly taken up with this love, then all the
powers and faculties of soul and body go along with the heart, and are taken up
with it. Therefore these words, all the Soul, Mind, Strength, are added to that
of the whole heart, to signify the great measure of this divine love.

10. The love of our Neighbor as our selves pre-requireth the love of God: for
if we do not love God first, we can neither love our selves or our Neighbor
aright. For our love of God must measure and qualify both the love of our
selves and our Neighbors, and render it acceptable to God.

11. This love of God presupposes our knowledge of God both as excellent and
amiable in himself, and as good and loving to us, especially in Christ; and
therefore some acts of faith in Christ must go before this love of God as God,
and our God Redeemer and Sanctifier. And as it presuposeth knowledge, and in us
Christians faith in Christ already come, so it vertually includes all
subsequent duties and acts of obedience.

Sect. 7.
Therefore after 1. The general observations premised, and 2. This discourse
upon the several abridgments of the moral Law, I will in the third place
manifest that love is the fulfilling of the Law.

1. The love of God is against all Atheism, Idolatry, Apostasy; renounceth all
confidence in any other thing, and will take God alone to be our God, who
created us, preserves, redeemeth, sanctifies us unto everlasting life, and
will serve him, fear him, trust in him, be loyal and obedient unto him in the
highest degree, and will give all praise, glory, honor, and power to him as
the only supreme Lord.

2. This love will not make any image or likeness of any thing visible or
sensible to represent him, nor cause any such thing to be made for that end;
neither will it ascribe any divine power or sanctifying virtue unto any such
thing; nor make it a sign of Gods special presence, nor worship or serve it, or
serve God by it. It will reject all traditions of men and all superstition in
Religious Worship, and will faithfully observe the institutions of God in
Divine Service.

3. This love will not swear falsely or vainly, to the dishonor of God and
Christ our Savior. It will be careful to swear the truth. It will not profane
or pollute the name of God in the performance of his service, but will worship
God and perform all religious duties with humility and reverence, so that God
in them may be glorified.

4. This love will not profane the times determined and hallowed by God for
his more solemn worship, and will lay aside at those times, not only all
sinful, but all secular employments; and will apply it in public and private,
to the performance of holy and heavenly duties. It will observe the first day
of the week in acknowledgement of Christ's Resurrection, and the coming down of
the Holy Ghost, and by this observation signify our belief of the abolition of
the Law, the taking down of the partition wall, and the uniting of Jew and
Gentile in one body Christian; neither will love so confine it self to one day
in seven as not to observe those standing occasional times of humiliation or
thanksgiving appointed by Authority both Ecclesiastical and Civil for the
public service and solemn Worship of God.

5. If we love God, we will love our selves in God; and as our selves our
Neighbors, and that not only our Acquaintance, Friends, near Relations, but
Strangers, Enemies especially the Children of God; and will do as we would be
done unto. This love will honor, obey, and submit unto all our Superiors;
whether in Family, or State, or Church, according to their places, and will not
dishonor, disobey, or any ways as such, disrespect them.

6. This love will not give way to Anger, malice, envy, implacable revenge, or
any such violent and destructive passion, which tends to the endangering of
limb or life: but it will account the life of our neighbor very precious, and
will use all means to preserve it, and to live in peace, concord, and safety.

7. This love will detest adultery, whoredom, fornication, incest, and all
uncleanness, with all the causes and occasions thereof; it will endeavor
chastity in body and spirit, and use all means to preserve it.

8. This love will not by any fraud or force take away or detain the goods of
his neighbor out of covetousness, or any other iniquity, but will be careful
to give every one their own; and so not only be just, but also merciful, and
liberal when God requires it.

9. This love will not bear false witness against his Neighbor, though his
Enemy, nor any way seek to hinder or pervert just judgment, but will desire and
use their best means to right his Noighbour, and to promote justice in all
judicial proceeding.

10. This love will not covet any thing that is his Neighbors, though he want
it himself, will not envy his prosperity, will not rejoice in the misery of an
enemy; it will seek the good of every one, rejoice in their happiness, look
upon every one, especially a godly man, as his brother.

This love of God and our neighbor will desire, endeavor, and intend the
observation of all these commandments from the heart and soul, and that in
obedience to Jesus Christ, who loved us, and gave himself for us: it will
repent and grieve for disobedience, and speedily return sincerely to God
Redeemer, seek for pardon in the name of Christ, and pray for the Spirit of
sanctification to renew us more and more.

Sect. 8.
In the next place after these natural and supernatural morals, follow the
ceremonials of the New Testament, which are Baptism and the Lords Supper. Of
Baptism I have spoken at large; it remains therefore that I further add
something concerning the Eucharist, which is a Sacrament of the New Testament,
as Baptism is, and follows it, because as that is a Sacrament of our initiation
and regeneration, so this is of our continuance in Christ and the Church, and
of our spiritual nourishment and increase. In this, as in Baptism, we may
observe,

1. The Elements, or Signs. 2. The Actions. 3. The Words.
In Baptism the sensible Sign and Element was single, and only one, which was
Water; but in this Sacrament we have two.

1. Bread. 2. Wine.
Both these presupposing life in them who use them, are great blessings of God,
given to continue and preserve the same, and were singled out and determined by
Christ to be used in this Sacrament to signify the spiritual food and repast
of our souls; and by these two in his heavenly discourse concerning the meat
that perishes not, but endures to everlasting life, did represent unto his
hearers the food of life, which came down from Heaven, whereby sinful men live
for ever. Bread did signify his Flesh and Body which he gave and offered for
the life of the world, and Wine did signify his Blood: And as Bread must be
eaten, and Wine must be drank, that we may live thereby, so by a divine Faith
we must eat his Flesh, and drink his Blood, that we may live for ever. In this
respect this Sacrament agrees with the Eucharistical Offerings, and Sacrificial
Feasts, wherein the Sacrifice was first slain and offered to God, and then part
of it given to men to eat and drink before God in his Sanctuary. Christ's Body
was the Sacrifice, and was crucified, slain, and offered upon the Cross; and in
this Sacrament given and received for our spiritual food. The Bread and Wine
signify his Body; the breaking of the Bread, and pouring out the Wine,
signify his Death and Sacrifice: the eating of this Bread, and the drinking of
this Wine, the participation of those spiritual and heavenly Blessings which he
merited by his Sacrifice, Death, and Passion.

2. The Actions are, according to some,

Consecration, Distribution, Participation;
Yet may be reduced to two: the

1. Of Administration, the 2. Of Participation.
The Administration, which in this Commission is proper to the Minister of the
Gospel, is performed in

Consecrating, or blessing, Breaking, and pouring out. Distribution.
The Participation is

Taking, Eating, Drinking.
1. The Consecration is by word and prayer, thanksgiving, and petition. 2. The
breaking of the Bread, and pouring out of the Wine, do serve not only for the
better distribution, but also to signify the Death and Sacrifice of Christ,
offering himself for our sins. 3. The distribution it self puts us in mind of
God's giving us the benefit of his passion unto our eternal Salvation; for as
in death he was given for us, so in this Sacrament he is given unto us. 4. The
taking, eating, drinking, signifies our receiving by Faith, first of Christ
himself, then of all his benefits. 5. The words are such as our Savior used at
the first Institution and Administration of this Sacrament in the distribution
of the Bread and the Cup.
1. The words used in giving the Bread, are, Take, eat, this is my body, given,
broken for you; do this in remembrance of me. In them we may observe, 1. The
body of Christ. 2. The offering of this body. 3. The giving of it unto
Communicants.

1. The body of Christ was the Sacrifice, or thing to be sacrificed. 2. The
giving and breaking this for us, signifies the offering of this Sacrifice unto
God for to expiate the sins of man. 3. The commanding of man to take, etc.
signifies God's promise, and readiness for to give Christ sacrificed with all
his benefits, commanding, and by command binding man to take; This is the
mystical and hidden matter of this part of the Sacrament. In the outward
sensible matter is 1. Bread, to signify the body of Christ. 2. This Bread
broken, to signify the offering of this body. 3. The taking and eating of this
Bread, to signify the receiving of Christ sacrificed into our hearts by Faith.
4. The manner and end of this receiving, which is expressed in the words, Do
this in remembrance of me. In these words we have 1. The Death and Passion of
Christ. 2. The Covenant. 3. The sealing and confirmation of the Covenant.

1. The Death of Christ, and the Redemption by this death, is expressed in
these words, My body given, broken for you. 2. The Covenant, which consists of
a Promise and a Precept: The promise is employed in the words, Take, eat, this
is my body; the precept expressed in these words, Do this in remembrance of me.
To take and eat is an action of the body; to take and eat in remembrance of
Christ, is an action of the soul: The promise offers remission of sin, the
precept requires Faith and remembrance of Christ's Death, the principal object
of this Faith. 3. The Covenant is sealed and confirmed on Gods part of giving
the bread upon condition of remembrance of Christ's death; or man's part by
taking and eating in remembrance of Christ: so that the bread blessed, broken,
given, taken eaten in remembrance of Christ, is a sign and a feal.

2. The words used in giving the Cup, are, This cup is the New Testament in my
blood; this do, as often as ye drink it, in remembrance of me; Thus Luke and
Paul; Drink ye all of it, for this is my blood of the New Testament, which is
shed for the remission of the sins of many. Thus Matthew; where we have many
things observable, and amongst others these.

1. The blood of Christ shed. 2. The remission of sins. 3. The New Testament.
4. The Cup. 5. The drinking of it in remembrance of Christ.
1. The Blood of Christ shed, and the Body of Christ broken and given, are
nothing else but the Death of Christ, which he suffered upon the Cross for the
expiation of our sins, whereby Gods justice was satisfied, his wrath appeased,
sin made justly pardonable, and man savable. This unspotted blood of Christ the
great High Priest, was of infinite value, the great ransom whereby heaven
gates were opened, and eternal life merited.

2. The end of this blood shed, and this cruel, cursed, and ignominous death
was the actual remission of the sins of many; even of all such as should
believe in him. The shedding of this purest blood accepted of God, made sin
pardonable; the belief in this bloodshed and accepted, obtains actual
remission. For God was so just that he would not pardon any sin without
effusion of this blood, and yet so merciful, that for an inconsideration of the
same believed on by guilty man on Earth, and pleaded by Christ in heaven, he
will fully and for ever pardon sin, and justify the guilty.

3. The Testament is the Covenant* which is so called, because in some respect
it is like a Testament which is confirmed and made effectual by the death of the
Testatour; so the Covenant being grounded upon the death of Christ, whereby he
became mediator of the same, is confirmed by the blood and death of Christ,
and is made eternally effectual: It Is called the New Testament or Covenant, to
distinguish it from the Old, which was also confirmed with blood, Exodus 24. And
is a Covenant not of works and strict justice, but of faith and Gods mercy; and
its said to be the New Covenant in this blood, because confirmed by this blood,
and to be the New Covenant in this blood, and the blood of the New Covenant,
are the same. For both signify the Confirmation of it by Christ's Blood.

4. We have the Cup, that is, the Wine contained in the Cup, which signifies
the Blood of Christ shed for the Remission of sins, and puts us in mind of
Christ's Death, and Blood shed; and its given and taken to confirm the Covenant
renewed between God and the Communicant.

5. The Communicants are commanded to drink of this Cup in remembrance of
Christ's Blood shed for the remission of sin. And by this command they are bound
to drink, and also to drink it in remembrance of Christ; that so by faith they
may receive Christ into their hearts for their spiritual life and comfort. In
this part we have as before in the former, the Redemption, the Covenant, the
fealing of the Covenant. The Redemption was signified before by the bread
broken and given; and here by the Wine in the Cup poured out: for both signify
but one and the same death and sacrifice of Redemption. The Covenant as
formerly, has a promise of remission of sins, and a precept commanding to take
and drink of the Cup in remembrance of his death. And this remembrance
presupposing knowledge and faith with sense of our sins, is practical and
effectual to stir up to love and thankfulness in an high degree. For how can we
remember and seriously consider the greatest love of our Savior unto us his
enemies, his cruel sufferings for us, and the incomparable blessings merited
thereby; and not be made sensible of our sins, rely upon his sufferings, love
our enemies, and be for ever thankful to our God!

3. The sealing of the Covenant in this part is like unto the former. And here
it is to be observed, that the Covenant is sealed and confirmed in this
Sacrament two several times, that God may more fully assure man that as by his
Minister he gives both Bread and wine, so certainly he will give Christ and all
his benefits, and continue constant in his Covenant; and as certainly as he
receives bread and eats it; wine, and drinks it in remembrance of Christ; so
certainly he shall receive remission of sins and eternal life by Christ. And by
the Celebration of this Sacrament, does more deeply engage himself to God for
to continue faithful in his Covenant unto the end.

Sect 9.
Before I conclude this Doctrine of the Eucharist, I will add some observations
upon the same. For,

1. As Christ in Baptism contracted all Purifications, Cleansings, and
Lustrations in the Law; so in this he abridged all the Ilastical and
Eucharistical sacrifices, with their Meat Offerings, Drink Offerings, and
sacrificial Feasts.

2. The Author, institutor and first efficient cause of this Sacrament is
Christ the Son of God our Savior.

3. The subject and principal matter thereof, is the death of Christ, and the
benefits procured thereby.

4. The form is the use of the Elements, with the words according to the first
institution.

5. The end is the continued remembrance of the sacrifice of Christ upon which
depends our eternal salvation.

6. This is one of the Laws of Christ, which we are bound to observe till his
coming to judgment; as appears by these words: Do this in remembrance of me.

7. The dispensation of it belongs to the Minister of the Gospel; for he that
must baptize, must administer the Eucharist, and he that dispenses the one,
must dispense the other Sacrament.

8. The reason why this Sacrament is administered in two several Elements, is
more fully and distinctly to represent the death of Christ, to signify the
plenty of food God has prepared for our souls; and the more strongly to
confirm the Covenant.

9. It Is to be celebrated not only once, but often; and is to be continued in
the Church unto the worlds end.

10. In it we have many points of Christian Doctrine concerning man's sin, Gods
love, the Redemption, the Covenant, and therein of Gods promises, man's duty, as
Repentance and Faith; the benefits wereceive thereby, and the Confirmation of
the Covenant.

11. In it we have many parts of Gods worship employed, as confession of sin,
profession of faith, prayer, charity, thanksgiving: and the whole Celebration
of it, is a piece of Divine Service.

12. By receiving of this Sacrament, we profess our Christianity, our
continuance in the Christian faith, and in the Communion with the holy
Catholic Church, and the Renunciation of all other Religions.

13. By the Doctrine of this Sacrament, and the tenor of Christ's commission, we
understand something of Church Discipline. For as no man before he by the
profession of his faith and promise of obedience manifest himself to be a
Disciple, can be baptized; so no man except he appear to be baptized, continue
in the Christian faith, keep Christ's Commandments, may be admitted to this
Table: neither may one grossly ignorant before he be instructed, or guilty of
scandal, before he signify his repentance and be absolved, be received as a
guest of this heavenly Feast. They also who do neglect it when they are invited
and have opportunity, are unworthy. Therefore besides the power which God gives
unto the Minister, it is fit that in every Church there should be some order
established, and some trusted with power to judge what persons are fit and
worthy, and who are not.

14. No man can have benefit by this Sacrament, but such as are truly penitent
and believing; of whom God can only judge, and the Minister doing his duty
according to his best judgment, and the appearance of such as desire to
communicate, must refer all such as he admits to the judgment of God, who alone
knows the hearts of men. And here its to be noted that such as are habitually
penitent and believing, may so come unto the Sacrament as that they may offend
God because not actually prepared at such a time.

Sect. 10.
The last work to be done for to close up this Chapter, is to reduce the matter
of these Commandments into the form of a more explicit vow; that so every one
that owns his Baptism, may know what by virtue thereof he is more particularly
bound to perform.

1. I believe in one eternal infinite glorious Lord, who has by his Almighty
power created Heaven and Earth, and all things therein; Redeemed mankind by the
precious blood of his Eternal Word made flesh; sanctifies his Elect people, and
by a Covenant of grace is become my God in Christ; do renounce the Devil, the
World, and the Flesh, and all false Gods, and Idols, and all Profane
Irreligious thoughts. I deny my self, and wholly resign up my self unto him,
with all the powers and faculties of my soul and body. I take him for my
supreme Lord, Lawgiver, Judge, Redeemer by Jesus Christ, upon whom alone I
depend for Salvation; and for whom I am ready to bear the Cross, and sacrifice
my self at any time, when called unto it. He alone shall be the object of my
great Love, Fear, Service, Reverence, Confidence, Joy, Solace and Delight. To
him alone I will present my Prayers, Praises, Thanksgiving, Glory, Honor, as
only eternally worthy of it; and abhorring all Pride, I will with greatest
humility adore his glorious Majesty and be nothing in my self, that I may be
all in my God. I tremble to think of Apostasy or denying my Savior, to whom I
will be faithful to the end as I expect glory and life everlasting from my God
by him.

2. I will not make any Image or Likeness of any thing in Heaven and Earth, or
in the Waters under the Earth, for to represent his glorious and eternal
excellency and Godhead, but will abandon all false and base conceits and
apprehensions of him, and look upon him as represented in his mighty and
wonderful works, and his holy and most blessed word. I will not bow down unto
any Image or Likeness for to worship it; nor perform any service unto it, as
though it had any Divine excellency or sanctifying power in it, or were any
sign of Gods special presence without his institution. I renounce all
Traditions, Ceremonies, Customs, Inventions, Practices of men in Religious
Worship that are contrary to Gods Word, or imposed and enjoined as necessary
parts of Worship. I will serve and worship my God with that kind of worship
which he has instituted in the Gospel, which shall be the rule, according to
which I will pray, confess, give thanks, praise, hear the word, celebrate the
Sacraments, and perform all other Religious Service unto him in the name and
mediation of Jesus Christ, and not of Angels, Saints, or the blessed Virgin.
And this shall move me much, because the Lord my God is a jealous God, and will
not endure Superstition in Worship; the devices of men which pollute and debase
his service, tend unto, and many times end in Idolatry, which he will punish
not only in the Fathers who begin it, give examples to others, but also in the
Children unto the third and fourth Generation, and will show mercy to such as
worship him with a pure Virgin love according to his institution, unto a
thousand Generations. Both the fear and love of my God, and the hope of Reward
according to his gracious promises, shall work much upon me.

3. I will not swear vainly or falsely, nor call upon my God to be a witness
against my soul, in affirming or denying any thing which I do not certainly
know to be so, as it is affirmed or denied by me, or in promising that which I
know I have no power to do, or no sincere intention to perform; for so I should
dishonor his glorious name, deceive and disappoint my neighbor, lose my
interest in my God, and bring his curse upon me: for he will certainly punish,
and severely revenge all such iniquity. I promise that when I take up the name
of my God in swearing, praying unto him, praising of his name, and in
performing all other his religious service, I will do it with humility,
reverence, deliberation, due preparation, the sincerity of my heart, that so I
may be innocent before God, just toward men, and that my service may be
accepted of him, and effectually conducing to his glory. I will abhor all
profane cursing, all blasphemous thoughts and words against his Majesty, his
word, and holy Institution.

4. Seeing my God requires a set and determinate time to be set apart for
religious worship, and his more solemn service, I will remember, and have a
special care to observe that holy rest, and apply it to the performance of more
holy duties, converse with my God, and prepare my self for that eternal
sabbath, and full communion with him, which he has promised and prepared to be
enjoined by his people in the place of eternal glory. And seeing he has
granted mesix days for my wordly business, and secular employments, I will
endeavor in that time so to order and dispatch my business, that I may not be
distracted in his service upon that day, which he has appropriated to himself,
and in a peculiar manner made his own: And I will have a care not only to rest
and sanctify that time in mine own person, but I will command such as are
under my power, and use all means to cause them both to rest and sanctify it
with me. And seeing according to the Gospel the first day of the week is
honored, blessed, hallowed by the Resurrection of my Savior, and the coming
down of the Holy Ghost, upon both which depends our eternal Salvation, I will
weekly observe and sanctify that day in remembrance of the great benefits of
Redemption by Christ and of sanctification by the Holy Ghost and of taking down
the partition wall and the shadows of Moses Law, the body and substance whereof
is Christ. And by the observation of this time, I will renounce all Heathenism,
Mahometism, and Judaism; and testify my self a Christian believing in Christ
already come. This day I will not neglect or profane by idleness or any works,
and so profanely mispend it to the dishonor of my God, and the hindrance of my
Salvation. As for works of necessity, of charity toward man or beast, or such
as tend to the sanctification of the day, I will take liberty to do them
according as my God has allowed; neither will I neglect those solemn times of
prayer and thanksgiving appointed by Ecclesiastical and Civil Authority for the
public service of God. And I shall account the free and quiet enjoyment of
these holy times, and the Communion of Saints to be a great blessing.

5. Next unto my God, I must love my Neighbor, made in his image, and redeemed
with the precious blood of Christ; and I must love him as my self. These are
natural Parents, civil Powers, and Magistrates in the State, Ministers in the
Church, and all such as God has set over us for our good. These I promise to
reverence and honor according to their excellency and dignity; I will submit
unto their lawful power, obey their just commands, and give them and all others
my superiors due respect according to their places. If I my self be either
Father, or Mother, or Master, or Magistrate, or Minister, Tutor, Guardian and
Governor, I will endeavor in these several relations to do my duty and seek
the good of these that shall be under my power, and committed to my charge. I
will not dishonor, or disobey, or resist, and rebel against my lawful
Superiors; neither will I be perfidious unto them, nor vex and discomfort
them, but so carry my self toward them, as I desire my inferiors to carry
themselves toward me, that so my God may bless me in that place of my
pilgrimage where he has appointed me to live and sojourn on Earth. For I know
that upon the performance of these duties, according to the promise of God, the
peace and welfare of Family, Church, and State, and all other Societies do much
depend; and that God will curse and punish all disobedient, rebellious, and
unthankful wretches, and such as envy, despise, mock, dishonor, vex,
discomfort their betters.

6. I will put away all wrath, anger, violent passion; and will beware of all
quarrels, dissentions, batteries, wicked thoughts, words, deeds; all secret
plots, designs, and enterprises which may any ways prejudice or endanger the
life, limbs, safety, health of my Neighbor. I will abhor hatred, malice,
purposes to revenge my self, and endeavor to keep my self innocent and free
every way from the innocent blood of others, even of mine enemies. I will
neither be principal or accessory, either by neglect or doing any thing against
any man's life. The health, peace, safety, life and blood of my Neighbor shall
be as precious to me as mine own. I will be patient, meek, loving, kind,
peaceable, ready to be reconciled, forbear, suffer long, forgive, and every
lawful way seek to perserve and keep the life of my Neighbor as mine own.

7. I will abhor all lewd, wanton, unchaste thoughts, purposes, words, deeds,
gestures, apparel, books, immodest company; all adultery, whordom, fornication,
incest, and other kinds of uncleanness. And because idleness, glottony,
drunkenness, and all other kind of intemperance give advantage to the Devil to
tempt us to this sin; therefore I will take heed of them, and all other things
which may be causes and occasions of the same. Marriage with me shall be
honorable, and the marriage bed undefiled. My thoughts, words, deeds, gestures
and carriage shall be chaste; and seeing my body being redeemed with a price,
should be a member of Christ, and the Temple of the Holy Ghost, I will not
defile and dishonor it. I will endeavor chastity in body and spirit, in
marriage or single life; I will not join with any other in this sin, and so
bring the judgments of God upon me.

8. Seeing God has made the Earth and the fullness thereof, given it to the
Sons of men, disposes and dispenses of these Earthly goods as it pleases
him; makes rich and poor, and gives to men something that is justly their
own: I do therefore renounce all unjust thoughts, words, deeds, which tend
unjustly to endammage and impair the estate of my Neighbor. I will neither by
fraud or force, secretly or openly take away or detain that which is another
right. I will not be unjust to any man, nor unmerciful unto the poor, the
fatherless, the widow, or any that are in need, and cannot help themselves; and
I will endeavor to deliver them out of the hand of such as do oppress them.
And that I may be free from this sin of injustice, I will shun idleness and
prodigal courses, and vain and unnecessary expenses. I will not be covetous,
and use any unlawful means to enrich my self; neither will I be improvident, or
unbelieving, orimmoderately, orinordinately careful. I will not be unjust, or
unfaithful in my contracts, commerce, and dealing with other men: nor
carelessly waste my estate by gaming, unnecessary lawsuits or rash suretiship.
I promise to be just, honest, faithful in all my dealing, give every man his
due, restore that which is unjustly taken away, withhold no man's goods trusted
in my hands. I will rather lose then gain to the wrong and damage of another
man. I will not only be just, but merciful and charitable to the poor and
needy, and especially to the indigint and persecuted Saints of God, and to them
I will be liberal according to mine ability. I will be careful that God, the
Church, the State, and every private person may have their due. And that I be
not tempted to injustice, I will painfully labor in some honest way that I may
maintain me and mine; and will be frugal, moderately sparing, provident, and
use just and lawful means of getting and keeping a competent estate, I will be
content with little, and trust in God for these earthly necessaries.

9. God has appointed in all Commonwealths Courts of Judicature, to relieve
the oppressed, right such as are wronged, punish offenders, and rightly judge
all causes, and determine all controversies. And the end of all judgment is
justice; and one means, and the same principal, tending to that end, is
evidence, which often depends upon witnesses; therefore I promise neither as
Party, Plaintiff, or Defendant, nor as Witness, nor Juror, nor Sollicitour, nor
Attorney, nor Advocate, or Counselor, nor Judge, nor Register, to cause men
to believe that which is false, conceal the truth, oppose a just cause, or by
forgery, neglect, infidelity, out of malice, fear, favor, partiality,
covetousness, go about to hinder or pervert just judgment. I will endeavor to
discover the truth, to oppose the unjust cause of a friend, promote the just
cause of an enemy or stranger I will use all means both by my self and others
to do what I can, to take away all needless and unjust delays, help the
helpless, punish offenders, right the innocent, and endeavor to my power that
justice and judgment may have a free passage and flow down like a mighty
stream. I will pray for just Judges, and for integrity in all such as act in
judicial proceedings.

10. Many times it falls out that my Neighbor has such things as I want, or
something better then I have; is in a better condition then I am, and in
prosperity, when I am in adversity; and then such is, or may be the corruption
of my heart and self-love, that I begin to envy him and covet that which is
duly his, and I have no right unto. And out of this envy, and coveting that
which is another man's, much wickedness, if not prevented, may be committed,
therefore I promise and vow by the help of Gods grace to mortify and suppress
betimes these envious thoughts, and unjust covetings, will be content with mine
own estate though poor and mean; I will neither envy another prosperity, nor
rejoice in his Adversity. But I will love my Neighbors as my self, rejoice
with them that do rejoice, and mourn with them that mourn, and will be inwardly
touched with their misery. I will seek their temporal and eternal good, relieve
mine enemies, do good for evil, and overcome evil with good, pray for them that
despitefully use me, bless them that curse me, think none evil, and have
charitable thoughts till I have evidence of the truth to the contrary. I will
endeavor to reform such as do amiss, and wander out of the right way. I will
do all the acts and good offices of love, and will not do any thing contrary to
true love and charity. Thus I will love, not only my private but my public
Neighbor, and I will not deny it to strangers or enemies: and out of this love
will endeavor to do as I would be done unto, and be perfect as my heavenly
Father is perfect, and follow the example of my dearest Savior.

These are the moral Laws of my Savior, which by my Baptism I am bound to
observe. By them I understand my sins to be many, and grievous, and my self
guilty, and liable not only to temporal but eternal punishments; even the
regenerate Children of God cannot obey them perfectly; but have their failings,
and sometimes grievously fall, so that by the works of the law no man living
can be justified; yet this is my comfort, that my Savior by suffering for
these my sins, has made them pardonable, and the punishments deserved by them
avoidable. And he not only dyed for mine offenses, but rose again for my
justification, makes intercession in heaven, and pleads his blood for all
penitent sinners. These things I verily believe, and according to this belief I
rely upon my Savirous propitiation and intercession; and renewing daily my
supplications before the throne of grace, hope to obtain remission of all my
sins against this Law and his other commands. I acknowledge it a great
unspeakable mercy, that my God has made faith and not perfect obedience the
condition of life. As this Law does discover my sins, so it is a rule of my
life; and as I will renew my repentance daily, and seek remission of sin past,
so I will daily pray for the sanctifying power of his Spirit to write th^se
Laws more and more in my heart, to strengthen me against all temptations,
enable me to observe them willingly and with delight; beseeching him to accept
my poor endeavors and to look upon me as washed in the blood of my Savior.

There is another positive and ceremonial Law of my Savior, which I by Baptism
am bound to observe together with these morals; and that is the Sacrament of
the Eucharist, which is to be Celebrated by all Christians to the worlds end,
in remembrance of the Sacrifice sof Christ death. Therefore I promise with an
humble, penitent, and believing heart to come unto this heavenly Table, when I
am invited and called to eat the blessed Bread in remembrance of my Saviors
body, which was broken and offered for me, and drink the blessed* Cup in
remembrance of his blood, whereby the New Covenant is confirmed, as being shed
for the remission of my sins. And as my God by his Ministers giving this Bread
and this Cup, does seal and confirm anew his promises unto me to strengthen my
faith and hope, so I will by receiving these Elements according to the first
institution, solemnly renew and confirm my engagement for the performance of
the conditions of the Covenant, and thereby I will testify my union with the
Church, my charity to all, my thankfulness to Christ, and will never forget his
unspeakable love to my poor soul, manifested in his sacrifice of everlasting
virtue, and will hope according to the integrity of my heart, though my
failings be many, that he will increase my graces and heavenly comforts upon
the receiving of the same.

Chap. 8. Of Prayer, one of Christ's Commandments.
Sect. 1.
PRayer is a duty required in the moral Law of God, especially as it is
understood Evangelically: and is to be used both by every Christian both in
private and public, and also by the universal Church whilst Militant on Earth,
until it become triumphant in Heaven, when all prayers shall be turned into
praises, and petitions into thanksgiving. Its a part of Gods worship both moral
and ritual; for neither Word nor Sacraments can be rightly* dispensed without
it: and this is the reason why it takes up so great a part of our Liturgies and
Forms of Worship* To pray always is one of Christ's Commandments, and without
prayer we can neither observe his Commandments, nor persevere in our
profession; because without prayer we cannot expect grace, which is necessary
to enable us to do both. And because it is continual, a necessary, and an
excellent piece of service, I intend to speak of it more particularly and
distinctly. And for order sake I will,

1. Premise some generals. 2. Expound the Lords Prayer. 3. Reduce the matter of
it into a form of Prayer.
1. Prayer may be described thus. It Is a part of God's Worship wherein we
represent our minds unto God. As it is a part of God's Worship, it is to be
ranked amongst the duties of the first Table, and in several respects to be
referred to the several commandments of it. It looks at God as supreme Lord of
infinite and eternal excellency and perfection, as all other religious acts do;
yet it considers in God some particular perfections more then others, as shall
be showed hereafter. The more particular nature of it is a presentation of our
minds to God. The matter thereof is something in our minds, which we desire and
propose to make known to God; and the act of it is the representations of these
to his glorious Majesty. Therefore the Schoolmen make prayer to be an act of
the understanding, presupposing the heart first affected with those things
which are the matter of our prayers, which were nothing to purpose without the
affection of the heart, which may be said to animate and give life unto them;
yet we must not think that we can inform God (who knows our thoughts afar off)
of any thing which he is ignorant of. Therefore the intention of prayer is not
only to honor him, but to move and affect him with the matter represented.
This is the nature of prayer largely taken, so as to include in one continued
Speech, Petition, Praise, Thansgiving. Therefore Praise and Thanksgiving are
said to be parts of Prayer, which in respect of the representation of our minds
is said to be a speaking unto God, and a conference with him: For in all these
we address our selves to God, approach to his Throne, and express our minds
unto him, and pour our hearts out before him. Petition ascends, mercies
descend, praise and thanksgiving are returned unto him again. Prayer strictly
taken, is an humble presentation of our petition unto God as able and willing
to effects them. This may be made either unto a false God or the true God: and
to the true God either according to the Law of Nature, or the Light of Grace;
and that either implicitly in the name of Christ as before his Ascension, or
explicitly as after. They must be made especially by us Christians in the name
of Christ, who by his blood has satisfied Gods justice, made him propitious,
the Throne of grace accessible, has merited all mercies, promised to be our
Advocate, and to solicit our cause in heaven, and procure for us whatsoever
we ask in his name. They must also be made by the Spirit, who alone does
sanctify us and qualify our hearts for this duty, and enables us to perform it
so as that it may be effectual, and when we know not how to pray as we ought,
he stirs up in us sighs, and groans, which cannot be uttered; by which he makes
intercession for us to the Father, who not only understands these dark
expressions, but is much moved and affected with them: So that a Christian
effectual prayer is a presenting of our petitions to God the Father, in the
name of Christ by the Spirit! And how powerful must that prayer be which is
offered to the Father in the name of his Son, by the power and grace of his
Spirit! A prayer may be made inwardly in the soul, without any words of the
Mouth, and it may be ^o qualified as to prevail very much with God, who
principally looks at the heart. It may be made outwardly, and that without any
understanding, sense and inward affection: and this is but a Carkase of prayer,
and not regarded of God, though delivered in most excellent expressions, and as
it were in the language of Angels. This outward prayer whether said or sung, in
Prose or Verse, if made in public or in company, must be in a language, and in
terms more easily understood by the people with whom we pray, that they may say
Amen, which they cannot, if they understand not. And though they understand,
yet if their hearts be not affected with the matter, and rightly disposed
toward God, its to no purpose. For all outward prayer should be joined with
the inward, and issue from an heart rightly disposed. A prayer of a righteous
man may sometimes be ineffectual, because its not made by him as righteous.

Sect. 2.
These things concerning prayer in general observed, I proceed unto the Lords
prayer; we find many particular prayers, praises, and thanksgivings in the
Scripture, and many forms both for public and private devotion taken out of
this blessed Book; yet all these seem to be but so many branches of that
excellent form, which our Savior taught his Disciples, wherein he contracted
the substance of all lawful prayers, and that in an excellent method. It was
taught and prescribed in the days of his humiliation, and was suitable unto
their present light and condition. For herein he gives no direction how to ask
any thing in his name: and the reason was, he was not yet glorified, nor made
Advocate general in heaven, nor possessed of his glorious Kingdom. This may
seem to be intimated in that petition, Thy Kingdom come. For then to him and so
to them it was to come. In it we may observe.

1. The Entrance or Preface. 2. The Body and Matter. 3. The Conclusion.
In the entrance we may take notice of

1. The parties who must perform this duty. 2. The parties for whom Prayer must
be made. 3. The party to whom Prayer must be made. 4. The qualification of the
Prayer it self.
1. The parties who must perform this duty, are persons living on Earth, who
have not lost their interest in God, upon whom all and every one depends; and
our necessities are many and great, and prayer is Ordained as a means whereby
all things we need may be obtained, and that more certainly, because we have a
Promise. Besides its an universal Command, and all Men are bound in that
respect to pray, and by prayer to worship and glorify God. For by it we
acknowledge that God is the supreme Lord, the fountain of all goodness, the
Father of Mercies, willing freely to give us what we need; and that we are
miserable and indigent persons, and that God is no ways bound to relieve us or
supply our wants, but only he promised to hear and help, and this promise was
freely made. Some will not pray, some cannot; some can pray, but not
effectually; yet all these are bound to pray, and therefore their sin or misery
must be very great.

2. The persons for whom we must pray, are our selves and all others, who are
capable of any benefit by our prayers. For we are directed to say, ( Our
Father) and in this word ( Our) we include our selves and others too. As we
must love our Neighbor as our selves, so we must pray for our Neighbor as for
our selves. And by Neighbor we must understand, not only our Acquaintance and
Friends but strangers and Enemies. For we must pray for them which despitefully
use us. So Christ prayed for such as did Crucify him; saying, Father, forgive
them, for they know not what they do; yet as we must love some more then
others, so we must pray more especially for some then others, most of all for
the Church and our persecuted Brethren. For Christian charity in our prayers
does enlarge it self, and abhors partiality and selflove.

3. The person to whom we must pray is God, and God is our Father in heaven.
Father is a word of power and pity; Father in heaven is a term of supreme power
and infinite pity. And if all the power and pity of all Fathers, even the best,
were united in one, yet all were nothing to the pity and power of our God. This
Father loved us, and gave his Son for us, when we were Enemies, and called us,
when we were dead in Sins and Trespasses; greater love never was manifested to
any creature, and greater love to any creature there cannot be. And how much
must he love us, when once we begin to love him as our God! What cannot a
Father in heaven, what will not a father in Christ do for his Children? seeing
in him meet in one power and pity, might and mercy, greatness and goodness,
which include all his perfections. Thus we must conceive of God, to whom we
address our selves, to whom we direct our prayers.

4. The qualifications of prayers are many. 1. One is faith, whereby we believe
that he is present in all places at all times; hears all prayers, knows all
things, and with what heart we pray; that he is just, holy, wise, of infinite
goodness, and unspeakable mercy in Christ, who makes intercession for us in
heaven, that his power is Almighty, and his dominion over all things is
supreme. 2. In respect of his infinite and eternal excellency and supreme
dominion, we must come into his presence with all humility and reverence
adoring his eternal Majesty. 3. As he is holy, we must be holy, and draw near
with pure and upright hearts. 4. As he is just, we must petition for just
things. 5. As he is a father, we must be obedient Children. 6. As he is full of
love, so we must pray in charity and love toward others. 7. As he is Almighty
and Almerciful in Christ, in whom he has promised all things, we must pray in
greatest confidence. 8. Because our necessity is great, and we seek great and
necessary things from him, so we must be instant, importunate, wrestle with
him, and not let him be quiet till he hear, help, and bless us.

Sect. 3.
In the body of the prayer we must observe the Method and excellent order, to
which he has reduced all matters to be prayed for. To understand this, we must
consider that he has made two general heads and parts of petition: the 1. Of
supplication, the 2. Of deprecation. In the former we petition for all good we
can justly desire: In the latter we seek deliverance from all evil, where unto
we are subject. The good we pray for is spiritual or temporal; the spiritual
respects Gods glory in 1. ( Hollowed be thy name) or our spiritual happiness in
the coming of his Kingdom. 2. In doing of his will. Temporal good we pray for,
when we say, Give us this day our daily Bread. Deliverance from evil is two
fold, either from sin or affliction. The evil of sin is either guilt of sin
past, or temptation to sin in time to come. The former we seek in these words,
Forgive us our trespasses as we forgive them who trepass against us. The latter
in these, Lead us not into Temptation. Deliverance from evil we pray for when
we say, Deliver us from evil.

Sect. 4.
We begin our petitions with these words, Hallowed be thy Name; where by name
we must understand the excellent Majesty, and supreme Dominion of God our
heavenly Father; in respect of which all honor, glory, power and praise are
due to him, and ought to be ascribed unto him by men and Angels for ever: yet
all this does not make him more glorious and excellent then he is in himself:
for what can be added to that which is infinite? This excellency and supreme
dominion we profess to believe in the first Article of our Creed, and promise
to acknowledge in the first commandment of the moral Law. And here we pray for
the universal acknowledgment in the first Petition; for such must be our
respect to him, as that above all things his name may be glorified: therefore
in these words we pray that his name and supreme excellency may be manifested
more and more both by his Ordinary and Extraordinary works of creation and
providence; and also by his blessed word, especially by the Gospel of Christ.
^. That being manifested to us and to all others, it may be more and more
clearly known. 3. That being known, we and all others may acknowledge it, and
submit with all our hearts to him as supreme Lord; and that he may be glorified
in the eternal destruction of such as will not honor him as supreme Lord. In
these words we pray against all Atheism, Idolalatry, Profaneness, Rebellion,
Apostasy, and the usurpation of divine power.

2. We pray, Thy Kingdom come, where we have 1. A kingdom. 2. The coming of it.
3. A petition for the coming of it. Gods Kingdom is twofold, 1. Universal and
general over all. 2. Special over men. The latter here is meant; this second
Kingdom respects Men as sinful and ready to perish; yet as having some hope of
Salvation by the Redemption of Jesus Christ; therefore its the kingdom of God
Redeemer, looking upon Man as first redeemed, and so ordinable unto everlasting
salvation: for sinful Man's happiness begins in Gods love, which moved him to
give Christ to death for the Expiation of our sins: for this was the laying the
foundation of Eternal Life. The coming of this Kingdom is the exercise of his
power to make redemption effectual; for then this kingdom comes to any person
or persons, when God Redeemer begins to reign by his Word and Spirit, and by
them calls men to repentance and faith. The end where at this government aims
is the ruin of all enemies, and the eternal peace of all such as shall submit
unto his power, and continue to be loyal and obedient subjects. Thus God did
always reign since the first promise of Christ made unto Adam, but this reign
advanced and became more glorious after that Christ was ^et at the right hand
of God, sent down the Holy Ghost, revealed the Gospel, and it shall be
consummate when all enemies shall be subdued, and Gods chosen Saints fully and
for ever glorified. Some make two degrees of this Government; the first of
grace, and the second of glory: The one begins with our first conversation, the
other with the resurrection. In this petition therefore we do not seek of God
the coming of Christ, nor the conquest of Sin, and Satan upon the Cross, nor of
death by his resurrection, nor his exaltation to the right hand of God, nor the
beginning of his reign: for all these are past. But we pray that our heavenly
Father would, 1. Send his Ministers with the Gospel, and the power of his
Spirit into all nations, who sit in darkness, and the shadow of death, and
contrive the means of conversion to all people who enjoy them, and in
particular to us. 2. That he would make these means effectual to the conversion
of many. 3. That he would justify, sanctify adopt all such as are converted.
4. That he would do these things more and more till he has subdued all sin in
them. 5. That he would hasten to subdue death, the last enemy, by the
resurrection, and the last change of mortal bodies. 6. That all enemies being
conquered, he may reign perfectly, and that when Christ has delivered up the
kingdom, God may be all in all his Saints, and give them perfect holiness, full
joy, and peace everlasting. 7. That he would by degrees, and at last totally
and finally destroy all the power of Satan, Sin, Death, wicked Men, which
oppose our Salvation and Eternal Peace. The principal thing desired is first
eternal life, then all means which conduce unto the end. The principal effect
of this Government is destruction of Rebels and Enemies, and the conversion and
salvation of his People. To this head may be referred all Petitions for the
ruin of Babylon and Antichrist, persecuting Enemies, both open and secret, for
good Magistrates, Ministers, and Governors in Church and State; for powerful
preaching of the Gospel, for good discipline, and due administration of the
Sacraments: and here is to be observed, that the more his Kingdom comes, the
more his name is hallowed and glorified.

3. Yet because no man can enjoy the benefits, peace, and privileges of any
Kingdom, tho never so excellent, except he will submit unto the power of the
Prince, observe his Laws, and do his will; therefore that we may attain to the
eternal peace and felicity of this Kingdom, we pray that the will of our
heavenly Father may be done; where we have,

1. The will of God. 2. The doing of it. 3. The manner or pattern of doing, 4.
The thing petitioned for in these words.
1. The will of God is sometimes his decree, sometimes his command, or law;
this will here intended is not his decree, but his law: the matter of the
decree is something that God will do; the matter of the command is something
that man must do: and the effect of this will once signified, is the obligation
of man unto obedience, or upon disobedience unto punishment: and by this will
here is meant the Laws of God Redeemer in force under the Gospel. And these
Laws by some are reduced to repentance, faith, obedience to Gods Laws,
continued after our first faith and conversion* and this according to the parts
of the vow made in Baptism. All well ordered Kingdoms have their laws, which
all such as will be admitted subjects, or will receive protection and enjoy the
privileges of that Government, must observe. And so it is in the Kingdom of
God Redeemer; and these Laws are moral, yet Evangelically understood, or
positive and ceremonial. The moral are fundamental or superstructive. The
fundamental is that which requires subjection aad fealtv to the Sovereign
Christ Jesus, and submission to his power; the superstructive are such Laws
moral as are grounded upon this; such are all the Commandments following the
first. And whereas some understand this will as well of the Executive will, as
the Legislative; yet that's not proper, though true in some sense.

2. To do this will, does presuppose that the Laws be published, and that by
the same the will of God be made known, that none but such as are negligent or
wilful, may be ignorant. This being presupposed, 1. We must have a certain
knowledge of the Will of our heavenly Father. For if in every action of a man
as he is a man and a rational creature, knowledge be requisite and necessary,
much more in this obedience. To do that which is commanded by God, and not to
know its Gods command, is no obedience unto God. 2. After this Will is once
known, there must be a free and full consent and steadfast resolution for to
conform unto it, and that not only because the commands of God are just, and
holy, the doing them is pleasing unto him, and beneficial unto man; but for
this very reason, because we know them to be the commands of God. 3. Because
neither of these can be done except we renounce our own conceits, imaginations,
lusts and corrupt inclinations of our own hearts; therefore we must resign up
our understandings to the wisdom, and our own wills wholly to the Will of God.
4. This doing does not stay and rest in knowledge and good affection, but must
proceed to endeavors, and if our power fail not, to the doing, prosecuting and
finishing of the things commanded: for our obedience should reach to the full
measure of the command. 5. This will is observed, not only in doing good, but
in suffering evil, and that with patience and thankfulness. 6. We must submit
unto the executive will of God, and be content therewith, even then when the
works of Gods providence do cross us, and seem to be contrary to his Laws. For
they may seem sometimes to be so, though they never are so; yet they may be
above these Laws, and beyond the reach of our understanding. No man can do this
will by nature except he be regenerate by grace. And because our knowledge is
imperfect at the first, and our spiritual ability poor, therefore we must
improve them more and more.

3. The manner how this will must be performed, and the measure of our
obedience, is expressed by a pattern given us in heaven. For we are taught to
pray, Thy will be done on Earth as it is in Heaven. This implies, that God has
Subjects in Heaven. 2. That these do his will more perfectly. 3. That we must
follow this Example, and aim at that perfection. These Subjects are not the
Stars and Lights of Heaven as some do understand the words: Though its true
that these observe a constant regular Motion, according to an order preferred
in the Creation, and never were Exorbitant or swerved from the rule since the
beginning. Only if God do command them to stand, they stand; or go back, they
go back: or withhold their light, they refuse to give it. But these are not
intelligible creatures or capable of Laws; yet they may be witnesses against
us, confound us, and make us for ever ashamed of our disobedience. Therefore
the words are meant of Angels, which are Spirits Intellectual, and most noble
creatures, and their proper place is Heaven; and therefore styled in Scripture
the Angels of Heaven. Of these its written, That they do Gods Commandments
harkening to the voice of his pleasure, Psalm. 103. 20. The perfection of their
obedience is in this, that they never sinned but always obeyed God from the
first moment of their creation. They did Gods will. 1. Always and in all times
2. They did it in all things. 3. They did it freely, readily, and with joy and
delight. 4. They did it in the highest degree of their perfection. So that
their obedience was constant, universal, free, and perfect. This example we
must follow, striving to attain their perfection, though we cannot reach it,
and never rest till God has fully sanctified us, and made us perfectly
Righteous and Holy as they are. This pattern does not exclude that of Sanits
and Martyrs, though it come short; yet we have a more excellent and glorious
example of Christ, which is more perfect then that of theirs, because they
never denied themselves, and bare the Cross as he did.

4. In these words. 1. We confess our ignorance, errors, blindness,
corruption, inclination to sin, aversness to good, and our impotency, which by
nature is such, that of our selves we can do nothing. 2. We pray for Gods
preventing, regene rating, cooperating, assisting, and consummating grace, and
that he would enlighten us, inspire and sanctify us so, that we may clearly
unsterstand, and effectually do his will from our hearts, aiming at his glory.
3. That we would sanctify us more and more, that we may daily improve our
knowledge and Obedience. 4. That he would strengthen and assist us continually,
that we may persevere in an universal obedience to the end. This sanctifying
grace we desire as merited by Christ, to be given us by the Spirit according to
his promise; yet we do not expect it so from him, as though he should do all
things, and we do nothing; we must use the means he has appointed, exercise
the power he has given us, hearken unto the Doctrine of the Gospel, meditate
in the same, and continually pray for his assistance; we must be diligent,
careful, watchful, continually depending upon him. To this position we may and
must refer all the prayers of Gods Saints recorded in Scripture, wherein they
seek of God, knowledge, understanding, wisdom, faith, charity, and all other
heavenly virtues, with the increase of them, and Gods perpetual assistance and
direction. And though our perfection be very little, our imperfections many,
yet we must desire and endeavor to be perfectly obedient to the end.

4. We pray, Give us this day our daily Bread: In the former part of this form
of prayer we sought of God spiritual blessings, and such as tended more
immediately to Gods glory, and our salvation: And in this we sue for temporal
mercies, and the necessary comforts of this life, whilst we are seeking a
better: and the order here observed by our Savior does teach us that we must
prefer spiritual graces before temporal blessings, and seek Gods Kingdom, and
his righteousness first: which if we do, we may more certainly expect our daily
Bread, according to his promise. In the words we have,

1. Bread. 2. Our daily Bread. 3. This day. 4. Our petition for this to be
given us.
1. By bread is meant all necessary comforts of this life, which are given us,
that we may more cheerfully and freely without distraction serve our God, seek
his Kingdom, and do his will. Bread which is the staff of Life, and has great
affinity with Man's Body, is only namely to signify that we must not seek
unnecessary dainties, rarities, variety, superfluity, and abundance to expend
them in maintaining our Pride, pomp, and pleasure. These necessaries signified
by bread are private or public, temporal Commodities, Goods, Blessings, as
health, food, raiment, house, lands, cattle, and other things whereby Man's life
is preserved; and also good government, peace, seasonable and plentiful times,
safety, quiet, enjoyment of that we have, and Gods blessing upon our labors.

2. Our daily bread, that is the bread of our indigency, which we daily want;
so the Syriack: our Bread for to morrow, so the Arabic our Food of every day,
so the Ethiopick, our Bread which is necessary for the day. The meaning of all
is, that by daily bread is meant a competent portion of necessaries fit for the
preservation of our lives; so that we need not perish, or be distracted with
fear of want.

3. This day, that is the present time of our life, and does imply that our
life is not long, neither must we expect to live many days; and though we have
not provision beforehand, but from hand to mouth, as the Proverb is, yet we
should be content, and trust in God; we must not perplex, or distract our
selves with thoughts of future times, nor promise to our selves long life, and
torment our souls with needless and ineffectual cares, as tho we had no faith,
no Father in heaven, no Interest in him, or think that he that feeds the Ravens
who make no provision for time to come, nor have any thing laid up in store,
will be so careless of us as to see his Children want bread.

4. We in these words petition our heavenly Father to give us this bread. This
implies, 1. That we have nothing, not one morsel of bread but from our God. 2.
That he gives us this, and all things necessary, freely; we do not deserve or
buy it, but beg it at his hands; therefore 1. we seek it of him by prayer for
our selves and others. 2. That he would continue to provide for us still. 3.
That he would bless that which he gives; and we possess, unto us; for if he
give it not, we have nothing: if he continue it not, its easily took from us;
and tho we be as rich as Job, yet we may be as poor as he was in a day; have
much this hour, and have nothing the next; and that our best and most wholesome
food without his blessing can do us no good. 4. We pray that God would deliver
us from Diseases, sickness, famine; nakedness, sword, oppression, drought,
inundation, unseasonable times, and all such things as deprive us of our daily
bread: and because we never knew what want of bread is nor ever considered how
much we depend for these things upon our God; therefore we so little prize
these earthly comforts, and are unthankful for these mercies. 5. We must with
our prayers labor, and use lawful means for the attaining of these things, be
provident, frugal, liberal, charitable, and expend as much as we can spare in
pious uses: and then that Father who will give us Eternal, will surely give us
Temporal blessings; he that will give us an heavenly kingdom, will give us
earthly necessaries; and he that has given us Christ, will with him give us
all things.

5. We pray for forgiveness of our sins in these words, Forgive us our
trespasses as we forgive them that trespass against us. Here begins the
deprecatory part of this prayer, whereby we seek deliverance from evil, and
that which is contrary to our happiness. This kind of prayer is sometimes
joined with weeping, fasting, complaints, lamentations, and confession of sins.
The first evil is that of sin past, which remains in the guilt; for to
understand this petition we must consider,

1. Trespasses. 2. Our trespasses. 3. The forgiveness of trespasses. 4. The
party forgiving. 5. The party capable of forgiveness.
1. By trespasses we must understand sin and disobedience to Gods Laws: the
word which in St. Matthew signifies debts, is expounded in Luke by a word which
signifies sins, and all sins are debts: or rather contract debts: for first we
owe unto God obedience, and by the Law are bound to perform it: but if we pay
not this, but prove disobedient, we run into another debt, and owe a punishment
to God; and by the same law are bound to suffer it: for we are bound unto
obedience by the precept, and to punishment by the commination of the law. When
sin is once past, the guilt thereof, which is an obligation unto punishment,
remains. The punishments which man deserves, and God does threaten, are not
only bodily and temporal, but spiritual and eternal: The reason and cause why
sin does render the sinner liable to the displeasure of God, and to so many and
fearful penalties, not only of the loss of all those mercies God has promised,
but of suffering of all those evils God does threaten, is because it is so base
and vile, and so unworthy and unbeseeming so noble a creature as man is by Gods
creation, that it must needs offend God, pollute man, and deba^e him very much:
its contrary to Gods justice and holiness, and includes in it a contempt of
Gods power and of his law, which is a mirror of wisdom and righteousness. The
sins of men are many, and of different sorts; there is sin original, sin
actual, sin of omission, sin of commission, sin against the law of nature, sin
against the law of grace, and a great inequality between these actual
transgressions; some less, some more heinous, and such as may be several ways
fearfully agravated; and the more of will there is in any sin, the more
grievous it is.

2. These sins and trespasses are said to be (Ours) so that we are chargeable
with them and punishable for them. For though the Devil may tempt us, yet he
cannot force us, cannot necessitate us. Though our wants, defects, and
imperfections be many, and our corruptions, what by nature, what by custom, be
great, yet they are some ways from our selves. And we make our selves guilty by
consent, so that our hearts are the chiefest subject, and also either the sole,
or principal, or accessory causes of our sins. This consent appears by our
continuance in them, or return unto them; and that especially, when we contrary
to the light of nature, the law of God, and other means and motives of
repentance walk according to the imaginations and lusts of our hearts.
Therefore we must say Our trespasses, that we may charge our selves, and
justify God.

3. The Forgiveness of Sins, the freeing of the party sinning from the sad and
woeful consequents of sin, and especially from the guilt, and so from the
punishment; in this respect its called remission, or absolution, loosing,
because pardon takes away the obligation unto penalty. This act of forgiveness
presupposes first, that sin is pardonable, and that without any violation or
breach of justice; yet according to the rules of Gods proceeding with sinful
man, this cannot be without satisfaction made unto divine justice. Therefore
God to signify that he was just and hated sin, yet willing to show mercy to
the sinner, required the bloody sacrifice of his dearest Son to be offered
without spot unto his eternal Majesty, before he would grant that any sin of
man should be pardonable; and this blood must be pleaded by Christ in heaven
before he would actually pardon any. Neither would this bloodshed pleaded be
accepted for any but such as were penitent, and believing, and did rely upon
this satisfaction and intercession. And this freedom from guilt does not leave
the party pardoned under the dominion of sin, which is the greatest penalty,
but is always joined with sanctification of the divine Spirit, without which
remission is to little purpose; because the root of sin remains, and will be a
cause of new sin, which will make man punishable again; when man is thus
pardoned and purified, the greatest cause of shame, of fear, of grief, is taken
away, Gods wrath averted, the sinner reconciled, adopted, and in a state of
salvation, of peace, and joy, in hope of everlasting life. There is no sin but
is pardonable in respect of Christ, death, Gods mercy, and the general promise;
yet upon impenitency and unbelief no sin, not the least shall actually be
pardoned. There are some sins so heinous and so directly contrary to the blood
of Christ and the holy Spirit, and no benefit can be expected from the blood,
nor any hope of repentance to be wrought by that Spirit, which was never
promised to renew such persons. These are sins to death, for which we must not
pray. By forgiveness we are freed from the eternal punishment by way of
prevention, from present punishment lying upon us by way of removal.

4. The party which can forgive, and to whom we sue for pardon, is God, yet as
atoned and propitiated by the blood of Christ. This is proper unto him; for as
he is the supreme Lawgiver, so he is the supreme Judge, whose peremptory
sentence is irrevocable; from him lies no appeal; who only knows the hearts of
men seeking pardon, who alone can free not only from temporal but eternal
punishments, and can execute his sentence to the full, which none else can do.
He may make use of men to declare his sentence, and apply his promises to such
as by them being prepared may seem capable of pardon; yet their sentence and
absolution on earth is so far good and valid, as he shall ratify and make it
effectual in heaven. This absolution by some is said to be only declarative, by
others to be judicial; yet if it be passed by virtue of their commission and
according to the rules of that commission from Christ, its judicially
declarative. Therefore if man believe, Christ plead, the Church absolve, and
God justify, who can condemn? who can lay any thing to our charge?

5. The parties who being capable of remission, upon their prayers shall obtain
mercy, are such as being conscious and sensible of their sins, are grieved,
because they have offended God, hate sin, loath themselves, are willing to
amend their lives, confess themselves guilty, offer the sacrifice of an humble
and contrite spirit, rely upon the Death and Intercession of Christ, the
promise and mercy of God, and are as willing to be merciful to their offending
Brethren, returning unto them, as they desire God to be merciful unto them.
These, and only these, are they who shall be washed in the Blood of Christ, and
justified before the throne of God, and being justified, shall have peace with
God, and joy in the hope of glory. In these words therefore we in all humility
and godly sorrow, confessing our sins, and daily renewing our repentance, do
earnestly pray that God for Christ's sake would forgive our many and grievous
sins, turn away his wrath, receive us into favor, look upon us as his
children, give us joy and comfort, seal unto us a pardon, by giving us his
blessed Spirit of consolation, and sanctification, that so we being delivered
from the terrors of conscience, the accusations of the devil, the danger of
hell, and fear of eternal death, may magnify his mercy, and glorify his name
for evermore.

6. We pray, Lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil. This
petition is against sin, and respects it as to come, and us as in danger to
contract new guilt: for as before, so after our-penitent and believing Prayers
made in this name of Christ, we have obtained remission of sin past, we may be
tempted and overcom, and so sin again: therefore we pray to be delivered from
temptation. And here we must consider,

1. What temptation is. 2. What it is to be led into temptation. 3. What we
pray for in these words. 4. What it is to be delivered from evil.
1. To tempt in this place is taken in an ill sense, and to tempt is to
solicit and persuade man to sin, and disobey the just and good and holy Laws
of God: and seeing man is endued with understanding and free will, the way is
to delude his understanding, and pervert his will, by representing that which
is evil as good, and that which is good as evil, and by taking away the fear of
punishment, and promising some happiness to follow, that so the understandding
may assent to that which is false, and the will consent to that which is evil.
Those suggestions are always false, and contrary to the holy Scriptures; and
the thing persuaded unto is against the Laws of God, which always should be the
rule of our thoughts, words, and deeds: So likewise the swasives and motives
are contrary to the promises and the comminations of the word. And if we be
ignorant of the Scriptures, depraved in our hearts, or rash and inconsiderate,
the tempter will have great advantage against us. The great tempter the devil,
that old subtle serpent who deluded our first mother Eve, persuaded her, that
in transgressing Gods law, there was no fear of death, but certain hope of high
advancement, as he is subtle, so he is malicious, restless, raging, knows our
weakness, takes all advantages, and seeks our everlasting ruin. Besides the
Devil, there are the wicked men of the world, who are his agents, who by their
evil example, customs, laws, promises, threats, preferments, persecutions, and
many other ways seek to draw us unto sin: therefore if any person either fear
men more then God, and temporal miseries more then eternal punishments, or love
himself more then God, and the world more then heavenly glory and eternal life,
then a little temptation will easily draw such an one into transgression. We
are also said to be tempted in this respect by our own lust or concupiscence;
for when any occasion is offered, we are easily moved and overcome. Such is our
ignorance and blindness, that our understanding is easily deluded. Such is the
corruption of our wills, that we are easily perverted. This makes us like
tinder, and we take fire at every spark of temptation: nay, we are so vile by
nature, that our own corruption inclines us unto sin, and sometimes when there
is no temptation from without, carries us violently into iniquity.

2. To be led into temptation is not merely to be tempted, but something more;
for one may be tempted, and yet be in no great danger, because the party
tempted may be so armed and prepared, that the temptation may be overcome, and
that sometimes with ease: so that in such a case there is no great danger: but
one may be said to be led into temptation, when the party tempted is weak, or
surprised, or deserted, or over-powred, or brought into such straits, that
there is great fear of a foil, and little hope of escape, because of the
advantage gained by the tempter, and disadvantage befallen the person tempted.
In this case the danger is great, and the temptation difficult, if not
impossible to be overcom. This is to be brought into the midst of potent
enemies, plunged into the depth of great waters, and cast into the mouth of the
Lion, and so sin is unavoidable.

3. In these words we pray, 1. That God would so order all occurrences and
events, that we may not be brought into straights; for this petition implies
that nothing can come to pass without the providence of God, doing or
permitting what he pleases, and ordering all events. Without his permission
neither man nor devil can tempt us; without it Satan could not touch Job, nor
be a lying Spirit in the mouth of Ahab's Prophets, nor enter so much as into
the Herd of Swine. And the event of all temptations depends upon his will. 2.
That when we are too weak, he would restrain the malice and power of Satan. 3.
That he would not suffer us to be secure, and so easily surprised. 4. That he
would continually arm and strengthen us, that we may not only resist, but
overcome. 5: That he would not suffer us to presume upon our own strength, or
despair of his assistance. 6. That he would not desert us in the day of trial
and great danger. 7. That he would so inflame us with the zeal of his glory,
possess us with the fear of sin and his wrath, and the desire of heavens glory,
that no earthly prosperity may much affect us, or any earthly affliction much
daunt us; yet he requires that we acknowledge all our strength to be from him,
that the issue of all temptations depends upon him, that renouncing our own
strength we trust in him, that we continually watch and pray, and use all means
to provide for our safety; and when we see and consider the fall of David,
Peter, and other eminent Saints, how great cause have we to fear and be
careful! This must be our daily prayer, and our earnest petition.

4. To deliver us from evil may be understood to be a distinct petition from
the former, or part of the same. In the former sense evil is not the evil of
sin from temptation, but the evil of affliction. And in this sense we desire
God so to perfect and bless us, as either to prevent the miseries, troubles,
afflictions, and adversities, of the world; or if we fall into them, that he
would sanctify them unto us, for our spiritual good, give us strength to bear
them with patience, and in the end deliver us out of them, and hasten that day
and time, when there shall be no sorrow, pain, crying, but eternal peace and
joy, when all sorrow shall flee away, and all tears be wiped from all faces,
yet though God by these does chastise and try us, yet the devil by them takes
advantage to tempt us unto many sins, and discourage us in the ways of
godliness: So great is the frailty of man, that both in prosperity and
adversity he is in danger, and in both has need to pray to be delivered from
evil: therefore the wisdom of God mixeth our joys with sorrow, and our
prosperity with adversity.

For thine is the Kingdom, etc. Some make this no part of the body, but the
conclusion of the Prayer. We find not these words in Luke, nor in many Greek
Copies, nor in the Arabic, and therefore it may be a question whether our
Savior added them to this form of Prayer or no: but suppose them to be the
words of our Savior, it is doubted whether that be a form of Doxology, or
contain certain reasons for to move God to hear our petitions, or both. The
words are found in Scripture, 1 Chronicles. 29. 11. and there used in form of a
Doxology, and praising of God, which is a part of divine Worship, and sometimes
joined with petition, and oftentimes concludes the same; and in this sense it
may be a part of prayer, and fit to be used when we depart out of his presence,
and take our leave with our heavenly Father.

Amen is made the conclusion, and by it we signify our desire, that God would
hear us, and put his hand and seal to our petitions, and also our joint consent
in our desires with him, who is the mouth of the people praying together; which
implies that we understand the Prayers made, have attended to them, and approve
them, and by this word make them Our Prayers. It Is oftentimes a word of
confirmation, and then it signifies [ so it is;] sometimes a word of petition,
and then it signifies [ so be it.]

Sect. 5.
The matter of all these petitions may be reduced into the form of a Prayer in
this manner.

1. O Almighty Lord, and in Christ Jesus our most gracious Father, we thine
unworthy Servants do here present our selves before the throne of Grace, and
desire in the first place, and above all things, that thy name be hallowed, and
thine eternal excellency and supreme dominion being manifested more and more,
both by thy blessed word and glorious works, we and all others may know thee to
be God alone, who do wonders, and glorify thy name for ever, and give all
glory, praise, and thanks to thee, that so all Atheists, Idolaters, profane
persons, Apostates, and rebellious wretches, may be convinced or confounded.

2. That thy name be the more hallowed, and we sinful wretches eternally saved,
let thy Kingdom come; that Christ at thy right hand may powerfully and
gloriously reign, till all his enemies be made his footstool. O let thy word
and spirit so mightily prevail, that all Nations may be converted, submit
themselves to Christ their Savior, thy Church enlarged from Sea to Sea, and
from the river to the worlds-end, till the number of thy Saints be finished,
and made perfect, and thou may rule in our hearts, till sin and the power of
Satan be wholly and forever destroyed. Raise up a continual supply of faithful
and godly Ministers, and good Kings, and Magistrates, which may be Defenders of
the Faith, and nursing Fathers to thy Church, and pour down the gifts of thy
Spirit in great plenty upon all flesh: break in pieces the power of Satan, and
all persecuting enemies: let death the last enemy be destroyed; make all thy
Saints immortal, and bless them with eternal joy and peace, that so they may
sing an eternal Hallelujah to thy name in the heaven of heavens, where there
shall be no sin, no sorrow, no pain, but fullness of joy in thy presence, and
pleasures for evermore at thy right hand.

3. That we may enjoy the privileges, and attain the eternal felicity of thy
Kingdom, we desire that thy will may be done on earth as it in heaven; we do
confess that by nature we are blind and ignorant, and have no power to do thy
heavenly will* All our spiritual knowledge, wisdom, and power of obedience is
from thee our God, and the good spirit of Christ. Seeing therefore this is our
condition as born of Adam, and brought up in a wicked world, and Christ has
given himself for us to redeem us from all iniquity, and purify to himself a
peculier people zealous of good works; we beseech thee open our eyes and
enlighten our understanding, that we may more clearly know thy heavenly Laws;
and sanctify our hearts more and more, that we may constantly and freely with
joy and delight, observe all thy holy and blessed Laws, O raise up our thoughts
and affections that we may seek that glorious and eternal estate which thou
has prepared for those that love thee, and so renew our hearts that we may be
zealous of thy glory, mortify sin, bring forth the fruits of thy spirit,
abound in good works, give good example unto others, make our calling an
Election sure, manifest that we are born from Heaven, that so following the
example of thy blessed Angels, and aiming at their perfection, may in the end
be partakers of eternal bliss together with them.

4. Whilst in this vale of tears we seek thy Kingdom, and endeavor to do thy
holy will, we have need of many earthly comforts, as food, and raiment, and
such things as without which we cannot live; we therefore pray thee give us
this day our daily bread; we acknowledge that we have neither life, nor health,
nor a morsel of bread, nor any place where to lay our heads but from thee our
heavenly father. Be pleased therefore out of our fatherly goodness to give us
good government, peace, safety, seasonable times, a comfortable and competent
Estate, and a quiet enjoyment of the same. If we should ask for superfluities,
dainties, and abundance, to spend them for to maintain our pride and seusual
pleasures, we confess it were just with thee not to hearken unto us, thou
mights justly deny them: but we are contented with food and raiment, and other
necessaries, and seek them from thee, that we may without distraction seek thy
heavenly Kingdom. O pity the sick, the poor, the weak, the widow, and the
fatherless, the stranger, and such as are in want and oppressed; feed the
hungry cloth the naked, deliver poor captives and relieve thy persecuted and
distressed Saints! These mercies thou have promised in order to our eternal
happiness, whilst we are in this vale of tears, until we come to our abiding
city, where we shall have no need of these things. And we seek these at thy
hands with hope to receive them, because thou have promised them; yet we are
resolved, that howsoever thou shall deal with us, we will submit unto thy will*
and be contented.

5. O heavenly Father, though we should do thy will always, and from our heart in
all things, yet we have often sinned, and done evil in thy sight, made our
selves guilty, and liable to eternal death, and have great need of thy mercy in
Jesus Christ: therefore we pray thee, forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive
them that trespass against us. We do confess, that both in the state of Nature
and of Grace we often offend thee, and transgress thy holy laws; and besides
the guilt of the first sin, which lies heavy upon us, and our inbred
corruption, we are guilty of many actual transgressions. And these have been
committed, not only out of ignorance, or infirmity, or upon surprizal, or
violence of temptation, but many of them against knowledge, and some of them are
very heinous, and of a crimson die; some are public, some private, some open,
some secret: neither is this all, but we harden our hearts in them against the
light of thy Gospel, the dictates of thy Spirit, thy patience and
long-suffering, against thy mercies and deliverances, against thy
chastisements, and many gracious invitations, against thy dearest love, and the
bitter sufferings of our Savior. And these are the more heinous, because
committed by us who have received so many mercies, enjoyed for a long time so
many powerful means of conversion, and have vowed better things. O how much
has thou done to convert us, and we are not converted! how miserable have we
made our selves! what fearful punishments have we deserved! Oh take away these
stony hearts of ours, give us hearts of flesh, and make us sensible of our
sins, that we may loath our selves, and that our hearts may inwardly bleed,
because we have offended thee so good a God. Remember thy tender mercies, the
bitter sufferings of our Savior, and thy gracious promises in him unto poor
sinners. Shall he dye on earth, and plead his blood in heaven* and we confess
our sins, and yet not obtain mercy! O pity, spare, forgive, turn away thy
wrath, cast us not out of thy presence, take not thy holy Spirit from us, deny
us not the joy of thy salvation. And this mercy we desire with the greater
hope, because we desire to forsake our sins, put our sole and whole confidence
in our blessed Savior, and are willing to forgive, and be reconciled to such
as trespass against our selves.

6. O Lord, thou knows our frailty, the great danger of temptation, which is
such, that though we be sanctified, and sin past pardoned, yet we may fall into
sin again, and so contract new guilt; therefore we humbly beseech thee, Lead us
not into temptation. Satan is cruel, subtle, raging; temptations many times
very violent: we live in a wicked world, weich is full of snares; there is no
time or place of absalute safety* O therefore strengthen our faith, arm us with
thy complete armor from heaven, support us, assist us, watch over us
continually, that we mast stand firm against all assaults of the enemy, keep
the faith, and being watchful, and humbly depending upon thee our God, may
obtain a final victory by the power of our blessed Savior, who has overcome
the world, and triumphed over the powers and principalities of hell: Desert us
not at any time, especially not in the day of fiery persecutions, bloody
conflicts, and the hour of greatest trial: Order all occurrences and events by
thy wise providence in such a manner, as that in greatest straits we may find a
way to escape; and though we cannot avoid always the evil of afflictions, yet we
may be delivered from the evil of sin: Sanctify all conditions both of
prosperity and adversity unto us so, that Satan by them may not gain any
advantage against us. Tread him shortly under our feet, and put an end to all
our troubles, and hasten to give us eternal peace and safety. Lord hearken unto
these our prayers, which we offer unto thee in the name of Jesus Christ; to
whom with thee and thy Spirit, all praise, glory, honor, and thanks, be given
now and for evermore. Amen.

This Prayer may be contracted into four words, yet retaining the principal
matter; or more enlarged in the several heads, according to which, if we
consider the mercies prayed for once received, we may compose a form of
thanksgiving, and the same may be reduced to order, so as to render thanks for
blessings and deliverances; which may be considered as public of Church or
State, or private, as of Congregations, Families, persons: the blessings are
either spiritual or temporal, the deliverances are so too; for they are from
sin, or guilt, or from temptation, or from the miseries of this life, And here
it is to be observed, 1. That all the Prayers in Scriptuer may be reduced to
the several heads of this form, which, though it contracts the matter of Prayer
unto a few heads, disposed in an excellent order, yet leaves it indifferent
whether we will begin our more general Prayers with Thanksgiving or Petition,
and in presenting our petitions, whether we shall begin with supplication for
blessings, or with deprecations for deliverance from evil. The principal thing
is to pray to God alone with an upright heart in the name of Christ for such
things as God has promised, that we may be accepted and heard*

CHAP. IX. Of Christ's promise to the Apostles.
Sect. 1.
YOu heard before that there were two parts of the Commission granted by Christ
unto his Apostles; the first was a mandate to go to all Nations, to disciple
them, to baptize them discipled, to teach them baptized to observe all his
Commandments: the second a promise, of which I will now speak in a few words,
and so conclude. And we must observe,

1. The reasons why Christ made this promise. 2. The words of the promise
partly exprssed here, partly Mark 16. 17, 18.
There were several reasons, which moved Christ to add this promise: For 1. as
the death of Christ did trouble them much, so did his departure; he must go and
leave them behind him: he was their dearest Lord, whom they loved; he was their
joy, their solace, their guide, and their protector, and to part with him went
near their hearts. All this Christ understood; and therefore to comfort and
revive their sinking spirit, that so, though he withdraw his bodily presence,
yet they may be encouraged to go on with the work, he adds this promise,
because he would be present with them in another and more effectual way. 2. The
work was very difficult, and seemed to be far above their power, and they
should be encountered with many fearful enemies, from whom they should suffer
very much: the devil and the world would oppose them with all their strength;
lest therefore they should be terrified, dejected, and depsair, he lets them
know he will be with them, not only to strengthen and assist them, but to
preserve them in the midst of greatest danger, and deliver them out of all
their troubles. 3. They might doubt of the success of their labors, and fear
lest their doctrine seeming to be new, and contrary to the received opinions
both of Jew and Gentile, would not be received; he therefore promises so to be
with them, as that he would confirm it outwardly by glorious miracles, and make
it effectual by the Holy Ghost to the end.

Sect. 2.
In the words (which are) Lo I am with you always unto the end of the world,
we may consider,

1. The person to whom this promise is made. 2. The person promising. 3. The
thing promised.
1. The persons to whom this promise is made, are first the Apostles; for to
whom the commission is granted to them the promise is made; and these are
easily known to be all such as Christ intended to trust with the dispensation
of Word and Sacraments. These were of two sorts, 1. Extraordinary. 2. Ordinary.
The extraordinary, are the Apostles to whom the promise was made immediately
and principally; for their place was high and extraordinary, their power great,
and of large extent, their work very difficult, their sufferings grievous,
their enemies many, potent, cruel: these must lay the foundation, and plant the
Christian Church in all Nations, confirm the doctrine of the Gospel preached by
them with many signs, wonders, and gifts of the Holy Ghost: they must be
infallible in word and writing, and leave their doctrine upon record to be a
rule of doctrine, faith, and life unto the worlds end: yet these must die, and
when they had finished the great work, leave the world, and the Church which
they had planted must continue, and must have her pastors and teachers, who
must dispense both Word and Sacraments, in the generations following, till time
shall be no more: Therefore the promise must be understood as made to all their
lawful successors in the Ministry, till the number of Gods Saints be made up:
for what can those do, except Christ in their successive generations be with
them? how should they go through with the great work without him? His presence
thefore was necessary unto them also, without this promise, both made and
performed unto them, their Ministry cannot be successful and effectual, for the
conversion, edification, and salvation of the Church: yet here we must observe,
that though Christ promise his extraordinary presence to the Apostles, yet his
ordinary presence will be sufficient for their successors.

Sect. 3.
The person who made this promise was Christ otherwise, the promise of Man or
Angel had been to no purpose: he that had all power in heaven and earth, and
had given the four fold mandate, did give the promise, and he was only fit to
do it; for there can be no doubt either of his fidelity or power; as he was
able, so he was resolved to make good what he had said, and his word was his
deed, and will be so unto the end. He, and he alone could procure the Spirit,
and send him down from heaven; the Angels were at his command, all creatures at
his beck; and as he had begun, so he was resolved to finish the work of man's
salvation: This his purpose he might have concealed, or reserved to himself a
liberty; yet he was willing to promise, and by a promise not only to signify
his mind, that they might know it to their comfort, but also to bind himself
unto them: And now he cannot go back. This promise is a ground of unspeakable
comfort and encouragement to all faithful Ministers, and does assure us the
Church shall continue to this worlds end.

Sect. 4.
The third thing to be considered is the thing promised, and that is Christ's
certain presence with them to the worlds end where we have

1. His presence. 2. The continuance. 3. The certainty of it.
1. His presence is signified in these words, I am with you, which implies,
that he will not be against them, nor will he be absent from them; for there
are enemies who are against us, and there are friends which are absent and far
from us, but Christ will not be an enemy, or a Friend at distance. 2. It Is
Christ that will be present, I will be with you, and that's more then if all men
and Angels should be for us, and ever present with us. 3. This presence is not
bodily, for Christ was justly after this promise taken up into Heaven bodily,
and the Heavens must contain him till the restitution of all things. 4. Its a
spiritual presence, and the same far more excellent than that of his body: for
though a body may at several Times be present in many places, yet it cannot be
present in more places than one at one time: but Christ by his Spirit might be
with them in all places, at all times; for he promised before his death and
passion to send the Comforter, which should comfort their hearts in his
absence, teach them and lead them into all truth: and upon Penticost he sent
down his Spirit upon the Apostles, which has continued, and will continue in
the Church for ever. 5. This is not a bare or mere presence, for so this Spirit
is present in all places at all times; neither is it a presence with some
general power: for so he is with all things to preserve them: But its a special
presence with a special active power, for spiritual ends to produce spiritual
and supernatural effects. It is a presence not only to comfort, strengthen,
assist and deliver them, but also a powerful presence to make their Ministrry
effectual for the eternal Salvation of men's Souls. This Holy Ghost descended
and rested upon Christ, when he was ready to preach the Gospel, and execute
publicly his Offices. When he first sent these Apostles, he gave them the
gifts of this Spirit. After his Resurrection he breathed on them saying,
Receive ye the Holy Ghost, commanded them to stay at Jerusalem, and wait for
this Spirit; upon the day of Pen^ecost, as before, this Spirit came upon them.
By this Spirit all the Members of the Church are sanctified, the Ministers
qualified, the Word and Sacraments made effectual, and sentence of the Church
so valid, and of such mighty force. Take away this spirit, you take away the
life and soul of the Church, the power of the Ministry, the efficacy of Word
and Sacraments, and without it all the Preaching, Praying, and other works of
the Ministry will not be able to convert or comfort one Soul. Its said, I will
be with you, that is, with you mine Apostles, and your Successors in the
Ministry, to assist, and bless, and guide you in the discharge of your trust,
and execution of your office. Dispense you the Word and Sacraments, and by the
faithful observance of my mandate endeavor to save poor Souls, and in that
work I am with you, no ways else; so that such as are most faithful and
diligent, are most certain of his gracious presence. Here is no promise made
unto any particular Church or Ministers more than to others; here is no express
mention or intimation of the Bishop or Church of Rome, or Jerusalem, or
Antioch, or Constantinople. The promise is made to the Church in general and
their Ministers, especially to such as are most faithful in their place and
office.

Sect. 5.
This is the presence: the continuance of this presence is the second thing
observed, and is expressed in two words.

1. Always, or every day. 2. To the worlds end.
1. Always signifies that there shall be no intermission or interruption of
Christ's presence and assistance. He will not absent himself, or neglect them,
or desert them for a day; so that they shall never have any cause to complain,
or say, where is my Savior now? whether is he gone? why has he forsaken me?
There may be sad and woeful times, wherein Christ may seem to hide his face, and
to have forgotten them for a certain time; yet even then Christ is with them
and his faithful Ministers, though he does not appear, and instantly manifest
himself. He must be with them always, or else he breaks his promise, and that
he will never do: Let us therefore do our duty always, and Christ will be
always with us.

2. He will be with us to the worlds end: this may be a longer, this may be a
shorter time: Some understand the last period, and end of that present
generation, the destruction of Jerusalem, and the death of the Apostles: and
the reason of this opinion may be because some take the promise to be personal,
and to be made only to the Apostles for their lives; yet this is rather a
conceit than any solid well grounded truth, especially seeing the end of the
world in other places signifies either a far longer time than the life of a
mortal man on earth, unto the consummation of the creatures, and to all
eternity. So the person or the time of the final judgment, when the world shall
be no more, but Christ shall raise the dead, deliver up the Kingdom to the
Father, and God shall be all in all; for when the number of Gods Saints is
finished, there will be no need of Word or Sacraments, or Ministers, and then
this promise is performed to the full. But whilst these continue as they shall
continue to the end, Christ is bound, and will certainly be with them, that he
may make his redemption effectual by them in the (...)sion and salvation of
poor sinners(...)

3. The certainty of this perp(...) seems to be employed in the note of
attention ( Lo) and in the verb of the present tense; for Christ does not say
(I will be) but (I am) with you: for nothing is more certain than that which is
present. Besides, some Copies have ( Amen) added, which is a strong
confirmation of the promise. But this certainly does chiefly depend upon the
power and fidelity of Christ, who has made the promise, and has kept it in
all times unto this day: And the particle ( Lo) does require as their, so our
special attention, and serious consideration, both of the person promising, and
the thing promised, that they might be fully assured of performance to the
utmost. By virtue of this promise it is come to pass, that in the midst of the
tumults and confusions of the world, and af ter the ruin of so many glorious
kingdoms, of so many potent Empires, and of so many flourishing Churches of
particular Nations; yet an universal Church with Word, Sacraments, and
Ministry, do continue to this day, and the gates of Hell could never yet
prevail against it: so that we may take up the Words of the Psalmist, Come
behold the works of the Lord, what desolations he has made in the earth; the
Lord of Hosts is with us, the God of Jacob is our refuge: for this God is our
God, for ever and ever, he will be our guide unto death.

Amen.
FINIS.

